IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 2, APRIL 2025

2059

GSA-DT: A Malicious Traffic Detection Model
Based on Graph Self-Attention Network
and Decision Tree
Saihua Cai , Member, IEEE, Han Tang, Jinfu Chen , Member, IEEE, Tianxiang Lv,
Wenjun Zhao, and Chunlei Huang

Abstract—Malicious attack has shown a rapid growth in recent
years, it is very important to accurately detect malicious traffic to
defend against malicious attacks. Compared with machine learning and deep learning technologies, graph convolutional neural
network (GCN) achieves better detection results of malicious
traffic due to additional consideration of the correlation between
network traffic features. However, existing GCN-based detection
models suffer from fixed weight assignment, only focusing on
local features, lack the ability to model graph structure and
relationships as well as having gradient disappearance. To solve
these problems, this paper proposes the GSA-DT model based
on graph self-attention network and decision tree. GSA-DT first
preprocesses the original network traffic to obtain better traffic
features and labels, and then uses GCN to extract the topological
structure of network traffic as well as capture the correlation
relationships among traffic features, where the ReLU activation
function is replaced by LeakyReLU to overcome the problems of
neuron “death” and gradient disappearance during the training
process; It also introduces the self-attention mechanism into
GCN to assign larger weights to the key features to reduce the
interference of redundant features. Finally, GSA-DT uses decision
tree to perform the detection of malicious traffic. Experimental
results on four network traffic datasets show that GSA-DT model
improves the detection accuracy over 1% on average than seven
advanced malicious traffic detection models, and it also performs
better in F1-measure, TPR, FPR as well as stability.
Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, graph self-attention
network, decision tree, LeakyReLU, deep learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, malicious attacks show a rapid growth
trend, leading to severe service disruptions, thereby impacting the daily life of people. To mitigate the escalating security

I

Received 26 April 2024; revised 4 October 2024 and 16 December 2024;
accepted 16 January 2025. Date of publication 12 February 2025; date
of current version 22 April 2025. This work was partly supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant nos. 62202206,
U1836116, 62172194), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant
no. 2023T160275), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant
no. BK20220515), and the Qinglan Project of Jiangsu Province. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was M. Sayıt. (Corresponding author: Jinfu Chen.)
The authors are with the School of Computer Science
and Communication Engineering, and the Jiangsu Provincial
Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace Security Technology,
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China (e-mail: caisaih@
ujs.edu.cn;
2222208016@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;
jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn;
2222008039@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;
2222208077@stmail.ujs.edu.cn;
2232208014@stmail.ujs.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3531885

risks, it is crucial to promptly detect the malicious attacks.
Malicious attacks will generate malicious traffic, therefore,
accurately detecting malicious traffic can find hidden attack
behaviors, which can defend against network intrusion [1].
Previously, researchers mainly used statistics-based [2],
port-based [3], signature-based [4] and other methods to
detect malicious traffic. However, these methods show great
limitations in face of unknown types of malicious traffic.
Among them, statistics-based approaches have difficulty to
identify malicious traffic that does not fit a known model or
preset thresholds; Port-based approaches become ineffective
due to the absence of fixed port numbers; Signature-based
methods achieve low detection accuracy and robustness due
to the use of techniques such as mutation, encryption and
obfuscation in malicious attacks.
In recent years, machine learning (e.g., support vector
machine [5], KNN [6], etc.) methods have been widely used
in the field of malicious traffic detection, but the use of
machine learning models has the following limitations: (1)
It is very difficult in effectively identifying the complex
patterns and nonlinear relationships in network traffic [7];
(2) It relies on additional preprocessing to deal with the
problems included in complex network such as packet loss,
retransmission and reordering [8]; (3) It has weak ability to
recognize unknown attack types in complex tasks, has poor
generalization ability and weak feature expression ability [9].
Compared with traditional machine learning methods, deep
learning has stronger ability to handle the complex network
traffic, stronger end-to-end learning ability, stronger ability
to capture nonlinear relationships and can provide more
robust and reliable detection results, therefore, deep learning
techniques have gained widespread attention in recent years.
However, traditional deep learning models (e.g., TCN, LSTM,
RNN, etc.) do not consider the correlation between the features
of network traffic in the model training process. In the network
activities, the source IP and destination IP addresses as well
as the source port and destination port have tight correlations,
therefore, analyzing and modeling the correlation can improve
the detection ability.
As a powerful deep representation learning method, GCN
can learn node representation vectors that contain the
information about nodes’ own features and associations with
other nodes [10]. GCN shows remarkable performance in
network analysis through constructing network traffic topology

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

