Some of the things you will learn in THE CODEBREAKERS
• How secret Japanese messages were decoded in Washington hours before Pearl Harbor.
• How German codebreakers helped usher in the Russian Revolution.
• How John F. Kennedy escaped capture in the Pacific because the Japanese failed to solve a
simple cipher.
• How codebreaking determined a presidential election, convicted an underworld syndicate
head, won the battle of Midway, led to cruel Allied defeats in North Africa, and broke up a vast
Nazi spy ring.
• How one American became the world's most famous codebreaker, and another became the
world's greatest.
• How codes and codebreakers operate today within the secret agencies of the U.S. and Russia.
• And incredibly much more.
"For many evenings of gripping reading, no better choice can be made than this book."
—Christian Science Monitor




                                                                THE
                                    Codebreakers
                                           The Story of Secret Writing
                                                          By DAVID KAHN
                                                         (abridged by the author)

                                                          A SIGNET BOOK from
                                                        NEW AMERICAN LIBRARV
                                                                 TIMES MIRROR



Copyright © 1967, 1973 by David Kahn
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publisher. For information address
The Macmillan Company, 866 Third Avenue, New York,
New York 10022.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 63-16109
Crown copyright is acknowledged for the following illustrations
from Great Britain's Public Record Office:
S.P. 53/18, no. 55, the Phelippes forgery,
and P.R.O. 31/11/11, the Bergenroth reconstruction.
Published by arrangement with The Macmillan Company
FIRST PRINTING SECOND PRINTING THIRD PRINTING FOURTH PRINTING FIFTH PRINTING SIXTH PRINTING SEVENTH PRINTING
EIGHTH PRINTING NINTH PRINTING TENTH PRINTING
SIGNET TRADEMARK: REG. TJ.S. PAT. OFF. AND FOREIGN COUNTRIES
REGISTERED TRADEMARK---MARCA REGISTBADA
HECHO EN CHICAGO, U.S.A.
SIGNET, SIGNET CLASSICS, SIGNETTE, MENTOR AND PLUME BOOKS
are published by The New American Library, Inc.,
1301 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York 10019
FIRST PRINTING, FEBRUARY, 1973
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


                                               To my Parents
                                            and my Grandmother



Contents
A Note on the Abridged Version
Preface
A Few Words
1. One Day of Magic: I
2. One Day of Magic: II
3. The First 3,000 Years
4. The Rise of the West
5. On the Origin of a Species
6. The Era of the Black Chambers
7. The Contribution of the Dilettantes
8. Room 40
9. A War of Intercepts
10. Two Americans
11. Secrecy for Sale
12. Duel in the Ether: I
13. Duel in the Ether: II
14. Censors, Scramblers, and Spies
15. The Scrutable Orientals
16. PYCCKAJI Kranrojioras
17. N.S.A.
18. Heterogeneous Impulses
19. Ciphers in the Past Tense
20. The Anatomy of Cryptology
Suggestions for Further Reading
Index

A Note on the Abridged Version

MANY PEOPLE have urged me to put out a paperback edition of The Codebreakers. Here it is.
    It comprises about a third of the original. This was as big as the publishers and I could make it and still
keep the price within reason.
    In cutting the book, I retained mainly stories about how codebreaking has affected history, particularly
in World War II, and major names and stages in the history of cryptology. I eliminated all source notes and
most of the technical matter, as well as material peripheral to strict codebreaking such as biographies, the
invention of secondary cipher systems, and miscellaneous uses of various systems.
    I had no space for new material, but I did correct the errors reported to me and updated a few items.
The chapters have been slightly rearranged.
    Readers wanting to know more about a specific point should consult the text and notes of the original.
    If any reader wishes to offer any corrections or to tell me of his own experiences in this field, I would
be very grateful if he would send them to me.
                                                                                                        —D.K.
Windsor Gate
Great Neck, New York
Preface

CODEBREAKING is the most important form of secret intelligence in the world today. It produces much more
and much more trustworthy information than spies, and this intelligence exerts great influence upon the
policies of governments. Yet it has never had a chronicler.
    It badly needs one. It has been estimated that cryptanalysis saved a year of war in the Pacific, yet the
histories give it but passing mention. Churchill's great history of World War II has been cleaned of every
single reference to Allied communications intelligence except one (and that based on the American Pearl
Harbor investigation), although Britain thought it vital enough to assign 30,000 people to the work. The
intelligence history of World War II has never been written. All this gives a distorted view of why things
happened. Furthermore, cryptology itself can benefit, like other spheres of human endeavor, from knowing
its major trends, its great men, its errors made and lessons learned.
    I have tried in this book to write a serious history of cryptology. It is primarily a report to the public on
the important role that cryptology has played, but it may also orient cryptology with regard to its past and
alert historians to the sub rosa influence of cryptanalysis. The book seeks to cover the entire history of
cryptology. My goal has been twofold: to narrate the development of the various methods of making and
breaking codes and ciphers, and to tell how these methods have affected men.
    When I began this book, I, like other well-informed amateurs, knew about all that had been published
on the history of cryptology in books on the subject. How little we really knew! Neither we nor any
professionals realized that many valuable articles lurked in scholarly journals, or had induced any
cryptanalysts to tell their stories for publication, or had tapped the vast treasuries of documentary material,
or had tried to take a long view and ask some questions that now appear basic. I believe it to be true that,
from the point of view of the material previously published in books on cryptology, what is new in this
book is 85 to 90 per cent.
    Yet it is not exhaustive. A foolish secrecy still clothes much of World War II cryptology—though I
believe the outlines of the achievements are known—and to tell just that story in full would require a book
the size of this. Even in, say, the 18th century, the unexplored manuscript material is very great.
    Nor is this a textbook. I have sketched a few methods of solution. For some readers even this will be too
much; them I advise skip this material. They will not have a full understanding of what is going on, but that
will not cripple their comprehension of the stories. For readers who want more detail on these methods, I
recommend, in the rear of this book, some other works and membership in the American Cryptogram
Association.
    In my writing, I have tried to adhere to two principles. One was to use primary sources as much as
possible. Often it could not be done any other way, since nothing had been published on a particular matter.
The other principle was to try to make certain that I did not give cryptology sole and total credit for
winning a battle or making possible a diplomatic coup or whatever happened if, as was usual, other factors
played a role. Narratives which make it appear as if every event in history turned upon the subject under
discussion are not history but journalism. They are especially prevalent in spy stories, and cryptology is not
immune. The only other book-length attempt to survey the history of cryptology, the late Fletcher Pratt's
Secret and Urgent, published in 1939, suffers from a severe case of this special pleading. Pratt writes
thrillingly—perhaps for that very reason—but his failure to consider the other factors, together with his
errors and omissions, his false generalizations based on no evidence, and his unfortunate predilection for
inventing facts vitiate his work as any kind of a history. (Finding this out was disillusioning, for it was this
book, borrowed from the Great Neck Library, that interested me in cryptology.) I think that although trying
to balance the story with the other factors may detract a little from the immediate thrill, it charges it with
authenticity and hence makes for long-lasting interest: for this is how things really happened.
    In the same vein, I have not made up any conversations, and my speculations about things not a matter
of record have been marked as such in the notes in the full-length version. I have documented all important
facts, except that in a few cases I have had to respect the wishes of my sources for anonymity.
    The original publisher submitted the manuscript to the Department of Defense on March 4, 1966, which
requested three minor deletions—to all of which I acceded—before releasing the manuscript for
publication.
                                                                                                   DAVID KAHN
Windsor Gate
Great Neck, New York
Paris
