       Traffic Analysis: Protocols, Attacks, Design Issues and Open
                                 Problems

                                              Jean-François Raymond
                                           Zero-Knowledge Systems, Inc.
                                              jfr@zeroknowledge.com

                                                 19th December 2000


                                                          Abstract

             We present the traffic analysis problem and expose the most important protocols, attacks and
         design issues. Afterwards, we propose directions for further research.
         As we are mostly interested in efficient and practical Internet based protocols, most of the emphasis
         is placed on mix based constructions. The presentation is informal in that no complex definitions and
         proofs are presented, the aim being more to give a thorough introduction than to present deep new
         insights.



1 Introduction

Privacy is becoming a critical issue on the Internet. Polls constantly remind us that users feel that one of
the most important barriers to using the Internet is the fear of having their privacy violated. Unfortunately,
this isn’t unjustified as marketers and national security agencies have been very aggressive in monitoring
user activity 1 .
Two things can happen as a result of this lack of privacy: either the Internet’s popularity diminishes or,
as seems more likely, the Internet becomes the most pervasive surveillance system ever. The problem
studied in this text isn’t a purely theoretic one, in fact some would argue that it is a crucial one to solve if
the online world is to continue expanding and improving. In any case, from both theoretical and practical
perspectives, it certainly deserves to receive much more attention than it has gotten so far.


1.1 Desirable Properties

Our goal is to protect users against traffic analysis. That is, we don’t want an adversary that can monitor
and/or compromise certain parts of the systems to be able to match a message sender with the recipient
(sender-recipient matchings).
   1
       See http://www.freedom.net and http://www.inf.tu-dresden.de/˜hf2/anon for examples.



                                                              1
A related problem is that of network unobservability which attempts to hide all communication patterns.
(how many, at what time and to whom/from whom messages are sent and received). Notice that network
unobservability implies the ineffectiveness of traffic analysis.
Whereas message privacy can be obtained using encryption, it’s much harder to protect sender and/or
recipient privacy; especially in large open networks. The number of different assumptions and settings
is huge which makes it difficult to define and reason about the problem in a rigorous manner.
As with many constructions in cryptography, there are efficiency, practicality/security tradeoffs to be
made. For example, if efficiency and practicality weren’t issues, we could broadcast messages in order
to protect recipient privacy.
Notice that the problem definition isn’t entirely trivial. We can’t provide ”perfect” privacy since the
number of possible senders and recipients is bounded. So, for example, if there are only two parties on
the network, an attacker having access to this information can trivially determine who is communicat-
ing with whom  The best we can hope for is to make all possible sender-recipient matchings look
equally likely. That is, the attacker’s view2 ’s statistical distribution should be independent from the ac-
tual sender-recipient matchings. The protocol of subsection 2.2 has this strong property whereas those
of subsection 2.3 usually don’t. Unfortunately, there are no satisfactory definitions/methods providing a
solid framework in which to analyze protocols that fall short of the optimal performance3 and we usually
need to rely on more or less ad-hoc arguments.


1.2 Overview

A concise literature review can be found in section 2. A comprehensive listing of attacks against mix-
networks is presented in section 3. Design issues related to large mix based networks are given in section
4. We propose directions for further research in section 5 and conclude in section 6.


2 Literature Review

Before delving more deeply into the problem, we briefly review some privacy protecting mechanisms.
Although the link between these and sender-recipient privacy can be tenuous in certain instances, we
believe that some of the ideas used in these techniques might be useful.


2.1 Related Problems
          Secure Multi Party Computations (SMPC)[14] : A group of users, each having a private input,
           want to securely compute a function of their private inputs. At the end of the protocol, all users
           should know only the value of the function. That is, each user will not have gained any information
           about the other users’ private inputs apart from what can be deduced from the function’s value.
   2
       By view, we mean all the information available to the attacker.
   3
       i.e. protocols in which traffic analysis can help in obtaining some non-trivial information about sender-recipient matchings.




                                                                  2
      Oblivious RAM [22]: Code privacy can be protected by using a tamper resistant cryptographic
       processor. The protocol is such than an outside party looking at the memory accesses (reads and
       writes) can’t gain any information about what is being computed and how it is being computed.
       The code’s privacy is protected which could be useful to prevent reverse engineering and software
       piracy.
      Private Information Retrieval(PIR) [10, 11, 12] : A user privately queries one or many disjoint
       databases. By privately, we mean that the database(s) will not have any information about what
       element the user has queried.
   
       Oblivious Transfers [36]: This problem has many versions which are equivalent in that one
                                                                                                 
       implies the other. We mention a flavor which is related to PIRs and is referred to as out of 
       oblivious transfer. These protocols have very similar properties as PIRs, the major difference being
       that the database privacy is also protected: the user doesn’t gain any information about the other
       entries in the database.
   
       Steganography [27] : Steganography is the branch of information privacy that attempts to hide
       information within publicly observable data (e.g. using digital watermarking [42], subliminal
       channels [41], etc.).


2.2 Chaum’s Dining-Cryptographer Networks (dc-nets)[7, 43]

The goal here is to have one participant anonymously broadcast a message. If the message is aimed at
one user, the sender can encrypt the message by, for example, using an asymmetric crypto-system. Since
the message is received by all parties, recipient anonymity is trivially maintained.
Let       be the set of participants and let  be a finite Abelian (commutative)
group (for example (!"# )) in which all computations will be carried out. The protocol goes as follows:

   1. Initialization: Each participant securely shares secret keys (chosen at random from  ) with some
      other participants. We denote the secret key shared by $ and % by &'$( %)*&'%( $+ and define
      the set , composed of all pairs  $  %  such that  $ and  % share a secret key. Notice that if
       $  % !-., then  %  $ /-0, .

   2. Message Transmission: In order to send a message 1                                                  , 32 broadcasts:


                                                                                              E*F         EHJI
                                                      14               5                           G           LK&M2 ( 7
                                                              687
                                                                  s.t. 9;:=< ( :>?A@=BDC

                   ENF                                    HT
       Where             GPOQ        if OSR       and         otherwise.
               C
   3. “Noise” Transmission: All other participants,  7 , broadcast:
                                                                                       ENF          ITHYX
                                                                  5                          G             LK & 7 ( U
                                                        6VU
                                                            s.t. 9;:> ( :)W8?A@=BQC



                                                                                3
