Journal of Machine Learning Research 7 (2006) 2745-2769                Submitted 3/06; Revised 9/06; Published 12/06




  On Inferring Application Protocol Behaviors in Encrypted Network
                               Traffic

Charles V. Wright                                                                       CVWRIGHT @ JHU . EDU
Fabian Monrose                                                                              FABIAN @ JHU . EDU
Gerald M. Masson                                                                           MASSON @ JHU . EDU
Information Security Institute
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA


Editor: Philip Chan


                                                          Abstract
     Several fundamental security mechanisms for restricting access to network resources rely on the
     ability of a reference monitor to inspect the contents of traffic as it traverses the network. How-
     ever, with the increasing popularity of cryptographic protocols, the traditional means of inspecting
     packet contents to enforce security policies is no longer a viable approach as message contents
     are concealed by encryption. In this paper, we investigate the extent to which common applica-
     tion protocols can be identified using only the features that remain intact after encryption—namely
     packet size, timing, and direction. We first present what we believe to be the first exploratory
     look at protocol identification in encrypted tunnels which carry traffic from many TCP connections
     simultaneously, using only post-encryption observable features. We then explore the problem of
     protocol identification in individual encrypted TCP connections, using much less data than in other
     recent approaches. The results of our evaluation show that our classifiers achieve accuracy greater
     than 90% for several protocols in aggregate traffic, and, for most protocols, greater than 80% when
     making fine-grained classifications on single connections. Moreover, perhaps most surprisingly,
     we show that one can even estimate the number of live connections in certain classes of encrypted
     tunnels to within, on average, better than 20%.
     Keywords: traffic classification, hidden Markov models, network security


1. Introduction

To effectively manage large networks, an administrator’s ability to characterize the traffic within the
network’s boundaries is critical for diagnosing problems, provisioning capacity, and detecting at-
tacks or misuses of the network. Unfortunately, for the most part, current approaches for identifying
application traffic rely on inspecting packets on the wire, which can fail to provide a reliable, or even
correct, characterization of the traffic. For one, that information (e.g., port numbers and TCP flags)
is determined entirely by the end hosts, and thus can be easily changed to disguise or conceal aber-
rant traffic. In fact, such malicious practices are not uncommon, and often occur after an intruder
gains access to the network (e.g., to install a “backdoor”) or when legitimate users attempt to violate
network policies. For example, many chat and file sharing applications can be easily configured to
use the standard port for HTTP in order to bypass simple packet-filtering firewalls. Furthermore,
recent peer-to-peer file-sharing applications such as BitTorrent (Cohen, 2003) can run entirely on

2006
c     Charles V. Wright, Fabian Monrose, and Gerald M. Masson.
                                  W RIGHT, M ONROSE AND M ASSON




user-specified ports, and Trojan horse or virus programs may encrypt their communication to deter
the development of effective detection signatures.
     Even more problematic for such traffic characterization techniques is the fact that with the in-
creased use of cryptographic protocols such as SSL (Rescorla, 2000) and SSH (Ylonen, 1996), fewer
and fewer packets in legitimate traffic become available for inspection. While the growing popu-
larity of such protocols has greatly enhanced the security of the user experience on the Internet—
by protecting messages from eavesdroppers—one can argue that its use hinders legitimate traffic
analysis. Furthermore, we may reasonably expect that the use of encrypted communications will
only become more commonplace as Internet users become more security-savvy. Therefore future
techniques for identifying application protocols and behaviors may only have access to a severely
restricted set of features, namely those that remain intact after encryption.
     Clearly, the ability to reliably detect instances of various application protocols “in the dark” (Kara-
giannis et al., 2005) would be of tremendous practical value. For one, armed with this capability,
network administrators would be in a much better position to detect violations of network policies
by users running instances of forbidden applications over encrypted channels (e.g., using SSH’s port-
forwarding feature). Unfortunately, most of the existing work on traffic classification either relies
on inspecting packet payloads (Zhang and Paxson, 2000a; Moore and Papagiannaki, 2005), TCP
headers (Early et al., 2003; Moore and Zuev, 2005; Karagiannis et al., 2005), or can only assign
flows to broad classes of protocols such as “bulk data transfer,” “p2p,” or “interactive” (Moore and
Papagiannaki, 2005; Moore and Zuev, 2005; Karagiannis et al., 2005).
     Here we investigate the extent to which common Internet application protocols remain dis-
tinguishable even when packet payloads and TCP headers have been stripped away, leaving only
extremely lean data which includes nothing more than the packets’ timing, size, and direction. We
begin our analysis in §3 by exploring protocol recognition techniques for traffic aggregates where all
flows carry the same application protocol. We then develop tools to enhance the initial analysis pro-
vided by these first tools by addressing more specific scenarios. In §4, we relax the single-protocol
assumption and address protocol recognition with very lean data on individual TCP connections.
These methods might be used to estimate the traffic mix on traces which are believed to contain
several distinct protocols, or as a fine-grained way to verify that a set of connections really does
contain only a single given application protocol. In §5 we relax the assumption that the individual
flows can be demultiplexed from the aggregate and show how, when there is only a single appli-
cation protocol in use, we can nevertheless still glean meaningful information from the stream of
packets and track the number of live connections in the tunnel. We review related work in §6 and
discuss future directions in §7.

2. Data
To be useful in practice, traffic analysis approaches of the type we develop in this paper must be
effective in dealing with the noisy and skewed data typical of real Internet traffic. We therefore
empirically evaluate our techniques using real traffic traces collected by the Statistics Group at
George Mason University in 2003 (Faxon et al., 2004). The traces contain headers for IP packets on
GMU’s Internet (OC-3) link from the first 10 minutes of every quarter hour over a two-month period.
The data set contains traffic for a class B network which includes several university-wide and
departmental servers for mail, web, and other services, as well as hundreds of Internet-connected
client machines. From these traces, we extract inbound TCP connections on the well-known ports

                                                  2746
                           O N I NFERRING A PPLICATION P ROTOCOL B EHAVIORS




for SMTP (25), HTTP (80), HTTP over SSL (443), FTP (20), SSH (22), and Telnet (23), as well as
outbound SMTP and AOL Instant Messenger traffic. Since we do not have access to packet payloads
in these traces, we do not attempt to determine the “ground truth” of which connections truly belong
to which protocols.1 Instead, we simply use the TCP port numbers as our class labels, and therefore,
it is likely some connections have been incorrectly labeled. However, because these mislabeled
connections only increase the entropy of the data, the net result will be that we under-estimate the
accuracy our techniques could achieve if given a perfectly-labeled version of the same traces (Lee
and Xiang, 2001).
     For each extracted TCP connection, we record the sequence of size, arrival time tuples for
each packet in the connection, in arrival order. We encode the packet’s direction in the sign bit
of the packet’s size, so that packets sent from server to client have size less than zero and those
from client to server have size greater than zero. Since the traces in this data set consist mostly of
unencrypted, non-tunneled TCP connections, a few additional preprocessing steps are necessary to
simulate the more challenging scenarios which our techniques are designed to address. To simulate
the effect of encryption on the traffic in our data set we assume the encryption is performed with a
symmetric block cipher such as AES (Federal Information Processing Standards, 2001), and round
the observed packet sizes up accordingly. We perform our evaluation using a block size of 64 bytes
(512 bits), which is larger than most used in practice, yet still affords a good balance of recognition
accuracy and computational efficiency. If analyzing real traffic encrypted with a smaller block size
(for example, 128 bits), we can always round the observed packet sizes up.

3. Traffic Classification in Aggregate Encrypted Traffic
Here we investigate the problem of determining the application protocol in use in aggregate traffic
composed of several TCP connections which all employ the same application protocol. Unlike
previous approaches such as BLINC (Karagiannis et al., 2005), our approach does not rely on any
information about the hosts or network involved; instead, we use only the features of the actual
packets on the wire which remain observable after encryption, namely: timing, size, and direction.
    The techniques we develop here can be used to quickly and efficiently infer the nature of the
application protocol used in aggregate traffic without demultiplexing or reassembling the individual
flows from the aggregate. Such traffic might correspond to a set of TCP connections to a given
host or network, perhaps running on a nonstandard port and identified using techniques like that
of Xu et al. (2005) as comprising a dominant or “heavy hitter” behavior in the network. Our tech-
niques could then be used by a network administrator to determine the application layer behavior.
Furthermore, these techniques are also applicable to certain classes of encrypted tunnels, namely
those which carry traffic for a single application protocol. We address the case of tunneled traffic in
greater detail in §5.
    To evaluate the techniques developed in this section, we assemble traffic aggregates for each
protocol using several TCP connections extracted from the GMU data as described in §2. For each
10-minute trace and each protocol, we select all connections for the given protocol in the given trace,
and interleave their packets into a single unified stream, sorted in order of arrival on the link. We then
split this stream into several smaller epochs of constant length s and count the number of packets

 1. We have checked randomly-selected subsets of flows for each protocol and verified, using visualization techniques
    (Wright et al., 2006), that the behaviors exhibited therein appear reasonable for the given protocols. Examples of
    these visualizations are available on the web at http://www.cs.jhu.edu/˜cwright/traffic-viz.


                                                        2747
