                                          Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

                                                     ScienceDirect
                                            Procedia Computer Science 20 (2013) 502 – 509



                                           Complex Adaptive Systems, Publication 3
                                               Cihan H. Dagli, Editor in Chief
                            Conference Organized by Missouri University of Science and Technology
                                                    2013- Baltimore, MD

                                                   Homomorphic Encryption
                                      Monique Ogburna*, Claude Turnerb, Pushkar Dahalc
                 a,b,c
                         Bowie State University, Department of Computer Science, 14000 Jericho Park Rd.,Bowie, MD 20715, United States



   Abstract

   The study of homomorphic encryption techniques has led to significant advancements in the computing domain, particularly in
   the sphere of cloud computing. Homomorphic encryption provides a means for securely transmitting and storing confidential
   information across and in a computer system. The aim of this paper is to discuss the concepts and significance of homomorphic
   encryption along with the subdivisions and limitations associated with this type of encryption scheme. Recent studies conducted
   on the topic of homomorphic encryption are highlighted and some customary models of homomorphism are demonstrated. We
   also developed a proof of concept algorithm that demonstrates a practical use for a homomorphic encryption technique, the
   results of our algorithm are provided. The applications of homomorphic encryption methods are vast outside of the
   computational realm, and its purpose in other fields will be explored.
   © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
   Selection and peer-review under responsibility of Missouri University of Science and Technology
      Keywords: ciphertext; fully homomorphic encryption; partially homomorphic encryption; encrypt; decrypt




   1.    Introduction


   itself in such a way that the result obtained by applying operations to elements of the first set is mapped onto the
                                                                                                              [1]. The
   word homomorphism is derived from the Greek word homos meaning "same" and morphe meaning "shape". In
   computer science homomorphic encryption is used in the conversion of plaintext to ciphertext.

      Plaintext is any information that a senders desires to transfer to a receiver. It can be thought of as the input to any
   algorithm or as information being transmitted before an algorithm encrypts it. Some examples of plaintext include
   email messages, word processor files, images, or ATM and credit card transaction information. This plaintext is
   converted to ciphertext which is data that has been encrypted and is unreadable until it has been decrypted with a
   key.

      Homomorphic encryption seeks to aid in this encryption process by allowing specific types of computations to be
   carried out on ciphertext which produces an encrypted result which is also in ciphertext. Its outcome is the result of
   operations performed on the plaintext. Case in point, one person could add two encrypted numbers and then another
   person could decrypt the result, without either of them being able to find the value of the individual numbers.



1877-0509 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of Missouri University of Science and Technology
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2013.09.310
                              Monique Ogburn et al. / Procedia Computer Science 20 (2013) 502 – 509                   503



would like to ensure no one else gains access to that data, including the owner of the computer, conventional
methods of encryption would protect their data while it is in transit, but not while the computation is in progress.
                                                                                                         leaves their
computer until it returns. This method requires that all the arithmetical and logical operations needed in the
computation, which may be represented by circuits or gates, be applied to the encrypted form of the data [2].

2.    Significance of Homomorphic Encryption


leaking credit card information, physical addresses, passwords, and other personal information [3]. Sony accepted
responsibility for the incident admitting that they could have taken special precautions by encrypting the data on
their network. Around the same time, researchers discovered that Dropbox was storing unencrypted user files. As a
result users closed their accounts in protest angry at the company for not encrypting their confidential files [4].

   The solution to this issue these two companies encountered was not as apparent as one might believe. Firstly, in
order for data to have been used by their customers and clients, the data had to be decrypted. To do so, the
decryption key had to be located somewhere between the data-store and the user. The ideal place for the decryption
key was far from the data-store as possible and close to the user. However, this was extremely difficult to

their customers credit card whether they were online or not and this required a billing address. Even if the credit
card numbers and addresses were encrypted, they still needed to store the decryption key somewhere on their
                                                                     -filled, that decryption key had to be available
to decrypt the data as soon as the customer clicked                           4].
needed to be able to decrypt data, and hackers hacked
encryption would have been able to provide [4].

    The development of cloud storage systems such as Dropbox and computing platforms gives users the ability to
outsource storage and computations on their data, and allows businesses to outsource an increasing amount of data
storage and management to cloud services. Although they gain these advantages, the potential drawbacks of
utilizing cloud services are losses of privacy and business value of confidential data. One effective method of
                                                                                                      and perform
operations on the encrypted data. If the encryption scheme is homomorphic, the cloud can still perform meaningful
computations on the data, even though it is encrypted [5].

3.    Examples

   Earlier, homomorphic encryption was defined as a form of encryption where a specific algebraic operation
performed on plaintext is equivalent to another algebraic operation performed on its ciphertext. In mathematics,
these operations are called mappings or functions and are operation preserving (OP) mappings. For example, if
(G, o) and (H ,*) represent groups, an OP mapping h : (G, o) ( H ,*) is called a homomorphism from
(G, o) to (H ,*) . The groups (G, o) and (H ,*) represent sets of data and the mapping (function) that maps the
set (G, o) onto or into the set (H ,*) is h [6]. This function is an operation that preserves the structure from one
set of data to the other set of data.

   Mathematical analogies can be utilized to explain the concepts behind homomorphic encryption.  The
                                                                                      Alice and Bob in
Cipherspace article in the American Scientist Journal.

     To further explain how homomorphism works, we consider two sets of data. One is the set of positive real
numbers, R , and the other set is the logarithms of this set of real numbers. On these sets, the multiplication of real
504                                           Monique Ogburn et al. / Procedia Computer Science 20 (2013) 502 – 509


  numbers and the addition of logarithms are homomorphic operations. If we consider any real positive numbers
   x, y and z , if x y z , then log( x) log( y)               log( z) . This provides us with two alternate paths for
  obtaining our result, z . For the first method, if we are given x and y , we can multiply them together to obtain z .
  As the second option, we can add the logarithms of x and y and take the antilog of the sum to arrive at z . Both cases
  produce the same result [2].                                                                               he plaintext
  inputs x and y . Or we can encrypt x and y , apply a series of operations to the ciphertext values, then decrypt the
  result to arrive at the same final answer. The two routes pass through parallel universes: plainspace and
                 2]. Figs. 1a and 1b provide a visual representation of how homomorphic encryption is implemented.

     In Fig. 1a, we see two sets of objects, the lower group contains the set of all integers, Z , and the higher one
  represents the set of even integers. The operations performed on these objects are addition and multiplication.
  Transitioning between the two sets requires doubling or halving a number. In the case of addition, the numbers 3
  and 5 are the plaintext inputs and these inputs are encrypted by doubling their values producing 6 and 10. In
  cipherspace, addition is performed on the ciphertexts, 6 and 10, which yields 16. This encrypted result is decrypted
  by dividing by 2 to obtain its actual value. There is a slight variation in the example next to it which demonstrates
  the process for multiplication. Here again, the numbers 3 and 5 are used as the plaintext inputs. They are also
  converted to ciphertext by multiplying by 2 but in order to obtain the product of 3 and 5, we have to divide the
  product of the encrypted values in half.

      cipherspace                                                                            Non-homomorphic
                                                                                             Non homom       Concatenation
        6 + 10 =             16             ( 6 10) / 2 = 30
                                                                                   HELLO                  WORLD              HELLOWORLD

                                                                                  Encrypt
                                                                                            Homomorphic Concatenation
                                                                                            Homomorph
       encrypt(x) = 2x   decrypt(x) = x/2    encrypt(x) = 2x   decrypt(x) = x/2
                                                                                  URYYB                   JBEYQ              URYYBJBEYQ


                                                                                      yp
                                                                                  Decrypt


         3 + 5 =              8              3       5         = 15                HELLO                 WORLD               HELLOWORLD
      plainspace
     Fig. 1. (a) Example of an encryption of numerical values as plaintext using homomorphic encryption; (b) Example of the
  concatenation of two words using homomorphic encryption

       Fig. 1b illustrates an example of using homomorphic encryption to concatenate two words. In this example, we
  see that the operation used to concatenate the plaintexts HELLO and WORLD is the same operation used fo           f r
  concatenating their respective ciphertexts. This is not always the circumstance. The point to be made is that we can
  still perform some operation on the input ciphertext which will produce new ciphertext that when decrypted, will
  produce plaintext corresponding to a desired operation on the input plaintext [7].

     Three topics that must be highlighted are the concepts of partially homomorphic (PHE), somewhat homomorphic
  (SWHE), and fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) schemes. In partially homomorphic encryption, it is possible to
  perform one operation on encrypted data, such as multiplication or addition but not both. Somewhat homomorphic
  encryption techniques can perform more than one operation but can only support a limited number of addition and
  multiplication operations. A cryptosystem which sustains both addition and multiplication, and can compute any       y
  function is known as a fully homomorphic encryption system. The value of using FHE over PHE or SWHE is thatt
  with this model, circuits can be homomorphically evaluated. This in turn, successfully permits the construction off
  programs which may be run on encryptions of their inputs to produce an encryption of their output. Because these
  programs never decrypt their inputs, they can be run by untrusted individuals without risking and revealing its inputs
  and internal state. As of today, there is one advantage that PHE and SWHE methods have over FHE techniques;
  they have been found to be more efficient in their processes.
