INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF NETWORK MANAGEMENT
Int. J. Network Mgmt 2014; 00:1–24
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/nem




                       A Survey of Methods for Encrypted Traffic
                              Classification and Analysis

                      Petr Velan∗† , Milan Čermák, Pavel Čeleda, Martin Drašar
                         Institute of Computer Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic




                                                     SUMMARY

With the widespread use of encrypted data transport network traffic encryption is becoming a standard
nowadays. This presents a challenge for traffic measurement, especially for analysis and anomaly detection
methods which are dependent on the type of network traffic. In this paper, we survey existing approaches
for classification and analysis of encrypted traffic. First, we describe the most widespread encryption
protocols used throughout the Internet. We show that the initiation of an encrypted connection and the
protocol structure give away a lot of information for encrypted traffic classification and analysis. Then, we
survey payload and feature-based classification methods for encrypted traffic and categorize them using an
established taxonomy. The advantage of some of described classification methods is the ability to recognize
the encrypted application protocol in addition to the encryption protocol. Finally, we make a comprehensive
comparison of the surveyed feature-based classification methods and present their weaknesses and strengths.
Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received . . .


KEY WORDS: encrypted traffic; monitoring; network; traffic classification; traffic analysis; machine
           learning; encryption protocols




                                               1. INTRODUCTION

Network visibility is becoming a necessity in current networks. Security, traffic provisioning, and
failure detection are the prime reasons to deploy traffic measurement. Yet, measurement has other
uses and new ones are still being discovered. For instance, application performance can be measured
using the data from the application layer. Information about certain applications can also be used to
detect attacks and intrusions on the application level. In contrast to this, the need for protection of
transmitted data and user privacy is rapidly increasing. It is for this reason that, the encryption of
transmitted data is increasingly used. The ratio of encrypted traffic has recently been rising steeply
as common Internet services become protected [62]. This change poses a challenge to currently
used methods for traffic measurement, for which the identification and analysis of network traffic
becomes more difficult.

∗
    Correspondence to: Institute of Computer Science, Masaryk University, Botanická 68a, Brno, Czech Republic
†
    Email: velan@ics.muni.cz

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2                  PETR VELAN, MILAN ČERMÁK, PAVEL ČELEDA, MARTIN DRAŠAR


   Before any further analysis of encrypted network traffic can be done, the traffic needs to be
identified. Statistical and behaviour-based application identification methods are less affected by
encryption than deep packet inspection methods. Therefore, a lot of attention has been given to
these methods, which are also considered to be privacy-conscious. However, information can event
be extracted from encrypted connections, mainly from the session’s initiation.
   The goal of this survey is to provide a comprehensive overview of methods for classifying
and analysing encrypted traffic. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work which
comprehensively summarizes available approaches for encrypted traffic classification and analysis.
Although there has been a lot of research on traffic classification in the past decade [25, 58, 71, 20,
32], most of the existing surveys do not explicitly consider research which targets encrypted traffic.
A recent survey by Cao et al. [21] describes the fundamentals of encrypted traffic classification. It
briefly introduces recent advances and challenges in this field. However, the survey covers only a
few methods of traffic classification and does not provide any comparison or assessment of these
methods. Moreover, while traffic classification is an important part of network monitoring, there are
other methods for analysing encrypted traffic which need to be taken into consideration.
   To achieve this goal, we have produced a survey of methods for classifying and analysing
encrypted traffic in journals, conference papers, proceedings of specialized workshops and
technical reports. We studied works presented in selected computer science journals, mainly the
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Computer Networks, International Journal of Network
Management and Transactions on Network and Service Management. We also surveyed
international conferences such as IMC, PAM, CISDA, CNSM, IM and NOMS over the period 2005-
2014. Other methods were found in references provided by the surveyed papers and in papers that
referenced them.
   The contribution of our work is four-fold. First, we describe several of the most widely used
encryption protocols to show their packet structure and standard behaviour in a network. This
information forms the basis of all classification protocols which use either a specific packet structure
or a communication pattern to identify the protocol. Second, we investigate what information is
provided by these encryption protocols. Most protocols negotiate encryption algorithms in clear-
text, these data can be monitored, e.g., to reveal the use of weak ciphers. Third, we describe how
the structure of encryption protocols can be used to detect these protocols in a network. Traffic
classification algorithms using such information are presented and we describe several open-source
tools which implement these algorithms. Fourth, we provide an extensive survey of behaviour-based
methods for encrypted traffic classification. We show that surprisingly detailed information can be
obtained using these methods. In specific cases, even the content of the encrypted connection can be
established. To describe and categorize the classification methods, we use the taxonomy of Khalife
et al. [48].
   Over the last decade, many statistical and machine learning algorithms have been applied to
the problem of traffic classification. However, authors use different methodological data sets to
evaluate their methods and the results are therefore not directly comparable. Most of the methods use
supervised or semi-supervised machine learning algorithms to classify flows and even determine the
application protocol of the flow. Most methods target encryption protocols such as SSH, SSL/TLS
and encrypted BitTorrent.



Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                       Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls                                                                DOI: 10.1002/nem
         A SURVEY OF METHODS FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AND ANALYSIS                            3

   This paper is organized into seven sections. Section 2 explains the principles of several widely
used encryption protocols. Section 3 describes what information can be obtained from encrypted
traffic using specific knowledge of the encryption protocols. Section 4 describes the traffic
classification taxonomy used in this article. Section 5 describes traffic classification methods based
on the specific knowledge of encryption protocols. Section 6 surveys papers on the classification of
encrypted traffic using statistical and behavioural methods. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper
and provides directions for future research.




                        2. A DESCRIPTION OF ENCRYPTION PROTOCOLS

This section provides a description of chosen encryption protocols. We selected the most widely
used protocols to demonstrate the basic principles and show different approaches for secure data
transport. Our choice of encryption protocols was also influenced by protocols which are the most
commonly used in research of encrypted traffic classification. We shall describe IPsec, TLS, SSH,
BitTorrent and Skype protocols in this section. All these protocols provide confidentiality using
encryption and they usually offer authentication of communication peers, data integrity, replay
protection and non-repudiation. We shall describe the use of these protocols, their fundamental
properties, the structure of encrypted packets, and the type of exchanged data. The information
provided in this section will serve as the basis for the next sections of this paper.
   Almost all the presented encryption protocols can be divided into two main phases: the
initialization of the connection and the transport of encrypted data. The first phase can be further
divided to an initial handshake, an authentication and a shared secret establishment. During the first
phase, algorithm capabilities are usually exchanged, communication parties are authenticated and
secret keys are established. These keys are then used for encrypting transferred data in the second
phase. This general protocol scheme is depicted in Figure 1, which, with minor modifications, can
be applied to almost any protocol providing confidential data transfer.



                                                     Confirmation
              Initial        Authentication and shared          Authenticated and encrypted
            handshake          secret establishment                   data exchange

                                                                                                Time
                      Unencrypted initialization                 Encrypted data transport


                         Figure 1. A general scheme of network security protocols.



  The protocols presented in this section are listed in order of their position in the ISO/OSI reference
model [43]. IPsec protocol suite, which operates on the network layer is described first, followed
by TLS and SSH protocols on the presentation layer. BitTorrent and Skype protocols represent the
application layer and they implement their own protocols for secure data transmission.

Copyright c 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                         Int. J. Network Mgmt (2014)
Prepared using nemauth.cls                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/nem
