                                             How to Achieve High Classification Accuracy
                                              with Just a Few Labels: A Semi-supervised
                                                  Approach Using Sampled Packets

                                                                    Shahbaz Rezaei and Xin Liu

                                                           University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
arXiv:1812.09761v2 [cs.NI] 16 May 2020




                                                                  {srezaei,xinliu}@ucdavis.edu



                                               Abstract. Network traffic classification, which has numerous applica-
                                               tions from security to billing and network provisioning, has become a
                                               cornerstone of today’s computer networks. Previous studies have devel-
                                               oped traffic classification techniques using classical machine learning al-
                                               gorithms and deep learning methods when large quantities of labeled
                                               data are available. However, capturing large labeled datasets is a cum-
                                               bersome and time-consuming process. In this paper, we propose a semi-
                                               supervised approach that obviates the need for large labeled datasets.
                                               We first pre-train a model on a large unlabeled dataset where the input
                                               is the time series features of a few sampled packets. Then the learned
                                               weights are transferred to a new model that is re-trained on a small
                                               labeled dataset. We show that our semi-supervised approach achieves
                                               almost the same accuracy as a fully-supervised method with a large la-
                                               beled dataset, though we use only 20 samples per class. Duting inferene,
                                               based on a dataset generated from the more challenging QUIC proto-
                                               col, our approach yields 98% accuracy. To show its efficacy, we also test
                                               our approach on two public datasets. Moreover, we study three differ-
                                               ent sampling techniques and demonstrate that sampling packets from an
                                               arbitrary portion of a flow is sufficient for classification.

                                               Keywords: Transfer Learning · Semi-supervised Learning · Network
                                               Traffic Classification · Packet Sampling · QUIC Protocol Classification


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Network traffic classification is one of the key components of network manage-
                                         ment and administration systems. It has been used for Quality of Service (QoS)
                                         provisioning, pricing, anomaly detection, malware detection, etc. Depending on
                                         the usage scenario, traffic may be classified based on protocols (e.g. UDP, TCP or
                                         FTP), traffic-types (e.g. voice, video or downloading), application (e.g. Youtube,
                                         Facebook or WeChat), user-actions, operating system, etc [12]. Due to the inher-
                                         ent differences of traffic in these applications, a model, approach or dataset that
                                         is used for one application cannot be used for another application. As a result,
                                         due to the lack of general approach, designing an accurate traffic classifier for
                                         an application of interest a has been time-consuming and cumbersome task.
2       Industrial Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) 2019, New York, USA

    Classical machine learning approaches have been extensively used for more
than a decade and showed good accuracy. However, the emergence of new appli-
cations and encryption protocols has dramatically increased the complexity of
the traffic classification problem. Recently, deep learning algorithms have been
developed for traffic classification. Deep learning approaches are capable of auto-
matic feature selection and capturing highly complex patterns, and thus demon-
strated high classification accuracy in comparison to other methods.
    However, deep learning requires a large amount of labeled data during train-
ing. Capturing and labeling a large dataset is a non-trivial and cumbersome pro-
cess. First, current Internet traffic is mostly encrypted that makes DPI (Deep
Packet Inspection) based labeling impossible. Hence, most labeling procedures
capture each traffic class in isolation. However, this is only possible at the edge
of a network or in an isolated environment. Unlike labeled dataset, unlabeled
data is abundant and readily available in the Internet. Therefore, it motivates us
to study how to use easily-obtainable unlabeled datasets to dramatically reduce
the size of labeled dataset needed for accurate traffic classification.
    Furthermore, to make our approach practical, in particular for high speed
links or data centers, we propose to use sampled data packets instead of an entire
flow. Using sampled packets also reduces memory and computation complexity
needed for entire time series features [12]. In summary, in this paper, we make
the following contributions:
 1. We propose a semi-supervised approach that utilizes large quantities of unla-
    beled data and just a few labeled samples. Specifically, we first train a model
    on a large unlabeled dataset and then re-train the model with a few labeled
    data on the target classification problem.
 2. We study three different sampling methods on the encrypted traffic classi-
    fication problem: Fixed step sampling, random sampling, and incremental
    sampling. We show that good sampling methods can almost achieve the
    upper-bound accuracy in certain datasets.
 3. We evaluate the proposed approach using captured QUIC traffic and show
    that our semi-supervised approach using sampled packets can accurately
    classify QUIC traffic that has fewer unencrypted fields during handshake.
 4. We test our approach on different public datasets. Surprisingly, we show that
    we can train a model using a completely separate unlabeled dataset and then
    retrain the model with a small number of labels in the target dataset and
    still achieve good accuracy.


2   Related Work
In pre-deep learning era, traditional machine learning algorithms had been com-
monly used for traffic classification [16]. However, due to their simplicity, manual
feature extraction, and inability to capture complex patterns, their accuracy has
declined [12]. Recently, several studies develop deep learning models, such as
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM),
for network traffic classification in a fully-supervised fashion. In [18], authors
        How to Achieve High Classification Accuracy with Just a Few Labels         3

train six different CNN models based on LeNet-5 model on a public dataset
with 12 classes. They convert 249 statistical characteristics into a 2-d 16×16
image and report high accuracy. In [9], authors use CNN, LSTM and various
combinations on a private dataset captured at RedIRIS, a Spanish academic and
research backbone network. They use time series features of the first 20 packets,
including source port, destination port, payload size, window size, etc.
    In [10], a framework comprising a CNN and Stacked Auto-Encoder (SAE)
is trained on a dataset containing 12 VPN and non-VPN traffic classes. They
use raw header and payload bytes as input. In [2], Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) is used to convert the time series features of a flow to an image.
Then, produced images are used as input to a CNN model. The only study that
investigate QUIC protocol is [14]. They capture five Google services: Google
Hangout Chat, Google Hangout Voice Call, YouTube, File transfer, and Google
play music. They use CNN model and report high accuracy. They capture 150GB
of data and train the model in a fully-supervised manner.
    In [12], a general framework, covering all previous deep learning-based traffic
classifiers, is introduced that can deal with any typical network traffic classi-
fication task. The paper provide a seven-step training process, including data
capturing, data pre-processing, model selection and evaluation, etc. The frame-
work also requires large enough dataset for training. In summary, in comparison,
all work discussed above assumes large quantities of labeled data. Furthermore,
packet sampling is not considered in their approaches.


3   Problem Statement

As discussed earlier, deep learning models have been adopted for (encrypted)
traffic classification. Because deep learning approaches are capable of automatic
feature selection and capturing highly complex patterns, they demonstrate high
classification accuracy. However, a critical challenge is that deep models require
large amounts of labeled data during training. Capturing and labeling a dataset
is a non-trivial and cumbersome process.
    First, because encryption mechanisms are heavily used in today’s Internet,
labeling a dataset captured in an operational network is almost impossible unless
an accurate classifier is already available. As a result, labeling process is usually
done by assuring that only one target class is available during capturing by
turning off all other applications on the device used to generate traffic. This is
typically done in an isolated environment or at the edge of the network. Traffic
distribution in such an environment may differ from an operational network,
especially at the core of the network. In addition, to capture large amounts of
labeled data, previous studies often runs scripts to automatically perform certain
actions that can be captured and labeled without manual labor. However, we will
show that network traffic generated by scripts may have a different distribution
from that of human-generated traffic, causing poor performance on real traffic.
    In contrast, unlabeled data is abundant and readily available in an opera-
tional network. Capturing a large unlabeled dataset is an easy task. There are
