           sustainability

Article
BlockDeepNet: A Blockchain-Based Secure Deep
Learning for IoT Network
Shailendra Rathore 1 , Yi Pan 2 and Jong Hyuk Park 1, *
 1    Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University of Science and Technology,
      Seoul 01811, Korea
 2    Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30302-5060, USA
 *    Correspondence: jhpark1@seoultech.ac.kr; Tel.: +82-2-970-6702
                                                                                                    
 Received: 26 May 2019; Accepted: 18 July 2019; Published: 22 July 2019                             


 Abstract: The recent development in IoT and 5G translates into a significant growth of Big data
 in 5G—envisioned industrial automation. To support big data analysis, Deep Learning (DL) has
 been considered the most promising approach in recent years. Note, however, that designing
 an effective DL paradigm for IoT has certain challenges such as single point of failure, privacy leak
 of IoT devices, lack of valuable data for DL, and data poisoning attacks. To this end, we present
 BlockDeepNet, a Blockchain-based secure DL that combines DL and blockchain to support secure
 collaborative DL in IoT. In BlockDeepNet, collaborative DL is performed at the device level to
 overcome privacy leak and obtain enough data for DL, whereas blockchain is employed to ensure
 the confidentiality and integrity of collaborative DL in IoT. The experimental evaluation shows
 that BlockDeepNet can achieve higher accuracy for DL with acceptable latency and computational
 overhead of blockchain operation.

 Keywords: IoT; deep learning; blockchain; security and privacy; collaborative deep learning




1. Introduction
      The rapid advancement in 5G-envisioned industrial automation combines IoT and leading mobile
wireless connectivity (5G) to deliver high mobility, availability, and connectivity support in industrial
automation. It further enables significant growth in data generation on the IoT platform due to
the integration of autonomous machine, mobile robot, and many sensors [1,2]. A recent analyst report
valued the global IoT data-management market at around $27.13 billion in 2017 and predicted that
it would reach approximately $94.47 billion in 2024, growing at Compound Annual Growth Rate
(CAGR) of slightly above 19.51 percent between 2018 and 2024 [3]. To support the analysis of large
amounts of data and provide valuable information for the prediction, classification, and detection
of future events in IoT, the Deep Learning (DL) paradigm is often employed. As a strong analytic
tool, DL enables the reliable mining (feature extraction and representation) of IoT big data generated
and collected from various complex and noisy environments [4]. It has become a promising approach
for various informatics applications, such as autonomous driving, human activity recognition, anomaly
detection, bioinformatics, object detection, and face recognition in IoT [5]. The convergence of DL
and IoT has been applied in many real-world tasks and considered the most desirable choice to solve
the IoT big data problems. For instance, DL can support the accurate prediction of electricity power
consumption in the smart home by collecting and processing data from smart meters, which further
help in improving the electricity supply from the smart grid.
      With the significant growth in data-driven applications and generated data, however, DL is
expected to be more resource-intensive and to be the dominant computing workload in IoT in
the future. To support efficient big data analysis and handle dominant computing workload in


Sustainability 2019, 11, 3974; doi:10.3390/su11143974                     www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 3974                                                                         2 of 15



IoT, various DL paradigms have been presented in the recent year. The existing paradigms can be
divided into three categories: (1) Cloud intelligence, (2) Fog intelligence, and (3) Edge intelligence.
In cloud intelligence, a single DL model is deployed at the central cloud server to perform big data
analysis in IoT [6]. Note, however, that the IoT network generates a large amount of data that
impose heavy communication and computation tasks on the cloud server, such as raw data collection,
pre-processing, features extraction, and analysis; hence, the rapid escalation in the server calculation load
and communication frequency that further lead to overwhelming, and sometimes unbearable, load to
the centralized servers. To address these challenges, Fog intelligence—wherein the data collection
and computation tasks of DL are shifted to the fog layer in a distributed manner—was presented [7].
Each fog node prepares a DL model by training its own private data individually and periodically
shares the intermediate parameters of the model to the cloud server. The cloud server then aggregates
the received parameter and continuously updates the individual model at each fog node. Consequently,
the distributed learning at each fog node lowers the computation and communication overhead for
the cloud server. Note, however, that the cloud server has full control over the individual learning
model, which leads to single point of failure. On the other hand, edge intelligence has the cloud server
offloading the intermediate learning and computation tasks to the edge layer. To offload the processing,
edge intelligence distributes the DL model in such a way that the lower layers of the model are
trained into edge nodes and the higher layers of the model are processed into the cloud server. This is
because parts of the DL layers are offloaded at the edge, which, in turn, reduce the intermediate data
computation and processing at the cloud layer [8]. Nonetheless, the cloud server in edge intelligence
still has full control on the DL model as higher layers are trained at the cloud server, which might
result in single point of failure. In addition, all three paradigms do not maintain the full privacy of
the data contributors (IoT devices). This is because IoT devices are excluded from the DL process
as the data for the learning process are collected without the permission of the device owner, which may
cause a privacy leak. Due to the privacy issue, some data contributors do not share their data to
the server; hence the difficulty in accumulating enough training data for the distributed DL model,
which, in turn, leads to a weak DL model with low accuracy. Furthermore, all three forms of intelligence
may suffer from a data poisoning attack wherein any of the entities in the IoT network may demonstrate
adversarial behavior in the distributed DL process, e.g., a malicious server can deliberately implant
misleading training data, which may disrupt the distributed DL process and wrongly update the model
parameters into distributed DL models. Malicious data poisoning at the cloud server may disrupt
the individual DL model at the edge of the IoT network [9].
      From the aforesaid discussion of existing DL paradigms, we pointed out four major challenges that
require solving to design an effective DL paradigm for IoT: (a) Single point of failure, (b) Privacy leak,
(c) Training data insufficiency, and (d) Data poisoning attack. Given the migration of the DL platform
on the IoT edge device, the learning task is performed directly on the edge devices without depending
on the cloud server. Recently, Matt and Rei et al. [10] deployed a DL model directly on an edge device
using Google TensorFlow models and Project Flogo. Moreover, Tang, et al. [11] demonstrated that
the DL task on an IoT device can benefit from the tailoring of individual device data on the device itself,
thus maintaining data privacy. Moreover, data training performs nearer to the device, which reduces
the communication overhead and ensures low latency. In this sense, the DL task on an IoT device
can be regarded as advantageous in terms of not only offloading computation overhead, low latency,
and cost saving, but also as a solution to the problem of single point of failure and privacy leak.
      On the other hand, a blockchain supporting a secure network over the untrusted parties has
recently become an attractive choice to provide a secure, scalable IoT network [12]. It delivers the silent
features of decentralization and immutable distributed ledger to provide privacy in an IoT network.
Decentralization in blockchain supports secure sharing of resources and data among all the member
nodes in an IoT network that overcomes many-to-one traffic flows and central control dependency
and provides enough data for big data analysis. Consequently, it eliminates the problem of single
point of failure and training data insufficiency and reduces the communication delay. In addition,
Sustainability 2019, 11, 3974                                                                           3 of 15



the immutable distributed ledger securely maintains information about all the member nodes of an IoT
network in the form of blocks cryptographically controlled by all member nodes. This feature prevents
malicious tampering of training data, which, in turn, responds very well to data poisoning attacks in
an IoT network.
     The DL task on an IoT device (device intelligence) and Blockchain can jointly solve the challenges
in the existing DL paradigms for IoT. Therefore, the primary goal of our study is the integration of
device intelligence and blockchain technique to support a collaborative, secure DL paradigm for IoT.
The research contributions of our study include:
•     Introduction of BlockDeepNet, a Blockchain-based secure DL for IoT network that can support
      a secure, collaborative DL at the device level and which provides data integrity and confidentiality
      in the IoT network.
•     Introduction of a collaborative DL mechanism in the blockchain environment to support local
      learning models at the device level and aggregation of these local learning models at the edge
      server through blockchain transactions.
•     Presentation of prototype implementation and experimental evaluation to demonstrate
      the practicability and feasibility of the BlockDeepNet system.

2. Related Work
      Along with the recent advancement in the IoT, many researchers have presented their
methodologies to provide an efficient big data analysis in IoT. The recent methodologies are mainly
focused on the use of DL model that typically contains three layers: input layer, hidden layer, and output
layer. A multiple hidden layer (called depth of the model) is used in the DL model, wherein each hidden
layer contains a certain number of neurons to provide an accurate feature representation and extraction
at the different level. Typically, the neurons at each layer are responsible for the learning of hierarchical
features from the input data and give a final output at the output layer in terms classification, prediction,
and many more [5]. A neuron takes multiple inputs and gives a single output. The neurons at the lth
layer take input from the output of the neurons at the previous (l − 1)th layer. To connect the neurons
from the subsequent layer, weight and bias parameters are used. For instance, a neuron            j at the lth
                                                    th
                                                                                             
layer relates to a neuron i at the previous (l − 1) layer using model parameters wij , bi . These model
parameters are required to be learned to minimize the model error (i.e., the difference between final
model output and targeted value) for accomplishing the DL task successfully. A back-propagation
approach that relies on the gradient descent method is used to learn the model parameters efficiently.
The detailed process for the back-propagation approach can be found in Abeshu et al. [7].
      The abovementioned process to train a multilayer and complex DL model entails a high
computational overhead. To mitigate this issue, various novel DL paradigms have been proposed by
many researchers at the different layer of IoT such as cloud edge, and fog [4–8]. Zhang et al. [6] presented
a DL approach wherein the learning task is performed at the cloud layer to improve the learning
efficiency for big data analysis. In Abeshu et al. [7], the authors proposed an innovative distributed
deep learning approach called a Fog-to-Things Computing, wherein various fog nodes at the fog layer
are responsible for carrying out the DL task to mitigate issue of less scalability and low accuracy in big
data analysis. They evaluated their proposed approach using a case study of attack detection in IoT
and demonstrated the effectiveness of the distributed DL. Li at al. [8] examined the possibility of DL
into the edge computing environment and designed a new offloading methodology to offload the deep
learning task from cloud to edge layer in IoT. The authors demonstrated that the DL task can be carried
out by training the lower layer of DL at the edge nodes and the higher layer of the DL at the cloud
layer. Mohammadi et al. [4] summarized and analyzed existing researches reported of DL in IoT.
      As described in the preceding section, the existing research faces major challenges, such as Single
point of failure, Privacy leak, Training data insufficiency, and Data poisoning attack. To mitigate
these challenges, our research focused on performing the collaborative DL task at the device level
with the integration of blockchain technology. In Tang et al. [11], the authors demonstrated that
