               sensors
Article
CBD: A Deep-Learning-Based Scheme for Encrypted Traffic
Classification with a General Pre-Training Method
Xinyi Hu 1,2, * , Chunxiang Gu 1,2 , Yihang Chen 1 and Fushan Wei 1,2

                                          1   State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing, Zhengzhou 450001, China;
                                              gcx5209@126.com (C.G.); cyhpaper@163.com (Y.C.); weifs831020@163.com (F.W.)
                                          2   Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Zhengzhou 450001, China
                                          *   Correspondence: huxinyi.1994@foxmail.com


                                          Abstract: With the rapid increase in encrypted traffic in the network environment and the increasing
                                          proportion of encrypted traffic, the study of encrypted traffic classification has become increasingly
                                          important as a part of traffic analysis. At present, in a closed environment, the classification of
                                          encrypted traffic has been fully studied, but these classification models are often only for labeled data
                                          and difficult to apply in real environments. To solve these problems, we propose a transferable model
                                          called CBD with generalization abilities for encrypted traffic classification in real environments.
                                          The overall structure of CBD can be generally described as a of one-dimension CNN and the
                                          encoder of Transformer. The model can be pre-trained with unlabeled data to understand the
                                          basic characteristics of encrypted traffic data, and be transferred to other datasets to complete the
                                          classification of encrypted traffic from the packet level and the flow level. The performance of the
                                proposed model was evaluated on a public dataset. The results showed that the performance of the
         
                                          CBD model was better than the baseline methods, and the pre-training method can improve the
Citation: Hu, X.; Gu, C.; Chen,Y.;        classification ability of the model.
Wei, F. CBD: A Deep-Learning-Based
Scheme for Encrypted Traffic              Keywords: encrypted traffic classification; deep learning; transfer learning; nature language processing;
Classification with a General             unlabeled pre-training
Pre-Training Method. Sensors 2021, 21,
8231. https://doi.org/10.3390/
s21248231

                                          1. Introduction
Academic Editors: Nima Karimian
and Hossein Sayadi                              In recent years, with the rapid development of network technology and people’s
                                          gradual awareness of private data, a variety of encryption technologies have been widely
Received: 22 November 2021                used in network communications, resulting in a rapid increase in network encrypted
Accepted: 7 December 2021                 traffic. At the same time, encrypted traffic is also used by some people as the tool to hide
Published: 9 December 2021                activities, which also provides an opportunity for malicious network attackers to hide
                                          their command-and control activities. Therefore, encrypted traffic classification can better
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral      monitor abnormal conditions in the network, and detect network attack behaviors in time.
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   It has also contributed to the improvement in network service performance and the creation
published maps and institutional affil-   of a good network environment, which has gained widespread attetion from researchers.
iations.                                        Network traffic classification refers to using algorithms to construct a classification
                                          model for neiwork traffic, which has three levels of granularity for tasks: sequence-based,
                                          packet-based, and flow-based classification. The granularity can be determined according
                                          to practical scenarios, such as application classification, protocol identification, service
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.         analysis, etc. Network traffic classification plays a significant role in network management,
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        traffic control, and security detection. Meanwhile, the efficient and accurate classification
This article is an open access article    of network traffic is an important foundation for maintaining network security.
distributed under the terms and                 However, most of the existing research results are only implemented in a closed
conditions of the Creative Commons        environment. The experimental data are often labeled data, and training data and test
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     data often have high similarities. Moreover, some results tend to require more computing
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          resources and time. In a real environment, the data are often unlabeled, which can greatly
4.0/).




Sensors 2021, 21, 8231. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21248231                                                 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231                                                                                            2 of 18




                         decrease the performance of many classification models. To solve this problem, researchers
                         have tried to develop a model with a strong generalization ability.
                              In this work, we propose a model called CBD (based on a convolutional neural
                         network, bidirectional encoder representation from transformers and dense network) that
                         supports unlabeled data and has a certain generalization ability. It can directly learn from
                         unlabeled data and use this knowledge for model training. Model transfer can also be
                         carried out for different datasets, which only need to fine-tune the parameters to complete
                         the goal of encrypted traffic classification. The contributions of this paper are summarized
                         as follows:
                         •    A novel encrypted traffic classification model called CBD is designed. It combines a
                              Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Bidirectional Encoder Representation from
                              Transformers (BERT) to automatically learn the features of traffic data from the packet
                              level and flow level to achieve the encrypted traffic classification for applications.
                         •    A general pre-training method suitable for the field of encrypted traffic analysis is
                              proposed. For unlabeled data, this method proposes two tasks of identifying ciphertext
                              packets and identifying continuous flows, to deepen the model’s understanding and
                              learning of encrypted traffic data.
                         •    The CBD model has achieved good results when encrypting traffic classification. In
                              addition, the performence of the CBD model has obvious advantages compared with
                              other methods.
                              The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the related work
                         of network traffic analysis. In Section 3, we provide a detailed description of the overall
                         model structure. In Section 4, we introduce the specific details of the experiment, and
                         we evaluate and compare the experimental results. Finally, we conclude this paper in
                         Section 5.

                         2. Related Work
                              As a multidisciplinary subject, machine learning has three important components:
                         data, features, and algorithms. Traditional machine learning methods use different algo-
                         rithms to build models and take the features of the raw data as input. After training the
                         models, the expected prediction results can be obtained in the testing phase. In recent
                         years, there has been an increase in research on machine learning, including deep learn-
                         ing and transfer learning. There has also been an increase in research on network traffic
                         classification using these methods. In this section, we briefly introduce some methods
                         for network traffic classification, ranging from deep learning methods to classic transfer
                         learning methods, and then to the applications of Transformer model.

                         2.1. Applications of Deep Learning
                               For traditional machine learning, the relevant features of the data are not obvious
                         in many cases, and it is necessary to perform feature extraction and feature selection
                         to obtain the features that can show the data. This feature engineering often relies on
                         expert experience, and the quality of the features is critical to the final results. With the
                         development of deep learning, due to its end-to-end model structure, which can effectively
                         reduce the high cost of feature engineering, more and more researchers have chosen to use
                         deep learning in various fields. In 2015, Ref. [1] deep learning was first used in the field of
                         traffic analysis, and a large amount of research subsequently emerged.
                               In 2017, Höchst et al. [2] proposed a method for unsupervised traffic flow classification
                         using the statistical features of flows and clustering based on neural autoencoders. This
                         method was based on the feature vector of the time interval and used the semi-automatic
                         cluster marking method, which can effectively promote the flow classification independent
                         of the known class of traffic. The evaluation experiment was conducted on real datasets
                         captured within four months. The results showed that for seven different classes of mobile
                         traffic classification, this method can achieve an average accuracy of 80% and an average
                         recall rate of 75%.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231                                                                                           3 of 18




                              In 2018, Li et al. [3] proposed a Byte Segment Neural Network (BSNN) for protocol
                         classification based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). BSNN took network datagram
                         as input. First, the datagram was divided into multiple byte segments. These segments
                         were then fed to an encoder based on RNN. The information extracted by the encoder was
                         combined into a representation vector of the entire datagram. Finally, the softmax function
                         was applied to use this vector to predict the application protocol of the datagram, provoding
                         the classification result. Experiments on the real-world data of different protocols showed
                         that the BSNN classification of five protocols can achieve an average F1-score of about
                         95.82%, which was better than traditional machine-learning-based methods and packet
                         inspection methods.
                              In 2019, Marín et al. [4] proposed two methods for malicious network traffic detection
                         based on deep learning, depending on different forms of raw data. The method based
                         on the raw packet combines CNN and Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network, and
                         the method based on the raw flow uses CNN. The experimental results showed that the
                         performance of the method based on the raw packet was equivalent to that obtained
                         through expert knowledge, while the performance of the method based on the raw flow
                         was better than the performance obtained through expert knowledge. Moreover, when
                         the same input features were used, the deep learning model was better than the Random
                         Forest (RF) model used as the benchmark.
                              In 2020, Pacheco et al. [5] proposed a framework based on machine learning and deep
                         learning for the classification of heterogeneous Internet traffic in satellite communications.
                         The machine learning method chose rf, and the deep learning methods chose 1d and
                         2dcnn. This solution combined a classification solution in the satellite architecture for
                         QoS management. By dividing the Internet protocol technology and using the multi-label
                         classification method to process the tunnel connection, the Internet flow can be classified.
                         In addition, the specific feature extraction process of the tunnel connection was designed.
                         The experiment verified the reliability of the simulated Internet network placed on the
                         cloud platform, and also provided guidance for future work on the simulated and real
                         satellite platforms.
                              In 2020, Aceto et al. [6] combined and summarized some existing deep-learning-
                         based traffic classification methods, and proposed a general framework for mobile traffic
                         classification based on deep learning. To evaluate the framework, the authors conducted
                         experiments on three mobile datasets of human user activity. The results showed that the
                         classification result was better than the machine learning baseline method and the deep
                         learning baseline method.
                              In 2021, Hu et al. [7] proposed a model CNN LSTM Dense Network (CLD-Net) to
                         classify encrypted network traffic based on CNN and LSTM. This model introduced the
                         strategy of recombing traffic in the data-preprocessing part, which can effectively improve
                         the efficiency of neural network feature learning. In addition, a method for converting
                         the format of the time interval between adjacent packets was proposed, which can fuse
                         time information and payload information into a new packet matrix. The method was
                         validated on the public dataset ISCXVPN2016 [8]. The results showed that the method
                         can classify whether encrypted network flows used a Virtual Private Network (VPN) with
                         98% accuracy, and accurately classify the specific t