Neural Processing Letters (2021) 53:3497–3523
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11063-021-10534-6




CSCNN: Cost‑Sensitive Convolutional Neural Network
for Encrypted Traffic Classification

Shiva Soleymanpour1 · Hossein Sadr2                 · Mojdeh Nazari Soleimandarabi2

Accepted: 18 May 2021 / Published online: 17 June 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021


Abstract
By the rapid development of the Internet and online applications, traffic classification not
only has changed to an interesting topic in the field of computer networks but also plays a
key role in cyber-security and network management. Although numerous studies have been
conducted in recent years, encrypted traffic classification still remains a major challenge
and unbalanced data is known as one of the most important problems in this field. Even
though previous researches have focused on dealing with the class imbalance problem in
the pre-processing step via machine learning and specifically deep learning methods, they
are still confronted with some restrictions. To this end, a new traffic classification method
is presented in this paper that aims to deal with the problem of unbalanced data along
the training process. The proposed method utilized a Cost-Sensitive Convolution Neural
Network (CSCNN) where a cost matrix was employed to assign a cost to each misclas-
sification based on the distribution of each class. These costs were then utilized during the
training process to increase the final classification accuracy. Various experiments were car-
ried out to explore the performance of the proposed method for the tasks of traffic classifi-
cation, traffic description, and application identification.‌According to the obtained results,
CSCNN achieved higher efficiency compared to both machine learning and deep learning
based methods on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset.

Keywords Traffic classification · Encrypted traffic · Deep learning · Convolutional neural
network · Cost-sensitive learning




* Hossein Sadr
  Sadr@qiau.ac.ir
    Shiva Soleymanpour
    Soleymanpour.sh@gmail.com
    Mojdeh Nazari Soleimandarabi
    Mojdeh.nazari@qiau.ac.ir
1
    Department of Computer Engineering, Ayandegan Institute of Higher Education, Tonekabon, Iran
2
    Department of Computer Engineering, Rasht Branch, Islamic Azad University, Rasht, Iran


                                                                                                   13
                                                                                         Vol.:(0123456789)
3498                                                                        S. Soleymanpour et al.


1 Introduction

Traffic classification is generally known as a prominent concept in network security and
management. Enhancing the number of users and online applications has also increased
Internet traffic while about 80 % of Internet traffic belongs to peer-to-peer applications [1,
2]. The growth of bandwidth requirements and the restricted capacity of communication
lines have made a remarkable need for enhancing the quality of network resource utiliza-
tion. To this end, network traffic classification can help enhance network quality, licensing,
accounting, and security [3].
    The asymmetric architecture of today’s network access links can be considered as one
of the most important network classification examples that is based on this hypothesis that
clients generally download more than what they upload. Furthermore, the pervasiveness
of symmetric-demand applications (like peer-to-peer (P2P) applications, voice over IP
(VoIP), and video call) led to alternations in clients’ demands to deviate from the men-
tioned assumption [4]. Therefore, it is necessary to provide application-level knowledge for
allocating enough resources to such applications to be able to supply a satisfactory experi-
ence for the clients. Traffic identification and classification of the various applications and
services on the network are considered as the primary step for managing the networks.
Furthermore, according to the rapid growth of malware, while they try to conceal their
traffic to escape intrusion detection systems and firewalls, traffic classification is changed
to a necessary initial step in network security systems and intrusion detection against cyber
threats [5–7].
    Network traffic classification methods are generally categorized into four groups of
port-based, payload inspection, statistical, pattern matching, and machine learning methods
[2, 8, 9]. Port-based methods employ port communications in the TCP/UDP header. In
spite of the simplicity and speed of these methods, they cannot classify all protocols owing
to the existence of dynamic and private ports. Furthermore, payload inspection is a very
public term for acquiring the payload of a packet and it is referred to deep packet inspec-
tion. Although many techniques have been presented to increase the efficiency of payload
inspection, privacy, encryption, complexity, and high processing time are still identified as
their drawbacks [2].
    According to the fact that those traffic classification methods that do not need access to
the load capacity of packets cannot be used for specifying all protocols, some legal restric-
tions may be performed to prevent access to the load capacity of packets and protect user
privacy. Additionally, by encrypting the load capacity, access to the load capacity will be
also denied. Consequently, statistical classification methods prevent these issues by utiliz-
ing independent load capacity parameters including arrival time packet length and flow
length. It must be mentioned that although statistical methods cannot provide remarkable
accuracy, they are able to carry out the classification at a high speed [10, 11].
    Pattern matching methods are known as another group of network traffic classification
methods that have been utilized in this field for a long time. Based on the fact that they
need to read the contents of packets and reading the encrypted data is hard, they are con-
fronting with some barriers and need to overcome some problems like scalability for pro-
cessing multi-GB connections and supporting large volumes of signatures [2, 12]. On the
other hand, with the growth of machine learning methods, they have changed to signifi-
cant methods in the field of network traffic classification. Although machine learning based
methods are able to overcome some of the existing limitations and insufficiencies of the
previous methods, besides requiring feature engineering, they are still confronted with two


13
CSCNN: Cost‑Sensitive Convolutional Neural Network for…                                  3499


crucial challenges [6, 13]. Firstly, they cannot support real-time classification owing to the
high processing load of the large amounts of data on the network. Secondly, they are suf-
fering from overfitting while they are confronted with unbalanced data due to their unbal-
anced distribution among various classes [5, 6].
    Specifically, unbalanced data not only decrease the classification efficiency but also
enhance the incorrect classification rate that leads to an impracticable cost to the network
and causes crucial challenges to the security and management of network resources. To
overcome these issues, a re-sampling method at the pre-processing step of machine learn-
ing methods has been used to balance the data. Nonetheless, loss of information and false
information production are also known as the potential disadvantages of these methods [1,
14].
    In recent years, deep learning methods have also achieved remarkable attention for net-
work traffic classification owing to the fact that they do not need handcraft features and
are able to extract efficient features automatically without human intervention [15, 16].
Noteworthy, class imbalance has also a negative influence on the classification efficiency
of these methods. To overcome this insufficiency, a deep learning based encrypted traffic
classification framework is proposed in this paper. The proposed method utilizes the Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) integrated with cost-sensitive learning to provide a clas-
sification model that aims to manage the problem of unbalanced data, which is entitled as
Cost-Sensitive CNN (CSCNN). The proposed method employs a cost matrix that assigns a
cost to each misclassification according to the distribution of each class. This cost is then
applied to the network during the training phase. The cost matrix is created in the preproc-
essing step using data distribution of various classes where higher cost is assigned to the
minority classes in comparison to the majority classes.
    To evaluate the efficiency of the proposed method for tasks of traffic classification,
application identification, and traffic description, the ISCX VPN-nonVPN [17] dataset
was used in our experiments. According to the obtained results, CSCNN not only achieved
higher performance in comparison to other existing methods but also was able to identify
more minority class samples correctly. It can be owing to the fact that CSCNN assigns
higher cost to the minority classes and lower cost to the majority classes. CSCNN then
used these costs to update weight along with the training phase that made the model more
sensitive to the minority classes. The advantages of the proposed traffic classification
method that makes it superior compared to other classification schemes are mentioned in
the following:

• The proposed method is based on deep neural networks and therefore there is no need
  for experts to extract features related to the network traffic.
• The proposed method can decrease the influence of unbalanced data, especially class
  imbalance, on the efficiency of traffic classification using a cost-sensitive matrix which
  yields to assigning higher cost to the minority classes and lower cost to the majority
  classes.
• To the best of our knowledge, deep learning has been rarely employed for the task of
  traffic classification. However, we did our best to compare our proposed method with
  two of the most famous deep learning based methods for all tasks of traffic classifica-
  tion, application identification, and traffic description on the ISCX VPN-nonVPN data-
  set.

   We also compared our proposed method with machine learning based methods that
have conducted their experiments on this dataset. Based on the empirical results, it can be

                                                                                  13
