                applied
                sciences
Article
Generating Network Intrusion Detection Dataset Based on Real
and Encrypted Synthetic Attack Traffic
Andrey Ferriyan 1, *,† , Achmad Husni Thamrin 1,† , Keiji Takeda 2,† and Jun Murai 3,†

                                          1   Graduate School of Media and Governance, Keio University, Kanagawa 252-0882, Japan; husni@sfc.keio.ac.jp
                                          2   Faculty of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University, Kanagawa 252-0882, Japan;
                                              keiji@sfc.keio.ac.jp
                                          3   Keio University, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan; jun@sfc.keio.ac.jp
                                          *   Correspondence: andrey@keio.jp
                                          †   These authors contributed equally to this work.


                                          Abstract: The lack of publicly available up-to-date datasets contributes to the difficulty in evaluating
                                          intrusion detection systems. This paper introduces HIKARI-2021, a dataset that contains encrypted
                                          synthetic attacks and benign traffic. This dataset conforms to two requirements: the content require-
                                          ments, which focus on the produced dataset, and the process requirements, which focus on how the
                                          dataset is built. We compile these requirements to enable future dataset developments and we make
                                          the HIKARI-2021 dataset, along with the procedures to build it, available for the public.

                                          Keywords: network intrusion detection system; network intrusion datasets; encrypted network
                                          traffic; https; tls
         
         

Citation: Ferriyan, A.; Thamrin,
A.H.; Takeda, K.; Murai, J. Generating
Network Intrusion Detection Dataset
                                          1. Introduction
Based on Real and Encrypted                     It is challenging to estimate how much malicious detection methods have improved
Synthetic Attack Traffic. Appl. Sci.      in the intrusion detection system (IDS) field. Training IDSs that employ machine learning
2021, 11, 7868. https://doi.org/          depends on the available datasets, but obtaining a reliable dataset for comparison is
10.3390/app11177868                       difficult. Among the factors that make it difficult to compare datasets are a lack of proper
                                          documentation of the methods [1], a lack of comparison methodology [2], and a lack of
Academic Editor: Rafael T.                important features, such as ground-truth labels, and publicly available and real-world
de Sousa, Jr.                             environment traffic. Furthermore, network traffic nowadays is mainly being encrypted for
                                          communication security and privacy, and only very few datasets reflect this situation.
Received: 2 August 2021
                                                The dataset is an important part to build machine learning-based IDS models. The
Accepted: 21 August 2021
                                          process starts with capturing traffic either as a packet or flow from the internet. Afterward,
Published: 26 August 2021
                                          the captured traffic is compiled into a specific type of data containing network-related
                                          features, including labeling. A general machine learning-based IDS can be shown in
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          Figure 1. Labeling is a crucial process for the dataset. Handling ground-truth is a real
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          challenge, especially when experts cannot determine whether the traffic is an attack or
published maps and institutional affil-
                                          benign. This is a reason why researchers use synthetic traffic. However, this implies
iations.
                                          the generated traffic is not representative of the real world environment. In a nutshell,
                                          the process of making a dataset starts with capturing traffic, and ends with the final
                                          preprocessing phase. The final result from the preprocessing phase is a labeled dataset.
                                          Each data point is classified into malicious or benign. The file contains tabular data in a
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                          human-readable format, such as a CSV file, or binary form, such as an IDX file. The number
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          of detected malicious or false alarms can be used to benchmark the dataset.
This article is an open access article
                                                The existing datasets lack reliably encrypted traces and practicality to produce as
distributed under the terms and
                                          the basis to build the comprehensive model for the detection of new attacks. Most of the
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                          existing research that employs encrypted traffic are focused on different scopes, such as
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          traffic classification and analysis [3]. Although such research exists [4], the dataset is not
4.0/).
                                          publicly available, due to the sensitivity of the data.




Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 7868. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11177868                                               https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 7868                                                                                       2 of 17




                            Figure 1. A general machine learning-based IDS flow.

                                  Benchmark datasets are an important basis to evaluate and compare the quality among
                            different IDS. Based on the detection methods, there are three types of IDS: signature-
                            based, anomaly-based, and a combination of signature-based and anomaly-based. These
                            three types of IDS benchmark their systems with the KDD99 dataset, which is obsolete.
                            The signature-based one focuses on building automatic signature generation [5], while
                            the anomaly-based focuses on observing an outlier from the legitimate profile [6]. The
                            signature-based type relies on a pattern-matching method to identify and attempt to match
                            with the signatures database. When an attack attempt matches with the signature, an alert
                            is raised. The signature-based type has the highest accuracy and lowest false alarm rate
                            but this type cannot detect unknown attacks. While the anomaly-based type might detect
                            unknown attacks by comparing abnormal traffic with the normal traffic, the ratio of false
                            alarm rates remains high.
                                  In this paper, we present a tool and requirements for making a new dataset created
                            by generating encrypted network traffic in a real-world environment. Our contributions
                            are two-fold. First, we propose new requirements for creating new datasets. Second,
                            we create a new IDS dataset that covers the network traffic with encrypted traces. The
                            dataset is labeled with attacks, such as brute force login and probing. The packet traces
                            with payload are provided along with the background traffic and ground-truth data. We
                            extract and adopt more than 80 features from the CICIDS-2017 dataset for the ground-truth,
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 7868                                                                                            3 of 17




                            benign traffic, and malicious traffic by using Zeek [7], an open source network security
                            monitoring tool.
                                 The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the existing datasets and we
                            provide the most important features from their dataset, such as the duration of capturing
                            of the network traffic, what kind of attack they implemented, and what format of data they
                            used. From the review, we summarize the requirements that need to be satisfied to build a
                            practical, implemented dataset and compare it among the existing datasets in Section 3.
                            In Section 4, we describe the dataset generation methodology along with the attack traffic
                            generation and explain the characteristics of the attack traffic. Subsequently, we describe
                            the network configuration for generating network traffic, the scenarios, the tools and code
                            we used to generate, and the duration of capturing the network features. In Section 5, we
                            analyze the dataset and provide information on how the labeling works. Finally, the last
                            section concludes this paper.

                            2. Review of Existing Datasets
                                 Many researchers have published papers based on generated IDS datasets, such as
                            ISCX [8], UNSW-NB15 [9], and UGR’16 [10]. In this section, we introduce several IDS
                            datasets with their characteristics. We highlight several important requirements from
                            their perspective.

                            2.1. KDD99
                                  The KDD99 dataset was created in 1999, using tcpdump, and was built based on the
                            data captured by the DARPA 98 IDS evaluation program [11]. The training data are around
                            four gigabytes of compressed TCP data from seven weeks of network traffic. The network
                            traffic contains attack traffic and normal traffic. The capture of the network traffic was done
                            in a simulated environment. The dataset contains a total of 24 attack types, which fall into
                            four main categories: Denial of Service (DOS), Remote to Local (R2L), User to Root (U2R),
                            and probing. KDD99 has been used extensively in IDS research. The report [12] showed
                            that during 2010–2015, 125 published papers performed IDS evaluation using KDD99.
                            While this dataset is considered inadequate for evaluation, such as a lot of redundant
                            instances recorded, the main problem is that the dataset is not up to date with the recent
                            situation and attack vectors. Although many researchers were already convinced with this
                            information, studies from another group of researchers argued that this dataset is the most
                            widely used for benchmarking [13] or to limit their study only for KDD99 [14].

                            2.2. MAWILab
                                  MAWI was built in 2001 and consists of a set of labels locating traffic anomalies in
                            the MAWI archive [15]. This dataset contains tcpdump packet traces captured from an
                            operational testbed network in a link between Japan and the United States. The archive
                            contains 15 min of daily traces. This dataset is huge with a very long period. The labeled
                            MAWI archive is known as MAWILab, obtained from a graph-based methodology that
                            combines different and independent anomaly detectors [16]. MAWI archives labeling is
                            based on inferences that results in no ground-truth traffic that can be used for evaluation.
                            The label has three classes: anomalous for a true anomaly, suspicious indicates that the
                            traffic is likely to be anomalous, and notice is assigned as an anomaly but it does not reach
                            a consensus from all anomaly detectors. Several researchers used MAWILab for anomaly
                            detection [17] and generating labeled flow [18]. The limitation of this dataset is that the
                            packet traces are captured for 15 min each day. The header information is available in the
                            packet traces but the payload is removed.

                            2.3. CAIDA (Center of Applied Internet Data Analysis)
                                 CAIDA has several different types of datasets, categorized as ongoing, one-time
                            snapshot, and complete [19]. CAIDA collects the data from different locations, and each
                            of the datasets has different characteristics, such as Distributed Denial of Services (DDoS)
