                                                                                    Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning
                                                                                               Vol-3 Issue-2, October 2022, PP.15-21
                                                                                                        ISSN : 2582-7464 (Online)


A Review of Deep Learning Techniques for
Encrypted Traffic Classification
Auwal Sani Iliyasu 1, Ibrahim Abba 2, Badariyya Sani Iliyasu 3, Abubakar Sadiq Muhammad 4

1
  Department of Computer Engineering Technology, Kano State Polytechnic, Kano, Nigeria.
2
  Department of Electrical Engineering Technology, Kano State Polytechnic, Kano, Nigeria.
3
  Department of Computer Science, Federal College of Education (Technical) Bichi, Kano, Nigeria.
4
  Department of Computer Engineering Technology, Kano State Polytechnic, Kano, Nigeria.

*Corresponding Author: 1 engrausan@gmail.com, 2 ibrahimaba12950@yahoo.com, 3 ausan84@yahoo.co.uk, 4 alsiddiq4uhd@gmail.com,



    Abstract - Network traffic classification is significant for task such as Quality of Services (QoS) provisioning,
resource usage planning, pricing as well as in the context of security such as in Intrusion detection systems. The field
has received considerable attention in the industry as well as research communities where approaches such as Port
based, Deep packet Inspection (DPI), and Classical machine learning techniques were thoroughly studied. However,
the emergence of new applications and encryption protocols as a result of continuous transformation of Internet has
led to the rise of new challenges. Recently, researchers have employed deep learning techniques in the domain of
network traffic classification in order to leverage the inherent advantages offered by deep learning models such as
the ability to capture complex pattern as well as automatic feature learning. This paper reviews                    deep learning
based encrypted traffic classification techniques, as well as highlights the current research gap in the literature.

    Index Terms—Traffic classification, Encrypted traffic, Deep learning, Machine learning

1. Introduction
   A factor paramount to the management of a network and its security is Network traffic classification. It makes possible for
network operators to apply quality of service (QOS), resource usage planning, pricing and security policies (malware
detection, and intrusion detection) in accordance with the need of an application. Recently, the field is attracting more
researchers due to rapid changes in technologies associated with the internet and mobile communication. One of the
transformations is the use of encryption and obfuscation techniques, which are now prevalent in network applications.
Encrypted traffic is known to constitute more than 50% of Internet traffic as a result of increase in demand of privacy from
users in order to bypass censorship and enable access to services prohibited geographically [1]. This makes the field of traffic
classification to remain active as more challenges arise from use of encrypted network applications.
   Traditional approaches to traffic classification are:1) the port-based approach, 2) payload-based approach and 3)
statistical/machine learning approaches
   Port-based Approach: This classification method uses the official Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) list for
classifying applications thereby making it easier for implementation in real time. However, the use of dynamically assigned
ports numbers and use of other known port numbers by application to disguise their traffic render this approach ineffective
[2].
   Payload based approach: This classification method relies on the patterns or keywords in data packet a technique popularly
referred to as deep packet inspection (DPI) methods in some literatures. The approach provides very accurate results in
classifying applications [3] . Hence, it is mostly employed in commercial tools, however[4], DPI performs poorly against
encrypted traffics, and incurs high computational overhead [5].
   Statistical/Machine learning-based approaches: To address the limitation of the aforementioned approaches, methods base
on flow statistics were introduced. The main intuition behind such methods is that the statistical attributes of network traffic
are unique for different applications and can therefore be used to differentiate applications from each other [6]. Machine
learning (ML) methods on the other hand are highly efficient in dealing with statistical data[4]. Therefore, several machine
learning algorithms such as K-Nearest Neighbor[7], Random Forest [3] , Support Vector[8] Machines are employed.
                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                 Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning
                                                                                            Vol-3 Issue-2, October 2022, PP.15-21
                                                                                                     ISSN : 2582-7464 (Online)

These methods can effectively classify encrypted traffic, since, they rely on statistical attribute of the network traffic data.
   Recently, Deep learning (DL) which is a subset of ML have been widely applied for encrypted traffic classification. These
approaches do not require feature engineering, and can automatically learn features from the input data without the need for
a domain expert to perform feature selection[9],[10]. Thus, DL techniques perform effectively in large and complex data
which characterizes the modern-day network traffic [11]
   This work reviews research works that apply Deep learning models to classify encrypted traffic. The paper is organized as
follows: Section 2 describes Deep Learning architectures. Section 3 presents our taxonomy of Deep learning-based
techniques for encrypted traffic classification. In Section 4, Open challenges are discussed, and finally, section 5 concludes
the paper.

2. DL Architectures
   DL composed of multiple layers of artificial neurons capable of learning representation/pattern using multiple levels of
abstraction. DL has seen considerable adoption in many fields such as computer vision, Natural Language processing etc.
This subsection explains some state-of-the-art Deep Learning architectures commonly employed for encrypted traffic
classification.
A.   Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP)
   The Multi-layer Perceptron MLP, also known as feed-forward networks are neural networks architectures with at least one
hidden layer beside the conventional input and output layers. Layers in MLP are made up of nodes referred to as neurons,
each neuron is fully connected to all neurons in the previous layer. Neurons present in each given layer functions
independently without sharing any connection. These layers are connected to provide only unidirectional flow of
information. Hence the name feed-forward networks. The primary task of MLP is to approximate any given function by
making a neuron takes a sum of dot product of its weights with its inputs, and then pass it through a non-linear activation
function to produces an output. The output serves as input to another neuron in the subsequent layer. The last fully connected
layer is referred to as the output layer and represents the classes score in the classification context [12].




                                         Fig.1. Feed-forward Network Architecture
B.   Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
   Convolutional Neural Networks are designed to overcome the drawbacks of overfitting and scaling with high dimensional
data associated with regular neural network like MLP, whereby, each neuron in one layer is connected to all other neurons in
the next layer. CNN architecture models connectivity pattern of Neurons in mammalian visual cortex, in which individual
neurons respond to stimuli only in a limited region of a receptive field. It is made up of a sequence of layers called
convolutions. A collection of these fields overlaps to cover the visual area. Each neuron in a convolution layer is connected to
a small region of the preceding layer using what is termed as a kernel or filter. This highly reduces the parameter space, and
enables it to scales well with data of high dimension. Each layer of a CNN transforms multi-dimensional input volume to
another multi-dimensional output volume of neuron activation. However, there exists a layer called pooling which is often
sandwiched between one or two convolution layers to enable down sampling of the output. Finally, the last hidden layers of
CNN architecture usually employ fully connected layers [13].

                                                                                                                              16
                                                                                   Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning
                                                                                              Vol-3 Issue-2, October 2022, PP.15-21
                                                                                                        ISSN : 2582-7464 (Online)

C.   Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
   A neural network which has a self-recurrent connection in addition to forward flow of information is referred to as
Recurrent neural network. It is a form of artificial neural networks in which the self-recurrent connection acts as some kind of
memory that allows it to store temporal information. In this architecture, the output of a recurrent neuron at time step t is a
function of all the inputs from previous time steps. This feature of the RNN makes it more suited for sequential data such as
time series prediction and speech recognition in which good performance has been recorded in a number of literatures. The
long-short term memory (LSTM) was introduced to tackle the gradient problem associated with Conventional RNN when
training long sequences. LSTM are capable of detecting long-term dependencies in a data and also converge faster. Thus,
making them more preferable than the traditional RNN [14].
D.   Autoencoder
  Another form of artificial neural network is the Autoencoder. This ANN learns to reproduces a given input as its output.
The network is composed of Encoder function                     , a feature extraction function which is a hidden layer and a
decoder function            . The internal representation of the input data is learnt by the Encoder function while the decoder
function reconstructs the input from the output of the encoder function.




                                                       Fig. 3 Autoencoder

   It is worth noting that the output is not an exact replica of the input but an approximate value even though the Autoencoder
constructs a copy its input as its output. The model is constrained such that it prioritizes which aspect of the input data to learn.
As an analogy, noise could be added to the input the network will be trained to recover the original input. The presence of the
constraints forces the Autoencoder to learn efficient representation of the input data instead of copying the input directly to
the output. This feature makes the Autoencoder suitable for dimensionality reduction as the learned representation which are
referred to as codings have much lower dimensionality than the original input data. Autoencoders find suitable application in
model where new data that resembles the training data is randomly generated [15].
E.   Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
    GAN is a recently developed by Goodfellow et al [citation]. The model comprises of a combination of two neural
networks which are trained in adversarial setting. The first network composes of A generator which takes in a random noise
and generates new data instances, while the second neural network, receives input from both the generator and the original
training data and is termed as discriminator. Each data instances are then reviewed by the discriminator and a decision is
made on whether the data is from actual training dataset (real) or from the generator. Theoretically, there exist a point where
the generator captures the whole training data distribution and which the discriminator becomes unable to ascertain whether
the inputs are from the generator or not. Hence, the GAN is said to be fully trained at this point.

3. Taxonomy of Deep Learning for Encrypted Traffic Classification
  This work will employ five criteria to categorize research works in literature that apply deep learning techniques for
encrypted traffic classification problem
            ● Approach
            ● Features
            ● Model type
            ● Classification objective
            ● Learning mode

                                                                                                                                 17
