See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353227879



A Survey on Encrypted Network Trafﬁc Analysis Applications, Techniques, and
Countermeasures

Article in ACM Computing Surveys · July 2021
DOI: 10.1145/3457904




CITATIONS                                                                                                 READS
194                                                                                                       5,219


2 authors:

            Eva Papadogiannaki                                                                                       Sotiris Ioannidis
            Technical University of Crete                                                                            Technical University of Crete
            16 PUBLICATIONS 344 CITATIONS                                                                            341 PUBLICATIONS 9,031 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                               SEE PROFILE




 All content following this page was uploaded by Eva Papadogiannaki on 21 September 2021.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
A Survey on Encrypted Network Traffic Analysis Applications, Techniques and
Countermeasures

EVA PAPADOGIANNAKI, Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas
SOTIRIS IOANNIDIS, Technical University of Crete and Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas
The adoption of network traffic encryption is continually growing. Popular applications use encryption protocols to secure com-
munications and protect the privacy of users. In addition, a large portion of malware is spread through the network traffic taking
advantage of encryption protocols to hide its presence and activity. Entering into the era of completely encrypted communications
over the Internet, we must rapidly start reviewing the state-of-the-art in the wide domain of network traffic analysis and inspection, to
conclude if traditional traffic processing systems will be able to seamlessly adapt to the upcoming full adoption of network encryption.
    In this survey, we examine the literature that deals with network traffic analysis and inspection after the ascent of encryption
in communication channels. We notice that the research community has already started proposing solutions on how to perform
inspection even when the network traffic is encrypted and we demonstrate and review these works. In addition, we present the
techniques and methods that these works use and their limitations. Finally, we examine the countermeasures that have been proposed
in the literature in order to circumvent traffic analysis techniques that aim to harm user privacy.

CCS Concepts: • General and reference → Surveys and overviews; Surveys and overviews; • Networks → Network measure-
ment; Network security; Mobile networks; Security protocols; Network privacy and anonymity; Network measurement;
Network security; Mobile networks; • Security and privacy → Intrusion detection systems; Mobile and wireless secu-
rity; Security protocols; Web application security; Intrusion detection systems; Mobile and wireless security; Security
protocols.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Encrypted Network Traffic, Encrypted Network Traffic Analysis, Network Traffic Inspection,
Network Traffic Processing, Network Analytics, Application Analytics, Application Usage Analytics, QoS Analytics, QoE Analyt-
ics, Network Security, Network Intrusion Detection, Mobile Malware, User Privacy, Website Fingerprinting, PII Leakage, Device
Fingerprinting, Location Estimation, Network Middlebox, Network Function, Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Neural Networks,
Searchable Encryption, Network Traffic Interception, Network Packet Metadata


1    INTRODUCTION
The adoption of network encryption is rapidly growing. The 2019 Annual Report of Let’s Encrypt [19] states that in
just four years, global HTTPS page loads have increased from 39% to more than 80% [16]. In 2019, one year after TLS
1.3 been published as an RFC [15], IETF reports that its adoption is rapidly growing with a 30% of Chrome’s Internet
connections to negotiate TLS 1.3 [18]. Even though network encryption is crucial for the protection of users and their
privacy, it naturally introduces challenges for tools and mechanisms that perform deep packet inspection and rely
heavily on the processing of packet payloads. Typical applications of deep packet inspection are packet forwarding and
l7 filtering [6, 124], while it is a vital operation in firewalls, intrusion detection and prevention systems [21–23]. In
addition, the majority of content and service providers perform network analytics using deep packet inspection (DPI)
to improve network performance and provide good quality of service and experience to their users. However, with the
widespread adoption of network encryption protocols, solutions that rely on retrieving meaningful information from

Authors’ addresses: Eva Papadogiannaki, Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas, epapado@ics.forth.gr; Sotiris Ioannidis, Technical University
of Crete and Foundation for Research and Technology – Hellas, sotiris@ece.tuc.gr.
Manuscript submitted to ACM                                                                                                                         1
2                                                                                 Eva Papadogiannaki and Sotiris Ioannidis


packet payload contents are becoming less and less effective and new mechanisms must be employed to keep up with
network encryption.
    In this survey, we present the works that we find in the literature that are able to perform traffic processing and
inspection even when the network is encrypted. We examine the use cases of these works (e.g., network analytics) and
how authors achieve to implement such systems. Having no visibility over the packet payload contents introduces
major challenges. Thus, goal of this survey is to identify the means to achieve encrypted network traffic analysis and
inspection effectively. This survey will help researchers in the field to (i) understand the challenges of traffic inspection
when the network traffic is encrypted or tunnelled, (ii) discover the uses cases and applications of encrypted traffic
analysis, (iii) acquire knowledge on the methods that are used to achieve encrypted traffic analysis, (iv) deduce which
techniques are appropriate respecting the objectives of a system, (v) recognize the constraints each method presents,
and finally, (vi) identify the publicly available datasets that are appropriate for use.
    Figure 1 displays the taxonomy that we propose for the works that we examine in this survey. First, we divide the
works based on their use case and application goal. More specifically, we divide the works into four application domains:
(i) the network analytics domain, (ii) the network security domain, (iii) the user privacy domain and (iv) the domain of
network functions in middleboxes. Each work can be then characterized by the technique that is used (i.e., manipulation
of traffic metadata & characteristics, interception of encrypted traffic, and utilization of cryptographic functions) and its
main objectives (i.e., functionality, programmability and deployment).
    In Section 3 we discuss about the works that target the network analytics domain. We divide the works into more
detailed categories and we dedicate one subsection to one sub-category (e.g., in § 3.1 we present works that focus on
application and protocol classification, in § 3.2 we discuss works that identify application usage actions, etc.). Then, in
§ 3.4 we discuss about the algorithms and techniques used, in § 3.5 we present the publicly available datasets used and
in § 3.6 we examine the objectives and limitations of the works reviewed in the section. We follow the same paragraph
organization format for each one of the Sections 4–6. For completeness, the rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 offers background information about network traffic processing and inspection that could potentially help the
reader smoothly ingest the remaining sections. In Section 7, we discuss the countermeasures that have been developed
against encrypted network traffic analysis, and finally in Section 8, we discuss about the lessons that we acquire from
this survey. In the following paragraphs of this section, we present the related surveys that exist in the literature.

1.1   Related surveys
In this section, we present the related works that can be found in the literature. More specifically, we research the most
recent and popular surveys that exist in the domain of network traffic classification with focus on works that target
current trends in the area, such as encrypted and mobile networks. In 2015, Velan et al. [156] surveyed methods for
encrypted traffic analysis and classified the literature using a multi-level taxonomy proposed in [81]. The taxonomy
distinguishes the different traffic classification methods based on (i) the input (e.g., traffic payload or traffic properties),
(ii) the technique (e.g., payload inspection, statistical or machine learning), (iii) the output type and (iv) the dataset used.
The survey of Velan et al. covers the works that aim for application protocol and type detection in encrypted streams.
Our survey is more extensive; application and protocol identification in encrypted traffic is just a subset of the works that
we survey. In 2018, Conti et al. [48] published a study for network traffic analysis specifically for mobile devices. They
categorized the surveyed works based on the goal of the analysis (e.g., application identification, user fingerprinting),
the point of traffic capturing (e.g., mobile devices, Wi-Fi access points) and the targeted mobile platform (e.g., Android).
Their study includes works that inspect either unencrypted or encrypted traffic, but specifically on mobile devices. In
Manuscript submitted to ACM
