                                         Encrypted Internet Traffic Classification Using a
                                              Supervised Spiking Neural Network
                                         Ali Rasteh3,∗, Florian Delpech1, , Carlos Aguilar-Melchor1, , Romain
arXiv:2101.09818v2 [cs.LG] 21 Jul 2022




                                          Zimmer2, , Saeed Bagheri Shouraki3, , and Timothée Masquelier2
                                              1
                                                  Institut Supérieur de l’Aéronautique et de l’Espace (ISAE-SUPAERO),
                                                                       University of Toulouse, France
                                                   2
                                                       Cerco UMR 5549, CNRS, Université Toulouse 3, Toulouse, France
                                          3
                                              Artificial Creatures Laboratory, Electrical Engineering Department, Sharif
                                                                University of Technology, Tehran, Iran


                                                                                  July 22, 2022


                                                                                     Abstract
                                                       Internet traffic recognition is essential for access providers since it helps
                                                   them define adapted priorities in order to enhance user experience, e.g., a
                                                   high priority for an audio conference and a low priority for a file transfer.
                                                   As internet traffic becomes increasingly encrypted, the main classic traffic
                                                   recognition technique, payload inspection, is rendered ineffective. Hence
                                                   this paper uses machine learning techniques looking only at packet size
                                                   and time of arrival. For the first time, Spiking neural networks (SNNs),
                                                   which are inspired by biological neurons, were used for this task for two
                                                   reasons. Firstly, they can recognize time-related data packet features.
                                                   Secondly, they can be implemented efficiently on neuromorphic hardware.
                                                   Here we used a simple feedforward SNN, with only one fully connected
                                                   hidden layer, and trained in a supervised manner using the new method
                                                   known as Surrogate Gradient Learning. Surprisingly, such a simple SNN
                                                   reached an accuracy of 95.9% on ISCX datasets, outperforming previous
                                                   approaches. Besides better accuracy, there is also a significant improve-
                                                   ment in simplicity: input size, the number of neurons, trainable parame-
                                                   ters are all reduced by one to four orders of magnitude. Next, we analyzed
                                                   the reasons for this good performance. It turns out that, beyond spatial
                                                   (i.e., packet size) features, the SNN also exploits temporal ones, mainly
                                                   the nearly synchronous (i.e., within a 200ms range) arrival times of pack-
                                                   ets with specific sizes. Taken together, these results show that SNNs are
                                                   an excellent fit for encrypted internet traffic classification: they can be
                                          ∗ e-mail: ali.rasteh@ee.sharif.edu




                                                                                          1
      more accurate than conventional artificial neural networks (ANN), and
      they could be implemented efficiently on low-power embedded systems.


1     Introduction
Today, more than half of the global population uses the Internet network. The
amount of data exchanged through it increases each year endlessly, giving people
more access to information. Whether sending emails, downloading or uploading
files, watching videos on streaming platforms, chatting on social media, etc.,
all these operations involve devices interacting with computer servers located
around the world. To improve the integrity of traffic flows, a protocol stack
named TCP-IP is used (see e.g. [20] chap. 5). When data are exchanged via this
protocol stack, they are broken down into different packets. Traffic classification
consists of associating traffic flows comprised of data packets, with the categories
corresponding to different use cases (e.g., email, chat, file transfer, etc.).
     Increasing demands to protect privacy have led to the development of meth-
ods to encrypt traffic, and of different ways to navigate on the Internet anony-
mously, such as The Onion Router (Tor)[5] or Virtual Private Networks (VPN)
(see e.g. [24]). These techniques encrypt the whole original packets (payload
and headers) into a new encrypted payload, adding a new header to ensure
traffic handling in the VPN or Tor network. Thus neither the original payload
nor header are available for inspection, and the only features that can be used
for classification are the encrypted size of the original packet and the time at
which the packet is captured. With only these features, packet inspection is
not possible anymore, and statistical or machine learning techniques must be
used for traffic classification. The state-of-the-art results for such an approach
to traffic classification are based on ANNs.
     There are different types of neural networks that are used in different con-
texts:
    • Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [10] are mainly employed for im-
      age recognition and have a structure inspired by the primate’s visual cor-
      tex.
    • Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [23] are used for automatic speech or
      text recognition and take into account the temporal dimension by inter-
      connecting neurons to form cycles in the networks.
    • Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [15] are aimed at imitating biological
      neural networks. A neuron fires an electrical impulse called ”spike” when
      its membrane potential reaches a specific value, leading to a signal com-
      posed of spikes that propagate onto the subsequent neurons. They are
      very interesting for recognizing time-related patterns. Although SNNs
      are recurrent networks, their recursive architecture is the result of their
      neurons’ structure, and in that way, they differ from RNNs, which have
      recurrent connections between different neurons. Also, as described, they
      are entirely based on biological observations in contrast to RNNs.


                                         2
The main challenge of SNNs is that their binary nature prevents the use of
classic training methods like back-propagating gradient descent [18, 32, 31].
To solve this, most current methods are rate-based, meaning that they only
consider the number of spikes inside a temporal window, ignoring their times.
This is a severe limitation as different spike trains can have the same number of
spikes but present distinct temporal patterns. To solve this problem, different
alternatives have been developed. For instance, Neftci et al. 2019 [18] proposed
a surrogate gradient algorithm that provides spike compatible backpropagation
and preserves the temporal patterns. It consists of approximating the true
gradient of the loss function while keeping good optimization properties. While
training SNNs is hard; they can extract the temporal features of data naturally
as the surrogate gradient approach has preserved it. This feature makes them
well-suited for data with temporal properties, precisely like the case of internet
traffic.

1.1    Contributions
This paper shows that SNNs lead to very promising results for traffic recognition
of encrypted traffic. We beat the state of the art [25] for almost every metric
on accuracy, precision, or recall. The average accuracy for Tor traffic rises from
67.8% to 98.6%, and for unencrypted traffic from 85% to 99.4%. For VPN
traffic, it rises from 98.4% to 99.8%. The number of errors is thus divided by 8
for VPN traffic and by 20 for Tor and unencrypted traffic.
    It is important to note that for VPN traffic, the most challenging situation
(browsing versus chat traffic) is not present as the dataset used by [25] has no
VPN browsing data. One versus all experiments show that SNNs lead to a
very significant improvement with all the problematic categorizations such as
File Transfer for Tor (increased from 55.8% to 99.7%), Browsing for Tor (from
90.6% to 99.0%), Browsing for unencrypted (90.6% to 99.4%) and Chat for Tor
(89% to 99.1%).
    These results are obtained with: simpler inputs (300x300 images versus
1500x1500 images), a simpler network (one hidden layer of 100 neurons ver-
sus a six hidden layer LeNet-5 CNN with one million neurons), fewer training
parameters (31.5k versus 300k), and a higher testing data over training data
ratio (20/80 versus 10/90).
    Our approach is all but fancy; the merit is due to the superior capabilities
of SNNs to detect and exploit time-related features. In Section 5 we study this
with some experiments that highlight that short-term synchronicity detection
seems to be an essential feature for traffic categorization, and SNNs naturally
excel at this.

1.2    Outline
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief introduction
to related works in the field of internet traffic classification. Section 3 gives
a complete review of the proposed model for classification of internet traffic


                                         3
