See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/362292345



Granular Network Trafﬁc Classiﬁcation for Streaming Trafﬁc Using
Incremental Learning and Classiﬁer Chain

Article in Malaysian Journal of Computer Science · July 2022
DOI: 10.22452/mjcs.vol35no3.5



CITATION                                                                                               READS

1                                                                                                      109

4 authors:

             Faiz Zaki                                                                                            Firdaus Afifi
             University of Malaya                                                                                 University of Malaya
             19 PUBLICATIONS 421 CITATIONS                                                                        12 PUBLICATIONS 530 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                          SEE PROFILE



             Abdullah Gani                                                                                        Nor Badrul Anuar
             University of Malaya                                                                                 University of Malaya
             296 PUBLICATIONS 20,538 CITATIONS                                                                    209 PUBLICATIONS 13,435 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                          SEE PROFILE




 All content following this page was uploaded by Faiz Zaki on 28 July 2022.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
                                 Granular Network Traffic Classification for Streaming Traffic Using Incremental Learning
                                                                                        and Classifier Chain. pp., 264-280


                GRANULAR NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION FOR STREAMING TRAFFIC USING
                            INCREMENTAL LEARNING AND CLASSIFIER CHAIN

                                Faiz Zaki 1, Firdaus Afifi 2, Abdullah Gani 3, Nor Badrul Anuar 4*

        1,4
              Department of Computer System and Technology, Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology,
                                       Universiti Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

    2
     Faculty of Ocean Engineering Technology and Informatics, Universiti Malaysia Terengganu, Kuala Nerus, 21030
                                               Terengganu, Malaysia
3
    Faculty of Computing and Informatics, University Malaysia Sabah, International Campus Labuan, Sabah, Malaysia

                         Email: faizzaki@um.edu.my1, fdaus.isa@gmail.com2, abdullahgani@ums.edu.my3,
                                          badrul@um.edu.my4*(corresponding author)

                                         DOI: https://doi.org/10.22452/ mjcs.vol35no3.5

ABSTRACT

In modern networks, network visibility is of utmost importance to network operators. Accordingly, granular network
traffic classification quickly rises as an essential technology due to its ability to provide high network visibility.
Granular network traffic classification categorizes traffic into detailed classes like application names and services.
Application names represent parent applications, such as Facebook, while application services are the individual
actions within the parent application, such as Facebook-comment. Most studies on granular classification focus on
classification at the application name level. Besides that, evaluations in existing studies are also limited and utilize
only static and immutable datasets, which are insufficient to reflect the continuous and evolving nature of real-
world traffic. Therefore, this paper aims to introduce a granular classification technique, which is evaluated on
streaming traffic. The proposed technique implements two Adaptive Random Forest classifiers linked together using
a classifier chain to simultaneously produce classification at two granularity levels. Performance evaluation on a
streaming testbed setup using Apache Kafka showed that the proposed technique achieved an average F1 score of
99% at the application name level and 88% at the application service level. Additionally, the performance
benchmark on ISCX VPN non-VPN public dataset also maintained comparable results, besides recording
classification time as low as 2.6 ms per packet. The results conclude that the proposed technique proves its
advantage and feasibility for a granular classification in streaming traffic.

Keywords: Network Traffic Classification, Streaming Traffic, Network Management, Incremental Learning,
Classifier Chain, Granular, Encrypted

1.0               INTRODUCTION

According to a recent white paper by Huawei, the giant technology company forecasted that network operators
would experience a substantial hike up to ten times in network traffic volume by 2025 [1]. Similarly, Cisco echoed
the statement by highlighting the explosive growth of global IP traffic, which had grown 189% from 96.1 Exabytes
per month in 2016 to 278.1 Exabytes per month in 2021 [2]. Additionally, the same report also forecasted the
number of next-generation applications to hit nearly 300 billion by 2023, effectively changing the network
landscape in the years to come. Consequently, network management tasks, particularly monitoring and security,
become more complex for network operators. For example, network operators need to have solid apprehension of
the network traffic flowing through their networks to carry out appropriate actions, such as quality-of-service (QoS)
and security implementation. The efficacy of these actions largely depends on the network visibility level acquired
by network operators. In other words, as the network visibility increases, network operators gain a significant
advantage to manage their network at a more granular level. Network operators acquire network visibility through a
process known as network traffic classification. Network traffic classification is extremely crucial in modern
networks as it allows network operators to know the original application which generated any particular traffic. Due
to its crucial importance, there have been numerous research efforts to produce network traffic classifiers using
various innovative techniques [3, 4].

Among the available network traffic classification techniques include using the port and payload (i.e., deep packet
inspection (DPI)) information [5]. Although these techniques have succeeded in the past, their effectiveness is

                                                                                                                      264
                                    Malaysian Journal of Computer Science, Vol. 35 (3), 2022
                           Granular Network Traffic Classification for Streaming Traffic Using Incremental Learning
                                                                                  and Classifier Chain. pp., 264-280


continuously diminishing in modern networks. For example, dynamic port allocation leads to non-standard port
assignment, making the port-based technique obsolete on its own [6]. At the same time, the increasing adoption of
encrypted protocols, such as the transport layer security (TLS) protocol, encrypts the payload, reducing the
effectiveness of DPI solutions. As a result, machine learning classifiers emerge as the most promising technique to
overcome these challenges [7-9]. This is due to its capability to intelligently learn and generalize the model to fit
various use cases relating to the network domain [10, 11]. Machine learning classifiers mostly utilize statistical
properties from network packets or flows, such as the average packet and payload sizes, as input features to
discriminate between different traffic classes [12]. For instance, Cao, et al. [8] and Gómez, et al. [13] utilized
support vector machines and decision trees, while Lotfollahi, et al. [14] utilized the more advanced deep learning
algorithm to classify network traffic into various classes. Despite achieving superior performance, existing studies
portray several limitations, especially in classification granularity and strategy.

Classification granularity generally consists the coarse (i.e., application protocol and type) and fine-grained (i.e.,
application name and service) classification [15]. Although recent studies have started focusing on fine-grained
classification, most focus on classifying traffic only at the application name level instead of application service [14,
16]. Application name classification is becoming insufficient to support today's increasingly complex network, with
numerous applications offering multiple services, such as chatting and video streaming. On the other hand, the
classification strategy considers offline and online classification. Most studies only consider offline classification,
which utilizes readily available static data to evaluate the proposed techniques. Although efforts on offline
classification have shown tremendous progress, they fail to address the practical limitations, such as implementation
feasibility in a more realistic online classification setting. Indeed, it is more challenging to classify a continuous
stream of network traffic with high volume and velocity than static data [17].

Therefore, this paper addresses the two limitations mentioned above by proposing an innovative technique to
classify streaming network traffic with the highest granularity. To classify network traffic with the highest
granularity, the proposed technique improvises on the classifier chain approach, which is well known for multi-label
classification. It is also worth noting that this paper extends from our earlier study, utilizing the classifier chain but
with batch learning and static data [18]. A classifier chain links multiple classifiers, with each classifier
incrementally extending its input feature space by taking the output of the preceding classifier, effectively
maintaining label interdependency between classifiers. Label interdependency is important as it narrows down the
decision space when classifying similar services (e.g., video streaming) from different applications, such as
Facebook and Youtube. In this paper, the classifier chain links two incremental classifiers, which are the App and
Service-Classifier, to classify streaming traffic at both application name and service levels. Additionally, the
incremental classifier implements the adaptive random forest (ARF) algorithm, which allows it to learn and classify
continuously whenever new network packets arrive (i.e., streaming). As a result, it removes the need to store any
static data, as demonstrated in existing studies. Furthermore, this paper also utilizes a highly scalable event
streaming platform, Apache Kafka, to handle streaming traffic more efficiently.

To evaluate the performance of the proposed technique at both granularity levels, this paper used the ISCX VPN-
nonVPN public dataset [19] and private ground truth. The ground truth process collected the traffic of 43 different
application services across ten applications from four different locations: a campus network and three home
networks. The ground truth collection process spanned six months using Grano-GT, a specialized tool to create a
reliable granular ground truth [20]. Additionally, the experiments conducted in this paper replayed the dataset using
tcpreplay [21] to simulate streaming traffic. The prequential evaluation showed that the proposed incremental
technique achieved more than 88% average F1 scores across all granularity levels. In addition, this paper also
benchmarked the performance against a conventional non-hierarchical classifier (i.e., a flat classifier) and the public
dataset. In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:

a) A focused performance evaluation on streaming traffic classification to reflect a more realistic scenario in a
   real-world deployment.
b) A new approach to classify streaming traffic at the application name and service levels using incremental
   learning and classifier chain.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related works and our contribution
positioning. Section 3 discusses the proposed technique and provides comprehensive interpretations of the overall
architecture. Section 4 outlines the experimental analysis, and Section 5 discusses the current issues in the domain
and how to move forward. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.




                                                                                                                      265
                              Malaysian Journal of Computer Science, Vol. 35 (3), 2022
