                                                Computers and Electrical Engineering 101 (2022) 108024


                                                        Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                         Computers and Electrical Engineering
                                          journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compeleceng




Network traffic classification using convolutional neural network
and ant-lion optimization✩
Saadat Izadi, Mahmood Ahmadi ∗, Rojia Nikbazm
Computer Engineering and Information Technology Department, Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran



ARTICLE               INFO                            ABSTRACT

Keywords:                                             Traffic identification has become a challenging task in recent years. Recently, deep learning
Network traffic classification                        methods have been extensively studied for network traffic classification recently. Unfortunately,
Traffic identification                                these models require a large amount of training data. Another challenge with most traffic
Ant-lion meta-heuristic algorithm
                                                      classification methods is that the features must be extracted by an expert. In these methods,
Convolutional neural network
                                                      finding the desired features that lead to a better classification is very tedious and time-
Self-organizing map
                                                      consuming. In this regard, an excellent solution to address this challenge is to use of deep
                                                      learning methods that automatically extract features. This paper is an attempt to address these
                                                      issues by using a combination of the convolutional neural network (CNN), the ant-lion meta-
                                                      heuristic algorithm (ALO), and the self-organizing map (SOM) to create a traffic classification
                                                      model that can accurately identify traffic types. The proposed method was able to identify
                                                      encrypted traffic and distinguish between VPN and non-VPN traffics. The model was evaluated
                                                      using the ‘‘ISCX VPN-non-VPN’’ dataset, and achieved 98% accuracy.



1. Introduction

    Network traffic classification is a process for identifying different types of applications [1]. Traffic classification is used in various
applications, such as network management, network design, and network security. Network traffic classification is an essential and
challenging task for different reasons such as (a) the identification of some applications is complicated because of complex, and
dynamic protocols (e.g., P2P, online game, video streaming, etc.) [2,3]; (b) the use of dynamic ports and tunnels, which increases
the complexity of traffic identification; and (c) the use of encryption methods that can make it difficult to identify the traffic.
Therefore, the classification of encrypted network traffic has become a big challenge in modern networks. It should be noted that
many network traffic classification techniques like port number, payload based, statistical methods, and machine learning approaches
require patterns or extracted features. This process is time-consuming, error-prone, and expensive.
    Network traffic classification using traditional machine learning techniques requires the manual involvement of human experts in
the feature extraction process. The manual process is prone to human error, which in recent years has emphasized the need for deep
learning-based methods for automatic feature extraction. However, these methods require a large amount of data in the training
phase. Since these models contain several hidden layers, the optimized adjustment of weights cannot be performed entirely and
correctly with a small amount of data. Researchers have shown that the optimal and desirable result cannot be achieved without
a sufficient data volume, and inadequate training data results in a model with poor performance.
    However, the performance of traffic classification has been considerably improved by features that can be extracted and learned
through deep network models. The problems of robust feature selection and sufficient data availability for some traffics are still


 ✩ This paper is for regular issues of CAEE. Reviews were processed by Associate Editor Dr. Francesco Piccialli and recommended for publication.
 ∗ Corresponding author.
     E-mail addresses: s.izadi@razi.ac.ir (S. Izadi), m.ahmadi@razi.ac.ir (M. Ahmadi), nikbazm.rojia@razi.ac.ir (R. Nikbazm).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2022.108024
Received 24 May 2020; Received in revised form 14 April 2022; Accepted 18 April 2022
Available online 4 May 2022
0045-7906/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
S. Izadi et al.                                                                            Computers and Electrical Engineering 101 (2022) 108024


the two significant challenges. These challenges generally degrade the performance of network traffic classification. For classifying
network traffic, deep learning algorithms mainly use an end-to-end deep learning-based classification method, which does not require
manual features extraction and also does not provide the opportunity for further optimization of the algorithm. To improve the
performance of the network traffic classifier, in addition to the classification performance of the algorithm, the algorithm must
be further optimized throughout the designing phase. Therefore, to optimize the algorithm and overcome some of the problems
and challenges of deep learning, meta-heuristic algorithms were used. The reason for using them was the fact that they use basic
mechanisms and operations to finally achieve a proper and optimal solution through a set of iterations. Ant-lion meta-heuristic
algorithm (ALO) is a recently proposed bio-inspired optimization method and one of the meta-heuristic algorithms that shows good
performance in terms of searching the feature space for an optimal subset of features [4–8]. The ALO yields very ambitious results in
terms of exploitation, improved exploration, local optimum avoidance and convergence in different forms of optimization functions;
so that it is widely used for solving problems in different areas [7,8].
    The CNN is a type of multi-layer neural networks. Several applications use feed-forward neural networks that involve the back-
propagation (BP) learning method. These types of networks use the back-propagation (BP) gradient descent method for training.
This causes some problems for the algorithm because the algorithm is based on the gradient. One of the most critical problems is to
fall in the local minimum because of the slow convergence speed. Our proposed approach can provide an appropriate and effective
solution for these challenges [9].
    This paper presents an approach that can identify network traffic, extract features automatically, and solve the problem of
insufficient data availability. Our proposed method can classify different types of traffic with high accuracy and, acceptable
performance. It can also fix problems, including encrypted packets, dynamic protocols such as P2P (Peer to Peer), and those
protocols that use virtual private networks. Therefore, the method presented in this paper can determine the types of applications
(protocols) with high accuracy, using a combination of CNN, ALO, and fuzzy-SOM neural network-based clustering.
    The essential and beneficial points of the proposed method are:

     • Preprocessing traffic data using entropy and entropy variance.
     • Automated feature extraction from the hidden layers of the one-dimensional convolutional neural network (1D-CNN).
     • Efficient feature selection with high classification accuracy using ALO.
     • Classification of new instances using a fuzzy-SOM based-clustering.

   This paper is organized in following sections. In Section 2, a literature review is performed and the basic concepts of CNN and
meta-heuristic algorithms are introduced in Section 3. Section 4 explains the proposed method and in Section 5, the dataset, model
evaluation methods, results, and evaluation are presented. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Related works

   This section provides an overview of the main methods used to classify network traffic. In general, these methods can be
categorized into two main groups: (1) machine learning methods and (2) deep learning methods.
    Machine learning methods: There are many studies on traditional machine learning techniques, some of which are briefly
described here. Shafiq et al. [10] used various machine learning classifiers such as C4.5 decision trees, Naïve Bayse, Support Vector
Machine (SVM), and Bayes Net classifiers for network traffic classification using a real-time Internet dataset. They showed that C4.5
gave a better result (78.9%) in comparison to other machine learning approaches. In [11], Soysal et al. employed three machine
learning classifiers, decision trees, Bayesian networks, and multi-layer perceptrons (MLP), using flow traces for traffic classification.
The dependence of the performance of network traffic classification systems on the amount of the training data show that machine
learning algorithms such as decision trees, and Bayesian networks are suitable for the classification of high-speed Internet traffic
flows. They also encompass applications with dynamic port number changing. These algorithms analyze the impact of mislabeled
data (training and testing) on the accuracy of machine learning algorithms.
    Deep learning methods: Recently, researchers have tried to use deep learning for network traffic. Lixin, et al. [12] proposed a
new approach to train a CNN model by optimizing a new function, which emphasized on the learned features for network traffic
classification. They evaluated the proposed method on three traffic datasets. The experimental results showed that the method
improved the classification accuracy, and it can be well adapted to the challenges of class diversity and class similarity in network
traffic classification. Hong, et al. [13] proposed a method to improve network traffic classification performance using deep learning
methods. They presented a network applications classification model based on Deep Belief Network (DBN) and used the BP-based
model for comparison in the same conditions. The result showed that classifying network traffic based on DBN had a higher accuracy.
    Gil et al. [14] used statistical features such as flow arrival time, the number of flows, Bytes per second, etc., to classify network
traffic. They also applied a decision tree and KNN algorithms and achieved 92% accuracy for recognizing six classes (chat, email,
FTP, etc.). Yamansavascilar et al. [15] considered the‘‘ ISCX VPN-non VPN’’ dataset and 111 flow features with 12 application classes
and used the KNN algorithm to achieve 94% accuracy. The main disadvantage of these methods is that an expert does the feature
extraction and selection processes. Therefore, such methods are prone to human error, time-consuming, and expensive. In [16],
Rezaei et al. presented a general framework to classify network traffic based on deep learning. Lotfollahi et al. [17] introduced a
model based on CNN and Stacked Auto-Encoder (SAE) for classifying encrypted traffic. The numbers of classes and data instances
in their work were close to those used in the present study. They obtained an accuracy of 94% in traffic classification by the CNN

                                                                   2
S. Izadi et al.                                                                                         Computers and Electrical Engineering 101 (2022) 108024




                  Fig. 1. Tapered hole and an ant-lion hunting behavior. (a) A cone-shaped pit dug by an ant-lion. (b) Waiting in the pit.




model. Wang et al. [18] proposed a method for classifying encrypted traffic using 1D-CNNs. This method combines feature extraction,
feature selection, and the classifier into a final unified framework for automated learning of the non-linear relation between the
row input and the expected output. Their method applied the ‘‘ISCX VPN-non VPN’’ dataset and obtained an accuracy of 92% for
12 application classes. However, they only used a few instances of the dataset, which is insufficient to draw complete conclusion.
   Our proposed method achieved a significant accuracy on the same dataset, using the combination of the 1D-CNN, ALO, and SMO
algorithm compared with others work on ‘‘ISCX VPN-non VPN’’ dataset.


3. Convolutional neural network and ant-lion optimization algorithm concepts


   In this section, the concepts of the convolutional neural network (CNN) and the ant-lion optimization algorithm (ALO) are
described.


3.1. The concept of convolutional neural network


    One of the most popular deep learning algorithms is the convolutional neural networks (CNNs). A CNN consists of an input
layer, an output layer, and several hidden layers. Mainly, a CNN is composed of three types of layers, namely, convolutional layers,
pooling layers, and fully connected layers. In general, CNNs are hierarchical neural networks, in which the convolutional layers and
pooling layers are placed alternately, and then multiple fully connected layers are arranged. Performing a convolution operation
has three merits [9] (1) using a weight sharing mechanism in every feature map considerably decreases the number of parameters,
(2) the local connection learns the relations between neighboring pixels, and (3) it leads to immutability and stability against object
replacement. A pooling layer is usually place after the convolutional layers and can be used to reduce the size of the feature map
and the number of network parameters. Then, fully connected layers allow to represent the network’s result as a vector with a
defined size. We believe that this method is an optimal option for network traffic classification. The results approved this claim and
showed that 1D-CNN performs well in terms of feature extraction from network traffic classification.


3.2. Ant-lion optimizer algorithm


    In recent years, meta-heuristic algorithms have been used to obtain optimized solutions for optimization problems. Due to the
random nature of these algorithms, the probability of avoiding local optimums is high. If an evolutionary algorithm (EA) traps in a
local optimum, then the random operators make random changes in the solution and consequently depart from that local optimum.
The EAs use a general and common framework, in which a set of random solutions are created gradually or maybe iteratively. Some
of the most famous algorithms in the EA family include the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Emperor Penguins Colony algorithm,
Artificial Bee Colony optimization, Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), and Genetic Algorithm (GA).
    The ant-lion optimizer (ALO) algorithm was used in this study. The life cycle of an ant-lion consists of two main steps; larva
and adulthood. An ant-lion larva digs a cone-shaped hole with its hand by moving in a circular orbit and throws out the soil with
its jaw. Fig. 1(a) shows a tapered hole. After digging the trap, the larva hides beneath the cone and waits for insects (ideally ants)
to get trapped in the hole, like what is shown in Fig. 1(b) [19]. The edge of the cone is sharp enough so that ants easily fall into
the bottom of the trap. As soon as the ant-lion finds out about a miserable prey trapped in the hole, he tries to catch it. However,
insects are usually not easy to catch, while trying to fly out of the trap