                                                                 Internet of Things 24 (2023) 100965


                                                             Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                                  Internet of Things
                                        journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/internet-of-things




A federated and explainable approach for insider threat detection
in IoT
Mohammad Amiri-Zarandi a, Hadis Karimipour b, Rozita A. Dara a, *
a
    School of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada
b
    Department of Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary, AB, Canada




A R T I C L E I N F O                                      A B S T R A C T

Keywords:                                                  An insider threat is a malicious action launched by authorized personnel inside the organization.
Insider threat detection                                   Since insider actions may only leave a small digital footprint in the system, it is considered a
Internet of things                                         major cybersecurity challenge in different applications. Along with the rapid growth of the
Trustworthy learning
                                                           Internet of Things (IoT) and the extensive attack surface in this technology, many concerns have
Privacy
Security
                                                           been raised regarding the potential insider threats in IoT environments. Several studies have been
Federated learning                                         conducted on Machine Learning (ML)-based insider threat detection solutions which are focused
Explainable artificial intelligence                        on the models’ performance while the trustability of these models is neglected. Trustworthy
Interpretable artificial intelligence                      Learning refers to a new trend in ML that focuses on ways to ensure that the data collection and
Anomaly detection                                          data analysis procedures in ML techniques follow ethical applications and are trustable to human
                                                           users. This approach enforces the acceptance and successful adoption of ML-based solutions. This
                                                           study aims to propose an improved trustworthy insider threat detection method that ensures two
                                                           of the trustworthy learning requirements: Privacy and Explainability. The proposed solution
                                                           protects the privacy of the utilized data and is capable of explaining why certain behaviors are
                                                           detected as a threat. The proposed solution also leverages data collaboration between different
                                                           data owners to increase the volume of data used in the training process and enhance the per­
                                                           formance of the ML model. Experimental results show the proposed solution outperforms the
                                                           learning models trained by individual data holders.




1. Introduction

    Today’s highly interconnected world is made up of billions of smart Internet of Things (IoT) devices that collect, store, and analyze
data regarding different aspects of our daily lives. IoT technology enables smarter and faster control of our daily actions. [1,2,3]
Despite the benefits that IoT brings to our lives, it increases the vulnerability of the security frameworks to cyber threats. [4,5,6,7] The
attack surface in IoT is significantly expanded as insiders and intruders can launch cyber attacks by accessing IoT devices remotely. To
secure IoT against adversaries, cybersecurity experts not only must try to eliminate intrusion attacks by securing the devices, network,
and software. [8,9] but they also should take measures to mitigate insider threats. An insider threat happens when a user or a business
partner that has the authorization to access the resources such as the system and data aims to misuse the access capability to inten­
tionally or unintentionally cause a threat in the system. [10] The security of IoT can be seriously compromised by insider threats. It has
been reported by the IBM Security Intelligence Index [2] that 60% of all attacks are launched from the inside. According to Gurucul’s



    * Corresponding author.
      E-mail address: drozita@uoguelph.ca (R.A. Dara).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2023.100965

Available online 10 October 2023
2542-6605/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
M. Amiri-Zarandi et al.                                                                                          Internet of Things 24 (2023) 100965




                                                   Fig. 1. Federated Learning Architecture.


2020 Insider Threat Report [11], 68% of the cybersecurity experts responded that their organizations are vulnerable to insider threats
at medium or high levels while merely 5% believed they are not vulnerable at all. In spite of the high importance of insider threat
detection in IoT, a few studies have been conducted on this aspect of IoT security. [12]
    Previous research has proved that Machine Learning (ML) is an effective approach to insider threat detection. [13] ML-based
models can utilize historical data about previous actions in the system and classify a new behavior as benign or malicious. The
ML-based intrusion detection systems analyze different data about users including demographic information, position and re­
sponsibility of the users, and also behavior patterns of the users in the system to detect suspicious activities. For example, a user logs on
to a device after hours and uploads data to an untrusted website, or a user tries to log in to other users’ devices and run executive files.
Analysis of users’ information enables security officers to discover the early signs of malicious actions and take proper actions. When
the insider threat detection system finds a potential threat, it sends an alert to security officers for further investigation. This can lead to
some decisions such as preventing the action, blocking the device, or suspending the user.
    One significant concern in ML-based insider threat detection systems is the trustability of these systems. [14] This is due to the fact
that the analyzed data contain users’ personal information which is sensitive and should be protected. Furthermore, the explainability
of the ML-based model helps cybersecurity experts detect the causing factors of insider threats and take measures to mitigate the risks
of these threats in the future. Moreover, due to the potential impact that the detected threats will have on the related users’ jobs and
status, the detection mechanisms should be designed in an explainable manner. This enables the security officers to illustrate why a
particular action is considered a threat. To address privacy concerns in ML methods, one solution is to follow the Trustworthy Learning
approach. Trustworthy Learning refers to a new trend in ML that focuses on ways to ensure that the data collection and data analysis
procedures are trustable. [15] Since ML approaches have shown the capability to demonstrate and even surpass human intelligence,
this approach aims to address the concerns that have been raised about the ethical application and trustworthiness of ML models. [16]
Trustworthiness becomes a bigger issue when human data is used in the learning process, thus the privacy of sensitive personal in­
formation should be protected; or when the resulting predictions can be the basis for the decisions and actions related to human users,
therefore the causes for the decisions should be explainable for the users. [15] In this paper, we aim to propose a trustworthy ML
approach for intrusion detection in IoT which still is a gap in the literature. Different requirements for Trustworthy Learning have been
suggested in previous studies. [16,17,18,19] In this study, we focus on two of these requirements that are common in most Trustworthy
Learning requirement categories: privacy, and explainability. Privacy is the characteristic that information is not made available or
disclosed to unauthorised individuals, entities, or processes. [20] Data protection mechanisms reduce data privacy concerns and
encourage the data holders in the IoT ecosystem to utilize data analysis services. [21,22,23] On the other hand, explainability refers to
a property that provides visibility into how ML models make predictions. [24] This characteristic provides insight into the rationale for
results generated by ML models and helps understand and interpret these results.
    In this study, we propose a threat detection system that analyzes user behavior to discover early signs of malicious behaviors. These
behaviors are flagged as suspicious actions for further investigation by cybersecurity experts. The proposed method is explainable and
privacy-preserving and thus, addresses two of the major requirements of Trustworthy Learning. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first attempt to propose a privacy-preserving solution for insider threat detection in IoT, and also the first study on providing
explainability on this problem.
    The contribution of this research can be summarized as follows:

  - This research proposes a privacy-preserving approach for insider threat detection in IoT.
  - The study suggests an explainable approach that provides an illustration of the most contributing features to insider threats and the
    role of each feature.


                                                                       2
M. Amiri-Zarandi et al.                                                                                    Internet of Things 24 (2023) 100965




                                                Fig. 2. An overview of the SHAP method.


  - Experimental results on a public dataset of insider threats show that the proposed solution is capable of generalizing and detecting
    insider threats under limited investigation budgets.

   The remaining paper is organized as follows: A review of the background and the related works in the literature is provided in
Section 2. Section 3 presents the proposed threat detection system. In Section 4 a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed solution is
provided. Section 6 discusses the findings and limitations. Finally, the conclusions and future work are provided in Section 5.

2. Background

2.1. Federated learning

    Federated Learning is an approach that can be used to address the privacy concern in ML-based solutions. Federated learning first
was proposed by Google. [25] This approach involves two fields that are rapidly evolving: Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Information
Privacy (IP). Instead of gathering data to train a centralized ML model, the federated learning approach distributes the learning model
to devices that have stored data locally. [26,27],. The distributed models are trained on the local data and then are aggregated to build
a global ML model. Using this approach the participants do not need to share data with any other parties thus data privacy is preserved.
[28] An overview of the federated learning architecture is demonstrated in Fig. 1. The distributed nature of federated learning ar­
chitecture is well-aligned with IoT architecture. The IoT devices can participate in the federated learning process and collaborate to
train an ML model while keeping their data private. This cooperation can be handled by IoT devices that have enough computation
power for model training or the IoT gateways that are placed at the edge of the IoT network. [29,30]


2.2. Explainable learning

    The other Trustworthy property that we consider in this study is explainability. This property enables the ML model to explain the
reason for a prediction. An explanation of why an instance is detected as a threat provides insight into the most causing features and
enables cybersecurity experts to improve security monitoring practices. Moreover, once an anomalous behavior is detected, the
cybersecurity professionals can provide the involved users with the reasons why they are under investigation. In contrast to the black-
box concept in neural networks where even the algorithm designers cannot explain why a model arrived at a specific decision, the
Explainable AI tries to provide the decisions with reasons that can be understood by humans. [31] The Explainable AI methods can be
categorized into two different classes: first, local methods that can explain the reasons for specific predictions, and second, global
methods that are capable of summarizing the impact of input features on the model as a whole. [32] LIME (Local Interpretable Model
Agnostic Explanations) [33] is a sample of local explainable methods that reflect the behavior of the model around the instance being
predicted. This method changes the input data and builds a series of manipulated data containing only some part of the original data.
Then by evaluating the performance of the model in the presence or absence of certain features, the method evaluates the impact of
each feature in prediction. SHAP (Shapley Additive Explanation) [34] is an instance of global methods. This method uses a game
theory approach to explain the predictions of ML models. According to this approach, the feature values are presumed as players that
work in a collaborative game, while the payout is the prediction. As a result, Shapely values describe fairly how each feature con­
tributes to the predicted result. [32] An overview of using the SHAP method in explainable ML is shown in Fig. 2. Using this method,
first, the model is trained over the training dataset. Then the trained model and the training data will be shared with the SHAP
explainer which calculates the SHAP values for different features and provides some explanations such as the average influence of all

                                                                   3
