                                                  Computers and Electrical Engineering 110 (2023) 108852


                                                          Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                           Computers and Electrical Engineering
                                            journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/compeleceng




An intelligent network monitoring approach for online
classification of Darknet traffic✩
Rodrigo Moreira a ,∗, Larissa Ferreira Rodrigues Moreira a,b , Flávio de Oliveira Silva b
a Institute of Exact and Technological Sciences (IEP), Federal University of Viçosa (UFV), Rio Paranaíba, 38.810-000, Minas Gerais, Brazil
b Faculty of Computing (FACOM), Federal University of Uberlândia (UFU), Uberlândia, 38.400-902, Minas Gerais, Brazil




ARTICLE               INFO                              ABSTRACT

Keywords:                                               The Internet plays a crucial role in supporting global applications and businesses, but security
Darknet                                                 remains a major challenge. Within the Internet, there exists a parallel network known as the
Deep learning                                           Darknet, where malicious activities and traffic are present and require real-time classification.
Network sensing
                                                        Many methods aim to classify this Darknet traffic in real-time due to its significant volume
Adaptive sampling
                                                        within Internet traffic. However, online Darknet traffic classification faces challenges, partic-
Reinforcement learning
Monitoring
                                                        ularly in determining the optimal packet sampling amount for achieving a high classification
                                                        rate in high-performance networks. To address this, our paper presents a novel approach that
                                                        combines Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques
                                                        for intelligent and adaptive packet sampling rates in high-performance network interfaces. This
                                                        method reduces overhead on monitored entities, especially in high-speed networks with a high
                                                        bit rate. Our findings demonstrate a TOR traffic prediction accuracy of 99.84% and successful
                                                        classification tasks in high-throughput networks using our method.




1. Introduction

    Infrastructure monitoring is essential in order to understand the resource behavior, memory consumption, and availability and
support quality of the applications that run on them [1]. The Internet consists of heterogeneous types of infrastructure, with
numerous entities, users, and services that support its operation and maintain connectivity for essential applications such as those
used in finances, health, and business [2]. The infrastructure of the Internet enables the hosting and reachability of pages, known
as the Surface Web, indexed by conventional search engines and make up approximately 4% of the Internet traffic.
    On top of the same infrastructure runs an overlay network called the Darknet, which was developed in 1971 at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) [3]. Its pages are not indexed by conventional search engines, as shown in Fig. 1. The Darknet forms
part of the Deep Web, which has more than 500 times more traffic than the Surface Web [4]. On top of this overlay network, there
is traffic consisting of illegal activities such as hacking, phishing, and other crime, and frauds which is available through software,
specific protocols, and configurations [5].
    The Onion Router (TOR) is the standard method of accessing the content of this overlay network, which mainly carries encrypted
traffic [6]. Classifying this type of traffic is a relevant topic, and requires investigation both the industrial purposes and to allow
governments to carry out national crackdowns and supervision [7]. Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques have been successfully used
or have been combined with other methods of classifying and predicting this type of traffic over network infrastructures [5]. These
The aim of these efforts has been to classify TOR and non-TOR traffic in order to predict suspicious activity [8]. In the following,


 ✩ This paper is for special section VSI-webc. Reviews were processed by Guest Editor Dr. M. Manikandan and recommended for publication.
 ∗ Corresponding author.
     E-mail addresses: rodrigo@ufv.br (R. Moreira), larissarodrigues@ufu.br (L.F. Rodrigues Moreira), flavio@ufu.br (F. de Oliveira Silva).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2023.108852
Received 14 July 2022; Received in revised form 28 June 2023; Accepted 30 June 2023
Available online 14 July 2023
0045-7906/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
R. Moreira et al.                                                                                     Computers and Electrical Engineering 110 (2023) 108852




                                        Fig. 1. Composition of internet traffic inspired by Singh et al. [3].




we refer to TOR traffic as Darknet (malicious) traffic, and to non-TOR activity as non-Darknet (benign). The classification of these
types of real-time traffic with high precision still poses challenges.
    Convolutional Neural Network (CNNs) are currently achieving good results in the areas of Natural Language Processing (NLP),
image and video processing, and medical applications [9]. CNNs also seem to be suitable for network traffic classification tasks, due
to their ability to learn and extract features, and their capacity to capture the spatial dependence between the bytes of a network
packet [10,11]. The RL technique supports the detection of abnormal behavior on a network, and combining this approach with
CNNs shows promise in terms of achieving more consistent results [12]. However, classifying Darknet and non-Darknet traffic with
high accuracy requires large amounts of computational resources [3], giving rise to a need for low-power techniques using new
packet sampling techniques for traffic rating [13].
    From examining the methods in the literature, we discovered that many authors have used Artificial intelligence (AI) techniques
to handle traffic classification problems [14,15], and particularly CNNs [3,16]. In addition, many efforts have focused on predicting
Darknet and non-Darknet traffic [17,18]. We believe this paper is the first to propose advances in the online classification of this
type of traffic while advancing the state of the art with an intelligent packet sampling technique.
    The strategies in the literature for classifying TOR and non-TOR traffic show strong potential, but these mainly focus on classifying
traffic as malignant or benign within a set of known application classes. Methods that are capable of handling this classification
problem in real time (or close to it) are challenging and still need breakdowns. One important challenge involves determining the
optimal number of packets to sample on a network in order to maintain a high rate of detection accuracy while minimizing the
amount of computational resources needed to process a burst of packets. We hypothesize that an approach that combines CNNs with
RL will be suitable for near-real-time traffic profile classification. In our method, the CNNs are used to deal with traffic classification,
while RL is used to find the optimal amount of packets to sample at each instant to reach the maximum possible traffic profile
detection rate.
    To address this gap in state-of-the-art research, this paper proposes a method for the online classification of Darknet and non-
Darknet traffic. Our technique is novel in that it combines technologies such as CNNs with RL for online traffic prediction. We
combined these two methods to achieve suitable rates of online sampling and classification in high-performance networks, with the
aim of the avoiding the overloading of the monitoring entities through an intelligent sampling approach.
    The main contributions of this paper include the following:

    • We propose and evaluate of a high-accuracy classifier for TOR and non-TOR traffic prediction.
    • We present an adaptive packet sampling method for traffic classification.
    • We propose and evaluate a method for the online classification of packets based on CNNs.
    • We present an evaluation of and inferences related to the role of processing time in online traffic classification.
    • We compare our method with other state-of-the-art approaches for Darknet traffic classification.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of related works and identifies their main
differences from the present study. Section 3 introduces the proposed method we used for online classification of TOR and non-TOR
traffic, while Section 4 presents the experimental testbed and the dataset used. In Section 5, we discuss and highlight the main
findings of this work, and in Section 6, we present a summary of the paper.

                                                                         2
R. Moreira et al.                                                                            Computers and Electrical Engineering 110 (2023) 108852


2. Related work

    Classifying network traffic is essential for operators to know how resources are consumed and maintain the Service Level
Agreement (SLA) with users. Therefore, some surveys dived into understanding how the network traffic classification and AI evolved
monitoring technologies. In the literature, traffic classification approaches differ as feature-based or payload-based [19]. This section
describes how the literature has addressed artificial intelligence to support the monitoring and classification of network traffic more
effectively.
    Dias et al. [14] proposed an approach available for classifying video traffic in real-time through its packets. In the application
domain, both proposals are different, but they aim to classify real-time traffic. Therefore, it is imperative to highlight that the method
of authors storing and pre-processing the packets for future classification. In addition, their approach predicts a ranking of variables
that most influenced the prediction process. Differently, our method does not require storage or pre-processing packets in the online
sorting process.
    Aceto et al. [20] described and evaluated a CNN-based approach for mobile device traffic classification. Their approach bifurcates
the dataset training flow into two distinct CNNs, merging the measured weights at the end into a single network. Unlike the authors,
our proposal classifies Darknet and non-Darknet traffic in real-time based on a single CNN.
    Zheng et al. [21] describe and evaluate an encrypted traffic classification method based on the raw information of the flows
established between two end-to-end entities. The authors’ method consists of artificially increasing the dataset using the hallucinator
technique, training several CNNs simultaneously. Also, their method shares according to the Mean Squared Error (MSE) criterion,
their parameters mutually. They carried out a comparison in terms of performance with some state-of-the-art techniques. Unlike the
authors, our method classifies both Darknet and non-Darknet traffic with an RL-based technique for sampling traffic for real-time
classification.
    Lashkari et al. [16] proposed and evaluated a method based on feature extraction to detect and characterize Darknet and non-
Darknet traffic. The authors’ technique consists of creating an image based on extracting features collected by the CICFlowMeter
tool. The images that feed the CNNs were generated from the feature vector that the CICFlowMeter generated after feature ranking.
Unlike the authors’ approach, we classify packets not as a flow but rather consider the entire package structure. Furthermore, our
method can classify real-time traffic through an adaptive packet sampling mechanism designed for high-performance networks.
    There is a network monitoring approach based on machine learning capable of automatically setting network thresholds and
baselines under different conditions in Mijumbi et al. [22]. In their method, the collected data of the network elements are stored
and fed to the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) for future predictions that are further improved through the network operators’
feedback. Unlike the authors, our approach improves monitoring by using a reinforcement learning algorithm that determines how
many network packets need to be sampled for a Darknet traffic prediction goal to be achieved.
    Ujjan et al. [23] describe and evaluate a CNN-based pooling sampling approach to detect denial of service attacks in Software-
defined Networking (SN). Similar to our method, the authors argue that the pooling intervals in a monitored network need to be
adaptive since the flow characteristic can change suddenly depending on the network conditions. Network sampling with fixed
parameters can impose overhead. In this sense, the authors predict the frequency of pooling based on historical data. Our proposal
goes further and uses an RL algorithm for packet sampling intelligently to feed the traffic classifier with the best packet sample.
    Iliadis and Kaifas [17] applied conventional machine learning algorithms and evaluated its performance in the task of classifying
Darknet and non-Darknet traffic and in specific applications within each class. The evaluated techniques were K-Nearest Neighbors
(KNN), Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Gradient Boost (GB), Random Forest (RF), and Decision Tree (DT) for Darknet traffic
classification and reached an accuracy of around 98%. Unlike the authors, ours goes further with superior accuracy and provides
an online classification of Darknet and non-Darknet traffic.
    Jadav et al. [18] proposed and evaluated a method based on dimensionality reduction and balancing for the classification of
Darknet and non-Darknet traffic. Having reduced the dimensionality by the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE),
which consists of synthetically increasing classes that are the minority, there was a positive impact on the classifiers’ performance
metrics. Unlike the authors, our proposal does not require prior dataset processing since we classify Darknet and non-Darknet traffic
in real-time.
    Marim et al. [15] proposed an offline classification method for Darknet and non-Darknet traffic using conventional classifiers
such as DT and RF. Unlike the present article, the technique proposed by the authors does not allow online packet classification.
Thus, the present work allows the adaptive sampling of packets for online prediction of the traffic class.
    Singh et al. [3] used pre-trained CNNs for bi-level classification of Darknet and non-Darknet traffic. The authors’ technique
consists of building images from a matrix of features that are collected from flows. In contrast, our approach intelligently samples
network packets for online classification of Darknet and non-Darknet traffic.
    We summarize the primary efforts in the literature in classifying Internet traffic in Table 1. ‘‘Classification Goal’’ in Table 1 refers
to the work target containing the objective of traffic classification. The Column ‘‘Method’’ directly references the ML technique used
in the prediction or classification of traffic, and many works used classifiers with supervised learning [18].
    The ‘‘Input’’ column describes the type of data that fed the ML engine for predicting/categorizing network