                                                Data in Brief 46 (2023) 108888



                                          Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                     Data in Brief

                                     journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dib



Data Article

CESNET-QUIC22: A large one-month QUIC
network traﬃc dataset from backbone lines
Jan Luxemburk a,b, Karel Hynek a,b,∗, Tomáš Čejka b,
Andrej Lukačovič a, Pavel Šiška b
a
    Faculty of Information Technology, CTU in Prague, Thakurova 9, Prague, 160 00, Czech Republic
b
    CESNET, Zikova 4, Prague, 160 00, Czech Republic



a r t i c l e            i n f o                       a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                       The QUIC (Quick UDP Internet Connection) protocol has the
Received 19 December 2022                              potential to replace TLS over TCP, which is the standard
Revised 2 January 2023                                 choice for reliable and secure Internet communication. Due
Accepted 4 January 2023                                to its design that makes the inspection of QUIC handshakes
Available online 9 January 2023
                                                       challenging and its usage in HTTP/3, there is an increasing
Dataset link: CESNET-QUIC22: a large
                                                       demand for research in QUIC traﬃc analysis. This dataset
one-month QUIC network traﬃc dataset                   contains one month of QUIC traﬃc collected in an ISP back-
from backbone lines (Original data)                    bone network, which connects 500 large institutions and
                                                       serves around half a million people. The data are delivered as
Keywords:
                                                       enriched ﬂows that can be useful for various network moni-
Network monitoring
                                                       toring tasks. The provided server names and packet-level in-
Traﬃc classiﬁcation
Encrypted traﬃc
                                                       formation allow research in the encrypted traﬃc classiﬁca-
QUIC                                                   tion area. Moreover, included QUIC versions and user agents
                                                       (smartphone, web browser, and operating system identiﬁers)
                                                       provide information for large-scale QUIC deployment studies.
                                                                       © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
                                                               This is an open access article under the CC BY license
                                                                         (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)




    ∗
        Corresponding author at: CESNET, Zikova 4, Prague 160 00, Czech Republic.
        E-mail address: hynekkar@cesnet.cz (K. Hynek).
        Social media:     @liberouter (K. Hynek),   @tomcejka (T. Čejka)

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2023.108888
2352-3409/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
2                             J. Luxemburk, K. Hynek and T. Čejka et al. / Data in Brief 46 (2023) 108888

        Speciﬁcations Table

        Subject                               Computer Networks and Communications

        Speciﬁc subject area:                  Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation and analysis
        Type of data:                          Bidirectional network ﬂows in CSV
        How the data were acquired:            The network ﬂows were collected in the CESNET2 network, which is a large
                                               internet service provider network with around half a million users. The ﬂows
                                               were created using the ipﬁxprobe high-performance ﬂow exporter.
        Data format:                           Raw
        Description of data collection:        The data were collected on the monitoring probes located at the perimeter of
                                               the CESNET2 network. Each monitoring probe transmitted ﬂow data to a single
                                               ﬂow collector, where QUIC ﬂow ﬁltering, processing, and anonymization were
                                               performed. Client IP addresses were anonymized; server IP addresses were left
                                               intact as those are public non-sensitive information.
        Data source location:                  Network: CESNET2, Czech national research and educational network
                                               Institution: CESNET association
                                               City: Prague
                                               Country: Czech Republic
        Data accessibility:                    Repository name: Zenodo
                                               Data identiﬁcation number: 10.5281/zenodo.7409923
                                               Direct URL to data: https://zenodo.org/record/7409923




Value of the Data

    • The dataset [1] contains one month of QUIC traﬃc collected from 100 Gbps backbone lines
      of a large ISP. This unique ISP-based data source provides realistic characteristics of network
      traﬃc originating from various web browsers, operating systems, mobile devices, and desk-
      top machines. Also, due to the organic nature of the captured traﬃc, the dataset covers rich
      behaviors (for example, all possible user actions and settings) of web services and mobile
      applications, which would be impossible to achieve in a lab-generated dataset.
    • The provided dataset is useful for research in the computer networks ﬁeld. The real-world
      nature of data allows researchers to validate and evaluate network traﬃc classiﬁers and pre-
      pare their algorithms for various traﬃc phenomena and connection errors that appear in
      ISP-like networks. Flows in the dataset include packet metadata sequences, which are the
      standard data input for various tasks in encrypted traﬃc analysis.
    • The provided dataset can be used for (i) the design and real-world evaluation of QUIC web
      services classiﬁers [2–4], (ii) the design and evaluation of traﬃc type (e.g., streaming, chat,
      ﬁle transfer) classiﬁers [5], (iii) the dataset can also serve as real-world benign traﬃc samples
      in malicious QUIC traﬃc identiﬁcation challenges [6], and (iv) thanks to the QUIC user agent
      ﬁeld, which is present in 0.2% (still 342 K samples) of dataset ﬂows, it is possible to use the
      dataset for the recognition of various client devices, operating systems, or web browsers [7].
    • There are no public QUIC datasets of comparable size.1 Our dataset spans one month, was
      obtained from 27 TB worth of real-word traﬃc, comprises over 153 million ﬂows, and has
      102 service labels. A high number of class labels is crucial to make the studied classiﬁca-
      tion problems hard and realistic; related work showed that classiﬁers evaluated on datasets
      with few classes do not translate well into real-world deployment [8]. Moreover, the long
      time span of the dataset allows researching other deployment-related problems, such as the
      QUIC traﬃc distribution drift [9] and the degradation of the classiﬁer’s performance over
      time.
    • Previous studies [8,10,11] have identiﬁed the importance of detecting out-of-distribution
      (OOD) traﬃc samples. This problem arises when either new web services (mobile applica-
      tions, protocols, etc.) appear or known web services change their behavior. The OOD de-

    1
        The closest dataset is the UC Davis QUIC dataset [4], which contains 6.5 K ﬂows and ﬁve classes.
                       J. Luxemburk, K. Hynek and T. Čejka et al. / Data in Brief 46 (2023) 108888   3

     tection gives a traﬃc classiﬁer the power to detect those new or anomalous samples and
     label them as “unknown”. Apart from the 102 service classes, our dataset includes three
     background classes, making it suitable for designing and evaluating novel OOD detection ap-
     proaches for QUIC traﬃc.



1. Objective

    The QUIC protocol is gaining adoption across service providers and consumer software. Its us-
age as the transport protocol in HTTP/3 suggests its future mass usage. However, despite its ap-
parent importance, no extensive QUIC datasets exist. Therefore, we created the CESNET-QUIC22
dataset containing one month of QUIC network traﬃc transmitted through the backbone lines of
CESNET2, which is the Czech national research and educational network that serves half a mil-
lion people. The real-world nature of the provided traﬃc and its extensive size create a unique
and comprehensive dataset that enables research of the novel yet crucial QUIC protocol.



2. Data Description

   The dataset consists of network ﬂows describing encrypted QUIC communications. Flows are
extended with packet metadata sequences, packet histograms, and with ﬁelds extracted from
the QUIC Initial Packet, which is the ﬁrst packet of the QUIC connection handshake. The ex-
tracted handshake ﬁelds are the Server Name Indication (SNI) domain, the used version of the
QUIC protocol, and the user agent string that is available in a subset of QUIC communications.2
The next two sections describe two types of data features—the packet sequences, which provide
information about the ﬁrst 30 packets of a connection, and ﬂow statistics, which describe the
entire connection.



2.1. Packet sequences

    Sequences of packet sizes, directions, and inter-packet times are standard data input for traf-
ﬁc analysis. For the packet sizes, we consider payload size after transport headers (UDP headers
for the QUIC case). Packet directions are encoded as ±1, where “+1” means a packet sent from
client to server, and “−1” a packet from server to client. Inter-packet times depend on the loca-
tion of communicating hosts, their distance, and on the network conditions on the path. How-
ever, it is still possible to extract relevant information that correlates with user interactions and,
for example, with the time required for an API/server/database to process the received data and
generate the response to be sent in the next packet. Packet sequences have a maximum length
of 30, which is the default setting of the used ﬂow exporter.
    We also derive three ﬁelds from each packet sequence: its length, time duration, and the
number of roundtrips. The roundtrips are counted as the number of changes in the communi-
cation direction (from packet directions data); in other words, each client request and server
response pair counts as one roundtrip.



2.2. Flow statistics

   Flows in the dataset also include standard ﬂow statistics, which represent aggregated in-
formation about the entire bidirectional ﬂow. The ﬁelds are: the number of transmitted bytes

 2
     https://www.iana.org/assignments/quic/quic.xhtml - user_agent transport parameter.
