             sensors
Article
CICIoT2023: A Real-Time Dataset and Benchmark for
Large-Scale Attacks in IoT Environment
Euclides Carlos Pinto Neto, Sajjad Dadkhah * , Raphael Ferreira, Alireza Zohourian, Rongxing Lu
and Ali A. Ghorbani


                                         Faculty of Computer Science, University of New Brunswick (UnB), Fredericton, NB E3B 5A3, Canada;
                                         e.neto@unb.ca (E.C.P.N.); raphael.ferreira@unb.ca (R.F.); alireza.zohourian@unb.ca (A.Z.); rlu1@unb.ca (R.L.);
                                         ghorbani@unb.ca (A.A.G.)
                                         * Correspondence: sdadkhah@unb.ca

                                         Abstract: Nowadays, the Internet of Things (IoT) concept plays a pivotal role in society and brings
                                         new capabilities to different industries. The number of IoT solutions in areas such as transportation
                                         and healthcare is increasing and new services are under development. In the last decade, society
                                         has experienced a drastic increase in IoT connections. In fact, IoT connections will increase in the
                                         next few years across different areas. Conversely, several challenges still need to be faced to enable
                                         efficient and secure operations (e.g., interoperability, security, and standards). Furthermore, although
                                         efforts have been made to produce datasets composed of attacks against IoT devices, several possible
                                         attacks are not considered. Most existing efforts do not consider an extensive network topology with
                                         real IoT devices. The main goal of this research is to propose a novel and extensive IoT attack dataset
                                         to foster the development of security analytics applications in real IoT operations. To accomplish this,
                                         33 attacks are executed in an IoT topology composed of 105 devices. These attacks are classified into
                                         seven categories, namely DDoS, DoS, Recon, Web-based, brute force, spoofing, and Mirai. Finally, all
                                         attacks are executed by malicious IoT devices targeting other IoT devices. The dataset is available on
                                         the CIC Dataset website.

                                         Keywords: Internet of Things (IoT); dataset; security; machine learning; deep learning; DoS; DDoS;
                                         reconnaissance; web attacks; brute force; spoofing; Mirai
Citation: Neto, E.C.P.; Dadkhah, S.;
Ferreira, R.; Zohourian, A.; Lu, R.;
Ghorbani, A.A. CICIoT2023: A
Real-Time Dataset and Benchmark
for Large-Scale Attacks in IoT           1. Introduction
Environment. Sensors 2023, 23, 5941.          Nowadays, the Internet of Things (IoT) plays a pivotal role in society and brings new
https://doi.org/10.3390/                 capabilities to different industries [1–3]. IoT projects in areas such as transportation and
s23135941                                healthcare are becoming increasingly popular, and new applications are under develop-
Academic Editor: Antonio Puliafito       ment [4,5]. This new paradigm relies on an extensively connected sensors and actuators
                                         network with multiple devices producing network traffic [6–8]. Research and industrial
Received: 14 April 2023                  communities have been evolving this concept for years, and these devices are becoming
Revised: 16 June 2023                    more present in our daily lives [9–11].
Accepted: 20 June 2023
                                              Several areas have been transformed by this technology. For example, in healthcare
Published: 26 June 2023
                                         applications, patients can be regularly monitored using IoT technology [12–14]. In trans-
                                         portation, IoT devices have been used to detect and prevent accidents [15–17]. Industrial
                                         IoT (IIoT) has also brought different solutions, such as high reliability and low latency
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         automated monitoring and collaborative control [18]. IoT applications have also been
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.       developed for areas such as education [19], aviation [20], and forestry [21]. In the last
This article is an open access article   decade, society has experienced a drastic increase in IoT connections [22]. In fact, IoT
distributed under the terms and          connections will increase in the next few years across different areas [23]. This motivates
conditions of the Creative Commons       the creation and development of business ideas and new concepts that rely on a highly
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://    distributed infrastructure. In addition, various strategies have been proposed to solve
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/         potential problems in IoT operations, i.e., the deployment of new services is leveraged by
4.0/).                                   the scientific findings achieved in the past few years.



Sensors 2023, 23, 5941. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23135941                                                      https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2023, 23, 5941                                                                                            2 of 26




                               Conversely, despite these benefits, several challenges still need to be faced to enable
                         efficient and secure operations (e.g., interoperability, security, standards, and server tech-
                         nologies) [24–27]. The development of new applications may also bring new requirements
                         to the systems [28,29]. For example, the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) may require more restric-
                         tive response times than common IoT applications. Furthermore, detecting and mitigating
                         attacks performed against IoT devices is challenging due to several factors. For example,
                         distributed connections and light devices without security mechanisms may harden the
                         process of detecting and mitigating attacks [30–33].
                               Furthermore, although efforts have been made to produce datasets composed of at-
                         tacks against IoT devices, several possible attacks are not considered. In addition, most
                         efforts do not consider an extensive network topology with real IoT devices. Finally, the
                         attacks performed against IoT devices are executed by computer systems (i.e., non-IoT de-
                         vices), highlighting the need for a dataset composed of attacks performed by malicious IoT
                         devices. To enable the development of security analytics solutions for intrusion detection
                         in real-world scenarios, the data produced need to (i) include a variety of attacks that can
                         harm IoT operations, (ii) be collected from an extensive topology with real IoT devices of
                         different types and brands, and (iii) include attacks performed by malicious IoT devices.
                               The main goal of this research is to propose a novel and extensive IoT attack dataset
                         to foster the development of security analytics applications in real IoT operations. To
                         accomplish this, 33 attacks are executed in an IoT topology composed of 105 devices. These
                         attacks are classified into seven categories, namely DDoS, DoS, Recon, Web-based, brute
                         force, spoofing, and Mirai. In addition, all attacks are executed by malicious IoT devices
                         targeting other IoT devices. This dataset includes multiple attacks not available in other
                         IoT datasets and enables IoT professionals to develop new security analytics solutions.
                         Furthermore, the data are available in different formats, allowing researchers to use features
                         extracted in our evaluation or engineer new features.
                               The main contributions of this research are:
                         •    We design a new realistic IoT attack dataset, CICIoT2023, using an extensive topology
                              composed of several real IoT devices acting as either attackers or victims;
                         •    We perform, document, and collect data from 33 attacks divided into 7 classes against
                              IoT devices and demonstrated how they can be reproduced;
                         •    We evaluate the performance of machine and deep learning algorithms using the
                              CICIoT2023 dataset to classify and detect IoT network traffic as malicious or benign.
                              This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an extensive comparison of the
                         contributions of this research with other works present in the literature. Secondly, Section 3
                         introduces the CICIoT2023 dataset and presents the steps involved in the data collection.
                         After that, Section 4 presents the feature extraction process and describes the data. Section 5
                         presents the machine learning (ML) evaluation in the classification of different attacks using
                         the CICIoT2023 dataset. Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusion of this research.

                         2. Related Works
                              In the past few years, different contributions have been published regarding IoT
                         security datasets. In fact, data have been produced with different goals and using different
                         methods and resources. To better understand the characteristics of existing datasets, we
                         review several initiatives present in the literature and compare them with the proposed
                         CICIoT2023. The authors in [34] propose a novel network-based dataset for detecting
                         botnet attacks in the IoT environment called N-BaioT (2018). Mirai and BASHLITE botnets
                         were used to attack nine commercial IoT devices. Multiple features were extracted from the
                         network traffic and used by a deep-learning autoencoder for attack detection. In [35], the
                         authors introduce a host-based IoT dataset composed of data from real IoT devices. This
                         dataset, called IoTHIDS (2018), is produced based on experiments considering a topology
                         of three devices infected by Mirai, Hajime, Adira, BASHLITE, Doflo, Tsunami, and Wroba
                         malware botnets.
Sensors 2023, 23, 5941                                                                                            3 of 26




                               IoT-SH (2019) [36] is a dataset composed of captures of twelve attacks (categorized
                         into four classes) against eight different smart home devices. A three-layer Intrusion
                         Detection System (IDS) is used considering various combinations of rule-based and machine
                         learning approaches to classify the attacks. BoT-Iot (2019) is introduced in [37] as a realistic
                         traffic dataset, produced considering heterogeneous network profiles. Multiple attacks are
                         performed (e.g., DDoS, DoS, data theft, and scan) against five devices. In the evaluation
                         process, a set of new features are selected and used based on correlation coefficient and joint
                         entropy techniques. Various machine and deep learning models are trained to evaluate the
                         attack detection accuracy.
                               The authors in [38] introduce the Kitsune (2019) dataset, which is composed of four dif-
                         ferent categories of attacks executed against nine IoT devices. In the experiments conducted,
                         a security camera was infected by a real Mirai botnet sample. This dataset is intended to
                         support the development of plug-and-play Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS)
                         to detect normal and malicious traffic. Similarly, IoTNIDS (2019) [39] represent an initiative
                         focused on collecting data from a real-world IoT networking environment based on the
                         interaction between two IoT devices (speaker and camera). Multiple attacks are analyzed
                         in this effort, e.g., Mirai, MITM, DoS, and scanning. MedBIoT (2020) [40] is an IoT network
                         architecture dataset based on using real and emulated devices. The authors evaluated
                         multiple machine learning techniques using 100 statistical features extracted from the IoT
                         network traffic. In [41], the authors propose the IoT-23 (2020) dataset. This contribution
                         refers to a botnet dataset captured composed of real network environment captures of
                         benign and malicious traffic.
                               IoTIDs (2020) [42] is proposed as a dataset composed of IoT-related flow-based fea-
                         tures, selected and ranked by the correlation coefficients technique and the Shapiro–Wilk
                         algorithm, respectively. In the experiments, the authors performed four different attacks
                         against two IoT devices (speaker and camera) and recorded the data. Multiple machine
                         learning methods were used in the evaluation process (e.g., SVM, G-NB, LDA, and LR)
                         focusing on attack detection and classification. The authors in [43] present the MQTT (2020)
                         dataset with the primary goal of providing realistic data that include a protocol dedicated
                         to IoT network scenarios. Furthermore, eight IoT devices were connected to the MQTT
                         broker and a set of 33 different features were extracted and provided to various machine
                         learning algorithms. Similarly, MQTT-IoT-IDS (2020) [44] is another contribution focused
                         on producing a dataset using a lightweight protocol, i.e., MQTT, which is used in IoT
                         networks. The authors focus on replicating a realistic IoT network by using a camera feed,
                         twelve MQTT sensors, and a broker. Five scenarios are considered based on the variation in
                         the attacks performed. Several packet-based, uni-, and bi-flow features are used alongside
                         six different machine learning algorithms in the evaluation phase.
                               In [45], the authors proposed a new telemetry-based data-driven IoT/IIoT dataset
                         called TON-IoT (2020). This heterogeneous dataset comprises both normal and attack
                         samples captured in different scenarios. Targeting the development of a rea