                                                                Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229


                                                               Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                                Information Sciences
                                                         journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ins




Graph based encrypted malicious traﬃc detection with hybrid
analysis of multi-view features
Yueping Hong a , Qi Li a,∗ , Yanqing Yang a , Meng Shen b
a
    Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, No. 10 Xitucheng Road, Haidian District, Beijing, China
b
    Beijing Institute of Technology, No. 5 Yard, Zhong Guan Cun South Street, Haidian District, Beijing, China




A R T I C L E                I N F O                         A B S T R A C T

Keywords:                                                    At present, the TLS cryptographic protocol is widely deployed. While protecting the security
Malicious traﬃc                                              and integrity of transmitted information, it also makes the detection of malicious behavior
Encrypted traﬃc                                              more diﬃcult. In recent years, researchers have proposed many encrypted malicious traﬃc
SSL/TLS
                                                             detection methods. However, the existing approaches have some shortcomings. Firstly, although
Multi-view features
                                                             researchers have extracted multi-view features from diﬀerent aspects, which can be divided into
                                                             vectorized features based on feature engineering and image features based on original data,
                                                             existing methods cannot fully integrate the features of diﬀerent forms of expression. Secondly,
                                                             most of the existing methods do not fully analyze the correlation between diﬀerent encrypted
                                                             traﬃc. Thirdly, the existing methods based on correlation analysis have low processing eﬃciency
                                                             and cannot be applied to real networks. In the paper, we present MalDiscovery, a novel technique
                                                             to discover encrypted malicious traﬃc to address all the above issues. For encrypted malicious
                                                             traﬃc, MalDiscovery constructs an attribute KNN graph, in which encrypted sessions are used
                                                             as nodes to construct a KNN graph according to the similarity of image features, and vectorized
                                                             features are used as attributes of corresponding nodes. After that, the GraphSAGE model is used
                                                             to collect relevant node information through correlation analysis to enrich the embeddings of
                                                             each node. Finally, we achieve the accurate binary classiﬁcation of nodes in the graph based
                                                             on richer embeddings. We use extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed method, and the
                                                             experiment results show that MalDiscovery can achieve an accuracy of about 99.9%, signiﬁcantly
                                                             outperforming all compared methods.




1. Introduction

1.1. Background

   To protect security during data transmission, cryptographic protocols have gradually developed and are currently becoming
mature. According to the Google Transparency report [1], the proportion of encrypted traﬃc on the Internet has increased from
48% in 2014 to 99% in 2022. However, under the cover of cryptographic protocols, threat activities such as malware delivery,
command-and-control channels, and data exﬁltration, pose a serious threat to cyberspace security [2–4].



    * Corresponding author.
      E-mail address: liqi2001@bupt.edu.cn (Q. Li).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2023.119229
Received 8 January 2023; Received in revised form 6 April 2023; Accepted 22 May 2023
Available online 1 June 2023
0020-0255/© 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al.                                                                       Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229


    Among various cryptographic protocols, TLS protocol has been widely deployed in real networks since it can well protect the
security and integrity of transmitted data and is the most representative protocol among cryptographic protocols. Besides, attackers
are increasingly utilizing TLS-encrypted channels for the delivery and distribution of malware payloads, and for communication
between infected hosts and command and control (C&C) servers. According to the MITRE ATT&CK report [5], many cyberattacks
in the past few years have been related to port 443 of the TLS protocol. In addition, most of the existing public encrypted traﬃc
datasets collected encrypted traﬃc data based on the TLS protocol, while paying little attention to other cryptographic protocols.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to design an encrypted malicious traﬃc detection method for the TLS cryptographic protocols.

1.2. Shortcomings of existing approaches

    As researchers increasingly focus on encrypted malicious traﬃc detection, many approaches have been proposed. Initially, tra-
ditional methods were mostly based on signatures. However, such methods cannot detect unseen malicious traﬃc while violating
user privacy. Therefore, in recent years, researchers have chosen to use machine learning and deep learning methods to identify
encrypted malicious traﬃc [6]. These approaches extract a variety of features from encrypted traﬃc and regard encrypted traﬃc as
sample nodes, then use machine learning or deep learning models to detect the maliciousness of each node respectively according
to the features of encrypted traﬃc itself. However, these methods have two drawbacks. First, existing methods extract a variety of
encrypted traﬃc features from diﬀerent aspects. These features can often be referred to as multi-view features by researchers, and
they are divided into two categories: vectorized features and image features according to the representation form. Many researchers
believe that multi-view features extracted from diﬀerent aspects can complement each other and assist sample classiﬁcation from
diﬀerent perspectives under appropriate feature fusion methods [7,8]. Nevertheless, existing studies usually use only one type of
feature that ignore the supplementary information or directly concatenate several features that can destroy the correlation informa-
tion of the image and introduce noise to vectorized features. Second, with the development of adversarial technology, attackers can
easily interfere with the eﬀect of the models by modifying features and other methods [9]. Fortunately, malicious threat activities
are usually realized by multiple infected hosts jointly initiating network communication, and there must be rich correlations between
these encrypted malicious sessions. Using this correlation information can help us more accurately detect encrypted malicious traﬃc.
Nevertheless, most of the existing methods do not consider the analysis of the correlation between encrypted traﬃc. To fully analyze
the correlation between encrypted traﬃc, researchers introduced graph-based models and proposed many methods. In these studies,
encrypted traﬃc samples are constructed into a graph based on the correlation between diﬀerent samples, and correlation-analysis
models such as RandomWalk [10], GCN [11], etc. are utilized to discover the malicious sample nodes in the graph, so that realize
the malicious detection of samples. However, these methods are ineﬃcient in the phase of testing unknown traﬃc since they use
transductive graph-based models. Therefore, it is an urgent problem to design a method that can achieve appropriate feature fusion,
correlation analysis, and high eﬃciency.

1.3. Solution

    Considering the detection of encrypted malicious traﬃc, three problems need to be solved. (1) How to eﬀectively utilize the
multi-view features of encrypted traﬃc samples to learn a uniﬁed embedding? (2) How to consider the correlation information
of encrypted traﬃc samples in the testing phase? (3) How to improve detection eﬃciency? To address these issues, we make the
following contributions:

   • To fuse multi-view features skillfully, we construct an attributed KNN graph, in which we analyze the correlation between
     samples through the similarity of image features and combine the vectorized features as the attribute of each node in the KNN
     graph.
   • To exploit the correlation for detection, we propose MalDiscovery, which utilizes a GNN model which can capture the correla-
     tion information between diﬀerent nodes in the attributed KNN graph.
   • To improve detection eﬃciency, we abandon the transductive models such as GCN [11] and utilize the inductive model Graph-
     SAGE [12] for correlation analysis.

    Our approach not only realizes the fusion of multi-view features and the analysis of the correlation between encrypted traﬃc, but
also has high processing eﬃciency, which can be deployed in the real network environment.

2. Related work

   Malicious traﬃc detection is important for establishing a secure and reliable computer network architecture. With the develop-
ment of encryption technology, attackers also use it to evade the detection against their malicious activities, which brings a great
challenge to intrusion detection systems [13]. Presently, researchers pay more attention to detecting encrypted malicious traﬃc. The
research on encrypted malicious traﬃc detection has gone through a long period of development, which can be roughly divided into
three stages: signature-based studies, ML-based & DL-based studies, and correlation-based studies.
   Signature-based studies are based on the matches between the identiﬁcation signatures and the actual information in encrypted
traﬃc payloads. The signatures include the universal characteristics of an application protocol and are built via two sources: from

                                                                 2
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al.                                                                        Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229


the standard protocol speciﬁcations and documentation, or manual observation and analysis. Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) [14–16]
is the most well-known method for this type of research. These approaches are essentially a man-in-the-middle attack [17], which
intercept encrypted traﬃc during transmission, detect malicious activities by using DPI through decrypted ciphertext information,
then re-encrypt and forward traﬃc. However, these approaches destroy the secure channel in the procedure of decryption, which
seriously violates the user’s privacy. In addition, decryption and re-encryption are computationally expensive. In order to detect
encrypted malicious traﬃc without decryption, some researchers have tried to extract information from outside the payload and use
traditional machine learning (ML) or deep learning (DL) to analyze encrypted traﬃc samples.
    Machine Learning-based (ML-based) & Deep Learning (DL-based) studies have gradually matured in the last decade, and these
methods input the extracted encrypted traﬃc features into the models to determine the maliciousness of the samples. The extracted
features can be divided into vectorized features and image features according to their representation form. ML-based methods rely
on a large amount of prior knowledge to extract features and train shallow machine learning models on this basis to make full
use of the observable features introduced by encryption mechanisms to distinguish encrypted malicious traﬃc. In this process, the
features extracted by researchers through feature engineering are usually represented in the form of vectors, so these features are
usually referred to as vectorized features in subsequent works. Anderson et al. [2–4] have long focused on encrypted malicious traﬃc
detection and deﬁned the detection granularity as a single encrypted session. Their works mainly focused on two statistical features
of encrypted traﬃc: handshake information (version, cipher suite, extension, certiﬁcate, etc.) and session metadata (packet length
sequence, packet time interval sequence, etc.). Wang et al. [18] extracted the features from HTTPS traﬃc and then fed them into
shallow machine-learning models to detect encrypted malicious traﬃc. Shen et al. [19] proposed an attribute-aware encrypted traﬃc
classiﬁcation method based on the second-order Markov Chains to deal with the problem that the existing encrypted traﬃc classiﬁ-
cation methods have low classiﬁcation accuracy for traﬃc with similar ﬁngerprints. Dai et al. [20] proposed an encrypted malicious
traﬃc detection method using multi-view features for SSL protocol. They extracted features from multiple aspects, including ﬂow
statistics, SSL handshake ﬁelds, and certiﬁcates, to retain the original key information, and used four machine learning models as
classiﬁers to achieve the highest accuracy in the XGBoost model. Liu et al. [21] proposed a detection structure called MalDect for
encrypted malicious traﬃc and uses the method of online random forest to detect the traﬃc before illegal operation. Shen et al. [22]
proposed FineWP, a novel ﬁne-grained webpage ﬁngerprinting method, which extracts length information of packets and feeds into
machine learning models for classiﬁcation. Dong et al. [23] extracted packet length sequences and constructed MLTree for each
encrypted session to analyze the malicious traﬃc behavior. However, the detection accuracy of these approaches greatly depends on
prior knowledge. If the traﬃc packet changes or is confused by attackers, the eﬀect of this method will be greatly reduced [24]. DL-
based studies get rid of the limitation of prior knowledge [25] by converting the original encrypted traﬃc data into images and then
automatically discovering malicious encrypted traﬃc with deep learning approaches. The images extracted during this process are
called the image features of encrypted traﬃc by researchers, which can completely contain the information of the encrypted traﬃc.
Wang et al. [26] proposed an end-to-end encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation method with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,
which is the ﬁrst time to apply an end-to-end method for the encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation domain. Shapira et al. [27] proposed an
approach to transforming encrypted traﬃc into an intuitive picture and then using convolutional neural networks (CNN) to identify
the traﬃc category. Lin et al. [28] converted packets into images and used CNN to generate corresponding embeddings, and then fed
each image into a bidirectional LSTM in time order to obtain a classiﬁcation of a ﬂow. Bazuhair et al. [29] proposed an image-based
encrypted traﬃc embedding method based on Berlin noise, which uses Perlin noise to encode the given connection features into the
image to train the deep learning model for binary classiﬁcation of connection ﬂows. Wang et al. [30] proposed an encrypted traﬃc
application identiﬁcation method using a stack type of automatic encoder. Shao et al. [31] proposed a traﬃc data encoder based
on deep learning to extract traﬃc representation and classify the traﬃc. However, ML-based and DL-based methods have certain
drawbacks