    Encrypted traffic classification based on contrastive learning with
                     spatial-temporal feature fusion
                Rui Wanga, Zhidong Wua, Yaxi Lia, Feng Lia, Siyuan Tianb, Jianyi Liu*b
    a
      State Grid Information & Telecommunication Branch, Beijing, China; bSchool of Cyberspace
             Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China


                                                         ABSTRACT

While encryption ensures the confidentiality and integrity of user data, more and more attackers try to hide attack behaviors
through encryption, which brings new challenges to malicious traffic identification. How to effectively classify encrypted
traffic without decrypting traffic and protecting user privacy has become an urgent problem to be solved. This paper
proposes a classification method for encrypted traffic based on contrastive learning with spatial and temporal feature
fusion. Unlike traditional contrastive learning with a single encoder, this method separately designs a spatial feature
encoder and a temporal feature encoder to extract distinct features and implements contrastive learning in the same
encoding layer through a fully connected layer to obtain a unique feature representation of encrypted traffic. This method
focuses on the consistent features from different perspectives within the same sample. The effectiveness of this method is
demonstrated through ablation experiments and comparisons with existing works.
Keywords: Encrypted traffic classification, spatial features, temporal features, contrastive learning

                                                  1. INTRODUCTION
Encrypted traffic, while fully protecting various aspects of internet users’ security, also conceals various internet activities,
which poses new challenges for traffic identification. With the progress of research on identifying encrypted traffic,
supervised learning has been able to achieve satisfactory accuracy for specific tasks. However, in practical applications,
the vast majority of traffic is unlabeled data, which limits the application scope of supervised methods. How to use large
amounts of unlabeled data to train powerful and representative feature extraction models, is particularly suitable for
encrypted traffic that loses semantic information and is difficult to manually annotate.
The various features of network traffic have consistency in high-dimensional representation space, which means that both
spatial and temporal features of any traffic sample have consistency in the representation space. In this paper, based on the
idea of self-supervised contrastive learning and inspired by image and text consistency representation tasks, we design a
task of fusing the spatial and temporal features of encrypted traffic for encrypted traffic feature extraction. We propose a
spatial and temporal dual encoder structure unlike previous ones to obtain representations of different features of encrypted
traffic. The training objective is to obtain spatial and temporal representation consistency in a shared embedding space,
and we use contrastive loss to fuse these two features. We transform the traffic classification task into a task of fusing
spatial and temporal features and obtain consistent representations as the final traffic representation through mutual
guidance between spatial and temporal features.

                                                2. RELATED WORKS
2.1 Payload-based encrypted traffic classification
This method obtains information by analyzing the payload, establishes an encrypted traffic knowledge base, and matches
specific fields in encrypted traffic data to achieve encrypted traffic discrimination. Özdel 1 proposed a payload-based
application layer traffic identification method that can identify various application traffic. Tang 2 proposed a method that
first assigns similar packets to the same group, and then uses a machine learning algorithm to classify each group. Bonfiglio
et al.3 used Pearson’s chi-square test and Naive Bayes classifiers to extract protocol frame structure fingerprints from the



    *liujy@bupt.edu.cn




                     International Conference on Computer Application and Information Security (ICCAIS 2023),
                               edited by Jerry Chun-Wei Lin, Haidong Shao, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13090,
                                    1309024 · © 2024 SPIE · 0277-786X · doi: 10.1117/12.3025808


                                               Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13090 1309024-1
first 4 bytes of non-encrypted packet headers and payloads for Skype traffic identification. Shen 4 used second-order
Markov chain models to model traffic and considered application attributes such as port numbers and protocol types.
2.2 Statistical features based encrypted traffic classification
Statistical features focus on the characteristics of all packets within a certain period of time, such as the number of
unidirectional packets, the time difference between the start and end of packet transmission, the frequency of packet
transmission, etc. Then, the features are fed into a machine learning model for training to achieve the task of encrypted
traffic identification. Mahdavi5 utilizes statistical features such as empirical distribution functions, mutual information, and
autocorrelation functions to establish classifiers. Zhang6 uses features such as mutual correlation coefficients and wavelet
analysis to establish classifiers. Wang7 uses statistical features such as wavelet analysis and mutual information to extract
feature vectors, and uses a random forest classifier for classification. In addition, more than 20 flow statistical features
such as session duration, inter-arrival time, packet size, and protocol fingerprints are often used in combination with Naive
Bayes, support vector machines, decision trees, etc. for encrypted traffic identification 8.
2.3 Machine learning based encrypted traffic classification
Researchers often combine machine learning with various feature to complete the task of traffic classification. According
to different levels, encrypted traffic features can be divided into packet-level features, flow-level features, and session-
level features. Bar-Yanai et al.9 proposed a new network traffic classification method that combines K-means and K-
nearest neighbor algorithms. Moore et al.10 designed a network traffic feature classifier using supervised Bayesian
estimation. Sun et al.11 proposed a hybrid method for classifying encrypted traffic. This method first used signature
matching to identify encrypted protocols such as IPSec and SSL/TLS, and then applied the Naive Bayes algorithm to
identify encrypted applications. Alshammari12 studied the performance of C5.0, AdaBoost, and genetic programming (GP)
algorithms for identifying IP voice (VoIP) traffic. Besides payload features, temporal features have also been used as input
for machine learning models. Gil et al.13 used temporal -related features such as flow duration, forward inter-arrival time,
number of packets per second, and backward inter-arrival time, and employed k-nearest neighbor and C4.5 to classify
network traffic. Yao et al.14 analyzed the discrete distribution and temporal patterns of flow features and proposed a hidden
Markov model based on Gaussian Mixture.
2.4 Deep learning based encrypted traffic classification
Deep learning can automatically learn advanced features of data through training without manual design. Wang et al.15
proposed a classification framework based on CNN, comparing the experimental results between 1D-CNN, and 2D-CNN.
Lotfollahi et al.16 proposed the Deep Packet traffic classification framework, and exceeded the SOTA results. Zou 17
considered that there are effective features within continuous packets and used the characteristics of recurrent neural
networks for learning. Liu et al.18 decomposed the traffic into many small-time windows and took the data flow of these
time windows as the input of the network. The network used CNN and RNN to learn traffic sequence features and used
fully connected layers for classification. Yao et al.19 first converted packets into feature vectors and input them into LSTM
networks for encoding. This method shows that the combination of attention mechanisms and LSTM networks can
effectively identify encrypted traffic. Shapira20 converted traffic into a two-dimensional FlowPic image, and used CNN to
classify the FlowPic image. Hu21 proposes a network structure called CLD-Net, which combines CNN and LSTM for
classifying encrypted internet traffic. Lin 22 proposes a method based on flow space-time features of encrypted traffic for
effective management of industrial internet of things.

                                                      3. METHODS
For any traffic, the spatial and temporal features are consistent in the representation space. This paper proposes a dual
encoder architecture that fuses the spatial and temporal features of encrypted traffic using contrastive loss to achieve
training objectives based on obtaining spatial and temporal consistent representations in a shared embedding space. The
embedding distances of matching spatial and temporal pairs are pulled closer, while the embedding distances of non-
matching spatial and temporal pairs are separated, as shown in Figure 1. This method transforms the traffic classification
task into a task of fusing spatial and temporal features. By mutually guiding each other, spatial and temporal features
maximize the mutual information between different perspectives of the same traffic flow, obtaining a consistent
representation as the final traffic representation. Firstly, the input data is copied into two identical copies. In the spatial
feature extraction, 1014-dimensional data is processed into a two-dimensional grayscale image to extract spatial features




                                               Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13090 1309024-2
using a two-dimensional convolutional neural network. In the temporal feature extraction, encrypted traffic data is
processed as a single-channel sequence, and one-dimensional convolutional neural network and LSTM are used.

                                                                                                                        Stage 2: Contrastive
          Stage 1: Data
                                                                                                                              Learning
          Preprocessing
                                                                                                             S1
                                                                                                           Spatial
                                                                                                           Feature


                                       Image-
                                        based     S1 Grayscale Image
                                         Data
                                      Preproc                                                                S2
                                       essing                                                              Spatial
                                                                                                           Feature
                       Complet                                                                                  Positive Example
                          e      S1                   S2 Grayscale Image               Spatial Feature
   Encrypted traffic                                                                                           Negative example    Contrastive
        dataset
                        Packet                                                         Extraction Model                                Loss
                       Preproc
                        essing

                                                                                                           S1 Time
                                                 12    245   154   1   55
                                      Sequenc                                                              Feature
                                      e-based
                                        Data             S1 sequence
                                 S2   Preproc
                                       essing
                                                 12    245   154   1   55


                                                                                                           S2 Time
                                                         S2 sequence                                       Feature

                                                                                          Time Feature
                                                                                        Extraction Model


                                                      Figure 1. Model architecture.
3.1 Spatial feature extraction
The spatial feature extraction model uses 2D-CNN and consists of four identical blocks, each of which undergoes two
convolution operations and two normalization operations. After completion, ReLU is used as the activation function, and
the formula is as follows:
                                                             𝑓𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑥) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0, 𝑥)                                                               (1)
After extracting features with four blocks, this paper chooses to use an average pooling layer for pooling operations. The
reason is that this method obtains features that are more sensitive to background information and can integrate all
information from the feature maps.
                                                                            1
                                                             𝑦𝑖,𝑗,𝑘 =            ∑𝑝∈𝑃𝑖,𝑗 𝑥𝑝,𝑘                                                    (2)
                                                                            𝑚𝑛

where 𝑥 represents the input feature map, 𝑦 represents the pooled feature map, 𝑚 and 𝑛 represent the size of the pooling
window, and 𝑃𝑖,𝑗 represents the set of positions within the pooling window.
3.2 Temporal feature extraction
As shown in Figure 2, the temporal feature extraction module mainly consists of two parts: a one-dimensional
convolutional neural network and LSTM. The one-dimensional convolutional neural network part is composed of three
stages, each of which includes one-dimensional convolution, normalization, ReLU activation function, and maximum
pooling layer.
This paper first generates more complex patterns in the higher layers by applying one-dimensional convolution operations.
During the convolution process, ReLU is selected as the activation function, and normalization is performed after every
two convolutions. After one-dimensional convolution, each time step contains more features, which facilitates subsequent
feature extraction. After completing the convolution operation, temporal features are extracted from the data flow using
LSTM. Moreover, regardless of whether it is the handshake phase or the data transmission phase, the behavior
demonstrated in network communication only has forward associations. Therefore, this paper adopts unidirectional LSTM
to extract the time features of packets.




                                                Proc. of SPIE Vol. 13090 1309024-3
