              sensors
Article
Enhanced Network Intrusion Detection System for Internet
of Things Security Using Multimodal Big Data Representation
with Transfer Learning and Game Theory
Farhan Ullah 1,2 , Ali Turab 1 , Shamsher Ullah 3 , Diletta Cacciagrano 2                                  and Yue Zhao 4, *

                                             1   School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, China;
                                                 farhankhan.cs@yahoo.com (F.U.); aliturab@nwpu.edu.cn (A.T.)
                                             2   Division of Computer Science, University of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy; diletta.cacciagrano@unicam.it
                                             3   National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University,
                                                 Shenzhen 518060, China; shamsher@szu.edu.cn
                                             4   School of Computer Science, College of Science, Mathematics and Technology, Wenzhou-Kean University,
                                                 Wenzhou 325015, China
                                             *   Correspondence: yuezhao@kean.edu


                                             Abstract: Internet of Things (IoT) applications and resources are highly vulnerable to flood attacks,
                                             including Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. These attacks overwhelm the targeted device
                                             with numerous network packets, making its resources inaccessible to authorized users. Such attacks
                                             may comprise attack references, attack types, sub-categories, host information, malicious scripts,
                                             etc. These details assist security professionals in identifying weaknesses, tailoring defense measures,
                                             and responding rapidly to possible threats, thereby improving the overall security posture of IoT
                                             devices. Developing an intelligent Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is highly complex due to its
                                             numerous network features. This study presents an improved IDS for IoT security that employs
                                             multimodal big data representation and transfer learning. First, the Packet Capture (PCAP) files
                                             are crawled to retrieve the necessary attacks and bytes. Second, Spark-based big data optimization
                                             algorithms handle huge volumes of data. Second, a transfer learning approach such as word2vec
Citation: Ullah, F.; Turab, A.; Ullah, S.;   retrieves semantically-based observed features. Third, an algorithm is developed to convert network
Cacciagrano, D.; Zhao, Y. Enhanced           bytes into images, and texture features are extracted by configuring an attention-based Residual
Network Intrusion Detection System           Network (ResNet). Finally, the trained text and texture features are combined and used as multimodal
for Internet of Things Security Using        features to classify various attacks. The proposed method is thoroughly evaluated on three widely
Multimodal Big Data Representation           used IoT-based datasets: CIC-IoT 2022, CIC-IoT 2023, and Edge-IIoT. The proposed method achieves
with Transfer Learning and Game              excellent classification performance, with an accuracy of 98.2%. In addition, we present a game
Theory. Sensors 2024, 24, 4152.
                                             theory-based process to validate the proposed approach formally.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s24134152

Academic Editor: Alessandra                  Keywords: intrusion detection system; big data; transfer learning; game theory; network
Rizzardi                                     traffic; cybersecurity

Received: 7 May 2024
Revised: 16 June 2024
Accepted: 24 June 2024
Published: 26 June 2024
                                             1. Introduction
                                                  The adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies and systems is accelerating at an
                                             unprecedented rate. Modern IoT systems work on a far larger scale than the individual
                                             level, with interconnected devices dispersed throughout entire cities or countries. IoT
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.            devices can efficiently acquire, send, and process large amounts of data due to increased
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                             connectivity speed and bandwidth [1]. Together with their accumulated data, these IoT
This article is an open access article
                                             devices present considerable prospects for developing and delivering smart services in
distributed under the terms and
                                             various sectors, including autonomous vehicles, automatic monitoring, and smart cyber-
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                             physical networks [2,3]. However, the obtained IoT data may contain personal information,
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                             emphasizing the importance of privacy protection and stringent data security procedures.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                             Modern IoT and distributed systems must improve their capacity to effectively identify
4.0/).




Sensors 2024, 24, 4152. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24134152                                                        https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152                                                                                           2 of 31



                         and thwart network intrusions to resolve the rising issues regarding privacy and security.
                         Techniques for Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) based on machine learning or
                         deep learning have received much attention in the scientific community [4,5]. Their aim
                         is to mitigate misuse or deviations within IoT infrastructures and systems. While NIDS
                         has proven effective in detecting malicious network activity, a significant limitation is the
                         inability to identify new forms of network intrusions due to the challenges posed by big data
                         processing and related imbalances [6]. Furthermore, existing machine learning algorithms
                         for intrusion detection struggle with multimodal data, emphasizing the significance of
                         further study into hybrid feature engineering. Big data is generated via network traffic,
                         system events, and logs. Cybersecurity is improved by using big data analytics and related
                         approaches to analyze data flows, investigate events, and regularly detect anomalies, shifts,
                         and threats in network traffic, as shown in Figure 1. Remote routers properly collect and
                         track the network traffic that IoT devices generate. These routers send such real-time data to
                         Spark stream processors for efficient processing. The AMP Lab at UC Berkeley developed
                         Spark, a platform for distributed computation [7]. A Spark-based platform can dynamically
                         and efficiently manage massive amounts of generated data. Due to the expansion of large
                         data structures, networking system speeds, and intruder techniques, intelligent intrusion
                         detection remains an essential research challenge. Spark incorporates several integration
                         techniques across multiple big data systems, enabling it to quickly handle enormous
                         amounts of data [8,9]. Its memory-driven Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD) method is
                         designed for ensembles and recurrent computations and permits intermediary data caching
                         in storage. As a result, the Spark model provides particular benefits for processing massive
                         volumes of data through various optimization approaches, including partitioning, caching,
                         API selection, and more.




                         Figure 1. Monitoring of IoT-based network traffic flows using Spark stream processor.

                               Traditional Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) methods in NIDS have
                         prioritized model performance over in-depth network semantic analysis. NIDS evaluates
                         data from hosts and network traffic to detect intrusion attempts. Intruders regularly utilize
                         malicious scripts to disrupt IoT network functionality. Semantic-based feature engineering
                         can be applied to behavioral segmentation to detect potential malicious scripts. This
                         strategy entails evaluating network data semantically to generate training features before
                         using them for classification. Nonetheless, text-based behaviors such as code obfuscation,
                         insertion, and re-ordering present difficulties. In contrast, image-based feature analysis is
                         frequently used, capturing a wide range of structural information such as memory, process,
                         and header details. This enables visual images to retrieve dynamic or obfuscated data
                         of any type [10–12]. However, this strategy may disrupt the overall structure of network
                         traffic, making it harder to target specific scripts such as DDoS or authentication protocols.
                         It is also entirely dependent on the properties of images, which leaves it open to attacks
                         that impair image quality. To address these concerns, it is possible to employ multimodal
                         features that combine text and visual features to detect potentially harmful scripts and
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152                                                                                           3 of 31



                         risky behaviors such as memory or resource usage. This unique multimodal technique
                         accurately identifies a wide range of intrusion threats. This paper introduces an innovative
                         approach for detecting IoT-based NIDS involving analyzing and characterizing network-
                         based multimodal features. A crawler is developed to gather network flows from PCAPs
                         for in-depth study. Subsequently, word2vec is used to extract trained vocabulary features.
                         The network-based byte stream is then converted into an image. We develop a powerful
                         NIDS by integrating text-based and visual features. Our findings show that these two
                         features enhance one another, resulting in a higher intrusion detection rate. The proposed
                         methodology establishes a strong foundation by incorporating anomaly detection and
                         signature-based approaches. Although the current focus is on signature-based detection
                         approaches, including word2vec transfer learning to extract features from harmful scripts,
                         the system can be readily adapted to detect anomalies. This adaptability provides the
                         ability to detect network anomalies. Anomaly detection algorithms can be developed using
                         dynamic feature extraction techniques and enhanced streaming data processing capabilities.
                         This development can enable the IDS to detect abnormal network activity in real-time,
                         thereby improving signature-based detection. Consequently, it can offer a comprehensive
                         defense against emergent threats. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
                         •    We proposed custom datasets crawled from PCAPs in the CIC-IoT 2022 and 2023
                              datasets. Numerous attacks are assembled, including camera-based flood, DDoS,
                              RTSP brute force, etc. Furthermore, PCAPs are mined for various camera-based
                              attacks to analyze abnormal visual surveillance behavior.
                         •    The optimization approach, implemented within the Spark framework, efficiently
                              extracts insights from huge datasets. Comparative analysis of different optimization
                              strategies is used to determine how big data behaves and to improve the workings
                              of the NIDS. The word2vec transfer learning approach extracts trained features from
                              dangerous scripts while minimizing data transmission overhead. This strategy uses
                              semantic anchors to focus on specific network attacks involving malicious scripts.
                         •    We design a method that converts the network bytes to an image to analyze the visual
                              features. A malware-to-image conversion algorithm is developed that can transform
                              the byte stream into a grayscale image. The texture features are then extracted from
                              visuals using an attention-based Residual Network (ResNet)-trained model. The text
                              and texture features are then combined for effective IoT-based NIDS.
                         •    A game theory-based method is designed to validate the performance of the proposed
                              method, supporting the use of the Nash equilibrium and mathematical formulations
                              to develop a reliable and trustworthy IoT-based IDS system.
                              The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the relevant
                         and recent literature; Section 3 describes the proposed approach; Section 4 provides an
                         extensive experimental analysis; Section 5 presents the IDS game theory-based study; and
                         Section 6 concludes the work.

                         2. Related Work
                               Numerous research studies have been proposed on IoT security using IDS customized
                         to the IoT ecosystem’s characteristics. Stephen et al. [13] designed an approach renowned
                         for its mobility, composite structure, and centralized design. This method is intended to
                         detect Hello Flood and Sybil attacks on IoT networks that use the Low Power and Lossy
                         Networks (RPL) protocol for routing. Their method uses detection measures, including
                         the number of packets received and delivered, to verify the intrusion ratio (IR) via the
                         IDS agent. Raza et al. [14] designed the SVELTE method, a real-time IDS for the Internet
                         of Things. It includes a 6LoWPAN Mapper, an intrusion detection module, and a small
                         firewall. The method examines traced data to detect unauthorized network ac