             applied
             sciences
Article
Fast and Accurate Multi-Task Learning for Encrypted Network
Traffic Classification
Jee-Tae Park 1 , Chang-Yui Shin 2 , Ui-Jun Baek 1 and Myung-Sup Kim 1, *

                                            1   Department of Computer and Information Science, Korea University, Sejong 30019, Republic of Korea;
                                                pjj5846@korea.ac.kr (J.-T.P.); pb1069@korea.ac.kr (U.-J.B.)
                                            2   C4ISR System Development Quality Research Team, Defense Agency for Technology and Quality,
                                                Daejeon 35409, Republic of Korea; superego99@dtaq.re.kr
                                            *   Correspondence: tmskim@korea.ac.kr


                                            Abstract: The classification of encrypted traffic plays a crucial role in network management and
                                            security. As encrypted network traffic becomes increasingly complicated and challenging to analyze,
                                            there is a growing need for more efficient and comprehensive analytical approaches. Our proposed
                                            method introduces a novel approach to network traffic classification, utilizing multi-task learning
                                            to simultaneously train multiple tasks within a single model. To validate the proposed method,
                                            we conducted experiments using the ISCX 2016 VPN/Non-VPN dataset, consisting of three tasks.
                                            The proposed method outperformed the majority of existing methods in classification with 99.29%,
                                            97.38%, and 96.89% accuracy in three tasks (i.e., encapsulation, category, and application classification,
                                            respectively). The efficiency of the proposed method also demonstrated outstanding performance
                                            when compared to methods excluding lightweight models. The proposed approach demonstrates
                                            accurate and efficient multi-task classification on encrypted traffic.

                                            Keywords: encrypted traffic classification; multi-task classification; BERT; transformer




                                            1. Introduction
                                                  The advancement of science and technology and ultra-high-speed networks is ac-
Citation: Park, J.-T.; Shin, C.-Y.; Baek,   companied by the rise of various applications. With the advancement of modern network
U.-J.; Kim, M.-S. Fast and Accurate         technologies such as cloud computing and edge computing, research on efficient network
Multi-Task Learning for Encrypted           management has been actively conducted. Among them, network traffic classification
Network Traffic Classification. Appl.       research is one of the key factors for efficient network management [1–5].
Sci. 2024, 14, 3073. https://doi.org/             Traffic classification methods encompass traditional, signature-based, learning-based,
10.3390/app14073073                         and transformer-based approaches [3–8]. Traditional methods rely on port-based and
Academic Editor: Stefan Fischer             payload-based techniques. Port-based classification uses origin and destination ports,
                                            offering simplicity and low computational cost, but it faces limitations with dynamic
Received: 6 March 2024
                                            ports. Payload-based classification utilizes fixed payload content, providing simplicity
Revised: 29 March 2024
                                            and high performance, but it is susceptible to encrypted traffic and struggles to adapt to
Accepted: 3 April 2024
                                            new protocols [9]. Signature-based methods classify traffic based on specific patterns or
Published: 5 April 2024
                                            signatures, demonstrating high performance for defined signatures. However, they face
                                            challenges in adapting to changing patterns and encrypted traffic. Overall, network traffic
                                            classification research plays a key role in enhancing efficient network management amid
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.           evolving technological landscapes.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.                With recent advances in AI and technologies, most studies are using learning-based
This article is an open access article      methods [10–32]. Learning-based methods utilize machine learning (ML) and deep learning
distributed under the terms and             (DL) algorithms to learn and classify traffic. Models are trained on large amounts of traffic
conditions of the Creative Commons          data to identify specific patterns or trends, which are then used to predict or classify new
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://       traffic. Due to these advantages, many studies have utilized learning-based methods, and
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/            they have improved performance in many areas.
4.0/).




Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 3073. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14073073                                                 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 3073                                                                                             2 of 23



                                  Transformer-based methods are one of the more recent deep learning techniques to
                            emerge, applying structures that have performed particularly well in natural language
                            processing (NLP) for traffic classification [33–36]. The self-attention mechanism of the
                            transformer effectively learns the global dependencies of sequence data, which has shown
                            promising performance in a variety of applications. For instance, the field of NLP has
                            witnessed a notable advancement with the introduction of bidirectional encoder represen-
                            tation from transformers (BERT) pre-training models [35,36]. BERT has demonstrated high
                            performance in many fields and can be effectively applied to downstream tasks by learning
                            relationships and structures for unbiased data from unlabeled data. In line with this trend,
                            many studies have been conducted in the field of network traffic classification by applying
                            transform-based methods. These methods have shown higher performance than traditional
                            learning-based methods.
                                  With the growing concerns regarding personal privacy and security, most applications
                            now utilize encrypted traffic [37–39]. As encrypted communications protect payload
                            content, traditional traffic classification methods have become inapplicable. Researchers
                            use publicly available encrypted traffic datasets such as ISCX 2016 VPN/Non-VPN [40].
                            for encrypted traffic classification studies. In these encrypted traffic classification studies,
                            public datasets are mainly divided into intrusion detection systems (IDS) and application
                            classification, each of which is in turn divided into specific tasks. For example, the ISCX
                            2016 VPN/Non-VPN, which is often used for application classification studies, consists of
                            three tasks: encapsulation, category, and application.
                                  Traffic classification methods are categorized into single-task learning (STL) and
                            multi-task learning (MTL) based on the target data task. STL focuses on training a model
                            for a specific task in machine learning, enhancing performance by learning task-specific
                            features and patterns. However, this optimized model may have limited applicability to
                            other tasks. On the other hand, MTL involves training a model on multiple related tasks,
                            utilizing shared representations to improve overall performance. MTL shares common
                            low-level features across tasks while incorporating task-specific high-level features. This
                            approach is valuable for diverse yet interrelated tasks, leading to more efficient and effective
                            learning [41–43].
                                  Most network traffic classification research has traditionally used STL, and while
                            classification performance has improved, there are some limitations to applying traditional
                            STL. First, the evolving complexity of networks, including intricate network traffic patterns,
                            new network environments, applications, and encryption technologies, has challenged the
                            applicability of traditional STL. Second, STL requires training a separate model for each task,
                            which is time and resource intensive. Third, malicious activity on the network is becoming
                            increasingly sophisticated. Attackers are adept at evading or defeating traditional security
                            methods, requiring more detailed analysis that is more diverse and broader than traditional
                            research. Therefore, it is essential to study traffic classification with MTL, which can address
                            the limitations of traditional research by analyzing network traffic more comprehensively
                            and in-depth compared to STL.
                                  In this paper, we propose a multi-task classification method utilizing DistilBERT [36],
                            a variant of the BERT model within a transformer architecture, for classifying encrypted
                            traffic. This approach enables the performance of traffic classification for various tasks with
                            a single training, using BERT. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
                            •    We adopt a multi-task learning (MTL) approach for encrypted traffic classification,
                                 leveraging the DistilBERT model. The proposed method is based on a model that
                                 can handle multiple classification tasks simultaneously. The proposed method allows
                                 for a thorough and detailed analysis of encrypted network traffic, addressing the
                                 complexity of various tasks within a unified training framework.
                            •    To validate our proposed method, we conducted verification experiments, focusing
                                 on three specific tasks using the ISCX 2016 VPN/Non-VPN dataset. We compared
                                 our approach with other methods, assessing classification accuracy and efficiency. In
                                 terms of classification accuracy, we demonstrated average accuracies ranging from
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                  3 of 23
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 3073                                                                                                                 3 of 23



                                        terms    of modelacross
                                         96.89~99.29%        eﬃciency,     our outperforming
                                                                    all tasks,   approach showed    the favorable
                                                                                                         majority of per  samplemethods.
                                                                                                                                   processing
                                                                                                                        existing               In
                                         terms of model efficiency, our approach showed favorable per sample processing that
                                        time   compared     to  existing  models.     Through   our  experiment     results, we  validate  time
                                        our  proposed
                                         compared         method,models.
                                                      to existing    employing       multi-task
                                                                                Through          classification
                                                                                           our experiment         for encrypted
                                                                                                                results,          traﬃc,
                                                                                                                         we validate      is our
                                                                                                                                             ef-
                                                                                                                                       that
                                        fective  in terms   of  both  classification    performance     and  eﬃciency.
                                         proposed method, employing multi-task classification for encrypted traffic, is effective
                                       We   applied
                                         in terms      weight
                                                    of both      adjustments
                                                              classification     (class weight,
                                                                               performance     andtask  weight) within the model to solve
                                                                                                     efficiency.
                                   • the We problems      related
                                             applied weight         to data imbalance
                                                                  adjustments               and varying
                                                                                  (class weight,            task diﬃculty.
                                                                                                   task weight)    within theThrough
                                                                                                                               model toaddi-
                                                                                                                                          solve
                                        tional   experiments,      we  validated     the impact    of  both  weights    on  performance
                                         the problems related to data imbalance and varying task difficulty. Through additional             im-
                                        provement.  