                                                                       Heliyon 10 (2024) e35962


                                                             Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                                                Heliyon
                                                          journal homepage: www.cell.com/heliyon


Research article

FedETC: Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation based on federated
learning
Zhiping Jin a , Ke Duan a , Changhui Chen b , Meirong He c , Shan Jiang c ,
Hanxiao Xue d,∗
a School of Information Engineering, Zhongshan Polytechnic, Zhongshan, China
b Guangzhou Panyu Polytechnic, Guangzhou, China
c Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China
d School of Information Technology and Engineering, Guangzhou College of Commerce, Guangzhou, China




A R T I C L E              I N F O                         A B S T R A C T

Keywords:                                                  The current popular traﬃc classiﬁcation methods based on feature engineering and machine
Network traﬃc classiﬁcation                                learning are diﬃcult to obtain suitable traﬃc feature sets for multiple traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks.
Federated learning                                         Besides, data privacy policies prohibit network operators from collecting and sharing traﬃc data
Encrypted traﬃc
                                                           that might compromise user privacy. To address these challenges, we propose FedETC, a federated
                                                           learning framework that allows multiple participants to learn global traﬃc classiﬁers, while
                                                           keeping locally encrypted traﬃc invisible to other participants. In addition, FedETC adopts one-
                                                           dimensional convolutional neural network as the base model, which avoids manual traﬃc feature
                                                           design. In the experiments, we evaluate the FedETC framework for the tasks of both application
                                                           identiﬁcation and traﬃc characterization in a publicly available real-world dataset. The results
                                                           show that FedETC can achieve promising accuracy rates that are close to centralized learning
                                                           schemes.




1. Introduction


    The classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of network traﬃc play a signiﬁcant role in network operation management and cyberspace
security [1–3]. For instance, identifying the type of applications in a network enables ﬁne-grained management of critical bandwidth
resources. It also serves as an eﬀective and essential building block of network protection for detecting unknown attack behaviors,
preventing network intrusions, and facilitating network situational awareness [4,5].
    It is worth noting that with the evolution and development of encryption protocols such as Transport Layer Security (TLS), the era
of traﬃc encryption has come. Network traﬃc, as the core carrier of network data, can hide user behavior and protect user privacy
by using encryption technology. Traditional network traﬃc classiﬁcation approaches like deep packet inspection rely on matching
protocol signatures in the application layer data, which will face a huge challenge to process encrypted traﬃc data [6,7]. In contrast,
machine learning based approaches can eﬀectively handle encrypted traﬃc [8].
    Generally, encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation based on classic machine learning require researchers to design and deﬁne a set of
traﬃc feature in advance and then train a classiﬁcation model using machine learning algorithms such as Naive Bayes, support



 * Corresponding author.
   E-mail address: 20220057@gcc.edu.cn (H. Xue).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e35962
Received 22 May 2024; Received in revised form 22 July 2024; Accepted 6 August 2024
Available online 11 August 2024
2405-8440/© 2024 The Authors.           Published by Elsevier Ltd.                     This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Z. Jin, K. Duan, C. Chen et al.                                                                                      Heliyon 10 (2024) e35962


vector machine, decision trees and so on. Nonetheless, due to the complexity of network applications and the prominent diﬀerence
in traﬃc components, the manually deﬁned feature sets will signiﬁcantly aﬀect the performance of traﬃc classiﬁers. For example,
network operators have a wide variety of traﬃc types, and thus need to have experienced network experts to manually construct
a representative set of features, which incurs expensive labor costs [9]. In addition, manual feature engineering cannot adapt to
the current surge of network applications with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent behaviors and concept drifts. Deep learning [10], on the other
hand, diﬀers from classic machine learning algorithms in that it can accomplish both feature learning and traﬃc classiﬁcation without
requiring the manual eﬀorts of network experts. It not only reduces labor costs linked to feature design but also facilitates the discovery
of deep traﬃc patterns [11]. In recent years, a series of studies have adopted deep learning for classifying encrypted network traﬃc
and reported promising results [12–14].
    Despite the promising results of machine learning and deep learning approaches for network traﬃc classiﬁcation, most existing
studies focus on centralized learning schemes and rely on the quality of training data. In practice, collecting a large, representative
and diverse traﬃc data set is diﬃcult and subject to security and privacy concerns [15]. While centralized learning schemes can
aggregate traﬃc data from many network domains to improve data quality and model performance, the participating domains do not
have full control over their data, which can lead to data leakage. For example, although the payload of SSL/TLS packet is invisible,
a lot of side information such as the length of packets, the interval between packets, the dependency relationship between packets,
and the transmission relationship between packets can be disclosed. More importantly, due to the frequent occurrence of user privacy
leakage caused by centralized training, many countries around the world have introduced data privacy protection laws and policies.
    In this paper, we propose the FedETC (Federated Encrypted Traﬃc Classiﬁcation) framework, which allows multiple autonomous
network domains to collaborate with each other on training a universal end-to-end encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation model without
disclosing their data to other participants and the central server. The goal is to achieve classiﬁcation accuracy and data privacy at
the same time. In FedETC, the traﬃc sessions are transformed and represented in normalized byte sequences with ﬁxed length. The
sequences are provided as input to train the one-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network (1D-CNN) model. The parameters of the
local models are exchanged with the central server and merged into a global model using the FedAvg algorithm.
    For the purpose of evaluation, we conduct extensive experiments using a publicly available encrypted traﬃc dataset. In the
experiments, we perform two types of traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks (i.e., application identiﬁcation and traﬃc characterization), and also
consider two scenarios with diﬀerent class and data distributions across the participating network domains. The results show that
the proposed federated learning scheme can achieve accuracy rates that are close to that of the centralized learning scheme. The
diﬀerence in overall accuracy can be as low as 0.8%.
    The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:

   ∙ We propose a federated learning scheme for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation, which is based on 1D-CNN model and FedAvg
      algorithm.
   ∙ We compare the proposed scheme with centralized and other federated learning approaches using a publicly available real-world
      encrypted traﬃc dataset.
   ∙ We explore the impact of diﬀerent distributions of traﬃc class and data across the participants in the proposed federated learning.

   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the related works. Section 3 introduces the
FedETC framework and describes the components in detail. The experimental results and analysis are presented in Section 4. Finally,
section 5 concludes the paper.

2. Related works

    Traﬃc classiﬁcation approaches based on machine learning often use a pre-deﬁned feature set that consists of statistical traﬃc
characteristics [16–21]. For example, Riyad et al. [22] use more than 20 statistics data, such as the mean forward arrival interval and
the minimum forward packet length, as the input of the machine learning algorithm, and identiﬁed 14 traﬃc attributes for Secure
Shell (SSH) traﬃc classiﬁcation. Moore et al. [23] identify near 250 features that are useful for classifying ﬂow records. However,
more features result in higher computational cost and thus limit the application in real-time traﬃc classiﬁcation. Therefore, feature
selection or feature reduction techniques are often adopted for dimension reduction and redundancy removal.
    To avoid the disadvantages of manual feature design, researchers begin to adopt the deep learning models that integrate feature
learning. For example, Zhou et al. [24] adopt the minimum-maximum normalization method to process network ﬂow data and map it
into gray-scale images as the input data of the convolutional neural network to achieve feature learning. Rui et al. [25] provide a byte
segment neural network for traﬃc classiﬁcation, in which the payload fragments are put into the attention encoder to automatically
obtain feature representation vectors, and then the softmax classiﬁer is used for classiﬁcation.
    In recent years, encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation has attracted more and more research attention due to the widespread use of traﬃc
encryption. For example, Wang et al. [12] convert encrypted traﬃc into gray-scale images as the input of a 1D-CNN and perform
classiﬁcation tasks of diﬀerent granularity. Lotfollahi et al. [13] use stacked autoencoder and Convolution Neural Network (CNN) to
automatically extract the eﬀective load characteristics of encrypted packets to identify traﬃc. Aceto et al. [14] propose the Distiller
classiﬁer, which adopts a multi-modal multitask deep learning approach for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation.
    Other than the traditional centralized learning scheme adopted in the above-mentioned approaches, federated learning has also
been applied in the ﬁeld of network traﬃc classiﬁcation. For example, Mun et al. [15] propose a federated traﬃc classiﬁcation scheme
to identify traﬃc by associating locally encrypted data across various traﬃc transmission devices.

                                                                    2
Z. Jin, K. Duan, C. Chen et al.                                                                                                          Heliyon 10 (2024) e35962




                                                                  Fig. 1. The FedETC framework.


Table 1
Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks.

  Task                                 Classes

  APPI: Application Identiﬁcation      Aim Chat, Email, Facebook, FTPS, Gmail, Hangouts, ICQ, Netﬂix, SCP, SFTP, Skype, Spotify, Tor, Torrent, Vimeo, Voipbuster,
                                       Youtube.

  TC: Traﬃc Characterization           Chat, Email, File Transfer, Streaming, Torrent, VoIP, VPN Chat, VPN Email, VPN File Transfer, VPN Streaming, VPN Torrent,
                                       VPN VoIP.




                                                               Fig. 2. Data preprocessing operations.


3. Method

   This section ﬁrst introduces the proposed framework, then describes the data preprocessing process, classiﬁcation model, and
federated learning algorithms in detail.

3.1. Framework

    The proposed FedETC framework for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation is illustrated in Fig. 1. The ﬁgure shows the main process how
the participating domains implement the federated learning scheme to collaboratively train the 1D-CNN model without disclosing
local training data.
    In this work, we are interested in diﬀerent encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks including application identiﬁcation and traﬃc
characterization. As listed in Table 1, application identiﬁcation (APPI) involves identifying speciﬁc applications such as Facebook,
Gmail, Skype, Netﬂix, Spotify, YouTube and so on, while traﬃc characterization involves breaking the traﬃc down to categories such
as chat, email, ﬁle transfer, streaming and so on, with and without virtual private network (VPN) tunneling and encryption.
    After selecting the interested task, the network operators of the participating domains can collect and label local traﬃc data
within their domain for the purpose of training. The collected traﬃc data is stored in pcap format. Several data preprocessing steps
are involved to derive the training set, which is then fed into the local 1D-CNN model for training.
    A central server is coordinating the participating nodes to build a global model. It is done by communicating with the participants
to exchange model parameters and running the FedAvg federated learning algorithm to merge the models. Please note that the data
is processed and used for training locally within each participating domain, only the model parameters will be exchanged beyond
the domain boundaries.

3.2. Data preprocessing

    The data preprocessing consists of traﬃc cleaning, session cutting, bytes digitization, uniform length, and data standardization,
as shown in Fig. 2.
    Typically, a traﬃc trace collected from a network consists of many sessions. Each session 𝑆 can be identiﬁed by and represented
as in Equation (1).

                                                                                 3
