            sensors
Article
Multi-Task Scenario Encrypted Traffic Classification and
Parameter Analysis
Guanyu Wang and Yijun Gu *

                                         College of Information and Cyber Security, People’s Public Security University of China, Beijing 100038, China;
                                         gyc0016@163.com
                                         * Correspondence: guyijun@ppsuc.edu.cn

                                         Abstract: The widespread use of encrypted traffic poses challenges to network management and
                                         network security. Traditional machine learning-based methods for encrypted traffic classification no
                                         longer meet the demands of management and security. The application of deep learning technology
                                         in encrypted traffic classification significantly improves the accuracy of models. This study focuses
                                         primarily on encrypted traffic classification in the fields of network analysis and network security. To
                                         address the shortcomings of existing deep learning-based encrypted traffic classification methods
                                         in terms of computational memory consumption and interpretability, we introduce a Parameter-
                                         Efficient Fine-Tuning method for efficiently tuning the parameters of an encrypted traffic classification
                                         model. Experimentation is conducted on various classification scenarios, including Tor traffic service
                                         classification and malicious traffic classification, using multiple public datasets. Fair comparisons are
                                         made with state-of-the-art deep learning model architectures. The results indicate that the proposed
                                         method significantly reduces the scale of fine-tuning parameters and computational resource usage
                                         while achieving performance comparable to that of the existing best models. Furthermore, we
                                         interpret the learning mechanism of encrypted traffic representation in the pre-training model by
                                         analyzing the parameters and structure of the model. This comparison validates the hypothesis that
                                         the model exhibits hierarchical structure, clear organization, and distinct features.

                                         Keywords: encrypted traffic; network management; interpretability analysis; fine-tuning




Citation: Wang, G.; Gu, Y. Multi-Task    1. Introduction
Scenario Encrypted Traffic                    In network management and cybersecurity domains, network traffic classification
Classification and Parameter Analysis.   plays an integral role. Traffic classification refers to the process of identifying and dis-
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078. https://         tinguishing different categories of network traffic according to specific requirements and
doi.org/10.3390/s24103078                designs, enabling further analysis. Accurate network traffic classification can help us obtain
Academic Editor: Alberto Gotta           an overall perception of network bandwidth, capture different network usage habits, and
                                         assess network security. Internet Service Providers (ISPs) optimize network resources and
Received: 15 April 2024                  enhance network management through traffic classification, while security departments
Revised: 9 May 2024
                                         leverage traffic analysis to monitor network security states, identifying and responding to
Accepted: 10 May 2024
                                         malicious network attacks. However, the widespread use of traffic encryption technologies
Published: 12 May 2024
                                         such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) presents significant challenges to network traffic
                                         classification [1]. Encrypted traffic, where plaintext payloads are encrypted and transmitted
                                         as ciphertext, can only be decrypted by the sender and the receiver, making it difficult for
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
                                         third parties to interpret. Traditional traffic analysis methods, which rely on extracting
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.       valuable information from plaintext payloads (such as port-based methods, Deep Packet
This article is an open access article   Inspection (DPI) methods, and statistical methods), may become ineffective. This encryp-
distributed under the terms and          tion prevents network administrators from directly extracting useful plaintext information
conditions of the Creative Commons       from network traffic, complicates management tasks, and creates convenient channels for
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://    malicious actors to transmit malicious traffic, increasing network security risks [2,3].
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/              In this complex scenario, encrypted traffic classification methods based on feature
4.0/).                                   engineering extract statistically designed features and classify them using classical machine



Sensors 2024, 24, 3078. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24103078                                                     https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078                                                                                          2 of 21



                         learning [4–7] or deep learning [8,9]. This approach differs from traditional methods as they
                         do not solely rely on plaintext information such as ports, resulting in better classification
                         performance and ease of deployment. However, performance depends on the comprehen-
                         siveness and effectiveness of manually selected features [10]. Alternatively, representation
                         learning-based methods for encrypted traffic classification employ deep learning models
                         to automatically extract and process representations from encrypted traffic [2,10–14]. This
                         approach has become a high-performance algorithmic solution to the problem of encrypted
                         traffic classification [15,16]. While these methods can improve classification performance,
                         they also expose the immaturity of applying deep learning to this problem and are con-
                         strained by the limitations inherent in deep learning itself. Improper design may result
                         in biased conclusions or exaggerated classification outcomes. Neglecting the alignment
                         between deep learning methods and the challenges in this domain prevents designers from
                         fully harnessing the potential of deep learning [17]. Unlike natural language and images,
                         encrypted byte streams are difficult for humans to understand. The relevance of the loaded
                         bytes, coupled with the complexity of the deep learning model itself, makes the problem of
                         poor interpretability even more pronounced.
                               Among the many deep learning frameworks, pre-training models have been exten-
                         sively applied and have shown exceptional performance in fields such as Natural Language
                         Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) [14]. In the increasingly complex network
                         environment, pre-training model-based encrypted traffic classification methods outperform
                         other deep learning architectures. Pre-training models first undergo training with a large
                         volume of unlabeled data to pre-train the initial model, followed by fine-tuning with a
                         small amount of labeled data from downstream tasks. The fine-tuned model can then be
                         directly applied to well-designed tasks [18]. However, traditional pre-training methods
                         that adjust all parameters of the model lead to increasingly expensive training costs as the
                         model size and number of downstream tasks grow.
                               The feature engineering-based encrypted traffic classification methods and the rep-
                         resentation learning-based methods demonstrate that it is possible to classify traffic in a
                         fine-grained manner. Statistical representation, plaintext information, and features present
                         in the original payloads are discriminative enough to make each class easily separated
                         from one another [19]. We therefore focus on designing a fine-grained encrypted traffic
                         classification method with broad applicability and stable results in a generic network envi-
                         ronment. We aim to implement encrypted traffic functional classification methods under
                         limited conditions. The application scenarios for encrypted traffic classification include
                         four types: (I) the network analytics domain, (II) the network security domain, (III) the
                         user privacy domain, and (IV) the domain of network functions in middleboxes [3]. Our
                         research primarily focuses on two subdomains within Scenarios (I) and (II): application
                         identification, network intrusion detection, and malware detection, particularly emphasiz-
                         ing application identification in different network environments. Specifically, we aim to
                         design a representation learning framework that can be trained in different scenarios to
                         achieve encrypted traffic functional classification. For example, distinguishing different
                         services (VPN Email, Email, VPN Chat, Chat, etc.) and applications (Netflix, P2P, SCP, etc.)
                         in VPN traffic, distinguishing normal traffic (BitTorrent, Facetime, FTP, etc.) from traffic
                         generated by malware (Cridex, Geodo, etc.) in mixed traffic, and distinguishing different
                         attack traffic in the IoT environment (DDoS ACK Fragmentation, ARP Spoofing, XSS, etc.).
                               In this paper, we propose the Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)-based Encrypted
                         Traffic Representation Learning Method (PETReLM). We develop suitable data preprocess-
                         ing methods based on the characteristics of encrypted traffic and use pre-training models
                         for representation learning to accomplish encrypted traffic classification tasks.
                               Our contributions are as follows:
                         •   We propose a novel packet-level encrypted traffic classification method based on
                             pre-trained models and PEFT methods. We introduce the Low-Rank Adaptation
                             (LoRA) [20] method into encrypted traffic classification, enhancing pre-training and
                             fine-tuning methods to adapt to encrypted traffic classification tasks. Our method
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078                                                                                                   3 of 21



                                can learn different types of traffic representations in different scenarios with wide
                                applicability and also improve the efficiency of parameter utilization.
                         •      We validate the existence of comprehensive traffic representation information in in-
                                dividual packets and demonstrate the feasibility of classifying traffic for specific sce-
                                narios based on these representations. We also discuss the limitations of packet-level
                                encrypted traffic classification.
                         •      Based on singular values and vectors, we compare the matrix parameters of the fine-
                                tuned model with those of the pre-trained model to analyze the model’s representation
                                learning mechanism and fine-tuning principles.
                              The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces related work on
                         encrypted traffic classification and PEFT. Section 3 describes our proposed method for
                         encrypted traffic classification. Section 4 presents our experimental settings and results.
                         In Section 5, we analyze the mechanism of encrypted traffic representation extraction and
                         fine-tuning. In Section 6, we discuss the limitations of our method and conclude the paper.

                         2. Related Works
                              In this section, we review the related research in the fields of encrypted traffic classifi-
                         cation and PEFT, discussing the advantages and limitations of these methods.

                         2.1. Encrypted Traffic Classification
                              The methods of encrypted traffic classification mainly include feature engineering-
                         based approaches and representation learning-based methods. The objective is to classify
                         encrypted traffic according to predefined criteria by learning statistical features, payload
                         features, etc., of the encrypted traffic. Table 1 reports relevant work in these domains and
                         summarizes the fundamental aspects of the methodologies employed.

                         Table 1. Comparison of encrypted traffic classification algorithms.

                                           Input Data                              Algorithms                    Paper
                             IP, Port, Packet Lenth, Packet Direction,
                                                                         Random Forest, Correlation Graph    FlowPrint [4]
                                           TLS Certificate
                                    IP, Protocol, Packet Length                   Random Forest             APPScanner [5]
                                  Packet Lenth, Packet Direction                  Random Forest              Conti et al. [6]
                                     Certificate, Packet Length            Second-order Markov Chains        Shen et al. [7]
                                   Packet Length, Arrival Time                    Auto Encoder                Yu et al. [8]
                                  Packet Lenth, Packet Direction                      GNN                    Shen et al. [9]
                                              Payload                               1D-CNN                  Wang et al. [11]
                                              Payload                             SAE, 1D-CNN               Deep Packet [10]
                                              Payload                           1D-CNN, BiLSTM                TCSRNN [2]
                                              Payload                           BiLSTM, TextCNN             Jiang et al