                                                              Internet of Things 26 (2024) 101212


                                                          Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                                Internet of Things
                                                   journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/iot


Research article

SYN-GAN: A robust intrusion detection system using GAN-based
synthetic data for IoT security
Saifur Rahman, Shantanu Pal ∗, Shubh Mittal, Tisha Chawla, Chandan Karmakar ∗
School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia



ARTICLE                INFO                             ABSTRACT

Keywords:                                               As technological communication progresses, diverse datasets are exchanged across distributed
GAN                                                     environments using the Internet of Things (IoT). However, the IoT environment is vulnerable to
NIDS                                                    attacking and breaching data privacy or making a robust system worse by providing attack data.
Synthetic data
                                                        To address potential risks of attacks, researchers have been conducting experiments on network
Machine learning
                                                        intrusion detection systems (NIDS) to mitigate threats effectively. The issue of data imbalance
Internet of Things
                                                        and associated data collection costs persists, hindering the ability of machine learning (ML)
                                                        models to learn malicious behaviour effectively and consequently impacting the accuracy of
                                                        network threat detection. Addressing these issues, our study explores the potential of using
                                                        100% synthetic data generated via Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) for training ML
                                                        models in Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS). This approach reduces the dependency
                                                        on real-world data significantly, paving the way for a more flexible and ethically convenient
                                                        model-building process. For the UNSW-NB15 dataset, we achieved an accuracy of 90%, a
                                                        precision of 91%, a recall of 90%, and an F1 score of 89%. For the NSL-KDD dataset, our
                                                        results showed an accuracy of 84%, a precision of 85%, a recall of 84%, and an F1 score of
                                                        84%. For the BoT-IoT dataset, we attained perfect scores of 100% across all metrics. These
                                                        outcomes indicate that the values obtained from our analysis demonstrate high performance,
                                                        yielding comparative or superior results to previous studies. Therefore, our study successfully
                                                        replicates real-world network intrusion detection data, showing new opportunities for the use
                                                        of generative data in cyber security.




1. Introduction

    The emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), coupled with the high communication rates facilitated by fifth (5G) and sixth-
generation (6G) technologies, has led to the advancing the remote data monitoring and automated decision-making systems.
However, the access point for remote monitoring systems is vulnerable to potential threats, unauthorised access, data breaches,
or other security concerns. [1].
    Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) is essential as a defence mechanism for computer networks against potential threats
like DoS, DDoS, theft, shellcode, and backdoors. These mechanisms monitor network traffic, identify potential threats, and protect
against malicious activities. Traditional NIDS, such as signature-base, analyse network traffic for known attack signatures or patterns
indicative of abnormal behaviour. Upon detecting malicious traffic, systems require promiscuous access to network data, triggering
an alert. However, attack signatures or patterns indicative of abnormal behaviour method, while somewhat effective, often lag
behind the rapidly evolving landscape of cyber threats [2], including advanced persistent threats (APTs) [3], zero-day exploits,


  ∗ Corresponding authors.
     E-mail address: shantanu.pal@deakin.edu.au (S. Pal).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2024.101212
Received 6 March 2024; Received in revised form 22 March 2024; Accepted 2 May 2024
Available online 7 May 2024
2542-6605/© 2024 The Author(s).           Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
S. Rahman et al.                                                                                            Internet of Things 26 (2024) 101212


and polymorphic malware, which can evade detection. This distinction arises because traditional security approaches struggle to
keep pace with the dynamic nature of cyber threats. As threat actors continually develop new tactics and exploit vulnerabilities,
the time required to identify these risks, implement security updates, and adapt defensive strategies can create a significant gap.
Moreover, the risk posed by these threats is compounded by the increasing volume of network traffic and the diversity of network
protocols and devices, especially with the advent of the IoT and cloud computing. This evolving threat landscape necessitates a more
dynamic approach to network security. The integration of Machine Learning (ML) into NIDS advancing and enhancing significantly
improved network monitoring capabilities [4]. ML-based systems are adept at identifying malicious patterns in network traffic, which
traditional methods often fail to detect [5]. These systems depend on training and necessitate a substantial amount of labelled data.
This adaptability allows ML systems to detect previously unknown threats that might go undetected by static, rule-based security
measures. The quality data is crucial, as it forms the foundation upon which an ML-based NIDS learns and adapts. However, the
optimisation of ML-based NIDS faces a significant challenge due to the scarcity of high-quality of training data [6]. This limitation
poses a substantial challenge in the training and evaluation of NIDS.
    In recent years, there has been a paradigm shift towards the use of generative Models, particularly Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [7]. GANs consist of two neural networks: a Generator that creates data resembling real data from random noise
and a Discriminator that learns to differentiate between real and generated data. Through iterative training, the Generator improves
its data creation, while the Discriminator enhances its detection capabilities. This adversarial process enables GANs to produce
high-quality synthetic data close to real-world data, useful in various applications in healthcare, where it has been used for X-ray
security screening [8], artifact removal in medical imaging [9], emotion recognition using electroencephalogram (EEG) data [10],
and deep fake face generation [11]. Beyond healthcare, GANs have also found significant applications in other domains. These use
cases have paved the way for exploring GANs in cybersecurity for anomaly detection and class balancing in model training for
Deep Learning (DL) models. However, to the best of our knowledge, a gap remains in the available literature, as no available study
has yet focused on fully utilising synthetic data for model training in the context of NIDS instead of real-world data. The reason
for choosing synthetic data instead of real-world data collection is that it is costly and difficult to capture all the attack types in a
single data collection [12]. Through the fusion of GANs with anomaly detection, our novel method (more discussion on Section 3)
illustrates that training solely on synthetic data is sufficient for identifying attacks, alleviating the need for extensive, real-world
data collection. However, it is essential to clarify that a GAN is trained on a specific attack type to generate synthetic data during
training. In the context of attack detection, the efficacy relies on the classifier, as outlined in Table 5. Therefore, when encountering
new attack types, training the classifier with these new attack types is necessary. GANs are solely utilised to augment the dataset by
leveraging reference attack data. It is important to note that GANs do not serve as classifiers themselves; rather, they are employed
to mitigate the cost associated with collecting data for training classifiers with a large dataset to enhance the robustness of NIDS
classifiers.
    We provide a comprehensive framework of our system The framework comprises four distinct phases (refer to Fig. 1). From top
to bottom they are: (1) data preparation; (2) GANs model for synthetic data generation; (3) training various ML models for attack
detection; and (4) evaluating ML models using real-world data to determine the optimal model selection. In the data preparation step,
the system eliminates noisy data and maintains the standardisation of features. After data preparation, the system trains the GANs
model to generate synthetic data for different types of attacks. After generating synthetic data, we trained logistic regression, Decision
tree, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, AdaBoost, Support Vector Classifier, K-nearest neighbours and Gaussian Naive Bayes models
for attack detection. Finally, evaluated real-world data from UNSW-NB15, NSL-KDD dataset and BoT-IoT datasets [13–15] are used
to determine the optimal model selection. The major contributions of the paper can be summarised as follows:

    • We propose a novel NIDS by integrating cutting-edge GANs to generate synthetic data and train various ML models on synthetic
      data.
    • Through comparative experiments with various ML models tested with real-world data, we prove that training with synthetic
      data can detect attacks from real-world data from UNSW-NB15, NSL-KDD, and BoT-IoT sources.
    • Our study shows that Gaussian Naive Bayes (GaussianNB) and K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN) performance are superior in the
      context of NIDS compared to other ML models.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a concise overview of related studies in NIDS employing ML
methodologies. Section 3 explains our methodology and the proposed framework, elaborating on the four main stages, such as data
preparation, GANs model for synthetic data generation, training various ML models for attack detection and evaluating ML models
using real-world data to determine the optimal model selection. In Section 4, we present experimental outcomes with meticulous
analysis. Section 5 discusses the significant findings of the experiments. Finally, Section 6 offers concluding remarks and outlines
future research directions.

2. Related work

   In this section, we discuss the existing literature on the application of ML and DL techniques in NIDS, with a particular focus on
how these technologies have been utilised for attack classification. Additionally, we explore the emerging role of GANs in this field.
ML and DL-based attack classification techniques have been commonly used for anomaly detection, log analysis, heuristic-based
detection, and traffic volume monitoring in NIDS. While ML algorithms like Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Support Vector
Machines (SVM), and Naive Bayes (NB) are shallow models used for supervised learning tasks in NIDS; DL algorithms like GAN,
Autoencoders (AE), and Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) are used for unsupervised learning tasks in NIDS [16]. For example,

                                                                    2
S. Rahman et al.                                                                                                              Internet of Things 26 (2024) 101212




Fig. 1. Illustration of our proposed framework utilising GAN for generating synthetic training data and employing ML classifiers with real-time testing data for
NIDS.




Dutta et al. [17] proposed a DL-ensembled approach that addresses the evolving challenges of network intrusion detection. By
leveraging sophisticated DL techniques, the paper seeks to enhance the reliability and efficiency of detecting attacks in network
security systems. However, unlike ours, their experiment did not solely depend on synthetic data, and real-world data collection
still exists.
     Almaraz-Rivera et al. [18] demonstrated the application of ML and DL models in detecting DDoS attacks on IoT devices,
emphasising log analysis in identifying such threats. Similarly, Jiang et al. [19] discussed the integration of ML in additive
manufacturing, which can be analogous to heuristic-based detection in NIDS, where ML algorithms learn from historical data to
identify potential threats. While the above methods utilising traditional ML and DL algorithms have shown promising results with
a high attack classification rate in various NIDS use cases, one common limitation is the real-world dependency on training data
for model training, which is costly and involves ethical considerations. This shows there has been a recent shift towards generative
models for mimicking real-time data for NIDS. Generative models, particularly GANs, have been used frequently in NIDS for data
sampling, data creation, and anomaly detection. Studies have focused on employing GANs for synthetic data creation to balance
minority classes, which are underrepresented in the dataset, thereby removing bias during model training. For instance, Kumar
et al. [20] utilised XGBoost-WCGAN on datasets such as NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, and BoT-IoT, to demonstrate the effectiveness of
GAN variants in class balancing for producing high detection rates. Similarly, Zhao et al. [21] addressed data imbalance issues in the

                                                                               3
