                                         ETGuard: Malicious Encrypted Traffic Detection
                                            in Blockchain-based Power Grid Systems

                                              Peng Zhou1 , Yongdong Liu2,⋆ , Lixun Ma2 , Weiye Zhang2 , Haohan Tan2 ,
                                                               Zhenguang Liu2 , and Butian Huang2
                                                 1
                                                     State Grid Zhejiang Electric Power Company, LTD. Information and
arXiv:2408.10657v1 [cs.CR] 20 Aug 2024




                                                                      Communication Branch, China
                                                        2
                                                           Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China
                                                                            {malx}@zju.edu.cn



                                                 Abstract. The escalating prevalence of encryption protocols has led
                                                 to a concomitant surge in the number of malicious attacks that hide
                                                 in encrypted traffic. Power grid systems, as fundamental infrastructure,
                                                 are becoming prime targets for such attacks. Conventional methods for
                                                 detecting malicious encrypted packets typically use a static pre-trained
                                                 model. We observe that these methods are not well-suited for blockchain-
                                                 based power grid systems. More critically, they fall short in dynamic
                                                 environments where new types of encrypted attacks continuously emerge.
                                                     Motivated by this, in this paper we try to tackle these challenges from
                                                 two aspects: (1) We present a novel framework that is able to automat-
                                                 ically detect malicious encrypted traffic in blockchain-based power grid
                                                 systems and incrementally learn from new malicious traffic. (2) We math-
                                                 ematically derive incremental learning losses to resist the forgetting of
                                                 old attack patterns while ensuring the model is capable of handling new
                                                 encrypted attack patterns. Empirically, our method achieves state-of-
                                                 the-art performance on three different benchmark datasets. We also con-
                                                 structed the first malicious encrypted traffic dataset for blockchain-based
                                                 power grid scenario. Our code and dataset are available at https://github.
                                                 com/PPPmzt/ETGuard, hoping to inspire future research.

                                                 Keywords: Blockchain · Network security · Malicious encrypted traffic
                                                 detection · Incremental learning.


                                         1     Introduction
                                         The immutable and decentralized nature of blockchain has led to applications
                                         such as Bitcoin, decentralized crowdfunding, and cross-industry finance [31].
                                         While research often focuses on system and software issues like consensus mecha-
                                         nisms [29], smart contracts [18], and virtual machines, cybersecurity challenges,
                                         particularly malicious traffic attacks, are often neglected.
                                             In blockchain-based power systems, critical national infrastructure, malicious
                                         traffic poses severe risks such as widespread power outages and energy data
                                         ⋆
                                             Yongdong Liu is the corresponding author.
2         P. Zhou, Y. Liu, et al.

breaches. Although encryption protocols are widely adopted to secure data, they
can be exploited by attackers to hide malicious activities. Detecting malicious
encrypted traffic in power systems involves distinguishing attack patterns from
benign packets [15]. Research in this area generally follows two approaches: one
[12,7,9] uses decryption analysis to reveal clues in encrypted sequences, while an-
other [22,23] examines statistical differences using deep learning. Current meth-
ods face two main issues: poor performance on blockchain-based power grids,
leading to a significant drop in F1 scores, and difficulties with novel attack se-
quences due to reliance on static models.
    To address these challenges, we propose a novel approach incorporating incre-
mental learning to adapt to new attacks. Our method involves training a model
with self-supervised learning to extract detailed packet features and deriving
incremental learning losses to preserve old data while learning new attack pat-
terns. We update the model using replayed samples combined with these losses.
Additionally, we introduce the GridET-2024 dataset, which includes real-world
traffic data from the State Grid of China, to evaluate detection in blockchain-
based power grid scenarios. To evaluate our method, we conducted extensive
experiments on three benchmark datasets, as well as ablation studies to as-
sess key components. Our method demonstrates state-of-the-art performance on
these datasets. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
    • We propose ETGuard, a novel framework for detecting malicious encrypted
      traffic in blockchain-based power grids. It is the first method to automatically
      identify these attacks and adapt to new traffic patterns incrementally.
    • We derive a loss function for effective incremental learning, supported by
      rigorous theoretical analysis, to manage new attack patterns while mitigat-
      ing catastrophic forgetting. Additionally, we introduce a sample buffer for
      efficient storage and replay of representative traffic samples.
    • We have collected real-world data from blockchain-based power grid systems
      and created the GridET-2024 dataset, the first of its kind for detecting mali-
      cious encrypted traffic in this context. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
      performance on several benchmark datasets.


2      Problem Statement
Problem formulation. Given a sequence of encrypted packets s = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn },
we are interested in developing a fully automated model to determine whether
the packet sequence is malicious. Put differently, we aim to estimate the label
ŷ for each encrypted packet sequence s, where ŷ = 1 represents s is a malicious
sequence, and ŷ = 0 indicates that s is benign.


3      Method
Method Overview The detailed architecture of our proposed framework is
outlined in Fig. 1. Overall, the framework consists of three key components:
                                                                    ETGuard          3

 • Data Preprocessing: Raw packets are cleaned and processed, ensuring that
   the packets from an individual client are sorted into a packet sequence and
   are separated from the packets of other clients. To extract features from these
   sequences, we use an unsupervised auto-encoder with stacked bi-GRUs.
 • Incremental Learning Module: To adapt to novel attacks while preventing
   catastrophic forgetting, we introduce an incremental learning module and
   mathematically derive the incremental learning losses.
 • Detection Module: The detection module learns the feature distinctions be-
   tween benign and malicious sequences to continuously identify potential at-
   tacks. The learning process is supervised by the classification loss and incre-
   mental learning losses.
In what follows, we will elaborate on the details of these components one by one.




                       Fig. 1: The framework of ETGuard.


3.1   Data Preprocessing
The preprocessing module aims to clean and process raw packet data into distinct
sequences for different clients. Since packet sequences cannot be directly input
into a network, we employ an unsupervised auto-encoder with stacked bi-GRUs
to extract features from each client’s packet sequence.
    Specifically, raw traffic data consists of packets organized by a five-tuple (i.e.,
source and destination IP addresses, source and destination ports, and transport
layer protocol). We group packets with the same five-tuple into sequences s and
sort them chronologically. Irrelevant packet information, such as IP addresses
and port numbers, is removed from each sequence.
    The resulting sequences, sinput , are formatted with components l, d, and
tm , where: l = {b1 , b2 , . . . , bn } denotes the packet length sequence, d = tn − t1
represents the duration of sinput , tm is the mean time interval between packets.
