                                        Integrating Explainable AI for Effective Malware
                                             Detection in Encrypted Network Traffic

                                                   Sileshi Nibret Zeleke1[0009−0006−8172−9646] Amsalu Fentie
                                                     1[0009−0004−7356−682X]
                                            Jember                      , and Mario Bochicchio1,2[0000−0002−9122−6317]
                                                     1
                                                        Department of Computer Science, University of Bari, Bari, Italy
                                            2
                                                Digital Health National Lab, CINI - Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per
arXiv:2501.05387v1 [cs.CR] 9 Jan 2025




                                                                         l’Informatica, Roma, Italy
                                                      {sileshi.zeleke,amsalu.jember,mario.bochicchio}@uniba.it



                                                  Abstract. Encrypted network communication ensures confidentiality,
                                                  integrity, and privacy between endpoints. However, attackers are increas-
                                                  ingly exploiting encryption to conceal malicious behavior. Detecting un-
                                                  known encrypted malicious traffic without decrypting the payloads re-
                                                  mains a significant challenge. In this study, we investigate the integration
                                                  of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) techniques to detect malicious
                                                  network traffic. We employ ensemble learning models to identify mali-
                                                  cious activity using multi-view features extracted from various aspects of
                                                  encrypted communication. To effectively represent malicious communica-
                                                  tion, we compiled a robust dataset with 1,127 unique connections, more
                                                  than any other available open-source dataset, and spanning 54 malware
                                                  families. Our models were benchmarked against the CTU-13 dataset,
                                                  achieving performance of over 99% accuracy, precision, and F1-score. Ad-
                                                  ditionally, the eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGB) model demonstrated
                                                  99.32% accuracy, 99.53% precision, and 99.43% F1-score on our custom
                                                  dataset. By leveraging Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP), we iden-
                                                  tified that the maximum packet size, mean inter-arrival time of packets,
                                                  and transport layer security version used are the most critical features for
                                                  the global model explanation. Furthermore, key features were identified
                                                  as important for local explanations across both datasets for individual
                                                  traffic samples. These insights provide a deeper understanding of the
                                                  model’s decision-making process, enhancing the transparency and relia-
                                                  bility of detecting malicious encrypted traffic.

                                                  Keywords: XAI · Encrypted malware · SHAP · Ensemble tree · Tree-
                                                  Shap


                                        1       Introduction
                                        Malware represents a persistent cyber threat, and with the widespread adoption
                                        of encryption in network communications, it is increasingly being transmitted
                                        over encrypted channels [29]. As encryption becomes more prevalent for securing
                                        networks, including its use by malware to evade detection and analysis, the abil-
                                        ity to inspect encrypted traffic for signs of malicious behavior has become crucial
2      Sileshi N. Zeleke et al.

for effective cybersecurity. This gap is addressed by encrypted network analysis,
which provides methods and resources for deciphering encrypted data and identi-
fying indicators of compromise or hostile activity over encrypted communication
channels. Traditional malware detection techniques may struggle to identify en-
crypted malware, and deep packet inspection can compromise the privacy of the
payload [31]. To overcome this challenge, some studies have focused on analyz-
ing encrypted traffic through decryption, which can also compromise privacy.
However, many of these studies primarily consider the efficiency or accuracy of
intelligence-based detection systems. Most research prioritizes the efficiency and
accuracy of these systems while neglecting the importance of explainability in cy-
bersecurity tasks. A better understanding of the model’s decisions in classifying
specific traffic flows as malicious or normal is essential for effective analytics.
     Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has emerged as a means to interpret
the outputs of machine learning algorithms. XAI techniques can be categorized
into local and global interpretations. Local methods provide insights into spe-
cific instances, while global methods offer a comprehensive interpretation of the
model. Global explanations focus on interpreting the model’s behavior across the
entire test sample, enhancing the interpretability of the model. XAI techniques
can be either model-agnostic or model-dependent, depending on how much they
rely on specific AI models. While model-agnostic approaches can theoretically
be applied to any AI model, model-dependent methods are specifically designed
for a given model [30].
     In this study, We analyzed raw encrypted traffic from 6 different sources
to extract and analyze different feature sets that can discriminate malicious
flows from normal flows. The features include a handshake, certificate, inter-
arrival time and packet length, statistical features, meta-connection features,
and cipher suite used. Despite progress, challenges remain in multi-view feature
analysis, deep feature analysis, and efficient detection and classification models.
We extract diverse features from encrypted traffic and regard encrypted traf-
fic as sample nodes, then use AI for malicious traffic detection. This research
addresses gaps in explainability of model decisions and feature engineering of
flows of encrypted network traffic. A diverse feature set of encrypted network
communication, including server-side features, have important roles in detection
but have not been analyzed in previous studies.
     The main contributions of this study are:
 − Explainable approach to detect encrypted malware in network traffic.
 − Identify important features from server-side, time-related, payload-related,
   or other sets for detection models.
 − A dataset containing 1,127 malware traffic from 54 different malware families
   which represent significant number of malware variants is presented for the
   research community.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2, is a literature review
of existing encrypted malware detection studies and usage of explainable mod-
els for malware detection. Section 3 describes the proposed malware detection
methodology. The experimental setup and test results are presented in Section 4.
                              Explainable AI for Encrypted Malware Traffic       3

However, Section 5 discusses and concludes the paper with remarks and future
work ideas.


2   Related Work

Recent advances in encrypted traffic analysis for malware detection and XAI
have attracted significant research attention. Notably, Cisco has pioneered the
implementation of an encrypted traffic analyzer in their security devices. The
proposed supervised models are trained with multi-view features such as trans-
port layer security (TLS) handshake metadata. Moreover, DNS contextual flows
and HTTP metadata from the same source IP within a 5-minute interval, have
shown the potential of AI models to identify malware traffic [1]. By observing the
disparities between malicious and normal network flow’s contextual information
were can capture strong discriminatory feature set [2].
    Analytical techniques to infer HTTP semantics from passive observations of
HTTPS can reveal the significance of important fields [3]. The study conducted
in [4] performed a feature analysis of encrypted malicious traffic within HTTPS
network traffic, utilizing datasets captured from two research projects at the
Czech Technical University. This analysis involved 72 network traffic captures,
comprising 59 malware and 13 normal pcap files. Another study [5] identified
encrypted malware traffic using unsupervised learning methods. The distance
metric was employed to construct a new malware class termed FClass. 83 numer-
ical features were extracted from four categories: TCP/IP header, time-based,
length-related, and packet variation features. The 10 most relevant features were
then utilized for classification. In the study presented in [6], NetConverse exam-
ined the flow of traffic associated with various ransomware families within the
Windows ransomware network. Features were extracted from unencrypted web
traffic to train classifiers, achieving an accuracy of 97.1% with a decision tree
classifier. A primary limitation of this paper is that it extracts features solely
from unencrypted traffic and focuses on only a subset of ransomware families.
Biflow, as described in [7], is a flow-based system that aggregates data packets
from two families.
    In addition, the aforementioned experiments were conducted on a limited
number of ransomware families. To enhance the accuracy of malware identifi-
cation, a technique proposed by [10] involves decrypting suspected encrypted
flows and performing conventional deep packet inspection using intrusion signa-
tures. Another study by [11] utilized statistical and sequence features from both
flow-level and host-level perspectives to characterize encrypted traffic, acknowl-
edging the challenges associated with decryption. They introduced a detection
framework based on ensemble learning that incorporates real malware, including
normal traffic generated by legitimate hosts and malicious traffic produced by
malware-infected hosts.
    Most studies have focused on the availability of expert-labeled data for detec-
tion algorithms. However, the study by [12] addressed the challenge posed by the
scarcity of high-dimensional labeled data by proposing an unsupervised anomaly
