Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (03/2025)




SAFE-NID: Self-Attention with Normalizing-Flow Encodings
for Network Intrusion Detection

Brian Matejek                                                                            brian.matejek@sri.com
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International

Ashish Gehani                                                                            ashish.gehani@sri.com
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International

Nathaniel D. Bastian                                                            nathaniel.bastian@westpoint.edu
Army Cyber Institute, United States Military Academy

Daniel J. Clouse
Laboratory for Advanced Cybersecurity Research, Department of Defense

Bradford Kline
Laboratory for Advanced Cybersecurity Research, Department of Defense

Susmit Jha                                                                                  susmit.jha@sri.com
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International

Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= hDywd5AbIM



                                                 Abstract



        Machine learning models are increasingly adopted to monitor network traffic and detect
        intrusions. In this work, we introduce SAFE-NID, a novel machine learning approach for
        real-time packet-level traffic monitoring and intrusion detection that includes a safeguard to
        detect zero day attacks as out-of-distribution inputs. Unlike traditional models, which falter
        against zero-day attacks and concept drift, SAFE-NID leverages a lightweight encoder-only
        transformer architecture combined with a novel normalizing flows-based safeguard. This
        safeguard not only quantifies uncertainty but also identifies out-of-distribution (OOD) in-
        puts, enabling robust performance in dynamic threat landscapes. Our generative model
        learns class-conditional representations of the internal features of the deep neural network.
        We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach by converting publicly available network
        flow-level intrusion datasets into packet-level ones. We release the labeled packet-level ver-
        sions of these datasets with over 50 million packets each and describe the challenges in
        creating these datasets. We withhold from the training data certain attack categories to
        simulate zero-day attacks. Existing deep learning models, which achieve an accuracy of
        over 99% when detecting known attacks, only correctly classify 1% of the novel attacks.
        Our proposed transformer architecture with normalizing flows model safeguard achieves an
        area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of over 0.97 in detecting these novel
        inputs, outperforming existing combinations of neural architectures and model safeguards.
        The additional latency in processing each packet by the safeguard is a small fraction of the
        overall inference task. This dramatic improvement in detecting zero-day attacks and distri-
        bution shifts emphasizes SAFE-NID’s novelty and utility as a reliable and efficient safety
        monitoring tool for real-world network intrusion detection.




                                                       1
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (03/2025)




                     Zero-day Attack                                           Concept Drift
          Payload Distribution        Feature Distribution       Payload Distribution       Feature Distribution

                                                                                                Benign Traffic

                                                                                                Attack Traffic




                           Benign Traffic                                       2015 Benign Traffic
                           Attack Traffic                                       2017 Benign Traffic

Figure 1: Contrasting the input and feature space. Deep neural networks trained on packet-level data can,
with high accuracy, discriminate between benign and malicious traffic. However, these models fail in the
presence of zero-day attacks and evolving network traffic. These drifts in payload byte distribution are often
small, causing difficulty for OOD detection algorithms. We propose a “safeguard” generative model that
learns the distribution of hidden layers from a DNN to identify novel inputs that the model cannot adequately
evaluate. Shown above: t-SNE plots of the payload distributions and extracted feature distributions for
benign and attack traffic (left) and evolving benign traffic (right).


1   Introduction

An increasing amount of new malware originates every day with both targeted and random attacks occurring
against individuals, businesses, and government entities at large scales. These attacks often exploit known
vulnerabilities or attempt to overwhelm system capacity to steal privileged information, disrupt legitimate
traffic, and cause economic hardship to the victims. With an ever-increasing number of connected devices,
manual monitoring of network traffic to identify malicious behavior is simply too expensive and infeasible.
This has motivated increased adoption of machine learning (ML) (Leevy & Khoshgoftaar, 2020), in particular
deep learning (DL) (Ferrag et al., 2020), to aid and increase the bandwidth of cybersecurity professionals.
Traditionally, ML models for network traffic operate at the flow-level (Wang, 2015; Kim et al., 2019; Sarhan
et al., 2020). Network flow represents a continued connection between two devices parameterized by the
five-tuple: (src_ip, src_port, dest_ip, dest_port, protocol). Flow summary tools such as CICFlowMe-
ter (Draper-Gil et al., 2016; Lashkari et al., 2017) and Zeek (zeek) produce features from the bidirectional
flows on which an ML model can be trained. These features include flow duration, bytes per second, and flag
settings. These methods are inherently ex post facto, however, as the flow must conclude before we know the
final statistics and decide whether it was benign or identify its attack category. Furthermore, the features
themselves are highly variable to the flow capture mechanism and its setup (Sarhan et al., 2020). For these
reasons, we focus on the packet-level classification pipeline that labels traffic into benign and different attack
categories at a per-packet granularity. Expanding on existing work of packet-level classification (Shenfield
et al., 2018; De Lucia et al., 2021; Bierbrauer et al., 2022; Bizzarri et al., 2024; Rani & Bastian, 2024), we
include header context in inputs to our models to leverage additional information alongside the raw pay-
load bytes. Furthermore, we design a light-weight encoder-only transformer model for the network intrusion
detection task with a simple custom tokenization scheme.
While DNNs achieve high accuracy on inputs from the training distribution, they fail to generalize to novel
inputs outside this distribution. Thus, their success on existing datasets does not entail their effectiveness
in a real-world deployment where the network traffic is continuously evolving, and novel threats emerge
routinely. We address this challenge by proposing a model-agnostic safeguard for DNNs that quantifies
the uncertainty in the decision of any discriminative classification model by assigning a confidence score
to each decision made by the DNN. The novel inputs are assigned low confidence and for such inputs, the


                                                             2
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (03/2025)




      Novel/OOD Packets                                                             Detecting Zero-day Attacks
                               Packet-Level Network Intrusion Detection Model
      Malicious Traffic                                                                 and Concept Drift
      Benign Traffic                                                   Benign
                                                                                    Predicted Class
                                                 Predicted Class
                                                                       Attack           Benign        Keep Packet
                                     DNN
    Extracted Packets
                                                                                        Attack        Drop Packet

                             Internal DNN         Generative           Model           Out-of-        Further
                               Features             Model            Confidence      Distribution     Investigation

     Network Flow                            Model Safeguard


Figure 2: Packet-level network intrusion detection system with model safeguards. Our architecture ingests
raw packet data and extracted information from the internet (IPv4) and transport layer (TCP/UDP) headers.
We exclude information that is specific to the configuration used in data collection and not generalizable to
the real-world. The predicted class and the internal features of the packet-level network intrusion detection
model are used by the model safeguard. The monitor learns a class-condition distribution of the internal
features and quantifies the uncertainty in prediction as a confidence score (that reflects the distance of
internal features from the distribution of the features of the predicted class for any new input). The novel
and out-of-distribution inputs are assigned low confidence scores and can, hence, be detected for further
investigation. We show strong results on detecting novel inputs when using SAFE-NID—a transformer
architecture for our discriminative classifier and normalizing flows for our model safeguard.


decision by the machine learning model cannot be trusted. A high rate of detection of novel inputs by
the monitor ensures wrong decisions by the DNN are avoided, and a low false positive rate ensures that
the needed bandwidth of intervention (such as human experts) remains low. Thus, the proposed model
safeguard improves the robustness of the DNN network intrusion detection models. This approach differs
from unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms which look for concept drift before inference (Rabanser
et al., 2019; Han et al., 2023). We note that this is not an either-or situation. One could first detect
anomalous inputs in an unsupervised manner before using a discriminative classifier. However, the classifier
would still be susceptible to non-flagged out-of-distribution inputs, requiring a model safeguard. We learn
the intermediate latent representations of the inputs as the in- and out-of-distribution traffic are more easily
separable in the latent space (Figure 1). Furthermore, we highlight the success of SAFE-NID, which uses a
combination of encoder-only transformer model for packet classification and normalizing flows for the model
safeguard within this framework.
Without such robust models, system operators relying on DNN models may have overconfidence in their
network security. For example, incorrectly labeled benign network traffic may contain malicious payloads. In
particular, DNN models need to remain robust in the presence of novel inputs such as zero-day exploits and
distribution shift as network traffic and payload distribution evolves. Although we cannot currently expect
models to generalize to correctly classify all packets from zero-day exploits without additional finetuning, it
is critical to recognize these novel inputs as out-of-distribution (Lee et al., 2018; Geng et al., 2020; Bulusu
et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). By adding model safeguards to the DNN models, we can
quantify uncertainty in the predictions from the models as a confidence score. Previous research has shown
DNN models make overconfident wrong predictions on novel out-of-distribution inputs when considering
softmax output (Guo et al., 2017) as the confidence score. Furthermore, any such uncertainty quantification
should occur in near real-time (Cai & Koutsoukos, 2020) to augment current cybersecurity workflows where
attacks can significantly impair operations within milliseconds (Shan et al., 2017).
In this paper, we present SAFE-NID, a novel framework designed to address these challenges. SAFE-NID
employs a lightweight encoder-only transformer model, augmented with a safeguard that models uncertainty
and ensures robust detection of both known and novel threats. By combining the efficiency of transformer
models with the robustness of generative uncertainty quantification, our approach provides a significant
advancement over existing methodologies. The overall uncertainty-quantified and robust deep learning ar-


                                                            3
