IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026                                                                    655




  Alert2Vec: Eliminating Alert Fatigue by Embedding
      Security Alerts Through Subgraph Learning
                       Songyun Wu , Xiaoqing Sun , Enhuan Dong , Zhiliang Wang , Chen Zhao ,
                                        and Jiahai Yang , Senior Member, IEEE


   Abstract—With increasingly sophisticated attacks in cyberspace,
a growing number of security devices are deployed on the orga-
nization network to prevent attacks comprehensively. However,
they produce thousands of security alerts each day, causing a
severe burden on security analysts. Thus, it is increasingly con-
cerned about capturing the significant threats from the jumble of
alerts. Previous works only provided scene-specific algorithms for
given applications or services, which is hard to extend to other
scenarios and consequently not adequate for large organizations
that deploy multiple kinds of security devices. To address this, we
propose a general alert classification approach named Alert2vec.
With subgraph learning methods on the Heterogeneous Informa-
tion Network (HIN), Alert2vec is applicable for both network-
level and host-level security devices. Specifically, Alert2vec first
builds a heterogeneous Alert Intelligence Graph (AIG) to catch
the correlation between different alerts. Then, a novel subgraph
representation method is applied to generate alert vectors based
on six graph properties that can reveal the threat level of alerts.
Finally, these alert vectors are labeled with various threat levels in
semi-automatic or fully automatic classification mode. Alert2vec
is proven to be effective on real-world datasets, outperforming all
baselines on both network-level and host-level scenarios.
   Index Terms—Alert fatigue, threat alerts, subgraph learning.

                                                                                   Fig. 1. An example of enterprise network’s security defenses and alert pro-
                            I. INTRODUCTION                                        cessing. (a) illustrates that enterprise networks typically deploy numerous se-
                                                                                   curity detection devices. (b) demonstrates that the alerts generated by these
      O combat increasingly frequent and complex attacks, large
T     organizations tend to deploy multiple security devices on
their computer systems and networks. These security devices
                                                                                   devices require manual analysis and processing, which is both complex and
                                                                                   time-consuming.


constantly collect various monitoring data and trigger an alert
once a suspicious activity corresponds with the preset detection
rules. Fig. 1(a) depicts an example of security defenses for an                    (NIDS). Simultaneously, a series of host-level detectors are
enterprise network. In front of significant network infrastruc-                    applied to monitor process activities in servers and endpoints,
tures, some network-level detection devices are deployed to                        e.g., Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR), Host Intrusion
check the network data flow, such as Firewall, Web Applica-                        Detection System (HIDS), and anti-virus software. As shown
tion Firewall (WAF), and Network Intrusion Detection System                        in Fig. 1(b), security analysts need to review various alerts
                                                                                   generated by these devices one by one to identify and report
                                                                                   severe alerts.
  Received 13 November 2023; revised 16 July 2025; accepted 7 September
2025. Date of publication 15 September 2025; date of current version 14 January       However, these security devices frequently generate massive
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of           low-severity alerts, leading to alert fatigue among security ana-
China under Grant 2022YFB3102902 and in part by Scientific Research and            lysts [1], [2]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, a typical campus network
Development Plan Project of China Railway Information Technology Group Co.,
Ltd. under Grant WJZG-CKY-2024005(2024K02). (Corresponding authors:                produces over 1,000 daily alerts, with 97% classified as low-
Enhuan Dong; Jiahai Yang.)                                                         or medium-risk. Furthermore, the threat assessment process for
  Songyun Wu, Xiaoqing Sun, Enhuan Dong, Zhiliang Wang, and Jia-                   each alert is highly time-intensive (Fig. 1(b)). Consequently,
hai Yang are with the Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: shoinwu@gmail.com;             security teams face the formidable challenge of identifying
sxq16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; dongenhuan@tsinghua.edu.cn; wzl@cernet.               major threats amidst this overwhelming volume of alerts.
edu.cn; yang@cernet.edu.cn).                                                          To address this, an automatic approach to classify alerts is
  Chen Zhao is with the Information Technology Department of Asian Devel-
opment Bank, Mandaluyong City 1550, Philippines (e-mail: czhao@adb.org).           urgently required, i.e., identify significant threats from enormous
  Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3609834                              alerts. While the security community has drawn attention to
      1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
656                                                IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026




                                                                                    Fig. 3. An illustration of how Alert2vec alleviates the burden on security
                                                                                    analysts in alert processing. Alert2vec aims to automatically assess threat levels
                                                                                    in voluminous multi-source alert logs and prioritizes critical alerts for security
                                                                                    analysts.



                                                                                    and the adaptability to different organizational environments
                                                                                    with diverse device deployments. (ii) Alert correlation. The
Fig. 2. The number of alerts in a network-level security dataset produced by        ability to reasonably express the correlation between alerts and
the campus network of Tsinghua University during a week. The red bars stand
for the number of alerts produced per day, with the left vertical axis as the
                                                                                    leverage it to identify threat levels. (iii) Less Labor. Since the
reference. The proportion of alerts with higher threat levels is darker in color.   primary purpose is to alleviate the burden of security analysts,
In addition, the black curve represents the cumulative number of alerts, with the   the approach should introduce as little labor as possible, namely,
right vertical axis as a reference.
                                                                                    having a high level of automation and interpretation ability.
                                                                                       In summary, we propose Alert2vec, a general alert classifica-
                                                                                    tion framework addressing the three aforementioned challenges.
                                                                                    To resolve the first two challenges, we extract three generic
eliminating alert fatigue, recent works merely focused on a
                                                                                    elements (subject, object, and action) to construct a subgraph for
certain scenario at the host-level [1], [3] or the network-level [2].
                                                                                    each alert. This design ensures compatibility with diverse alerts
Hassan et al. [1] used a heuristic network diffusion algorithm to
                                                                                    from both network-level and host-level security devices in large
compute each alert’s anomaly score in a dependency graph gen-
                                                                                    networks. These subgraphs are unified into a heterogeneous
erated from audit logs. Obviously, this work cannot be extended
                                                                                    Alert Intelligence Graph (AIG), where correlations are inferred
to the network-level detectors since it needs plenty of fine-
                                                                                    via shared nodes (i.e., identical alert elements) at a fine-grained
grained host audit logs to build a vast provenance graph (a graph
                                                                                    level. For the third challenge, we introduce a novel subgraph
that combines all entities, control flows, and information flows
                                                                                    learning method to embed alert subgraphs into discriminative
in audit logs). Likewise, Zhao et al. [2] leveraged several scene-
                                                                                    vectors for automated threat-level identification. The embedding
specific features, such as KPI metrics, to catch severe alerts,
                                                                                    process optimizes six subgraph properties, capturing both global
which is only appropriate for the online service system and hard
                                                                                    and local correlation features. Finally, threat levels are classified
to extend to other scenarios. However, as Fig. 1(a) presents,
                                                                                    via a dual-mode approach (semi-automatic and fully automatic),
large organizations tend to deploy a variety of different security
                                                                                    leveraging the derived alert vectors.
devices to protect network communication and host activities
                                                                                       Alert2vec is demonstrated to be effective on three real-world
comprehensively. Unfortunately, these single-scenario-oriented
                                                                                    large organization’s datasets, outperforming all baseline meth-
works cannot be applied to both network-level and host-level
                                                                                    ods on both network-level and host-level scenarios. To conclude,
detectors simultaneously. Thus, a naïve way is to deploy an alert
                                                                                    this paper makes the following contributions:
classification approach for each detector, which remains two                            r We design a heterogeneous graph named AIG and propose
problems. (i) It costs highly in terms of labor and time, and
                                                                                          a general framework that can classify alert threat levels for
even no existing method is available for some devices. (ii) It
                                                                                          both network-level and host-level security devices.
ignores the correlation between alerts generated from various                           r We devise a novel subgraph learning method for represent-
devices, which can provide valid information to recognize false
                                                                                          ing alert subgraphs. By considering six graph properties,
positives [4]. Considering that these works are insufficient to
                                                                                          it can comprehensively extract both the global and local
eliminate alert fatigue for large organizational networks, there
                                                                                          information of subgraphs.
is an imperative need for a general alert classification method.                        r Alert2vec is proven to be effective on three real-world
   Hence, we aim to propose an intelligence alert classification
                                                                                          datasets, including the network-level dataset of Tsinghua
framework applicable to reduce the workload of security ana-
                                                                                          University and the host-level dataset of Asian Develop-
lysts in large organizations, as given in Fig. 3. Between enormous
                                                                                          ment Bank (ADB), and a publicly available network-level
alerts and exhausted security analysts, an alert-processing buffer
                                                                                          dataset.
is created for classifying heterogeneous alerts into several threat
levels based on the correlation between alerts. Then, instead of
                                                                                                                  II. MOTIVATION
facing tremendous alerts before, security analysts can just focus
on significant alerts with a small percentage. To this end, there                      We motivate the design of Alert2vec by investigating (i) the
are three challenges to the approach. (i) Generality. The com-                      weakness of current alert correlation and (ii) the essentiality of
patibility for heterogeneous alerts generated by various devices                    a subgraph learning method for threat level identification.
WU et al.: ALERT2VEC: ELIMINATING ALERT FATIGUE BY EMBEDDING SECURITY ALERTS THROUGH SUBGRAPH LEARNING                                            657



                                                                                  across disjointed fragments due to covert communication pat-
                                                                                  terns, making it difficult to infer their collective role in an
                                                                                  attack. However, when analyzed by target (e.g., IPd ) and action
                                                                                  (e.g., DDoS attack), these alerts can be intuitively aggregated
                                                                              