                    This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS                                                                                                                1




                 SpectraBayes: Exploring Traffic Series
                Reconstruction in Frequency Domain for
                          Anomaly Detection
  Ruoheng Li , Diyin Tang , Member, IEEE, Fei Wang , Xi Zhu , and Xianbin Cao , Senior Member, IEEE



   Abstract—Timely detection of anomalies in traffic systems
is crucial for mitigating risks and economic losses. Current
time series anomaly detection methods often use reconstruc-
tion errors to identify anomalies, and their accuracy depends
on how well they can reconstruct normal patterns from the
original series. However, traffic data typically exhibit high
noise, spatiotemporal heterogeneity, and uncertain inter-series
correlations, complicating the learning of normal patterns. To
address these challenges, we introduce SpectraBayes, which
explores the reconstruction of density and volume series in the
frequency domain for anomaly detection. First, we transform
the series into the frequency domain and apply a low-pass filter
to remove noise. Then, we embed periodic information into the
frequency-domain representation through phase shifts to enhance
the temporal awareness. Additionally, we model the inter-series
correlations between density and volume resiliently using cross-
spectrum probabilistic modeling. Optimized by maximizing the
Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), SpectraBayes ensures robust
reconstruction while avoiding overfitting against the uncertain
data. SpectraBayes outperforms 21 existing anomaly detection
models on traffic series anomaly detection tasks, achieving mean
improvements of 2.71% across three metrics over the second-
best model. Furthermore, it is lightweight and maintains robust                       Fig. 1. Spatial-temporal heterogeneity of traffic volume, which is revealed by
                                                                                      varied distribution and autocorrelation coefficient across different dates and
performance under varying noise levels.                                               locations. Data are selected from [1].
  Index Terms—Traffic anomaly detection, Bayesian neural net-
work, frequency-domain representation.
                                                                                      economic losses. Timely detection of such anomalies is crucial
                                                                                      for traffic management and mitigation [1], [2].
                          I. I NTRODUCTION                                               Macroscopic traffic data, such as volume and density,
                                                                                      are readily obtained from widely deployed loop detectors,
T     RAFFIC anomalies, such as congestion or accidents,
      disrupt transportation systems and incur significant                            providing a convenient resource for anomaly detection. Exist-
                                                                                      ing traffic time series anomaly detection methods can be
   Received 8 April 2025; revised 14 November 2025 and 25 January                     broadly categorized as supervised or unsupervised. Supervised
2026; accepted 22 February 2026. This work was supported in part by                   approaches rely on labeled data, limiting their generaliza-
Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4254101 and in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62373029 and                 tion [3]. Early unsupervised methods assume normal patterns
Grant 62372430. The Associate Editor for this article was M. Mesbah.                  are in low-rank and detect anomalies as samples with
(Corresponding author: Xi Zhu.)                                                       large deviations [4], [5], [6]. However, these models often
   Ruoheng Li, Xi Zhu, and Xianbin Cao are with the School of Electronic
and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China,               requires large time windows for offline analysis. Recently,
also with the MIIT Key Laboratory of Aerospace Mobile Communications,                 deep learning–based reconstruction methods enhance temporal
Beijing 100191, China, and also with the National Engineering Labora-                 modeling and anomaly identification by using the advanced
tory for Comprehensive Transportation Big Data Application Technology,
Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: ruohengli@buaa.edu.cn; zhuxi@buaa.edu.cn;              architecture [7], [8].
xbcao@buaa.edu.cn).                                                                      However, traffic time series pose three main challenges
   Diyin Tang is with the School of Automation Science and Elec-                      for modeling normal patterns and detecting anomalies. First,
trical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
tangdiyin@buaa.edu.cn).                                                               they are highly noisy due to random individual behaviors
   Fei Wang is with the State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of               and detector inaccuracies, which can impair model robustness
Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,                    and discrimination. Second, traffic exhibits pronounced spa-
China, and also with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, China (e-mail: wangfei@ict.ac.cn).                                            tiotemporal heterogeneity, as shown in Figure 1. Volume dis-
   Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3667876                                tributions and autocorrelation vary across locations and dates,
             1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
                       similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
                                     See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
                     This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.


2                                                                                              IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS



                                                                                                                   II. R ELATED W ORK
                                                                                          In this section, we review the current state of research on
                                                                                       traffic time series anomaly detection, as well as the general
                                                                                       time series representation models for anomaly detection.

                                                                                       A. Traffic Time Series Anomaly Detection Methods
                                                                                          Traffic time series anomaly detection methods can
                                                                                       be broadly categorized into statistics-based, density-based,
                                                                                       classification-based, and reconstruction-based approaches.
Fig. 2. Radar plots illustrate the normalized traffic volume and density               Early statistical methods applied thresholds to macroscopic
across various dates at a specific location, revealing a variable correlation
between these variables. Under normal conditions, the correlation between
                                                                                       [10], [11], [12] and microscopic [13] variables, enabling initial
traffic volume and density varies within a range. A rapid negative correlation,        anomaly identification but offering limited adaptability. Funda-
marked by a red background, indicates potential anomalies. Data and labels             mental Diagram-based approaches [14], [15] detect deviations
are sourced from [1].
                                                                                       in flow-occupancy pairs, despite the strong interpretabil-
                                                                                       ity, their reliance on manual calibration restricts robustness
                                                                                       to dynamic traffic conditions. Incoperating nonparametric
complicating the consistent definition of anomaly features.
                                                                                       density-based methods, such as kernel density estimation [16]
Third, although traffic flow and density are strongly correlated
                                                                                       and FastABOD [1], can help identify abnormal flow-density
in ideal normal patterns [9], their relationship fluctuates under
                                                                                       pairs, but require retraining for different road segments.
normal conditions and deviates during anomalies (Figure 2),
                                                                                          Classification-based methods, including logistic regression
highlighting the need for probabilistic modeling of inter-series
                                                                                       [17], feedforward and recurrent neural networks [18], [19],
correlations.
                                                                                       and graph convolutional networks [20], learn mappings from
   To address above challenging, we introduce SpectraBayes,
                                                                                       spatiotemporal data to anomaly labels, but are limited by the
a frequency-domain reconstruction model that utilizes the
                                                                                       availability of labeled data. Reconstruction-based approaches,
periodicity and cross-spectrum information for robust traffic
                                                                                       encompassing tensor learning [5], [6], self-expressive models
series anomaly detection. Specifically, SpectraBayes employs
                                                                                       [21], and deep time-series representation models [7], [22],
the real Fast Fourier Transform (rFFT) for domain transfor-
                                                                                       detect anomalies through deviations from learned normal
mation and integrates a low-pass filter for data denoising.
                                                                                       patterns, offering finer temporal modeling but with perfor-
Then, SpectraBayes enhances the temporal awareness of
                                                                                       mance varying across different setups [23]. Overall, traffic
model by embedding daily periodicity into the frequency
                                                                                       anomaly detection remains challenging due to system uncer-
domain. Meanwhile, the model explicitly quantifies corre-
                                                                                       tainty and dynamics, motivating the development of tailored
lations between traffic volume and density, leveraging the
                                                                                       methods.
Bayesian neural parameters to adaptively learn the desirable
correlated strength. The refined frequency representation is
                                                                                       B. General Time Series Representation Models for Anomaly
then reconstructed back to the time domain through an inverse
                                                                                       Detection
FFT. The model is trained with the Evidence Lower Bound
(ELBO) for probabilistic parameters estimation, which ensures                             Time-series representation models can be broadly catego-
both reconstruction accuracy and regularization.                                       rized into Encoder-Decoder and Encoder-only architectures.
   The main contributions of this paper are as follows:                                Classic Encoder-Decoder frameworks, such as Transformers
                                                                                       [24], GANs [25], and VAEs [26], involve both encoding and
   1) We propose SpectraBayes, to our knowledge, which is
                                                                                       decoding, increasing training complexity, whereas Encoder-
      the first probabilistic frequency-domain reconstruction-
                                                                                       only models offer simpler structures for series modeling [22],
      based anomaly detection model that specifically
                                                                                       [27]. Recent studies suggest that merely increasing model
      designed for traffic series, which enables efficient tem-
                                                                                       complexity does not consistently improve anomaly detection
      poral modeling and robust pattern reconstruction in an
                                                                                       [28], motivating approaches that explicitly capture anomaly-
      integrated framework.
                                                                                       specific features, including inconsistency [29] and association
   2) We introduce a periodicity embedding mechanism that
                                                                                       discrepancies [7].
      explicitly models daily cycles through phase-shifts in the
                                                                                          For traffic data, spatiotemporal heterogeneity, inherent daily
      frequency domain, enhancing detection performance by
                                                                                       periodicity, and stochastic variations due to road conditions
      introducing temporal awareness.
                                                                                       and human factors complicate the modeling of general pat-
   3) We design a probabilistic cross-spectrum learning mod-
                                                                                       terns. These characteristics should be explicitly considered
      ule that jointly models the spectral relationship between
                                                                                       when designing time-series representation models for traffic
      traffic density and volume, which can handle the
                                                                                