                                             Evidential Deep Learning to Quantify Classification
                                                                Uncertainty


                                                              Murat Sensoy                                    Lance Kaplan
                                                      Department of Computer Science                      US Army Research Lab
                                                        Ozyegin University, Turkey                       Adelphi, MD 20783, USA
arXiv:1806.01768v3 [cs.LG] 31 Oct 2018




                                                     murat.sensoy@ozyegin.edu.tr                           lkaplan@ieee.org

                                                                                Melih Kandemir
                                                                       Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
                                                                Robert-Bosch-Campus 1, 71272 Renningen, Germany
                                                                          melih.kandemir@bosch.com



                                                                                       Abstract
                                                  Deterministic neural nets have been shown to learn effective predictors on a wide
                                                  range of machine learning problems. However, as the standard approach is to train
                                                  the network to minimize a prediction loss, the resultant model remains ignorant to
                                                  its prediction confidence. Orthogonally to Bayesian neural nets that indirectly infer
                                                  prediction uncertainty through weight uncertainties, we propose explicit modeling
                                                  of the same using the theory of subjective logic. By placing a Dirichlet distribution
                                                  on the class probabilities, we treat predictions of a neural net as subjective opinions
                                                  and learn the function that collects the evidence leading to these opinions by
                                                  a deterministic neural net from data. The resultant predictor for a multi-class
                                                  classification problem is another Dirichlet distribution whose parameters are set by
                                                  the continuous output of a neural net. We provide a preliminary analysis on how
                                                  the peculiarities of our new loss function drive improved uncertainty estimation.
                                                  We observe that our method achieves unprecedented success on detection of out-
                                                  of-distribution queries and endurance against adversarial perturbations.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         The present decade has commenced with the deep learning approach shaking the machine learning
                                         world [20]. New-age deep neural net constructions have exhibited amazing success on nearly all
                                         applications of machine learning thanks to recent inventions such as dropout [30], batch normalization
                                         [13], and skip connections [11]. Further ramifications that adapt neural nets to particular applications
                                         have brought unprecedented prediction accuracies, which in certain cases exceed human-level
                                         performance [5, 4]. While one side of the coin is a boost of interest and investment on deep
                                         learning research, the other is an emergent need for its robustness, sample efficiency, security, and
                                         interpretability.
                                         On setups where abundant labeled data are available, the capability to achieve sufficiently high
                                         accuracy by following a short list of rules of thumb has been taken for granted. The major challenges
                                         of the upcoming era, hence, are likely to lie elsewhere rather than test set accuracy improvement. For
                                         instance, is the neural net able to identify data points belonging to an unrelated data distribution? Can
                                         it simply say "I do not know" if we feed in a cat picture after training the net on a set of handwritten
                                         digits? Even more critically, can the net protect its users against adversarial attacks? These questions
                                         have been addressed by a stream of research on Bayesian Neural Nets (BNNs) [8, 18, 26], which
                                         estimate prediction uncertainty by approximating the moments of the posterior predictive distribution.

                                         32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
This holistic approach seeks for a solution with a wide set of practical uses besides uncertainty
estimation, such as automated model selection and enhanced immunity to overfitting.
In this paper, we put our full focus on the uncertainty estimation problem and approach it from a
Theory of Evidence perspective [7, 14]. We interpret softmax, the standard output of a classification
network, as the parameter set of a categorical distribution. By replacing this parameter set with the
parameters of a Dirichlet density, we represent the predictions of the learner as a distribution over
possible softmax outputs, rather than the point estimate of a softmax output. In other words, this
density can intuitively be understood as a factory of these point estimates. The resultant model has a
specific loss function, which is minimized subject to neural net weights using standard backprop.
In a set of experiments, we demonstrate that this technique outperforms state-of-the-art BNNs by a
large margin on two applications where high-quality uncertainty modeling is of critical importance.
Specifically, the predictive distribution of our model approaches the maximum entropy setting much
closer than BNNs when fed with an input coming from a distribution different from that of the training
samples. Figure 1 illustrates how sensibly our method reacts to the rotation of the input digits. As it is
not trained to handle rotational invariance, it sharply reduces classification probabilities and increases
the prediction uncertainty after circa 50◦ input rotation. The standard softmax keeps reporting high
confidence for incorrect classes for high rotations. Lastly, we observe that our model is clearly more
robust to adversarial attacks on two different benchmark data sets.
All vectors in this paper are column vectors and are represented in bold face such as x where the k-th
element is denoted as xk . We use to refer to the Hadamard (element-wise) product.

2   Deficiencies of Modeling Class Probabilities with Softmax
The gold standard for deep neural nets is to use the softmax operator to convert the continuous
activations of the output layer to class probabilities. The eventual model can be interpreted as a
multinomial distribution whose parameters, hence discrete class probabilities, are determined by
neural net outputs. For a K−class classification problem, the likelihood function for an observed
tuple (x, y) is
                       P r(y|x, θ) = Mult(y|σ(f1 (x, θ)), · · · , σ(fK (x, θ))),
where Mult(· · · ) is a multinomial mass function, fj (x, θ) is the jth output channel of an arbitrary
                                                       PK
neural net f (·) parametrized by θ, and σ(uj ) = euj / i=1 euK is the softmax function. While the
continuous neural net is responsible for adjusting the ratio of class probabilities, softmax squashes
these ratios into a simplex. The eventual softmax-squashed multinomial likelihood is then maximized
with respect to the neural net parameters θ. The equivalent problem of minimizing the negative
log-likelihood is preferred for computational convenience
                                 − log p(y|x, θ) = − log σ(fy (x, θ))
which is widely known as the cross-entropy loss. It is noteworthy that the probabilistic interpretation
of the cross-entropy loss is mere Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). As being a frequentist
technique, MLE is not capable of inferring the predictive distribution variance. Softmax is also
notorious with inflating the probability of the predicted class as a result of the exponent employed on
the neural net outputs. The consequence is then unreliable uncertainty estimations, as the distance of
the predicted label of a newly seen observation is not useful for the conclusion besides its comparative
value against other classes.
Inspired from [9] and [24], on the left side of Figure 1, we demonstrate how the LeNet [22] fails
to classify an image of digit 1 from MNIST dataset when it is continuously rotated in the counter-
clockwise direction. Commonly to many standardized architectures, LeNet estimates classification
probabilities with the softmax function. As the image is rotated it fails to classify the image correctly;
the image is classified as 2 or 5 based on the degree of rotation. For instance, for small degrees of
rotation, the image is correctly classified as 1 with high probability values. However, when the image
is rotated between 60 − 100 degrees, it is classified as 2. The network starts to classify the image
as 5 when it is rotated between 110 − 130 degrees. While the classification probability computed
using the softmax function is quite high for the misclassified samples (see Figure 1, left panel), our
approach proposed in this paper can accurately quantify uncertainty of its predictions (see Figure 1,
right panel).


                                                    2
                         Rotation Angle                                    Rotation Angle




Figure 1: Classification of the rotated digit 1 (at bottom) at different angles between 0 and 180
degrees. Left: The classification probability is calculated using the softmax function. Right: The
classification probability and uncertainty are calculated using the proposed method.


3   Uncertainty and the Theory of Evidence
The Dempster–Shafer Theory of Evidence (DST) is a generalization of the Bayesian theory to
subjective probabilities [7]. It assigns belief masses to subsets of a frame of discernment, which
denotes the set of exclusive possible states, e.g., possible class labels for a sample. A belief mass
can be assigned to any subset of the frame, including the whole frame itself, which represents the
belief that the truth can be any of the possible states, e.g., any class label is equally likely. In other
words, by assigning all belief masses to the whole frame, one expresses ’I do not know’ as an opinion
for the truth over possible states [14]. Subjective Logic (SL) formalizes DST’s notion of belief
assignments over a frame of discernment as a Dirichlet Distribution [14]. Hence, it allows one to use
the principles of evidential theory to quantify belief masses and uncertainty through a well-defined
theoretical framework. More specifically, SL considers a frame of K mutually exclusive singletons
(e.g., class labels) by providing a belief mass bk for each singleton k = 1, . . . , K and providing an
overall uncertainty mass of u. These K + 1 mass values are all non-negative and sum up to one, i.e.,
                                                  K
                                                  X
                                             u+         bk = 1,
                                                  k=1

where u ≥ 0 and bk ≥ 0 for k = 1, . . . , K. A belief mass bk for a singleton k is computed using the
evidence for the singleton. Let ek ≥ 0 be the evidence derived for the k th singleton, then the belief
bk and the uncertainty u are computed as
                                                 ek        K
                                          bk =      and u = ,                                         (1)
                                                 S         S
             PK
where S = i=1 (ei + 1). Note that the uncertainty is inversely proportional to the total evidence.
When there is no evidence, the belief for each singleton is zero and the uncertainty is one. Differently
from the Bayesian modeling nomenclature, we term evidence as a measure of the amount of support
collected from data in favor of a sample to be classified into a certain class. A belief mass assignment,
i.e., subjective opinion, corresponds to a Dirichlet distribution with parameters αk = ek + 1. That
is, a subjective opinion can be derived easily from the parameters of the corresponding Dirichlet
                                                   PK
distribution using bk = (αk − 1)/S, where S = i=1 αi is referred to as the Dirichlet strength.
The output of a standard neural network classifier is a probability assignment over the possible classes
for each sample. However, a Dirichlet distribution parametrized over evidence represents the density
of each such probability assignment; hence it models second-order probabilities and uncertainty [14].
The Dirichlet distribution is a probability density function (pdf) for possible values of the probability
mass function (pmf) p. It is characterized by K parameters α = [α1 , · · · , αK ] and is given by
                                       1 QK αi −1
                                           B(α)    i=1 pi      for p ∈ SK ,
                          D(p|α) =
                                           0                   otherwise,


                                                    3
