    A Simple Unified Framework for Detecting
Out-of-Distribution Samples and Adversarial Attacks


                       Kimin Lee1 , Kibok Lee2 , Honglak Lee3,2 , Jinwoo Shin1,4
                  1
                      Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
                                       2
                                         University of Michigan
                                            3
                                              Google Brain
                                                4
                                                  AItrics



                                              Abstract

         Detecting test samples drawn sufficiently far away from the training distribution
         statistically or adversarially is a fundamental requirement for deploying a good
         classifier in many real-world machine learning applications. However, deep neu-
         ral networks with the softmax classifier are known to produce highly overconfident
         posterior distributions even for such abnormal samples. In this paper, we propose
         a simple yet effective method for detecting any abnormal samples, which is appli-
         cable to any pre-trained softmax neural classifier. We obtain the class conditional
         Gaussian distributions with respect to (low- and upper-level) features of the deep
         models under Gaussian discriminant analysis, which result in a confidence score
         based on the Mahalanobis distance. While most prior methods have been evalu-
         ated for detecting either out-of-distribution or adversarial samples, but not both,
         the proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art performances for both cases in
         our experiments. Moreover, we found that our proposed method is more robust
         in harsh cases, e.g., when the training dataset has noisy labels or small number of
         samples. Finally, we show that the proposed method enjoys broader usage by ap-
         plying it to class-incremental learning: whenever out-of-distribution samples are
         detected, our classification rule can incorporate new classes well without further
         training deep models.


1   Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved high accuracy on many classification tasks, e.g.,
speech recognition [1], object detection [9] and image classification [12]. However, measuring the
predictive uncertainty still remains a challenging problem [20, 21]. Obtaining well-calibrated pre-
dictive uncertainty is indispensable since it could be useful in many machine learning applications
(e.g., active learning [8] and novelty detection [18]) as well as when deploying DNNs in real-world
systems [2], e.g., self-driving cars and secure authentication system [6, 30].
The predictive uncertainty of DNNs is closely related to the problem of detecting abnormal sam-
ples that are drawn far away from in-distribution (i.e., distribution of training samples) statistically
or adversarially. For detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, recent works have utilized the
confidence from the posterior distribution [13, 21]. For example, Hendrycks & Gimpel [13] pro-
posed the maximum value of posterior distribution from the classifier as a baseline method, and it
is improved by processing the input and output of DNNs [21]. For detecting adversarial samples,
confidence scores were proposed based on density estimators to characterize them in feature spaces
of DNNs [7]. More recently, Ma et al. [22] proposed the local intrinsic dimensionality (LID) and
empirically showed that the characteristics of test samples can be estimated effectively using the


32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.
LID. However, most prior works on this line typically do not evaluate both OOD and adversarial
samples. To best of our knowledge, no universal detector is known to work well on both tasks.
Contribution. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method, which is applicable to
any pre-trained softmax neural classifier (without re-training) for detecting abnormal test samples
including OOD and adversarial ones. Our high-level idea is to measure the probability density of test
sample on feature spaces of DNNs utilizing the concept of a “generative” (distance-based) classifier.
Specifically, we assume that pre-trained features can be fitted well by a class-conditional Gaussian
distribution since its posterior distribution can be shown to be equivalent to the softmax classifier
under Gaussian discriminant analysis (see Section 2.1 for our justification). Under this assumption,
we define the confidence score using the Mahalanobis distance with respect to the closest class-
conditional distribution, where its parameters are chosen as empirical class means and tied empirical
covariance of training samples. To the contrary of conventional beliefs, we found that using the
corresponding generative classifier does not sacrifice the softmax classification accuracy. Perhaps
surprisingly, its confidence score outperforms softmax-based ones very strongly across multiple
other tasks: detecting OOD samples, detecting adversarial samples and class-incremental learning.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method using deep convolutional neural networks,
such as DenseNet [14] and ResNet [12] trained for image classification tasks on various datasets
including CIFAR [15], SVHN [28], ImageNet [5] and LSUN [32]. First, for the problem of detecting
OOD samples, the proposed method outperforms the current state-of-the-art method, ODIN [21], in
all tested cases. In particular, compared to ODIN, our method improves the true negative rate (TNR),
i.e., the fraction of detected OOD (e.g., LSUN) samples, from 45.6% to 90.9% on ResNet when
95% of in-distribution (e.g., CIFAR-100) samples are correctly detected. Next, for the problem
of detecting adversarial samples, e.g., generated by four attack methods such as FGSM [10], BIM
[16], DeepFool [26] and CW [3], our method outperforms the state-of-the-art detection measure,
LID [22]. In particular, compared to LID, ours improves the TNR of CW from 82.9% to 95.8% on
ResNet when 95% of normal CIFAR-10 samples are correctly detected.
We also found that our proposed method is more robust in the choice of its hyperparameters as well
as against extreme scenarios, e.g., when the training dataset has some noisy, random labels or a
small number of data samples. In particular, Liang et al. [21] tune the hyperparameters of ODIN
using validation sets of OOD samples, which is often impossible since the knowledge about OOD
samples is not accessible a priori. We show that hyperparameters of the proposed method can be
tuned only using in-distribution (training) samples, while maintaining its performance. We further
show that the proposed method tuned on a simple attack, i.e., FGSM, can be used to detect other
more complex attacks such as BIM, DeepFool and CW.
Finally, we apply our method to class-incremental learning [29]: new classes are added progressively
to a pre-trained classifier. Since the new class samples are drawn from an out-of-training distribution,
it is natural to expect that one can classify them using our proposed metric without re-training the
deep models. Motivated by this, we present a simple method which accommodates a new class at
any time by simply computing the class mean of the new class and updating the tied covariance of all
classes. We show that the proposed method outperforms other baseline methods, such as Euclidean
distance-based classifier and re-trained softmax classifier. This evidences that our approach have a
potential to apply to many other related machine learning tasks, such as active learning [8], ensemble
learning [19] and few-shot learning [31].


2     Mahalanobis distance-based score from generative classifier

Given deep neural networks (DNNs) with the softmax classifier, we propose a simple yet effective
method for detecting abnormal samples such as out-of-distribution (OOD) and adversarial ones. We
first present the proposed confidence score based on an induced generative classifier under Gaussian
discriminant analysis (GDA), and then introduce additional techniques to improve its performance.
We also discuss how the confidence score is applicable to incremental learning.

2.1   Why Mahalanobis distance-based score?

Derivation of generative classifiers from softmax ones. Let x 2 X be an input and y 2
Y = {1, · · · , C} be its label. Suppose that a pre-trained softmax neural classifier is given:


                                                   2
                                                                                                       TPR on in-distribution (CIFAR-10)
                                                              100                                                                          1.0
                                                                      Softmax            Mahalanobis




                                      Test set accuracy (%)
                                                                                                                                           0.8                                 1.00
                                                               90                                                                                                              0.95
                                                                                                                                           0.6                                 0.90
                                                                                                                                                                               0.85
                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                               80                                                                                    0      0.2        0.4

                                                                                                                                           0.2                        Softmax
                                                                                                                                                                      Euclidean
                                                                                                                                                                      Mahalanobis
                                                               70                                                                            0
                                                                    CIFAR-10 CIFAR-100        SVHN                                            0                  0.5              1.0
                                                                              Datasets                                                       FPR on out-of-distribution (TinyImageNet)

    (a) Visualization by t-SNE                                 (b) Classification accuracy                                                           (c) ROC curve

Figure 1: Experimental results under the ResNet with 34 layers. (a) Visualization of final features
from ResNet trained on CIFAR-10 by t-SNE, where the colors of points indicate the classes of the
corresponding objects. (b) Classification test set accuracy of ResNet on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and
SVHN datasets. (c) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves: the x-axis and y-axis represent
the false positive rate (FPR) and true positive rate (TPR), respectively.

                    exp(wc> f (x)+bc )
P (y = c|x) = P                             , where wc and bc are the weight and the bias of the soft-
                    c0 exp(wc>0 f (x)+bc0 )
max classifier for class c, and f (·) denotes the output of the penultimate layer of DNNs. Then,
without any modification on the pre-trained softmax neural classifier, we obtain a generative clas-
sifier assuming that a class-conditional distribution follows the multivariate Gaussian distribu-
tion. Specifically, we define C class-conditional Gaussian distributions with a tied covariance ⌃:
P (f (x)|y = c) = N (f (x)|µc , ⌃) , where µc is the mean of multivariate Gaussian distribution of
class c 2 {1, ..., C}. Here, our approach is based on a simple theoretical connection between GDA
and the softmax classifier: the posterior distribution defined by the generative classifier under GDA
with tied covariance assumption is equivalent to the softmax classifier (see the supplementary mate-
rial for more details). Therefore, the pre-trained features of the softmax neural classifier f (x) might
also follow the class-conditional Gaussian distribution.
To estimate the parameters of the generative classifier from the pre-trained softmax neural classifier,
we compute the empirical class mean and covariance of training samples {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xN , yN )}:
                    1 X                b = 1
                                               X X                                    >
              bc =
              µ               f (xi ), ⌃                  (f (xi ) µ              bc ) ,
                                                                    bc ) (f (xi ) µ                  (1)
                    Nc i:y =c              N c i:y =c
                             i                                                       i


where Nc is the number of training samples with label c. This is equivalent to fitting the class-
conditional Gaussian distributions with a tied covariance to training samples under the maximum
likelihood estimator.
Mahalanobis distance-based confidence score. Using the above induced class-conditional Gaus-
sian distributions, we define the confidence score M (x) using the Mahalanobis distance between
test sample x and the closest class-conditional Gaussian distribution, i.e.,
                                                                                        > b 1
                         M (x) = max                                 (f (x)         bc ) ⌃
                                                                                    µ         (f (x)                                        bc ) .
                                                                                                                                            µ                                       (2)
                                              c

Note that this metric corresponds to measuring the log of the probability densities of the test sample.
Here, we remark that abnormal samples can be characterized better in the representation space of
DNNs, rather than the “label-overfitted” output space of softmax-based posterior distribution used
in the prior works [13, 21] for detecting them. It is because a confidence measure obtained from the
posterior distribution can show high confidence even for abnormal samples that lie far away from
the softmax decision boundary. Feinman et al. [7] and Ma et al. [22] process the DNN features for
detecting adversarial samples in a sense, but do not utilize the Mahalanobis distance-based metric,
i.e., they only utilize the Euclidean distance in their scores. In this paper, we show that Mahalanobis
distance is significantly more effective than the Euclidean distance in various tasks.
Experimental supports for generative classifiers. To evaluate our hypothesis that trained features
of DNNs support the assumption of GDA, we measure the classification accuracy as follows:
                                                                                    > b 1
                             yb(x) = arg min (f (x)                             bc ) ⌃
             