         Energy-based Out-of-distribution Detection


                     Weitang Liu                                       Xiaoyun Wang
    Department of Computer Science and Engineering             Department of Computer Science
          University of California, San Diego                   University of California, Davis
               La Jolla, CA 92093, USA                             Davis, CA 95616, USA
                  wel022@ucsd.edu                                 xiywang@ucdavis.edu

                     John D. Owens                                        Yixuan Li
    Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering          Department of Computer Sciences
             University of California, Davis                   University of Wisconsin-Madison
                 Davis, CA 95616, USA                             Madison, WI 53703, USA
              jowens@ece.ucdavis.edu                              sharonli@cs.wisc.edu



                                             Abstract
         Determining whether inputs are out-of-distribution (OOD) is an essential building
         block for safely deploying machine learning models in the open world. However,
         previous methods relying on the softmax confidence score suffer from overconfi-
         dent posterior distributions for OOD data. We propose a unified framework for
         OOD detection that uses an energy score. We show that energy scores better distin-
         guish in- and out-of-distribution samples than the traditional approach using the
         softmax scores. Unlike softmax confidence scores, energy scores are theoretically
         aligned with the probability density of the inputs and are less susceptible to the
         overconfidence issue. Within this framework, energy can be flexibly used as a
         scoring function for any pre-trained neural classifier as well as a trainable cost
         function to shape the energy surface explicitly for OOD detection. On a CIFAR-10
         pre-trained WideResNet, using the energy score reduces the average FPR (at TPR
         95%) by 18.03% compared to the softmax confidence score. With energy-based
         training, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art on common benchmarks.


1   Introduction
The real world is open and full of unknowns, presenting significant challenges for machine learning
models that must reliably handle diverse inputs. Out-of-distribution (OOD) uncertainty arises when
a machine learning model sees an input that differs from its training data, and thus should not be
predicted by the model. Determining whether inputs are out-of-distribution is an essential problem
for deploying ML in safety-critical applications such as rare disease identification. A plethora of
recent research has studied the issue of out-of-distribution detection [2, 3, 13–15, 19, 22, 23, 26].
Previous approaches rely on the softmax confidence score to safeguard against OOD inputs [13].
An input with a low softmax confidence score is classified as OOD. However, neural networks can
produce arbitrarily high softmax confidence for inputs far away from the training data [29]. Such a
failure mode occurs since the softmax posterior distribution can have a label-overfitted output space,
which makes the softmax confidence score suboptimal for OOD detection.
In this paper, we propose to detect OOD inputs using an energy score, and provide both mathematical
insights and empirical evidence that the energy score is superior to both a softmax-based score and
generative-based methods. The energy-based model [20] maps each input to a single scalar that is
lower for observed data and higher for unobserved ones. We show that the energy score is desirable

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
for OOD detection since it is theoretically aligned with the probability density of the input—samples
with higher energies can be interpreted as data with a lower likelihood of occurrence. In contrast,
we show mathematically that the softmax confidence score is a biased scoring function that is not
aligned with the density of the inputs and hence is not suitable for OOD detection.
Importantly, the energy score can be derived from a purely discriminative classification model without
relying on a density estimator explicitly, and therefore circumvents the difficult optimization process
in training generative models. This is in contrast with JEM [11], which derives the likelihood score
log p(x) from a generative modeling perspective. JEM’s objective can be intractable and unstable
to optimize in practice, as it requires the estimation of the normalized densities over the entire
input space to maximize the likelihood. Moreover, while JEM only utilizes in-distribution data, our
framework allows exploiting both the in-distribution and the auxiliary outlier data to shape the energy
gap flexibly between the training and OOD data, a learning method that is much more effective than
JEM or Outlier Exposure [14].
Contributions. We propose a unified framework using an energy score for OOD detection.1 We show
that one can flexibly use energy as both a scoring function for any pre-trained neural classifier (without
re-training), and a trainable cost function to fine-tune the classification model. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of energy function for OOD detection for both use cases.
         • At inference time, we show that energy can conveniently replace softmax confidence for any
           pre-trained neural network. We show that the energy score outperforms the softmax confi-
           dence score [13] on common OOD evaluation benchmarks. For example, on WideResNet,
           the energy score reduces the average FPR (at 95% TPR) by 18.03% on CIFAR-10 compared
           to using the softmax confidence score. Existing approaches using pre-trained models may
           have several hyperparameters to be tuned and sometimes require additional data. In contrast,
           the energy score is a parameter-free measure, which is easy to use and implement, and in
           many cases, achieves comparable or even better performance.
         • At training time, we propose an energy-bounded learning objective to fine-tune the network.
           The learning process shapes the energy surface to assign low energy values to the in-
           distribution data and higher energy values to OOD training data. Specifically, we regularize
           the energy using two square hinge loss terms, which explicitly create the energy gap
           between in- and out-of-distribution training data. We show that the energy fine-tuned model
           outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method evaluated on six OOD datasets. Compared
           to the softmax-based fine-tuning approach [14], our method reduces the average FPR (at
           95% TPR) by 10.55% on CIFAR-100. This fine-tuning leads to improved OOD detection
           performance while maintaining similar classification accuracy on in-distribution data.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background of energy-based
models. In Section 3, we present our method of using energy score for OOD detection, and experi-
mental results in Section 4. Section 5 provides an comprehensive literature review on OOD detection
and energy-based learning. We conclude in Section 6, with discussion on broader impact in Section 7.

2       Background: Energy-based Models
The essence of the energy-based model (EBM) [20] is to build a function E(x) : RD ! R that maps
each point x of an input space to a single, non-probabilistic scalar called the energy. A collection of
energy values could be turned into a probability density p(x) through the Gibbs distribution:
                                              e E(x,y)/T      e E(x,y)/T
                              p(y | x) = R             0    =            ,                            (1)
                                             y0
                                                e E(x,y )/T    e E(x)/T
                        R           0
where the denominator y0 e E(x,y )/T is called the partition function, which marginalizes over y,
and T is the temperature parameter. The Helmholtz free energy E(x) of a given data point x 2 RD
can be expressed as the negative of the log partition function:
                                                    Z
                                                                0
                                 E(x) = T · log         e E(x,y )/T                          (2)
                                                        y0
    1
   Our code is publicly available to facilitate reproducible research: https://github.com/wetliu/
energy_ood.


                                                    2
                                                   Frequency




                 CNN   f (x;θ )                                  out-of-distribution

                                                                                        in-distribution

      x                              Energy Function
                                        E(x; f )

                                                                                                          Negative Energy

                                                                          threshold τ


Figure 1: Energy-based out-of-distribution detection framework. The energy can be used as a scoring function
for any pre-trained neural network (without re-training), or used as a trainable cost function to fine-tune the
classification model. During inference time, for a given input x, the energy score E(x; f ) is calculated for a
neural network f (x). The OOD detector will classify the input as OOD if the negative energy score is smaller
than the threshold value.


Energy Function The energy-based model has an inherent connection with modern machine learning,
especially discriminative models. To see this, we consider a discriminative neural classifier f (x) :
RD ! RK , which maps an input x 2 RD to K real-valued numbers known as logits. These logits
are used to derive a categorical distribution using the softmax function:
                                                    efy (x)/T
                                        p(y | x) = PK             ,                                                         (3)
                                                         fi (x)/T
                                                    i e

where fy (x) indicates the y th index of f (x), i.e., the logit corresponding to the y th class label.
By connecting Eq. 1 and Eq. 3, we can define an energy for a given input (x, y) as E(x, y) = fy (x).
More importantly, without changing the parameterization of the neural network f (x), we can express
the free energy function E(x; f ) over x 2 RD in terms of the denominator of the softmax activation:
                                                                 K
                                                                 X
                                    E(x; f ) =         T · log        efi (x)/T .                                           (4)
                                                                  i


3     Energy-based Out-of-distribution Detection
We propose a unified framework using an energy score for OOD detection, where the differences
of energies between in- and out-of-distribution allow effective differentiation. The energy score
mitigates a critical problem of softmax confidence with arbitrarily high values for OOD examples [12].
In the following, we first describe using energy as an OOD score for pre-trained models, and the
connection between the energy and softmax scores (Section 3.1). We then describe how to use energy
as a trainable cost function for model fine-tuning (Section 3.2).

3.1       Energy as Inference-time OOD Score

Out-of-distribution detection is a binary classification problem that relies on a score to differentiate
between in- and out-of-distribution examples. A scoring function should produce values that are
distinguishable between in- and out-of-distribution. A natural choice is to use the density function of
the data p(x) and consider examples with low likelihood to be OOD. While it is possible to obtain
the density function for a discriminative model by resorting to the energy-based model [11, 20]:
                                                        e E(x;f )/T
                                          p(x) = R                    ,                                                     (5)
                                                        x
                                                          e E(x;f )/T
                                R
the normalized densities Z = x e E(x;f )/T (with respect to x) can be intractable to compute or
even reliably estimate over the input space.


                                                         3
