IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2017

563

An Introduction to Deep Learning
for the Physical Layer
Timothy O’Shea , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jakob Hoydis, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present and discuss several novel applications of
deep learning for the physical layer. By interpreting a communications system as an autoencoder, we develop a fundamental new
way to think about communications system design as an end-toend reconstruction task that seeks to jointly optimize transmitter
and receiver components in a single process. We show how this
idea can be extended to networks of multiple transmitters and
receivers and present the concept of radio transformer networks
as a means to incorporate expert domain knowledge in the
machine learning model. Lastly, we demonstrate the application
of convolutional neural networks on raw IQ samples for modulation classification which achieves competitive accuracy with
respect to traditional schemes relying on expert features. This
paper is concluded with a discussion of open challenges and
areas for future investigation.
Index Terms—Machine learning, deep learning, physical layer,
digital communications, modulation, radio communication, cognitive radio.

I. I NTRODUCTION
OMMUNICATIONS is a field of rich expert knowledge
about how to model channels of different types [1], [2],
compensate for various hardware imperfections [3], [4], and
design optimal signaling and detection schemes that ensure
a reliable transfer of data [5]. As such, it is a complex and
mature engineering field with many distinct areas of investigation which have all seen diminishing returns with regards
to performance improvements, in particular on the physical
layer. Because of this, there is a high bar of performance over
which any machine learning (ML) or deep learning (DL) based
approach must pass in order to provide tangible new benefits.
In domains such as computer vision and natural language
processing, DL shines because it is difficult to characterize
real world images or language with rigid mathematical models. For example, while it is an almost impossible task to
write a robust algorithm for detection of handwritten digits or
objects in images, it is straightforward today to implement DL
algorithms that learn to accomplish this task beyond human

C

Manuscript received February 24, 2017; revised July 11, 2017 and
September 18, 2017; accepted September 21, 2017. Date of publication
October 2, 2017; date of current version December 22, 2017. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication
was M. Zorzi. (Corresponding author: Timothy O’Shea.)
T. O’Shea is with the Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Virginia Tech and DeepSig, Arlington, VA 22203 USA (e-mail:
oshea@vt.edu).
J. Hoydis is with the Department of Software-Defined Mobile
Networks, Nokia Bell Labs, 91620 Nozay, France (e-mail:
jakob.hoydis@nokia-bell-labs.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2017.2758370

levels of accuracy [6], [7]. In communications, however, we
can design transmit signals that enable straightforward analytic algorithms for symbol detection for a variety of channel
and system models (e.g., detection of a constellation symbol
in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)). Thus, as long as
such models sufficiently capture real effects, we do not expect
DL to yield significant improvements on the physical layer.
Nevertheless, we believe that the DL applications which
we explore in this paper are a useful and insightful way of
fundamentally rethinking the communications system design
problem, and hold promise for performance improvements
in complex communications scenarios that are difficult to
describe with tractable mathematical models. Our main contributions are as follows:
• We demonstrate that it is possible to learn full transmitter and receiver implementations for a given channel
model which are optimized for a chosen loss function
(e.g., minimizing block error rate (BLER)). Interestingly,
such “learned” systems can be competitive with respect to
the current state-of-the-art. The key idea here is to represent transmitter, channel, and receiver as one deep neural
network (NN) that can be trained as an autoencoder. The
beauty of this approach is that it can even be applied to
channel models and loss functions for which the optimal
solutions are unknown.
• We extend this concept to an adversarial network of
multiple transmitter-receiver pairs competing for capacity.
This leads to the interference channel for which finding the best signaling scheme is a long-standing research
problem. We demonstrate that such a setup can also
be represented as an NN with multiple inputs and outputs, and that all transmitter and receiver implementations
can be jointly optimized with respect to a common or
individual performance metric(s).
• We introduce radio transformer networks (RTNs) as a
way to integrate expert knowledge into the DL model.
RTNs allow, for example, to carry out predefined correction algorithms (“transformers”) at the receiver (e.g.,
multiplication by a complex-valued number, convolution
with a vector) which may be fed with parameters learned
by another NN. This NN can be integrated into the
end-to-end training process of a task performed on the
transformed signal (e.g., symbol detection).
• We study the use of NNs on complex-valued IQ samples
for the problem of modulation classification and show
that convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which are
the cornerstone of most DL systems for computer vision,

c 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2332-7731 
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

564

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2017

can outperform traditional classification techniques based
on expert features. This result mirrors a relentless trend
in DL for various domains, where learned features ultimately outperform and displace long-used expert features,
such as the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) [8]
and Bag-of-words [9].
The ideas presented in this paper provide a multitude of
interesting avenues for future research that will be discussed
in detail. We hope that these will stimulate wide interest within
the research community.
The rest of this article is structured as follows: Section I-A
discusses potential benefits of DL for the physical layer.
Section I-B presents related work. Background of DL is
presented in Section II. In Section III, several DL applications for communications are presented. Section IV contains
an overview and discussion of open problems and key areas
of future investigation. Section V concludes the article.

evidence that “learned” algorithms taking this form could be
executed faster and at lower energy cost than their manually
“programmed” counterparts.
Fourth, massively parallel processing architectures with
distributed memory architectures, such as graphic processing units (GPUs) but also increasingly specialized chips for
NN inference (e.g., [17]), have shown to be very energy
efficient and capable of impressive computational throughput when fully utilized by concurrent algorithms [18]. The
performance of such architectures, however, has been largely
limited by the ability of algorithms and higher level programming languages to make efficient use of them. The inherently
concurrent nature of computation and memory access across
wide and deep NNs has demonstrated a surprising ability to
readily achieve high resource utilization on these architectures with minimal application specific tuning or optimization
required.

A. Potential of DL for the Physical Layer

B. Historical Context and Related Work

Apart from the intellectual beauty of a fully “learned” communications system, there are some reasons why DL could
provide gains over existing physical layer algorithms.
First, most signal processing algorithms in communications
have solid foundations in statistics and information theory and
are often provably optimal for tractable mathematically models. These are generally linear, stationary, and have Gaussian
statistics. A practical system, however, has many imperfections and non-linearities [4] (e.g., non-linear power amplifiers
(PAs), finite resolution quantization) that can only be approximately captured by such models. For this reason, a DL-based
communications system (or processing block) that does not
require a mathematically tractable model and that can be optimized for a specific hardware configuration and channel might
be able to better optimize for such imperfections.
Second, one of the guiding principles of communications
systems design is to split the signal processing into a chain
of multiple independent blocks; each executing a well defined
and isolated function (e.g., source/channel coding, modulation,
channel estimation, equalization). Although this approach has
led to the efficient, versatile, and controllable systems we have
today, it is not clear that individually optimized processing
blocks achieve the best possible end-to-end performance. For
example, the separation of source and channel coding for many
practical channels and short block lengths (see [10] and references therein) as well as separate coding and modulation [11]
are known to be sub-optimal. Attempts to jointly optimize
each of these components, e.g., based on factor graphs [12],
provide gains but lead to unwieldy and computationally complex systems. A learned end-to-end communications system,
however, does not require such a rigid modular structure as it
is optimized for end-to-end performance.
Third, it has been shown that NNs are universal function
approximators [13] and recent work has shown a remarkable
capacity for algorithmic learning with recurrent NNs [14] that
are known to be Turing-complete [15]. Since the execution
of NNs can be highly parallelized on concurrent architectures
and implemented with low-precision data types [16], there is

Applications of ML in communications have a long history
covering a wide range of applications. These comprise channel
modeling and prediction, localization, equalization, decoding,
quantization, compression, demodulation, modulation recognition, and spectrum sensing, to name a few [19], [20] (and
references therein). However, to the best of our knowledge and
due to the reasons mentioned above, few of these applications
have been commonly adopted or led to a wide commercial
success. It is also interesting that essentially all of these applications focus on individual receiver processing tasks alone,
while the consideration of the transmitter or a full end-to-end
system is entirely missing in the literature.
The advent of open-source DL libraries (see Section II-B)
and readily available specialized hardware along with the
astonishing progress of DL in computer vision have stimulated
renewed interest in the application of DL for communications
and networking [21] (and other papers in the special issue).
There are currently essentially two different main approaches
of applying DL to the physical layer. The goal is to either
improve/augment parts of existing algorithms with DL, or to
completely replace them.
Among the papers trying to improve existing algorithms
are [22]–[24] that consider belief propagation channel decoding and multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) detection,
respectively. These works are inspired by the idea of deep
unfolding [25] of existing iterative algorithms by essentially
interpreting each iteration as a set of NN layers. In a similar
manner, [26] aims at improving the solution of sparse linear
inverse problems with DL.
The approach of replacing existing algorithms through
DL is adopted in [27], dealing with blind detection for
MIMO systems with low-resolution quantization, and [28],
in which detection for molecular communications for which
no mathematical channel model exists is studied. The idea
of learning to solve complex optimization tasks for wireless resource allocation is investigated in [29]. Some of us
have obtained initial results in the area of learned end-to-end
communications systems [30] and considered the problems

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

O’SHEA AND HOYDIS: INTRODUCTION TO DL FOR PHYSICAL LAYER

565

of modulation recognition [31], signal compression [32], and
channel decoding [33], [34] with state-of-the art DL tools.
Notations: We use boldface upper- and lower-case letters
to denote matrices and column vectors, respectively. For a
vector x, xi denotes its ith element, x its Euclidean norm,
xT its transpose, and x  y the element-wise product with
y. For a matrix X, Xij or [X]ij denotes the (i, j)-element. R
and C denote the sets of real and complex numbers, respectively. N (m, R) and CN (m, R) are the multivariate Gaussian
and complex Gaussian distributions with mean vector m and
covariance matrix R, respectively. Bern(α) is the Bernoulli
distribution with success probability α and ∇ is the gradient
operator.

TABLE I
L IST OF L AYER T YPES

TABLE II
L IST OF ACTIVATION F UNCTIONS

II. D EEP L EARNING BASICS
A feedforward NN (or multilayer perceptron (MLP)) with
L layers describes a mapping f (r0 ; θ ) : RN0 → RNL of an
input vector r0 ∈ RN0 to an output vector rL ∈ RNL through L
iterative processing steps:
r = f (r−1 ; θ ),

 = 1, . . . , L

(1)

where f (r−1 ; θ ) : RN−1 → RN is the mapping carried
out by the th layer. This mapping depends not only on the
output vector r−1 from the previous layer but also on a set
of parameters θ . Moreover, the mapping can be stochastic,
i.e., f can be a function of some random variables. We use
θ = {θ1 , . . . , θL } to denote the set of all parameters of the
network. The th layer is called dense or fully-connected if
f (r−1 ; θ ) has the form
f (r−1 ; θ ) = σ (W r−1 + b )

(2)

where W ∈ RN ×N−1 , b ∈ RN , and σ (·) is an activation function which we will be defined shortly. The set of
parameters for this layer is θ = {W , b }. Table I lists several other layer types together with their mapping functions
and parameters which are used in this manuscript. All layers with stochastic mappings generate a new random mapping
each time they are called. For example, the noise layer simply
adds a Gaussian noise vector with zero mean and covariance
matrix βIN−1 to the input. Thus, it generates a different output for the same input each time it is called. The activation
function σ (·) in (2) introduces a non-linearity which is important for the so-called expressive power of the NN. Without
this non-linearity there would be not much of an advantage of
stacking multiple layers on top of each other. Generally, the
activation function is applied individually to each element of
its input vector, i.e., [σ (u)]i = σ (ui ). Some commonly used
activation functions are listed in Table II. NNs are generally
trained using labeled training data, i.e., a set of input-output
vector pairs (r0,i , rL,i ), i = 1, . . . , S, where rL,i is the desired
output of the neural network when r0,i is used as input. The
goal of the training process is to minimize the loss

1  
L(θ ) =
l rL,i , rL,i
S

TABLE III
L IST OF L OSS F UNCTIONS

is the output of the NN when r0,i is used as input. Several
relevant loss functions are provided in Table III. Different
norms (e.g., L1, L2) of parameters or activations can be
added to the loss function to favor solutions with small or
sparse values (a form of regularization). The most popular
algorithm to find good sets of parameters θ is stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) which starts with some random initial
values of θ = θ 0 and then updates θ iteratively as
θ t+1 = θ t − η∇ L̃(θ t )

(4)

where η > 0 is the learning rate and L̃(θ) is an approximation
of the loss function which is computed for a random minibatch of training examples St ⊂ {1, 2, . . . , S} of size St at
each iteration, i.e.,

1   
L̃(θ) =
(5)
l rL,i , rL,i .
St
i∈St

By choosing St small compared to S, the gradient computation complexity is significantly reduced while still reducing
weight update variance. Note that there are many variants of
the SGD algorithm which dynamically adapt the learning rate
to improve convergence [35, Ch. 8.5]. The gradient in (4)
can be very efficiently computed through the backpropagation algorithm [35, Ch. 6.5]. Definition and training of NNs
of almost arbitrary shape can be done with one of the many
existing DL libraries presented in Section II-B.
A. Convolutional Layers

S

(3)

Convolutional neural network (CNN) layers were introduced
in [6] to provide an efficient learning method for 2D images.

with respect to the parameters in θ , where
l(u, v) : RNL × RNL → R is the loss function and rL,i

1 The linear activation function is typically used at the output layer in the
context of regression tasks, i.e., estimation of a real-valued vector.

i=1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2017

By tying adjacent shifts of the same weights together in a
way similar to that of a filter sliding across an input vector,
convolutional layers are able to force the learning of features
with an invariance to shifts in the input. In doing so, they
also greatly reduce the model complexity (as measured by
the number of free parameters in the layer’s weight matrix)
required to represent equivalent shift-invariant features using
fully connected layers, reduce SGD optimization complexity,
and improve generalization on appropriate datasets.
In general, a convolutional layer consists of a set of F filter
weights Qf ∈ Ra×b , f = 1, . . . , F (F is called the depth),
which generate each a so-called feature map Yf ∈ Rn ×m
from an input matrix X ∈ Rn×m according to the following
convolution2 :
f

Yi,j =

a−1 
b−1


f

Qa−k,b− X1+s(i−1)−k,1+s(j−1)−

(6)

k=0 =0

where s ≥ 1 is an integer parameter called stride, n =
and m = 1 + m+b−2
, and it is assumed that
1 + n+a−2
s
s
/ [1, n] and
X is padded with zeros, i.e., Xi,j = 0 for all i ∈
j∈
/ [1, m]. The output dimensions can be reduced by either
increasing the stride s or by adding a pooling layer. The pooling layer partitions Y into p × p regions for each of which
it computes a single output value, e.g., maximum or average
value, or L2-norm.
For example, taking a vectorized grayscale image input consisting of 28 × 28 pixels and connecting it to a dense layer
with the same number of activations, results in a single weight
matrix with 784 × 784 = 614, 656 free parameters. However,
if we use a convolutional feature map containing six filters
each sized 5 × 5 pixels, we obtain a much reduced number
of free parameters of 6 · 5 · 5 = 150. For the right kind of
dataset, this technique can be extremely effective. We will see
an application of convolutional layers in Section III-D. For
more details on CNNs, we refer to [35, Ch. 9].
B. Deep Learning Libraries
In recent times, numerous tools and algorithms have
emerged that make it easy to build and train large NNs. Tools
to deploy such training routines from high level language to
massively parallel GPU architectures have been key enablers.
Among these are Caffe [38], MXNet [39], TensorFlow [40],
Theano [41], and Torch [42] (just to name a few), which allow
for high level algorithm definition in various programming
languages or configuration files, automatic differentiation of
training loss functions through arbitrarily large networks, and
compilation of the network’s forwards and backwards passes
into hardware optimized concurrent dense matrix algebra kernels. Keras [43] provides an additional layer of NN primitives
with Theano and TensorFlow as its back-end. It has a highly
customizable interface to quickly experiment with and deploy
deep NNs, and has become our primary tool used to generate
the numerical results for this manuscript [44].
2 In image processing, X is commonly a three-dimensional tensor with the

third dimension corresponding to color channels. The filters’ weights are also
three-dimensional and work on all input channels simultaneously.

Fig. 1. A simple communications system consisting of a transmitter and a
receiver connected through a channel.

C. Network Dimensions and Training
The term “deep” has become common in recent NN literature, referring to the number of sequential layers within a
network (but also more generally to the methods commonly
used to train such networks). Depth relates directly to the number of iterative operations performed on input data through
sequential layers’ transfer functions. While deep networks
allow for numerous iterative transforms on the data, a minimum latency network would likely be as shallow as possible.
“Width” is used to describe the number of output activations
per layer, or for all layers on average, and relates directly to
the memory required by each layer.
Best practice training methods have varied over the years,
from direct solution techniques over gradient descent to
genetic algorithms, each having been favored or considered at
one time (see [35, Ch. 1.2] for a short history of DL). Layerby-layer pre-training [45] was also a recently popular method
for scaling training to larger networks where backpropagation
once struggled. However, most systems today are able to train
networks which are both wide and deep directly using backpropagation and SGD methods with adaptive learning rates
(e.g., Adam [46]), regularization methods to prevent overfitting
(e.g., Dropout [36]), and activations functions which reduce
gradient issues (e.g., ReLU [37]).
III. E XAMPLES OF M ACHINE L EARNING A PPLICATIONS
FOR THE P HYSICAL L AYER
In this section, we will show how to represent an end-toend communications system as an autoencoder and train it via
SGD. This idea is then extended to multiple transmitters and
receivers and we study as an example the two-user interference
channel. We will then introduce the concept of RTNs to
improve performance on fading channels, and demonstrate the
application of CNNs to raw radio frequency time-series data
for the task of modulation classification.
A. Autoencoders for End-to-End Communications
Systems
In its simplest form, a communications system consists of a
transmitter, a channel, and a receiver, as shown in Fig. 1. The
transmitter wants to communicate one out of M possible messages s ∈ M = {1, 2, . . . , M} to the receiver making n discrete
uses of the channel. To this end, it applies the transformation
f : M → Rn to the message s to generate the transmitted signal x = f (s) ∈ Rn .3 Generally, the hardware of the transmitter
imposes certain constraints on x, e.g., an energy constraint
3 We focus here on real-valued signals only. Extensions to complex-valued
signals are discussed in Section IV. Alternatively, one can consider a mapping
to R2n , which can be interpreted as a concatenation of the real and imaginary
parts of x. This approach is adopted in Sections III-B–III-D.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

O’SHEA AND HOYDIS: INTRODUCTION TO DL FOR PHYSICAL LAYER

567

Fig. 2. A communications system over an AWGN channel represented as an autoencoder. The input s is encoded as a one-hot vector, the output is a
probability distribution over all possible messages from which the most likely is picked as output ŝ.

x22 ≤ n, an amplitude
|xi | ≤ 1 ∀i, or an aver constraint

age power constraint E |xi |2 ≤ 1 ∀i. The communication rate
of this communications system is R = k/n [bit/channel use],
where k = log2 (M). In the sequel, the notation (n,k) means that
a communications system sends one out of M = 2k messages
(i.e., k bits) through n channel uses. The channel is described
by the conditional probability density function p(y|x), where
y ∈ Rn denotes the received signal. Upon reception of y, the
receiver applies the transformation g : Rn → M to produce
the estimate ŝ of the transmitted message s.
From a DL point of view, this simple communications
system can be seen as a particular type of autoencoder
[35, Ch. 14]. Typically, the goal of an autoencoder is to
find a low-dimensional representation of its input at some
intermediate layer which allows reconstruction at the output
with minimal error. In this way, the autoencoder learns to nonlinearly compress and reconstruct the input. In our case, the
purpose of the autoencoder is different. It seeks to learn representations x of the messages s that are robust with respect
to the channel impairments mapping x to y (i.e., noise, fading,
distortion, etc.), so that the transmitted message can be recovered with small probability of error. In other words, while most
autoencoders remove redundancy from input data for compression, this autoencoder (the “channel autoencoder”) often adds
redundancy, learning an intermediate representation robust to
channel perturbations.
An example of such an autoencoder is shown in Fig. 2. Here,
the transmitter consists of a feedforward NN with multiple
dense layers followed by a normalization layer that ensures
that physical constraints on x are met. Note that the input s to
the transmitter is encoded as a one-hot vector 1s ∈ RM , i.e.,
an M-dimensional vector, the sth element of which is equal
to one and zero otherwise. The channel is represented by an
additive noise layer with a fixed variance β = (2REb /N0 )−1 ,
where Eb /N0 denotes the energy per bit (Eb ) to noise power
spectral density (N0 ) ratio. The receiver is also implemented
as a feedforward NN. Its last layer uses a softmax activation whose output p ∈ (0, 1)M is a probability vector over all
possible messages. The decoded message ŝ corresponds then
to the index of the element of p with the highest probability.

The autoencoder can then be trained end-to-end using SGD on
the set of all possible messages s ∈ M using the well suited
categorical cross-entropy loss function between 1s and p.4
Fig. 3a compares the block error rate (BLER), i.e.,
Pr(ŝ = s), of a communications system employing binary
phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation and a Hamming (7,4)
code with either binary hard-decision decoding or maximum
likelihood decoding (MLD) against the BLER achieved by
the trained autoencoder (7,4) (with fixed energy constraint
x22 = n). Both systems operate at rate R = 4/7. For comparison, we also provide the BLER of uncoded BPSK (4,4).
This result shows that the autoencoder has learned without
any prior knowledge an encoder and decoder function that
together achieve the same performance as the Hamming (7,4)
code with MLD. The layout of the autoencoder is provided
in Table IV. Although a single layer can represent the same
mapping from message index to corresponding transmit vector,
our experiments have shown that SGD converges to a better
global solution using two transmit layers instead of one. This
increased dimension parameter search space may actually help
to reduce likelihood of convergence to sub-optimal minima by
making such solutions more likely to emerge as saddle points
during optimization [47]. Training was done at a fixed value
of Eb /N0 = 7 dB (see Section IV-B) using Adam [46] with
learning rate 0.001. We have observed that increasing the batch
size while reducing the learning rate during training helps to
improve accuracy. For all other implementation details, we
refer to the source code [44].
Fig. 3b shows a similar comparison but for an (8,8) and
(2,2) communications system, i.e., R = 1. Surprisingly, while
the autoencoder achieves the same BLER as uncoded BPSK
for (2,2), it outperforms the latter for (8,8) over the full range
of Eb /N0 . This implies that it has learned some joint coding
and modulation scheme, such that a coding gain is achieved.
For a truly fair comparison, this result should be compared to
4 A more memory-efficient approach to implement this architecture is by
replacing the one-hot encoded input and the first dense layer by an embedding
that turns message indices into vectors. The loss function can then be replaced
by the sparse categorical cross-entropy that accepts message indices rather
than one-hot vectors as labels. This was done in our experiments [44].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

568

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2017

BLER versus Eb /N0 for the autoencoder and several baseline communication schemes.

a higher-order modulation scheme using a channel code (or
the optimal sphere packing in eight dimensions). A detailed
performance comparison for various channel types and parameters (n, k) with different baselines is out of the scope of this
paper and left to future investigations.
Fig. 4 shows the learned representations x of all messages for different values of (n, k) as complex constellation
points, i.e., the x- and y-axes correspond to the first an second transmitted symbols, respectively. In Fig. 4d for (7, 4), we
depict the seven-dimensional message representations using a
two-dimensional t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding
(t-SNE) [48] of the noisy observations y instead. Fig. 4a shows
the simple (2, 2) system which converges rapidly to a classical
quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) constellation with some
arbitrary rotation. Similarly, Fig. 4b shows a (4, 2) system
which leads to a rotated 16-PSK constellation. The impact
of the chosen normalization becomes clear from Fig. 4c for
the same parameters but with an average power normalization
instead of a fixed energy constraint (that forces the symbols
to lie on the unit circle). This results in an interesting mixed
pentagonal/hexagonal grid arrangement (with indistinguishable BLER performance from 16-QAM). The constellation has
a symbol in the origin surrounded by five equally spaced nearest neighbors, each of which has six almost equally spaced
neighbors. Fig. 4d for (7, 4) shows that the t-SNE embedding
of y leads to a similarly shaped arrangement of clusters.
The examples of this section treat the communication task
as a classification problem and the representation of s by an
M-dimensional vector becomes quickly impractical for large
M. To circumvent this problem, it is possible to use more
compact representations of s such as a binary vector with
log2 (M) dimensions. In this case, output activation functions
such as sigmoid and loss functions such as MSE or binary
cross-entropy are more appropriate. Nevertheless, scaling such
an architecture to very large values of M remains challenging
due to the size of the training set and model. We recall that a
very important property of the autoencoder is also that it can

Fig. 4. Constellations produced by autoencoders using parameters (n, k):
(a) (2, 2) (b) (2, 4), (c) (2, 4) with average power constraint, (d) (7, 4)
2-dimensional t-SNE embedding of received symbols.

learn to communicate over any channel, even for which no
information-theoretically optimal scheme is known.
B. Autoencoders for Multiple Transmitters and Receivers
The autoencoder concept from Section III-A, can be readily extended to multiple transmitters and receivers that share
a common channel. As an example, we consider here the
two-user AWGN interference channel as shown in Fig. 5.
Transmitter 1 wants to communicate message s1 ∈ M to
Receiver 1 while Transmitter 2 wants to communicate message s2 ∈ M to Receiver 2. Extensions to K users with possibly
different rates, i.e., sk ∈ Mk ∀k, as well as to other channel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

O’SHEA AND HOYDIS: INTRODUCTION TO DL FOR PHYSICAL LAYER

569

Fig. 5. The two-user interference channel seen as a combination of two
interfering autoencoders that try to reconstruct their respective messages.
TABLE IV
L AYOUT OF THE AUTOENCODER U SED IN F IGS . 3a AND 3b. I T H AS
(2M + 1)(M + n) + 2M T RAINABLE PARAMETERS , R ESULTING IN 62,
791, AND 135,944 PARAMETERS FOR THE (2,2), (7,4), AND (8,8)
AUTOENCODER , R ESPECTIVELY

Fig. 6. BLER versus Eb /N0 for the two-user interference channel achieved
by the autoencoder (AE) and 22k/n -QAM time-sharing (TS) for different
parameters (n, k).

adopted dynamic weights αt for each mini-batch t:
types are straightforward. Both transmitter-receiver pairs are
implemented as NNs and the only difference with respect to
the autoencoder from the last section is that the transmitted
messages x1 , x2 ∈ Cn now interfere at the receivers, resulting
in the noisy observations
y1 = x1 + x2 + n1
y2 = x2 + x1 + n2

(7)
(8)

where n1 , n1 ∼ CN (0, βIn ) is Gaussian noise. For simplicity, we have adopted the complex-valued notation, rather than
considering real-valued vectors of size 2n. That is, the notation (n, k) means each of the 2k messages is transmitted over
n complex-valued channel uses. Denote by
  
l1 = − log ŝ1 s ,
1

  
l2 = − log ŝ2 s
2

(9)

the individual cross-entropy loss functions of the first and
second transmitter-receiver pair, respectively, and by L̃1 (θ t ),
L̃2 (θ t ) the associated losses for mini-batch t (see (5)). In
such a context, it is less clear how one should train two
coupled autoencoders with conflicting goals. One approach
consists of minimizing a weighted sum of both losses, i.e.,
L̃ = α L̃1 + (1 − α)L̃2 for some α ∈ [0, 1]. If one would minimize L̃1 alone (i.e., α = 1), Transmitter 2 would learn to
transmit a constant signal independent of s2 that Receiver 1
could simply subtract from y1 . The opposite is true for α = 0.
However, giving equal weight to both losses (i.e., α = 0.5)
does not necessarily result in equal performance. We have
observed in our experiments that it generally leads to highly
unfair and suboptimal solutions. For this reason, we have

αt+1 =

L̃1 (θ t )
L̃1 (θ t ) + L̃2 (θ t )

,

t>0

(10)

where α0 = 0.5. Thus, the smaller L̃1 (θ t ) is compared to
L̃2 (θ t ), the smaller is its weight αt+1 for the next mini-batch.
There are many other possibilities to train such a system and
we do not claim any optimality of our approach. However, it
has led in our experiments to the desired result of identical
BLERs for both transmitter-receiver pairs.
Fig. 6 shows the BLER of one of the autoencoders (denoted
by AE) as a function of Eb /N0 for the sets of parameters
(n, k) = {(1, 1), (2, 2), (4, 4), (4, 8)}. The NN-layout for both
autoencoders is that provided in Table IV by replacing n by
2n. We have used an average power constraint to be competitive with higher-order modulation schemes (see Fig. 4c).
As a baseline for comparison, we provide the BLER of
uncoded 22k/n -QAM that has the same rate when used together
with time-sharing (TS) between both transmitters.5 While the
autoencoder and time-sharing have identical BLERs for (1, 1)
and (2, 2), the former achieves substantial gains of around
0.7 dB for (4, 4) and 1 dB for (4, 8) at a BLER of 10−3 . The
reasons for this are similar to those explained in Section III-A.
It is interesting to have a look at the learned message
representations which are shown in Fig. 7. For (1, 1), the
transmitters have learned to use binary phase shift keying
(BPSK)-like constellations in orthogonal directions (with an
arbitrary rotation around the origin). This achieves the same
performance as QPSK with time-sharing. However, for (2, 2),
the learned constellations are not orthogonal anymore and can
be interpreted as some form of super-position coding. For the
5 For (1, 1), (2, 2), and (4, 4), each transmitter sends a 4-QAM (i.e., QPSK)
symbol on every other channel use. For (4, 8), 16-QAM is used instead.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2017

Fig. 7. Learned constellations for the two-user interference channel with
parameters (a) (1, 1), (b) (2, 2), (c) (4, 4), and (d) (4, 8). The constellation
points of Transmitter 1 and 2 are represented by red dots and black crosses,
respectively.

first symbol, Transmitter 1 uses high power and Transmitter 2
low power. For the second symbol, the roles are changed.
For (4, 4) and (4, 8), the constellations are more difficult
to interpret, but we can see that the constellations of both
transmitters resemble ellipses with orthogonal major axes and
varying focal distances. This effect is more visible for (4, 8)
than for (4, 4) because of the increased number of constellation points. An in-depth study of learned constellations and
how they are impacted by the chosen normalization and NN
weight initializations is out of the scope of this paper but a
very interesting topic of future investigations.
We would like to point out that one can also consider other
types of multi-transmitter/receiver communications systems
with this approach. These comprise, the general multiple
access channel (MAC) and broadcast channel (BC), as well as
systems with jammers and eavesdroppers. As soon as some of
the transmitters and receivers are non-cooperative, adversarial
training strategies could be adopted (see [49], [50]).
C. Radio Transformer Networks for Augmented Signal
Processing Algorithms
Many of the physical phenomena undergone in a communications channel and in transceiver hardware can be
inverted using compact parametric models/transformations.
Widely used transformations include re-sampling to estimated
symbol/clock timing, mixing with an estimated carrier tone,
and convolving with an inverse channel impulse response. The
estimation processes for parameters to seed these transformations (e.g., frequency offset, symbol timing, impulse response)
is often very involved and specialized based on signal specific
properties and/or information from pilot tones (see [3]).
One way of augmenting DL models with expert propagation domain knowledge but not signal specific assumptions is
through the use of an RTN as shown in Fig. 8. This RTN

could be used in place of the receiver shown in Fig. 2. An
RTN consists of three parts: (i) a learned parameter estimator
gω : Rn → Rp which computes a parameter vector ω ∈ Rp
from its input y, (ii) a parametric transform t : Rn ×Rp → Rn
that applies a deterministic (and differentiable) function to
y which is parameterized by ω and suited to the propagation phenomena, and (iii) a learned discriminative network
g : Rn → M which produces the estimate ŝ of the transmitted
message (or other label information) from the canonicalized
input y ∈ Rn . By allowing the parameter estimator gω to
take the form of an NN, we can train the system end-toend to optimize for a given loss function. Importantly, the
training process of such an RTN does not seek to directly
improve the parameter estimation itself but rather optimizes
the way the parameters are estimated to obtain the best endto-end performance (e.g., BLER). While the example above
describes an RTN for receiver-side processing, it can similarly be used wherever parametric transformations seeded
by estimated parameters are needed. RTNs are a form of
learned feed-forward attention inspired by Spatial Transformer
Networks (STNs) [51] which have worked well for computer
vision problems.
The basic functioning of an RTN is best understood from
a simple example, such as the problem of phase offset estimation and compensation. Let yc = ejϕ ỹc ∈ Cn be a vector
of IQ samples that have undergone a phase rotation by the
phase offset ϕ, and let y = [{y}T , {y}T ]T ∈ R2n . The goal
of gω is to estimate a scalar ϕ̂ = ω = gω (y) that is close
to the phase offset ϕ, which is then used by the parametric
transform t to compute ȳc = e−jϕ̂ yc . The canonicalized signal
ȳ = [{ȳc }T , {ȳc }T ]T is thus given by
ȳ = t(ϕ̂, y) =

cos(ϕ̂){ȳc } + sin(ϕ̂){ȳc }
cos(ϕ̂){ȳc } − sin(ϕ̂){ȳc }

(11)

and then fed into the discriminative network g for further
processing, such as classification.
A compelling example demonstrating the advantages of
RTNs is shown in Fig. 9 which compares the BLER of an
autoencoder (8,4) with and without RTN over a multipath
fading channel with L = 3 channel taps. We assume complexvalued channel uses, so that transmitter and receiver have
2n real-valued inputs and outputs. The received signal y =
[{yc }T , {yc }T ]T ∈ R2n is given as
yc,i =

L


hc, xc,i−+1 + nc,i

(12)

=1

where hc ∼ CN (0, L−1 IL ) are i.i.d. Rayleigh fading channel
taps, nc ∼ CN (0, (REb /N0 )−1 In ) is receiver noise, and xc ∈
Cn is the transmitted signal, where we assume in (12) xc,i = 0
for i ≤ 0. Here, the goal of the parameter estimator is to
predict a complex-valued vector ωc (represented by 2L real
values) that is used in the transformation layer to compute the
complex convolution of yc with ωc . Thus, the RTN tries to
equalize the channel output through inverse filtering in order
to simplify the task of the discriminative network. We have
implemented the estimator as an NN with two dense layers
with tanh activations followed by a dense output layer with
linear activations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

O’SHEA AND HOYDIS: INTRODUCTION TO DL FOR PHYSICAL LAYER

571

Fig. 8. A radio receiver represented as an RTN. The input y first runs through a parameter estimation network gω (y), has a known transform t(y, ω) applied
to generate the canonicalized signal y, and then is classified in the discriminative network g(y) to produce the output ŝ.

Fig. 9. BLER versus Eb /N0 for various communication schemes over a
channel with L = 3 Rayleigh fading taps.

While the plain autoencoder struggles to meet the
performance of differential BPSK (DBPSK) with maximum
likelihood sequence estimation (MLE) and a Hamming (7,4)
code, the autoencoder with RTN outperforms it. Another
advantage of RTNs is faster training convergence which can
be seen from Fig. 10 that compares the validation loss of
the autoencoder with and without RTN as a function of the
training epochs. We have observed in our experiments that
the autoencoder with RTN consistently outperforms the plain
autoencoder, independently of the chosen hyper-parameters.
However, the performance differences diminish when the
encoder and decoder networks are made wider and trained
for more iterations. Although there is theoretically nothing an
RTN-augmented NN can do that a plain NN cannot, the RTN
helps by incorporating domain knowledge to simplify the target manifold, similar to the role of convolutional layers in
imparting translation invariance where appropriate. This leads
to a simpler search space and improved generalization.

Fig. 10.

Autoencoder training loss with and without RTN.

The autoencoder and RTN as presented above can be
extended through minor modifications to operate directly on
IQ samples rather than symbols to effectively deal with
problems such as pulse shaping, timing-, frequency- and
phase-offset compensation. This is an exciting and promising area of research that we leave to future investigations.
Interesting applications of this approach could also arise in
optical communications dealing with highly non-linear channel impairments that are notoriously difficult to model and
compensate for [52].
D. CNNs for Classification Tasks
Many signal processing functions within the physical layer
can be learned as either regression or classification tasks. Here
we look at the well-known problem of modulation classification of single carrier modulation schemes based on sampled
radio frequency time-series data, i.e., IQ samples. This task has
been accomplished for years through the approach of expert

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2017

TABLE V
L AYOUT OF THE CNN FOR M ODULATION C LASSIFICATION
W ITH 324,330 T RAINABLE PARAMETERS

Fig. 12.

Fig. 11.

Classifier performance comparison versus SNR.

feature engineering and either analytic decision trees (single
trees are widely used in practice) or trained discrimination
methods operating on a compact feature space, such as support vector machines, random forests, or small feedforward
NNs [53]. Some recent methods take a step beyond this using
pattern recognition on expert feature maps, such as the spectral coherence function or α-profile, combined with NN-based
classification [54]. However, approaches to this point have not
sought to use feature learning on raw time-series data in the
radio domain. This is however now the norm in computer
vision which motivates our approach here.
As is widely done for image classification, we leverage a series of narrowing convolutional layers followed by
dense/fully-connected layers and terminated with a dense
softmax layer for our classifier (similar to a VGG architecture [55]). The layout is provided in Table V and we
refer to the source code [44] for implementation details. The
dataset6 for this benchmark consists of 1.2 M sequences of 128
complex-valued basedband IQ samples corresponding to ten
different digital and analog single-carrier modulation schemes
(AM, FM, PSK, QAM, etc.) that have gone through a wireless
channel with harsh impairments including multipath fading
and both clock and carrier rate offset [31]. The samples are
taken at 20 different SNRs within the range from −20 dB to
18 dB.
6 RML2016.10b—https://radioml.com/datasets/radioml-2016-10-dataset/.

Confusion matrix of the CNN (SNR = 10 dB).

In Fig. 11, we compare the classification accuracy of the
CNN against that of extreme gradient boosting7 with 1000
estimators, as well as a single scikit-learn decision tree [56],
operating on a mix of 16 analog and cumulant expert features
as proposed in [53] and [57]. The short-time nature of the
examples places this task on the difficult end of the modulation
classification spectrum since we cannot compute expert features with high stability over long periods of time. The CNN
outperforms the boosted feature-based classifier by around
4 dB in the low to medium SNR range while the performance
at high SNR is similar. Performance in the single tree case is
about 6 dB worse than the CNN at medium SNR and 3.5 %
worse at high SNR. Fig. 12 shows the confusion matrix for
the CNN at SNR = 10 dB, revealing confusing cases between
QAM16 and QAM64 and between Wideband FM (WBFM)
and double-sideband AM (AM-DSB). Despite the high SNR,
classification is imperfect due to several other impairments
as described above. The distinction between AM-DSB and
WBFM is additionally complicated by the small observation window (0.64 ms of modulated speech per example) and
low information rate with frequent silence between words.
Discriminating between QAM16 and QAM64 also suffers
from short-time observations over only a few symbols since
constellations are higher order and share common points. The
accuracy of the feature-based classifier saturates at high SNR
for the same reasons, and neither classifier reaches a perfect
score on this dataset. George and Huerta [58] report on a successful application of a similar CNN for the detection of black
hole mergers in astrophysics from noisy time-series data.
IV. D ISCUSSION AND O PEN R ESEARCH C HALLENGES
A. Data Sets and Challenges
In order to compare the performance of ML models and
algorithms, it is crucial to have common benchmarks and open
datasets. While this is the rule in the computer vision, voice
7 At
the
time
of
writing
of
this
document,
XGB
(http://xgboost.readthedocs.io/) was together with CNNs the ML model
that consistently won competitions on the data-science platform Kaggle
(https://www.kaggle.com/).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

O’SHEA AND HOYDIS: INTRODUCTION TO DL FOR PHYSICAL LAYER

recognition, and natural language processing domains (e.g.,
MNIST8 or ImageNet,9 ) nothing comparable exists for communications. This domain is somewhat different because it
deals with inherently man-made signals that can be accurately
generated synthetically, allowing the possibility of standardizing data generation routines rather than just data in some
cases. It would be also desirable to establish a set of common
problems and the corresponding datasets (or data-generating
software) on which researchers can benchmark and compare
their algorithms. One such example task is modulation classification in Section III-D; others could include mapping of
impaired received IQ samples or symbols to codewords or
bits. Even “autoencoder competitions” could be held for a
standardized set of benchmark impairments, taking the form
of canonical “impairment layers” that would need to be made
available for some of the major DL libraries (see Section II-B).
B. Data Representation, Loss Functions, and Training SNR
As DL for communications is a new field, little is known
about optimal data representations, loss-functions, and training strategies. For example, binary signals can be represented
as binary or one-hot vectors, modulated (complex) symbols,
or integers, and the optimal representation might depend
among other factors of the NN architecture, learning objective, and loss function. In decoding problems, for instance,
one would have the choice between plain channel observations or (clipped) log-likelihood ratios. In general, it seems
that there is a representation which is most suited to solve a
particular task via an NN. Similarly, it is not obvious at which
SNR(s) DL processing blocks should be trained. It is clearly
desirable that a learned system operates at any SNR, regardless at which SNR or SNR-range it was trained. However,
we have observed that this is generally not the case. Training
at low SNR for instance does not allow for the discovery of
structure important in higher SNR scenarios. Training across
wide ranges of SNR can also severely effect training time.
George and Huerta [58] have observed that starting off the
training at high SNR and then gradually lowering it with each
epoch led to significant performance improvements for their
application. A related question is the optimal choice of loss
function. In Sections III-A–III-C, we have treated communications as a classification problem for which the categorical
cross-entropy is a common choice. However, for alternate output data representations, the choice is less obvious. Applying
an inappropriate loss function can lead to poor results.
Choosing the right NN architecture and training parameters for SGD (such as mini-batch size and learning rate) are
also important practical questions for which no satisfying hard
rules exist. Some guidelines can be found in [35, Ch. 11],
but methods for how to select such hyper-parameters are currently an active area of research and investigation in the DL
world. Examples include architecture search guided by hypergradients and differential hyper-parameters [59] as well as
genetic algorithm or particle swarm style optimization [60].

573

C. Complex-Valued Neural Networks
Owing to the widely used complex baseband representation,
we typically deal with complex numbers in communications.
Most related signal processing algorithms rely on phase rotations, complex conjugates, absolute values, etc. For this reason,
it would be desirable to have NNs operate on complex rather
than real numbers [61]. However, none of the previously
described DL libraries (see Section II-B) currently support
this due to several reasons. First, it is possible to represent all
mathematical operations in the complex domain with a purely
real-valued NN of twice the size, i.e., each complex number
is simply represented by two real values. For example, an NN
with a scalar complex input and output connected through a
single complex weight, i.e., y = wx, where y, w, x ∈ C, can be
represented as a real-valued NN y = Wx, where the vectors
y, x ∈ R2 contain the real and imaginary parts of y and x in
each dimension and W ∈ R2×2 is a weight matrix. Note that
the real-valued version of this NN has four parameters while
the complex-valued version has only two. Second, a complication arises in complex-valued NNs since traditional loss
and activation functions are generally not holomorphic so that
their gradients are not defined. A solution to this problem is
Wirtinger calculus [62]. Although complex-valued NNs might
be simpler to train and consume less memory, we currently
believe that they do not provide any significant advantage in
terms of expressive power. Nevertheless, we keep them as an
interesting topic for future research.
D. ML-Augmented Signal Processing
The biggest challenge of learned end-to-end communications systems is that of scalability to large message sets M .
Already for k = 100 bits, i.e., M = 2100 possible messages,
the training complexity is prohibitive since the autoencoder
must see at least every message once. Also naive neural channel decoders (as studied in [33]) suffer from this “curse of
dimensionality” since they need to be trained on all possible codewords. Thus, rather than switching immediately to
learned end-to-end communications systems or fully replacing certain algorithms by NNs, one more gradual approach
might be that of augmenting only specific sub-tasks with DL.
A very interesting approach in this context is deep unfolding
of existing iterative algorithms outlined in [25]. This approach
offers the potential to leverage additional side information
from training data to improve an existing signal processing
algorithm. It has been recently applied in the context of channel decoding and MIMO detection [22]–[24]. For instance
in [22], it was shown that training with a single codeword
is sufficient since the structure of the code is embedded in
the NN through the Tanner graph. The concept of RTNs as
presented in Section III-C is another way of incorporating both
side information from existing models along with information
derived from a rich dataset into a DL algorithm to improve
performance while reducing model and training complexity.
E. System Identification for End-to-End Learning

8 http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
9 http://www.image-net.org/

In Sections III-A–III-C, we have tacitly assumed that
the transfer function of the channel is known so that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 3, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2017

backpropagation algorithm can compute its gradient. For
example, for a Rayleigh fading channel, the autoencoder needs
to know during the training phase the exact realization of the
channel coefficients to compute how a slight change in the
transmitted signal x impacts the received signal y. While this
is straightforward for simulated systems, it poses a major challenge for end-to-end learning over real channels and hardware.
In essence, the hardware and channel together form a blackbox whose input and output can be observed, but for which
no exact analytic expression is known a priori. Constructing
a model for a black box from data is called system identification [63], which is widely used in control theory. Transfer
learning [64] is one appealing candidate for adapting an endto-end communications system trained on a statistical model to
a real-world implementation which has worked well in other
domains (e.g., computer vision). An important related question is that of how one can learn a general model for a wide
range of communication scenarios and tasks that would avoid
retraining from scratch for every individual setting.
F. Feedback, CSI, and Privacy
Feedback is a fundamental enabler in many adaptive communications systems (e.g., adaptive modulation and coding
(ACM)), while accurate channel state information (CSI) is
needed for multi-user MIMO communications. For this reason, current cellular communication systems invest significant
resources (energy and time) in the acquisition and feedback
of CSI. In this work, we consider only learned physical
layer schemes that can cope with, but do not adapt to timevarying channels. However, in [50], the concept of learning
information encoder and decoder which adapt to a variable
key to provide privacy is introduced. A similar approach
could be used to provide privacy at the physical layer and to
extend the channel autoencoder to support learning schemes
with CSI feedback. Finally, CSI is generally only used for
precoding and mode selection, rather than being further analyzed to extract information. Storing and analyzing large
amounts of CSI (or other radio data)—possibly enriched with
location information—poses significant potential for revealing
novel big-data-driven physical-layer understanding algorithms
beyond immediate radio environment needs. New applications
outside the traditional scope of communications, such as tracking and identification of humans (through walls) [65] as well
as gesture and emotion recognition [66], could be achieved
using ML on radio signals.
V. C ONCLUSION
We have discussed several promising new applications of
DL to the physical layer. Most importantly, we have introduced
a new way of thinking about communications as an end-to-end
reconstruction optimization task using autoencoders to jointly
learn transmitter and receiver implementations as well as
signal encodings without any prior knowledge. Comparisons
with traditional baselines in various scenarios reveal extremely
competitive BLER performance, although the scalability to
long block lengths remains a challenge. Apart from potential
performance improvements in terms of reliability or latency,

our approach can provide interesting insight about the optimal
communication schemes (e.g., constellations) in scenarios
where the optimal schemes are unknown (e.g., interference
channel). We believe that this is the beginning of a wide range
of studies into DL and ML for communications and are excited
at the possibilities this could lend towards future wireless communications systems as the field matures. For now, there are
a great number of open problems to solve and practical gains
to be had. We have identified important key areas of future
investigation and highlighted the need for benchmark problems and data sets that can be used to compare performance
of different ML models and algorithms.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice,
2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[2] R. M. Gagliardi and S. Karp, Optical Communications, 2nd ed.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1995.
[3] H. Meyr, M. Moeneclaey, and S. A. Fechtel, Digital Communication
Receivers: Synchronization, Channel Estimation, and Signal Processing.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1998.
[4] T. Schenk, RF Imperfections in High-Rate Wireless Systems: Impact and
Digital Compensation. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 2008.
[5] J. Proakis and M. Salehi, Digital Communications, 5th ed. Boston, MA,
USA: McGraw-Hill Educ., 2007.
[6] Y. LeCun, “Generalization and network design strategies,” in
Connectionism in Perspective. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
North-Holland, 1989, pp. 143–155.
[7] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Santiago, Chile, 2015,
pp. 1026–1034.
[8] D. G. Lowe, “Object recognition from local scale-invariant features,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 1999, pp. 1150–1157.
[9] Z. S. Harris, “Distributional structure,” Word, vol. 10, nos. 2–3,
pp. 146–162, 1954.
[10] A. Goldsmith, “Joint source/channel coding for wireless channels,”
in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., vol. 2. Chicago, IL, USA, 1995,
pp. 614–618.
[11] E. Zehavi, “8-PSK trellis codes for a Rayleigh channel,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 873–884, May 1992.
[12] H. Wymeersch, Iterative Receiver Design, vol. 234. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007.
[13] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, “Multilayer feedforward
networks are universal approximators,” Neural Netw., vol. 2, no. 5,
pp. 359–366, 1989.
[14] S. Reed and N. de Freitas, “Neural programmer-interpreters,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.06279, 2015.
[15] H. T. Siegelmann and E. D. Sontag, “On the computational power of
neural nets,” in Proc. 5th Annu. Workshop Comput. Learn. Theory,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1992, pp. 440–449.
[16] V. Vanhoucke, A. Senior, and M. Z. Mao, “Improving the speed of neural
networks on CPUs,” in Proc. Deep Learn. Unsupervised Feature Learn.
NIPS Workshop, vol. 1. 2011, p. 4.
[17] Y.-H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, and V. Sze, “Eyeriss: An
energy-efficient reconfigurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural networks,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 127–138,
Jan. 2017.
[18] R. Raina, A. Madhavan, and A. Y. Ng, “Large-scale deep unsupervised learning using graphics processors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. (ICML), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2009, pp. 873–880.
[19] M. Ibnkahla, “Applications of neural networks to digital
communications—A survey,” Elsevier Signal Process., vol. 80,
no. 7, pp. 1185–1215, 2000.
[20] M. Bkassiny, Y. Li, and S. K. Jayaweera, “A survey on machine-learning
techniques in cognitive radios,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15,
no. 3, pp. 1136–1159, 3rd Quart., 2013.
[21] M. Zorzi, A. Zanella, A. Testolin, M. D. F. De Grazia, and M. Zorzi,
“Cognition-based networks: A new perspective on network optimization
using learning and distributed intelligence,” IEEE Access, vol. 3,
pp. 1512–1530, 2015.
[22] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Allerton Conf.
Commun. Control Comput. (Allerton), Monticello, IL, USA, 2016,
pp. 341–346.
[23] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “RNN decoding
of linear block codes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.07560, 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

O’SHEA AND HOYDIS: INTRODUCTION TO DL FOR PHYSICAL LAYER

[24] N. Samuel, T. Diskin, and A. Wiesel, “Deep MIMO detection,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.01151, 2017.
[25] J. R. Hershey, J. L. Roux, and F. Weninger, “Deep unfolding:
Model-based inspiration of novel deep architectures,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.2574, 2014.
[26] M. Borgerding and P. Schniter, “Onsager-corrected deep learning for
sparse linear inverse problems,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Conf. Signal Inf.
Process. (GlobalSIP), Washington, DC, USA, 2016, pp. 227–231.
[27] Y.-S. Jeon, S.-N. Hong, and N. Lee, “Blind detection for MIMO systems
with low-resolution ADCs using supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun. (ICC), Paris, France, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[28] N. Farsad and A. Goldsmith, “Detection algorithms for communication
systems using deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08044, 2017.
[29] H. Sun et al., “Learning to optimize: Training deep neural networks for
wireless resource management,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09412, 2017.
[30] T. J. O’Shea, K. Karra, and T. C. Clancy, “Learning to communicate:
Channel auto-encoders, domain specific regularizers, and attention,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Signal Process. Inf. Technol. (ISSPIT), Limassol,
Cyprus, 2016, pp. 223–228.
[31] T. J. O’Shea, J. Corgan, and T. C. Clancy, “Convolutional radio modulation recognition networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Eng. Appl. Neural Netw.,
Aberdeen, U.K., 2016, pp. 213–226.
[32] T. J. O’Shea, J. Corgan, and T. C. Clancy, “Unsupervised representation learning of structured radio communication signals,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Workshop Sens. Process. Learn. Intell. Mach. (SPLINE), Aalborg,
Denmark, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[33] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. T. Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 51st Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci.
Syst. (CISS), Baltimore, MD, USA, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[34] S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, and S. T. Brink, “Scaling deep
learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.06901, 2017.
[35] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
[36] N. Srivastava, G. E. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overfitting,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958,
2014.
[37] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
Boltzmann machines,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Haifa,
Israel, 2010, pp. 807–814.
[38] Y. Jia et al., “Caffe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Orlando, FL, USA,
2014, pp. 675–678.
[39] T. Chen et al., “MXNet: A flexible and efficient machine learning library for heterogeneous distributed systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.01274, 2015.
[40] M. Abadi et al. (2015). TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on
Heterogeneous Systems. [Online]. Available: http://tensorflow.org/
[41] R. Al-Rfou et al., “Theano: A Python framework for fast computation
of mathematical expressions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.02688, 2016.
[42] R. Collobert, K. Kavukcuoglu, and C. Farabet, “Torch7: A MATLABlike environment for machine learning,” in Proc. BigLearn NIPS
Workshop, 2011, pp. 1–6.
Keras.
[Online].
Available:
[43] F.
Chollet.
(2015).
https://github.com/fchollet/keras
[44] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis. (2017). Source Code. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/radioml/introdlphy/
[45] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, “A fast learning algorithm
for deep belief nets,” Neural Comput., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1527–1554,
2006.
[46] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA,
2015, pp. 1–15.
[47] Y. N. Dauphin et al., “Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem
in high-dimensional non-convex optimization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NIPS), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2014, pp. 2933–2941.
[48] L. V. D. Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008.
[49] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[50] M. Abadi and D. G. Andersen, “Learning to protect communications
with adversarial neural cryptography,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.06918,
2016.
[51] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, and K. Kavukcuoglu,
“Spatial transformer networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. (NIPS), 2015, pp. 2017–2025.
[52] J. Estaran et al., “Artificial neural networks for linear and non-linear
impairment mitigation in high-baudrate IM/DD systems,” in Proc. 42nd
Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun. (ECOC), Düsseldorf, Germany, 2016, pp. 1–3.
[53] A. K. Nandi and E. E. Azzouz, “Algorithms for automatic modulation
recognition of communication signals,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46,
no. 4, pp. 431–436, Apr. 1998.

575

[54] A. Fehske, J. Gaeddert, and J. H. Reed, “A new approach to signal classification using spectral correlation and neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. New Front. Dyn. Spectr. Access Netw. (DYSPAN), Baltimore,
MD, USA, 2005, pp. 144–150.
[55] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA, 2015.
[56] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, Feb. 2011.
[57] A. Abdelmutalab, K. Assaleh, and M. El-Tarhuni, “Automatic modulation classification based on high order cumulants and hierarchical
polynomial classifiers,” Phys. Commun., vol. 21, pp. 10–18, Dec. 2016.
[58] D. George and E. A. Huerta, “Deep neural networks to enable real-time
multimessenger astrophysics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.00008, 2016.
[59] D. Maclaurin, D. Duvenaud, and R. P. Adams, “Gradient-based hyperparameter optimization through reversible learning,” in Proc. 32nd Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Lille, France, 2015, pp. 2113–2122.
[60] J. Bergstra and Y. Bengio, “Random search for hyper-parameter
optimization,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 13, pp. 281–305, Jan. 2012.
[61] A. Hirose, Complex-Valued Neural Networks. Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer, 2006.
[62] M. F. Amin, M. I. Amin, A. Y. H. Al-Nuaimi, and K. Murase, “Wirtinger
calculus based gradient descent and Levenberg–Marquardt learning algorithms in complex-valued neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process., Shanghai, China, 2011, pp. 550–559.
[63] G. C. Goodwin and R. L. Payne, Dynamic System Identification:
Experiment Design and Data Analysis. New York, NY, USA: Academic
Press, 1977.
[64] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2010.
[65] F. Adib, C.-Y. Hsu, H. Mao, D. Katabi, and F. Durand, “Capturing the
human figure through a wall,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 34, no. 6, p. 219,
2015.
[66] M. Zhao, F. Adib, and D. Katabi, “Emotion recognition using wireless signals,” in Proc. ACM Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw.,
New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp. 95–108.

Timothy O’Shea (S’05–M’08–SM’13) received
the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from
North Carolina State University in 2007. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering with Virginia Tech, where he is a Research
Associate. He is the Founder and CTO with DeepSig
Inc., Arlington, VA, USA. He was an Engineering
Researcher with UMIACS affiliated research center
with the University of Maryland. He has been a Core
Contributor and a Technical Advisor to the GNU
Radio Project since 2006. His research interests
include the application of machine learning and deep learning to software
radio and novel applications in signal processing and synthesis of radio
communications and sensing systems.

Jakob Hoydis (S’08–M’12) received the Diploma
(Dipl.-Ing.) degree in electrical engineering and
information technology from RWTH Aachen
University, Germany, in 2008 and the Ph.D. degree
from Supélec, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, in 2012.
He is a Technical Staff Member with Nokia Bell
Labs, France, where he is investigating applications
of deep learning for the physical layer. He was
the Co-Founder and CTO of the social network
SPRAED and worked for Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs,
Stuttgart, Germany. His research interests are in
the areas of machine learning, cloud computing, SDR, large random matrix
theory, information theory, and signal processing, and their applications
to wireless communications. He was a recipient of the 2012 Publication
Prize of the Supélec Foundation, the 2013 VDE ITG Förderpreis, the 2015
Leonard G. Abraham Prize of the IEEE COMSOC, the WCNC’2014 Best
Paper Award, and has been nominated as an Exemplary Reviewer 2012 for
the IEEE C OMMUNICATION L ETTERS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:12:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.