See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/319569635

Network Trafﬁc Classiﬁer With Convolutional and Recurrent Neural Networks
for Internet of Things
Article in IEEE Access · September 2017
DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560

CITATIONS

READS

741

10,082

4 authors, including:
Manuel Lopez-Martin

Belén Carro

University of Valladolid

University of Valladolid

37 PUBLICATIONS 2,335 CITATIONS

114 PUBLICATIONS 4,628 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Jaime Lloret
Polytechnic University of Valencia
1,010 PUBLICATIONS 24,658 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Jaime Lloret on 11 September 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983

1

Network traffic classifier with convolutional
and recurrent neural networks for Internet of
Things
Manuel Lopez-Martin (Senior Member, IEEE), Belen Carro, Antonio Sanchez-Esguevillas (Senior
Member, IEEE) and Jaime Lloret (Senior Member, IEEE)


Abstract— A Network Traffic Classifier (NTC) is an important
part of current network monitoring systems, being its task to
infer the network service that is currently used by a
communication flow (e.g. HTTP, SIP…). The detection is based
on a number of features associated with the communication flow,
for example, source and destination ports and bytes transmitted
per packet. NTC is important because much information about a
current network flow can be learned and anticipated just by
knowing its network service (required latency, traffic volume,
possible duration…). This is of particular interest for the
management and monitoring of Internet of Things (IoT)
networks, where NTC will help to segregate traffic and behavior
of heterogeneous devices and services. In this paper, we present a
new technique for NTC based on a combination of deep learning
models that can be used for IoT traffic. We show that a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) combined with a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) provides best detection
results. The natural domain for a CNN, which is image
processing, has been extended to NTC in an easy and natural
way. We show that the proposed method provides better
detection results than alternative algorithms without requiring
any feature engineering, which is usual when applying other
models. A complete study is presented on several architectures
that integrate a CNN and an RNN, including the impact of the
features chosen and the length of the network flows used for
training.

Index Terms—Convolutional Neural Network; Deep Learning;
Network traffic classification; Recurrent Neural Network

This work has been partially funded by the Ministerio de Economía y
Competitividad del Gobierno de España and the Fondo de Desarrollo
Regional (FEDER) within the project "Inteligencia distribuida para el control
y adaptación de redes dinámicas definidas por software, Ref: TIN2014-57991C3-2-P", and the Project “Distribucion inteligente de servicios multimedia
utilizando redes cognitivas adaptativas definidas por software”, Ref:
TIN2014-57991-C3-1-P, in the Programa Estatal de Fomento de la
Investigación Científica y Técnica de Excelencia, Subprograma Estatal de
Generación de Conocimiento.
M. Lopez, B. Carro and A. Sanchez are with Dpto. TSyCeIT, ETSIT,
Universidad de Valladolid, Paseo de Belén 15, Valladolid 47011, Spain;
(manuel.lopezm@uva.es; belcar@tel.uva.es; antoniojavier.sanchez@uva.es).
J. Lloret is with Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de
Zonas Costeras, Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino Vera s/n,
Valencia 46022, Spain; (jlloret@dcom.upv.es).

I. INTRODUCTION
A Network Traffic Classifier (NTC) is an important part of
current network management and administration systems. An
NTC infers the service/application (e.g. HTTP, SIP...) being
used by a network flow. This information is important for
network management and Quality of Service (QoS), as the
service used has a direct relationship with QoS requirements
and user contracts/expectations.
It is clear that Internet of Things (IoT) traffic will pose a
challenge to current network management and monitoring
systems, due to the large number and heterogeneity of the
connected devices. NTC is a critical component in this new
scenario [1][2], allowing to detect the service used by
dissimilar devices with very different user-profiles. Network
traffic identification is crucial for implementing effective
management of network policy and resources in IoT networks,
as the network needs to react differently depending on traffic
profile information.
There are several approaches to NTC: port-based, payloadbased, and flow statistics-based [3][4]. Port-based methods
make use of port information for service identification. These
methods are not reliable as many services do not use wellknown ports or even use the ports used by other applications.
Payload-based approaches the problem by Deep Packet
Inspection (DPI) of the payload carried out by the
communication flow. These methods look for well-known
patterns inside the packets. They currently provide the best
possible detection rates but with some associated costs and
difficulties: the cost of relying on an up-to-date database of
patterns (which has to be maintained) and the difficulty to be
able to access the raw payload. Currently, an increasing
proportion of transmitted data is being encrypted or needs to
assure user privacy policies, which is a real problem to
payload-based methods.
Finally, flow statistics-based methods rely on information that
can be obtained from packets header (e.g. bytes transmitted,
packets interarrival times, TCP window size…). They rely on
packet header high-level information which makes them a
better option to deal with non-available payloads or dynamic

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983
ports. These methods usually rely on machine learning
techniques to perform service prediction [3]. Two machine
learning alternatives are available in this case: supervised and
unsupervised methods. Supervised methods learn an
association between a set of features and the desired labeled
output by training an algorithm with samples containing
ground-truth labeled outputs. In unsupervised methods, we do
not have data with their associated ground-truth labeled
outputs; therefore, they can only try to separate the samples in
groups (clusters) according to some intrinsic similarities.
In this paper, we propose a new flow statistics-based
supervised method to detect the service being used by an IP
network flow. The proposed method employs several features
extracted from the headers of packets exchanged during the
flow lifetime. For each flow, we build a time-series of feature
vectors. Each element of the time-series will contain the
features of a packet in the flow. Likewise, each flow will have
an associated service/application (a labeled value) which is
required to train the algorithm.
To ensure data confidentiality our method only makes use of
features from the packet’s header, not including the IP
addresses.
In order to train the method, we have used more than 250,000
network flows which contained more than 100 distinct
services. As an additional challenge, the frequency distribution
of these services was highly unbalanced.
The proposed method is a classifier based on a deep learning
model formed by the combination of a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN).
One of the main drivers of this work was to assess the
applicability of deep learning advances to the NTC problem.
Therefore, we have studied the adequacy of different deep
learning architectures and the influence of several design
decisions, such as the features selected, or the number of
packets per flow included in the analysis.
In the paper, we present a comparison of performance results
for different architectures; in particular, we have considered
RNNs alone, CNNs alone and different combinations of CNN
and RNN.
In order to apply a CNN to a time-series of feature vectors, we
propose an approach that renders the data as an associated
pseudo-image, to which CNN can be applied.
When assessing the suitability of a new method it is important
to apply it to real data. We have made use of data from
RedIRIS, which is the Spanish academic and research
network.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the
related works. Section III describes the work performed.
Section IV describes the results obtained and finally, Section
V provides discussion and conclusions.

II. RELATED WORKS
Comparison of work results is difficult in NTC because the
datasets being studied and the performance metrics applied are
very different. NTC is intrinsically a multi-class classification

2
problem. There is no single universally agreed metric to
present results in a multi-class problem, as will be shown in
Section IV. Considering these facts, we now present several
related works.
There are many works that apply neural networks to NTC,
but the network models employed are very different in nature
to the ones presented here.
In [5] they propose a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with
zero or one hidden layer, but it is actually adopted as the
internal architecture to apply a fully Bayesian analysis. The
best one vs. rest accuracy, using 246 features, for 10 grouped
labels is 99.8%, and a macro averaged accuracy of 99.3% (10
labels).
An ensemble of MLP classifiers with error-correcting
output codes is applied in [6], achieving an average overall
accuracy (for 5 labels) of 93.8%. Meanwhile, in [7] an MLP
with a particle swarm optimization algorithm is employed to
classify 6 labels with a best one vs. rest accuracy of 96.95%.
Somehow related, the purpose of [8] is to investigate neural
projection techniques for network traffic visualization.
Towards that end, they propose several dimensionality
reduction methods using neural networks. No classification is
performed. Another work [9] explores the applicability of
rough neural networks to deal with uncertainty but does not
give any performance results for NTC.
Zhou et al. [10] apply an MLP with 3 hidden layers and
different numbers of hidden neurons to the Moore dataset
[11]. They give an overall accuracy greater than 96%, for a
grouping of labels in 10 classes, resulting in a final class
distribution very unbalanced (a frequency of almost 90% for
highest frequency class), no F1 score is provided. A Parallel
Neural Network Classifier Architecture is used in [12]. It is
made up of parallel blocks of radial basis function neural
networks. To train the network is employed a negative
reinforcement learning algorithm. They classify 6 labels
reporting a realistic overall accuracy of 95%, no F1 score is
provided.
Another set of papers applies general machine learning
techniques, not related with neural networks, to the NTC
problem.
Kim et al. [13] propose an entropy-based minimum
description length discretization of features as a preprocessing
step to several algorithms: C4.5, Naïve Bayes, SVM and kNN.
Claiming an enhanced performance of the algorithms,
achieving a one vs. rest accuracy of 93.2%- 98% for 11
grouped labels. In [14] authors apply different machine
learning techniques to NTC (C4.5, Support Vector Machine,
Naïve Bayes) reporting an average accuracy of less than 80%
using 23 features and detecting only five services (www, dns,
ftp, p2p, and telnet)
Wang et al. [15] employ an enhanced random forest with 29
selected features. They group the services in 12 classes,
providing only one vs. rest metrics (not aggregated). Having
F1 scores in the interval 0.3-0.95, with only 3 classes higher
than 0.96. They use their own dataset. Authors of [16] include
flows correlation in a semi-supervised model providing overall
accuracy of less than 85% and a one vs. rest F1 score, for 10

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983
labels, of less than 0.9 (except two labels with 0.95 and 1).
They use the WIDE backbone dataset [16]. They report having
better results than other works using C4.5, kNN, Naïve Bayes,
Bayesian Networks and Erman´s semi-supervised methods
[17][18][19][20][21].
A Directed Acyclic Graph-Support Vector Machine is
proposed in [22], attaining an average accuracy of 95.5%. The
method is applied to a one-to-one combination of classes with
a dataset provided by the University of Cambridge (Moore
dataset) [11]. Yamansavascilar et al. [23] study the application
of several algorithms: J48, Random Forest, Bayes Net, and
kNN to UNB ISCX Network Traffic dataset, with 14 classes
and 12 features, reporting the best accuracy of 93.94%.
Yuan et al. [24] present a variant of decision tree algorithm
C4.5 working on the Hadoop platform. They classify 12 labels
giving a one vs. rest accuracy in the interval 60-90% with only
two labels higher than 90%. The dataset is the Moore set from
Cambridge University [11].
In this paper, we present the first application of the RNN
and CNN models to an NTC problem. The combination of
both models provides automatic feature representation of
network flows without requiring costly feature engineering.

III. WORK DESCRIPTION
Following sections present the dataset used for this work
and a description of the different deep learning models that
were applied.
A. Selected dataset
For this work, we have made use of real data from RedIRIS.
RedIRIS is the Spanish academic and research backbone
network that provides advanced communication services to the
scientific community and national universities. RedIRIS has
over 500 affiliated institutions, mainly universities and public
research centers.
We have extracted 266,160 network flows from RedIRIS.
These flows contained 108 distinct labeled services, with a
highly unbalanced frequency distribution. Fig. 1 shows the
names and frequency distribution for the 15 most frequent
services. The frequency distribution is based on the proportion
of flows with a specific service.

Fig. 1. Frequency distribution of the 15 most frequent services.

3
A network flow consists of all packets sharing a unique bidirectional combination of source and destination IP addresses
and port numbers, and transport protocol: TCP or UDP. We
include encrypted packets, as algorithms considered do not
rely on payload content.
Each flow is associated with a particular service. In order to
train and evaluate the models, we need to assign a groundtruth service to each flow. This assignment is not initially
available and has been made possible by applying the nDPI
tool [25] to the packets exchanged during the flow lifetime.
nDPI applies a DPI technique to perform service detection.
DPI provides the best available classification results by
inspecting both the header and payload of the packet. With
this in mind, we assume the output of a DPI tool as our best
approximation to the ground-truth service. nDPI handles
encrypted traffic and it is the most accurate open source DPI
application [26]. The flows which nDPI was not able to label
were discarded. For this work, we have considered UDP and
TCP flows.
Each flow is formed by a sequence of up to 20 packets. For
each packet, we have extracted the following six features:
source port, destination port, the number of bytes in packet
payload, TCP window size, interarrival time and direction of
the packet. The TCP window size (TCP flow control) is set to
zero for UDP packets. The packet address may have a value of
0-1 indicating whether the packet goes from source to
destination or in the opposite direction.
We have considered only the first 20 packets exchanged in
a flow lifetime. In the case of flows with more than 20
packets, we have discarded any packet after packet number 20.
As we will see, 20 packets are more than enough to obtain a
good detection rate, and even a much smaller number still
provides excellent performance.
Finally, from these flows, we have built our dataset.
Therefore, the dataset consists of 266,160 flows, each flow
containing a sequence of 20 vectors, and each vector is made
up of 6 features (the six features extracted from the packets’
header). The final result is a time-series of feature vectors
associated with each flow.
To evaluate the models, we set apart a 15% of flows as a
validation set. All the performance metrics given in this paper
correspond to this validation set. In order to build the
validation set, we sampled the original flows, keeping the
same labels frequency between the validation set and the
remaining flows (training set).
Fig. 2 presents the final arrangement of a network flow
inside the dataset.

Fig. 2. The composition of a network flow.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983

B. Models description
Different deep learning models have been studied. The
model with best detection performance has been a
combination of CNN [27] and RNN [28]. In this section, we
will show all the models considered for this work.
The first model analyzed (Fig. 3) was a simple RNN. In
particular, we used a variant of an RNN called LSTM [29],
which is easier to train (it solves the vanishing gradient
problem). An LSTM is trained with a matrix of values with
two dimensions: the temporal dimension and a vector of
features. LSTM iterates a neural network (cell) with the time
sequential feature vectors and two additional vectors
associated with its internal hidden and cell states. The final
hidden state of the cell corresponds to the output value.
Therefore, the output dimension of an LSTM layer is the same
as the size of its internal hidden state (LSTM units). In the
model of Fig. 3 we add at the end several fully connected
layers. Two layers are fully connected when each node of the
previous layer is fully forward connected to every node of the
consecutive layer. The fully connected layers have been added
to all models.

4
connected layers. To accomplish this transformation a simple
tensor flattening can be done (Fig. 4).

Fig. 4. Deep learning CNN model

The previous models can be combined in a single model as
presented in Fig. 5. In this combined model, the final tensor of
several chained CNNs is reshaped into a matrix that can act as
the input to an RNN (LSTM network). To reshape the tensor
as a matrix we keep the dimension associated with the filter’s
action unchanged, performing a flattening on the other two
dimensions, to finally reach a matrix shape. The values
produced by the filters of the last CNN will be the equivalent
of feature vectors, and the flattened vector produced by the
reshaping operation will act as the time dimension needed by
the LSTM layer.

Fig. 3. Deep learning RNN model

In Fig. 4 a pure CNN network is shown. CNNs were
initially applied to image processing, as a biologically inspired
model to perform image classification, where feature
engineering was done automatically by the network thanks to
the action of a kernel (filter) which extracts location invariant
patterns from the image. Chaining several CNNs allows
extracting complex features automatically.
In our case, we have used this image-processing metaphor
to apply the technique to a very different dataset. In order to
do that, we consider the matrix formed by the time-series of
feature vectors as an image. Image pixels are locally
correlated; similarly, feature vectors associated with
consecutive time slots present a correlated local behavior,
which allows us to adopt this analogy.
Each CNN layer generates a multidimensional array
(tensor) where the dimensions of the image get reduced but, at
the same time, a new dimension is generated, having this new
dimension a size equal to the number of filters applied to the
image. Consecutive CNN layers will further decrease the
image dimensions and increase the new generated dimension
size. To top off the model it is necessary to transform the
tensor to a vector that can be the input to the final fully

Fig. 5. Combination of CNN and single-layer RNN

Finally, the model introduced in Fig. 6 is similar to the
previous model with the inclusion of an additional LSTM
layer. When several LSTM layers are concatenated, the LSTM
behavior is different to the one explained previously (Fig. 3).
In this case, all LSTM layers (except the last one) adopt a
‘return-sequences’ mode that produces a sequence of vectors
corresponding to the successive iteration of the recurrent
network. This sequence of vectors can be grouped in a time
sequence, forming the entry point to the next LSTM layer. It is
important to note that, for successive LSTM layers, the
temporal-dimension of data input does not change (Fig. 6), but
the vector-dimension of the successive inputs does.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983

5
indicate no detection but there is one; (3) true positive (TP)
when we indicate a detection and it is real and (4) true
negative (TN) when we indicate there is no detection and we
are correct. Considering these previous definitions:

Fig. 6. Combination of CNN and two-layer RNN

Additionally, to the different types of layers presented
previously, we have made use of some additional layers: batch
normalization, max pooling, and dropout layers.
A dropout layer [30] provides regularization (a
generalization of results for unseen data) by dropping out
(setting to zero) a percentage of outputs from the previous
layer. This apparently nonsensical action forces the network to
not over-rely on any particular input, fighting over-fitting and
improving generalization.
Max pooling [31] is a kind of convolutional layer. The
difference is the filter used. In max pooling, it is used a maxfilter, that selects the maximum value of the image region to
which the filter is applied. It reduces the spatial size of the
output, decreasing the number of features and the
computational complexity of the network. The result is a
down-sampled output. Similar to a dropout layer, a max
pooling layer provides regularization.
Batch normalization [32] makes training convergence faster
and can improve performance results. It is done by
normalizing, at training time, every feature at batch level
(scaling inputs to zero mean and unit variance) and re-scaling
again later considering the whole training dataset. The newly
learned mean and variance replace the ones obtained at batchlevel.

IV. RESULTS
This section presents the results obtained when applying
several deep learning models to NTC. The influence of several
important hyper-parameters and design decisions is analyzed,
in particular: the model architecture, the features selected and
the number of packets extracted from the network flows.
In order to appreciate the detection quality of the different
options, and considering the highly unbalanced distribution of
service labels, we provide the following performance metrics
for each option: accuracy, precision, recall, and F1.
Considering all metrics, F1 can be considered the most
important metric in this scenario. F1 is the harmonic mean of
precision and recall and provides a better indication of
detection performance for unbalanced datasets. F1 gets its best
value at 1 and worst at 0.
We base our definition of accuracy, F1, precision, and recall
in the following four previous definitions: (1) false positive
(FP) that happens when there is actually no detection but we
conclude there is one; (2) false negative (FN) when we

We have used Tensorflow to implement all the models, and
the python package scikit-learn to calculate performance
metrics. All computations have been performed in a
commercial PC (i7-4720-HQ, 16GB RAM).
A. Impact of network architecture
We have tried different deep learning architecture models to
see their suitability for the NTC problem. In order to build the
different architectures, we have considered different
combinations of RNN and CNN: RNN only, CNN only, and
various arrangements of a CNN followed by an RNN. In all
cases, we have added at the end two additional fully connected
layers.
In Table I, we provide a description of the different
architectures and in Fig. 7 we present their performance
metrics. From Fig. 7, we can see that the model CNN+RNN2a gives the best results for both accuracy and F1.
The architecture description provided in Table I is as
follows: Conv(z,x,y,n,m) stands for a convolutional layer with
z filters where x and y are the width and height of the 2D
filter window, with a stride of n and SAME padding if m is
equal to S or VALID padding if m is equal to V (VALID
implies no padding and SAME implies padding that preserves
output dimensions). MaxPool(x,y,n,m) stands for a Max
Pooling layer where x and y are the pool sizes, with a stride of
n and SAME padding if m is equal to S or VALID padding if
m is equal to V (VALID implies no padding and SAME
implies padding that preserves output dimensions). BN stands
for a batch normalization layer. FC(x) stands for a fully
connected layer with x nodes. LSTM(x) stands for an LSTM
layer where x is the dimensionality of the output space; in the
case of several LSTM in sequence, each LSTM, except the
last one, will return the successive recurrent values which will
be the entry values to the following LSTM. DR(x) stands for a
dropout layer with a dropout coefficient equal to x.
In all cases, the training was done with a number of epochs
between 60-90 epochs, with early stopping if the last 10
epochs did not improve the loss function. We consider an
epoch as a single pass of the complete training dataset through
the training process.
All the activation functions were Rectified Linear Units
(ReLU) with the exception of the last layer with Softmax

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983
activation. The loss function was Softmax Cross Entropy and
the optimization was done with batch Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) with Adam.
In Table I, an added suffix ‘a’ to a model name, implies that
the model has only changed the dropout percentage at the
dropout layers.

6
process is done.
The performance metrics in Fig. 7 are aggregated metrics
using a weighted average. We have used the weighted average
provided by scikit-learn [33], to calculate the aggregated F1,
precision, and recall scores.
In Fig. 8 we provide the One-vs.-Rest metrics for the
classification of the first 15 more frequent labels (results
obtained with model CNN+RNN-2a). An important
observation in Fig. 8 is that for all labels with a frequency
higher than 1% (Fig. 1) we achieve accuracy always higher
than 98%, and many cases higher than 99%, and an F1 score
higher than 0.96. The macro averaged accuracy for these 15
labels is 99.59% (best value in literature).

Table I. Details of deep learning network models applied to NTC problem

Fig. 8. Performance metrics (one vs. rest) for the classification of several
service labels (15 more frequent)

Fig. 7. Classification performance metrics (aggregated) vs. network models

The best model attains an accuracy of 0.9632, an F1 score
of 0.9574, a precision of 0.9543 and a recall of 0.9632 (model
CNN+RNN-2a).
Analyzing the results, we can see that a simple model, of
two CNN layers followed by one LSTM layer with two fully
connected layers at the end, provides best detection results,
both in terms of accuracy and F1. The inclusion of
MaxPooling or additional CNN or LSTM layers does not
improve results. Batch normalization between CNN layers and
the inclusion of some dropout layers at the end of the network
do improve results.
For this problem, we have 108 distinct service labels to be
detected. This is a multi-class classification problem. There
are two possible ways to give results in this case: aggregated
and One-vs.-Rest results.
For One-vs.-Rest, we focus in a particular class (label) and
consider the other classes as a single alternative class,
simplifying the problem to a binary classification task for each
particular class (one by one). In the case of aggregated results,
we try to give a summary result for all classes. There are
different alternatives to perform the aggregation (micro,
macro, samples, weighted), varying in the way the averaging

B. Impact of features
In Table II we can see the influence of the features
employed in the learning process. Fig. 2 gives the full set of
possible features, but it is important to appreciate which
features have a higher importance in the detection process.
Table II shows the importance of features by analyzing the
detection metrics as we remove different features. The first
column in Table II gives the features that are used to train the
model (grouped in feature sets) and the right columns the
usual aggregate performance metrics for the detection process.
The chart in Fig. 9 presents the same results in a different
format, to make it easier to compare different feature sets.
As expected, in general, the more features render better
results. But, interestingly the packets inter-arrival time
(TIMESTAMP) gives slightly worse results when added to the
full features set. It seems it provides some not well-aligned
information with the source and destination ports, because, as
soon as we take away the source and destination port, it is
clear it becomes again an important feature. It is also
interesting to appreciate the importance of the feature TCP
window size (WIN SIZE), being more important than
TIMESTAMP when operating with a reduced set of features.
Table II provides metric values with a color code to make it
easier to rank the results. In this color code, darker green

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983
colors mean better results whereas darker red colors mean
worse results.

7
enough to consider the very first packets of a flow to have
most of the information that allows us to infer their service. In
Fig. 10 we can easily appreciate that the detection quality
starts to degrade when the number of packets per flow is less
than five.

Table II. Classification performance metrics (aggregated) vs. features
employed (model CNN+RNN-2a)(Table)

Fig. 10. Classification performance metrics (aggregated) vs. time-series length
for architecture RNN-1

Fig. 9. Classification performance metrics (aggregated) vs. features employed
(model CNN+RNN-2a)(Chart)

Model CNN+RNN-2a was used to obtain the results
presented in Table II, but the same relationship between
results and feature sets was maintained when repeating this
same study with the other models.

C. Impact of time-series length
An important parameter to be studied is the influence of the
number of packets to be considered when we analyze the
network flows. There are flows with hundreds of packets
whereas others have only a single packet.
An important doubt at the beginning of the study was the
possible influence of this parameter, since increasing the
number of included packets could improve detection but at the
cost of much higher computing time and resources. As a
balanced decision, we opted for a maximum of 20 packets. We
have considered only the first 20 packets exchanged in a flow
lifetime. In the case of flows with more than 20 packets, we
have disregarded any packet after packet number 20. Flows
with less than 20 packets were padded with zeros.
Then it was important to know the impact of the number of
packets in the overall detection problem and to confirm
whether 20 packets was a sensible number. To this aim, we
analyzed the performance considering a different number of
packets and different architectures. We present here the results
for two representative architectures (RNN-1 and CNN+RNN2a)
We can see the results for the RNN-1 architecture in Fig.
10, and it is important to note that overall detection quality is
not significantly changed by using fewer packets until the
number of packets is less than five per flow. Therefore, it is

Fig. 11 shows the results on the impact of the number of
packets for the architecture CNN-RNN-2a. This model
supports a smaller reduction in the number of packets (the
model needs a minimum length of 7 in the temporaldimension), but we can still appreciate that regardless of an
initial performance decrease, this reduction is not monotonic
with the decrease in the number of packets, in fact, it keeps
approximately constant for packets lengths in the interval from
7 to 15 (disregarding some intermediate noisy values).

Fig. 11. Classification performance metrics (aggregated) vs. time-series length
for architecture CNN+RNN-2a

Therefore, it seems clear that although a minimum number
of packets is important, a large number of packets (that is
architecture-dependent) is not necessary. In general, between 5
and 15 packets are enough to achieve excellent detection
results.

V. CONCLUSION
This work is a contribution to improve the available
alternatives and capabilities of NTC in current network
monitoring systems; being specially targeted to IoT networks,
where traffic classification is highly required [1][2].
As far as we know, there is no previous application of the
RNN and CNN deep learning models to an NTC problem.
Therefore, the work presented in this paper is original in

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983
essence.
This work provides a thorough analysis of the possibilities
provided by deep learning models to NTC. It shows the
performance of RNN and CNN models and a combination of
them. It demonstrates that a CNN can be successfully applied
to NTC classification, giving an easy way to extend the imageprocessing paradigm of CNN to a vector time-series data (in a
similar way to previous extensions to text and audio
processing [34][35]).
A model based on a particular combination of CNN plus
RNN gives the best detection results, being these results better
than other published works with alternative techniques.
The impact of selected features is demonstrated, and also
that it is not necessary to process a large number of packets
per flow to have excellent results: any number of packets
higher than 5-15 (a number which is architecture-dependent)
gives similar results.
The proposed method is robust and gives excellent F1
detection scores under a highly unbalanced dataset with over
100 different classification labels. It works with a very small
number of features and does not require feature engineering.
To train the models we have made use of high-level headerbased data extracted from the packets. It is not required to rely
on IP addresses or payload data, which are probably
confidential or encrypted.
A simple RNN model provides already very good results,
but it is interesting to appreciate that these results improve
when the RNN model is combined with a previous CNN
model.
Being it possible to improve results with the inclusion of a
CNN shows how the initial intuition that allowed us to
assimilate the vector time-series extracted from network
packets’ features as an image is correct, and therefore CNNs
are valid candidates for dealing with vector time-series of
similar nature
Being the deep learning architectures such a fruitful source
of new models, we consider, as future work, to experiment
with new applications and variants of the CNN and LSTM
models.
This work can be especially applicable for new IoT
networks in which NTC can be used to differentiate or
segregate different classes of traffic, e.g. device identification
[36], target detection in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN)
[37] or user priority based [38].
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

B. Ng, M. Hayes and W. K. G. Seah, "Developing a traffic
classification platform for enterprise networks with SDN: Experiences
& lessons learned," 2015 IFIP Networking Conference (IFIP
Networking), Toulouse, 2015, pp. 1-9.
A. Sivanathan, D. Sherrat, H. Habibi Gharakheili, A. Radford, C.
Wijenayake, A. Vishwanath, and V. Sivaraman , “Characterizing and
Classifying IoT Traffic in Smart Cities and Campuses”, IEEE
INFOCOM Workshop on SmartCity: Smart Cities and Urban
Computing, USA, May 2017.
T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for internet traffic
classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, 2008.

8
J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Robust Network
Traffic Classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 23, no. 4, pp.
1257–1270, 2015.
[5] T. Auld, A. W. Moore, and S. F. Gull, “Bayesian Neural Networks for
Internet Traffic Classification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 223–239, Jan. 2007.
[6] X. Xie, B. Yang, Y. Chen, L. Wang and Z. Chen, "Network Traffic
Classification Based on Error-Correcting Output Codes and NN
Ensemble," 2009 Sixth International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and
Knowledge Discovery, Tianjin, 2009, pp. 475-479.
[7] Chen, Z., Wang, H., Abraham, A., Grosan, C., Yang, B., Chen, Y.,
Wang, L., “Improving Neural Network Classification Using Further
Division of Recognition Space”. International Journal of Innovative,
Computing, Information and Control 5(2) (2009)
[8] Herrero, A., Corchado, E., Gastaldo, P., Zunino, R., “Neural projection
techniques for the visual inspection of network traffic”.
Neurocomputing, Volume 72, Issue 16, Pages 3649-3658, 2009.
[9] Kothari, A., Keskar, A., “Rough Set Approaches to Unsupervised
Neural Network Based Pattern Classifier”, Advances in Machine
Learning and Data Analysis, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 151163, 2010.
[10] W. Zhou, L. Dong, L. Bic, M. Zhou and L. Chen, "Internet traffic
classification using feed-forward neural network," 2011 International
Conference on Computational Problem-Solving (ICCP), Chengdu,
2011, pp. 641-646.
[11] A Moore D Zuev L. Crogan "Discriminators for use in flow-based
classification", Technical Report RR-05-13. Department of Computer
Science Queen's Mary University, 2005.
[12] Bereket Mathewos, Marco Carvalho, and Fredric Ham. 2011. “Network
traffic classification using a parallel neural network classifier
architecture”. In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Workshop on
Cyber Security and Information Intelligence Research (CSIIRW '11),
Frederick T. Sheldon, Robert Abercrombie, and Axel Krings (Eds.).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, , Article 33 , 1 pages.
[13] Kim, H., Claffy, K., Fomenkov, M., Barman, D., Faloutsos, M., Lee,
K.: “Internet traffic classification demystified: myths, caveats, and the
best practices”, In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT Conference
(CoNEXT '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 11:1–11:12, 2008.
[14] M. Shafiq, Xiangzhan Yu, A. A. Laghari, Lu Yao, N. K. Karn and F.
Abdessamia, "Network Traffic Classification techniques and
comparative analysis using Machine Learning algorithms," 2016 2nd
IEEE International Conference on Computer and Communications
(ICCC), Chengdu, China, 2016, pp. 2451-2455.
[15] C. Wang, T. Xu and X. Qin, "Network Traffic Classification with
Improved Random Forest," 2015 11th International Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Security (CIS), Shenzhen, 2015, pp.
78-81.
doi: 10.1109/CIS.2015.27
[16] Jun Zhang, Chao Chen, Yang Xiang, Wanlei Zhou, and Athanasios V.
Vasilakos, “An Effective Network Traffic Classification Method with
Unknown Flow Detection”, IEEE Transaction on Network and
ServiceManagement, Vol 12, Dec 2013
[17] Y.-s. Lim, H.-c. Kim, J. Jeong, C.-k. Kim, T. T. Kwon, and Y. Choi,
“Internet traffic classification demystified: on the sources of the
discriminative power,” In Proceedings of the 6th International
COnference (Co-NEXT '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 9:1–
9:12. 2010.
[18] J. Erman, A. Mahanti, M. Arlitt, I. Cohen, and C. Williamson,
“Offline/realtime traffic classification using semi-supervised learning,”
Performance Evaluation, vol. 64, no. 9-12, pp. 1194–1213, Oct. 2007.
[19] N. Williams, S. Zander, and G. Armitage, “A preliminary performance
comparison of five machine learning algorithms for practical IP traffic
flow classification,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36, pp.
5–16, Oct. 2006.
[20] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service
mapping for QoS: a statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic
classification,” in Proc. 2004 ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet
Measurement, pp. 135–148.
[21] A. W. Moore and D. Zuev, “Internet traffic classification using
Bayesian analysis techniques,” SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol.
33, pp. 50–60, June 2005.
[22] S. Hao, J. Hu, S. Liu, T. Song, J. Guo and S. Liu, "Network traffic
classification based on improved DAG-SVM," 2015 International
Conference
on
Communications,
Management
and
Telecommunications (ComManTel), DaNang, 2015, pp.256-26
[4]

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2747560, IEEE Access

IEEE Access-2017-04983
[23] B. Yamansavascilar, M. A. Guvensan, A. G. Yavuz and M. E.
Karsligil, "Application identification via network traffic classification,"
2017 International Conference on Computing, Networking and
Communications (ICNC), Santa Clara, CA, 2017, pp. 843-848.
[24] Z. Yuan and C. Wang, "An improved network traffic classification
algorithm based on Hadoop decision tree," 2016 IEEE International
Conference of Online Analysis and Computing Science (ICOACS),
Chongqing, 2016, pp. 53-56.
doi: 10.1109/ICOACS.2016.7563047
[25] L. Deri, M. Martinelli, T. Bujlow, and A. Cardigliano, “nDPI: Opensource high-speed deep packet inspection,” in 2014 International
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference
(IWCMC), 2014, pp. 617–622.
[26] T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Independent
comparison of popular DPI tools for traffic classification,” Comput.
Networks, vol. 76, pp. 75–89, 2015.
[27] Behnke, Sven, “Hierarchical Neural Networks for Image
Interpretation”, Volume 2766 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Springer-Verlag, 2003
[28] Zachary C. Lipton, John Berkowitz, Charles Elkan (2015), “A Critical
Review of Recurrent Neural Networks for Sequence Learning”,
arXiv:1506.00019 [cs.LG]
[29] Klaus Greff; Rupesh Kumar Srivastava; Jan Koutník; Bas R.
Steunebrink; Jürgen Schmidhuber (2015). "LSTM: A Search Space
Odyssey". arXiv:1503.04069
[30] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever,
and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014. “Dropout: a simple way to prevent
neural networks from overfitting”. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15, 1 (January
2014), 1929-1958.
[31] Chen-Yu Lee, Patrick W. Gallagher, Zhuowen Tu (2015),
“Generalizing Pooling Functions in Convolutional Neural Networks:
Mixed, Gated, and Tree”, arXiv:1509.08985 [stat.ML]
[32] Sergey Ioffe, Christian Szegedy (2015), “Batch Normalization:
Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate
Shift”, arXiv:1502.03167 [cs.LG]
[33] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O.
Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J.
Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot and E.
Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”, Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825-2830, 2011.
[34] T. N. Sainath, O. Vinyals, A. Senior and H. Sak, "Convolutional, Long
Short-Term Memory, fully connected Deep Neural Networks," 2015
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), South Brisbane, QLD, 2015, pp. 4580-4584.
[35] Y. Xiao, K. Cho, “Efficient Character-level Document Classification by
Combining Convolution and Recurrent Layers”, arXiv:1602.00367v1
[cs.CL] 1 Feb 2016
[36] Y. Meidan, M. Bohadana, A. Shabtai, J. D. Guarnizo, M. Ochoa, N. O.
Tippenhauer, and Y. Elovici. 2017. “ProfilIoT: a machine learning
approach for IoT device identification based on network traffic
analysis”. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing
(SAC '17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 506-509
[37] S. Althunibat, A. Antonopoulos, E. Kartsakli, F. Granelli and C.
Verikoukis, "Countering Intelligent-Dependent Malicious Nodes in
Target Detection Wireless Sensor Networks," in IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 16, no. 23, pp. 8627-8639, Dec.1, 2016.
[38] M. Grajzer, M. Koziuk, P. Szczechowiak and A. Pescape, "A MultiClassification Approach for the Detection and Identification of eHealth
Applications," 2012 21st International Conference on Computer
Communications and Networks (ICCCN), Munich, 2012, pp. 1-6.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.
View publication stats

9