Received February 22, 2019, accepted March 21, 2019, date of publication April 1, 2019, date of current version April 16, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2908225

Deep-Full-Range: A Deep Learning
Based Network Encrypted Traffic
Classification and Intrusion
Detection Framework
YI ZENG1,2 , HUAXI GU

1 , WENTING WEI

1 , AND YANTAO GUO2

1 State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China

2 Science and Technology on Communication Networks Laboratory, Shijiazhuang 050081, China

Corresponding author: Huaxi Gu (hxgu@xidian.edu.cn)
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant 61634004 and Grant 61472300, in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant JB180309 and Grant JB170107, in part by the Key Research and
Development Plan of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2017ZDCXL-GY-05-01, in part by the Open Fund Project of the Science and
Technology on Communication Networks Laboratory under Grant HHS19641X001, and in part by the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation under Grant 2018M633465.

ABSTRACT With the rapid evolution of network traffic diversity, the understanding of network traffic
has become more pivotal and more formidable. Previously, traffic classification and intrusion detection
require a burdensome analyzing of various traffic features and attack-related characteristics by experts, and
even, private information might be required. However, due to the outdated features labeling and privacy
protocols, the existing approaches may not fit with the characteristics of the changing network environment
anymore. In this paper, we present a light-weight framework with the aid of deep learning for encrypted
traffic classification and intrusion detection, termed as deep-full-range (DFR). Thanks to deep learning,
DFR is able to learn from raw traffic without manual intervention and private information. In such a
framework, our proposed algorithms are compared with other state-of-the-art methods using two public
datasets. The experimental results show that our framework not only can outperform the state-of-the-art
methods by averaging 13.49% on encrypted traffic classification’s F1 score and by averaging 12.15% on
intrusion detection’s F1 score but also require much lesser storage resource requirement.
INDEX TERMS Encrypted traffic classification, network intrusion detection, deep learning, end-to-end.

I. INTRODUCTION

An accurate traffic classification has been the prerequisite
for network basic tasks, say providing appropriate Qualityof-Service (QoS), Network Intrusion Detection (NID), etc.
Yet traffic classification has been becoming more and more
challenging due to the following fact. The first one is the
great boom in traffic diversity and variety. Apart from that,
more and more applications have started to apply security
protocols, such as HTTPS, SSH, SSL, to encrypt internet
traffic for the sake of user’s privacy; The third fact is that
some of the basic information, like flow volume or flow
duration, is not easy to be acquired nowadays due to privacy
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Irene Amerini.

45182

protocols and laws. In a nutshell, how to achieve a highquality traffic identification without private information has
drawn significant attention in the concerning of cyber security
and QoS.
Previous methods of traffic classification, like the Port
Number Based method and the Data Packet Inspection (DPI)
Based method [1], are not competent enough for modern traffic environment due to their disability toward encrypted traffic. The newest generation of traffic classification method is
based on flow-statistics and Machine Learning (ML), which
can cope with both encrypted and normal traffic, like the
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) and the Decision Tree (DT) that
used in Atli’s work [2].
However, ML-Based approaches’ performance highly
depends on the human-engineered features and some private

2169-3536 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

traffic information, hence dramatically limits their accuracy and generalizability. Moreover, ML-Based classification methods usually require high storage and computational
resource, which limited the implementation of it in resources
constrained nodes, like vehicles [3], home gateways, and
mobile phones. A real-time accurate network traffic classifier
is the foundation of network management tasks and NID
systems, therefore, a novel classification method is of urgent
need.
Methods based on Deep Learning (DL) obviate the burdensome work of selecting features and acquiring private features information since it automatically extracts and selects
features through training [4]. This characteristic has made
DL-based methods a highly desirable approach for traffic
classification. Another characteristic of DL-based methods
is that DL has a higher learning capability in comparison
with traditional ML methods like Random Forest, Support
Vector Machine, and KNN [2]. Thus, they are expected to
learn highly complicated patterns in order to gain a higher
accuracy than previous methods with more functionality, like
NID, critical link analysis, traffic classification, and so on,
within just one framework. Take those two characteristics
into mind, as an end-to-end approach, DL-based methods
are capable of effectively learning relationships between raw
traffic and corresponding output without the need of requiring
heavy labor and private information.
In this paper, we present a novel network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection framework, named
Deep-Full-Range (DFR), where three deep learning algorithms — Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [5], Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [6], and Stacked Auto-Encoder
(SAE) [7]— are employed. We intend to use CNN to learn
features of the raw traffic from spatial range. LSTM is used
to learn features from the time-related aspect. SAE is adopted
to extract features from coding characteristics. All those
three aspects are combined to gain a deep and full ranged
understanding of the raw input. With a full-range concerned
structure, DFR is capable of classifying encrypted traffic and
malware traffic within one framework without human’s help
and private details. Since our framework will only save the
model that most effective with the current traffic environment, compared with previous methods, a dramatic drop in
the storage resource requirement is met.
This paper’s contributions can be summarized as follows: 1) A light-weight classification and intrusion detection framework, named DFR, is proposed. The effectiveness
of completing those two tasks is evaluated on two public
datasets, significant improvement of effectiveness is met.
2) DFR is based on three DL models which can acquire a deep
and full-ranged understanding of the raw traffic. 3) DFR is an
end-to-end framework, does not require too much human’s
help and private information of the data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
details of DFR and the methodology of each part is illustrated in Section II. We evaluate the framework by comparing
with other state-of-art methods on two public datasets in
VOLUME 7, 2019

Section III. Finally, Section IV gives the concluding remark
of this paper.
II. THE DFR FRAMEWORK

In this section, we will illustrate the details of our proposed
network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection framework. DFR framework can be divided into two
functional modules, as shown in Fig.1: Preprocessing Procedure, DFR Procedure.

FIGURE 1. Overview of the DFR framework.

The notations and definitions of some of the parameters
used in the DFR model are listed in Table 1.
TABLE 1. Notations & parameters used in the DFR.

A. PREPROCESSING PROCEDURE

In this process, our presented framework will convert raw
network traffic data into IDX format, which is the format that we used as the input of the following procedure.
The reason why we preprocess the raw data has 3 following reasons. 1) The raw data from the network is of different length, which is not an ideal input format for DL
models. 2) The raw data contains some information that
might interfere with the result, say the port number or the
MAC address. 3) An unified format can pave the way for
following works like adding more network applications,
the maintenance of the procedure, and etc. Fig.2 illustrates
the overview of the preprocessing procedure, which consists
of 5 steps.
Package Generation is the step to split continues raw
traffic data and save as PCAP files by a package-capture
tool — Wireshark — [8]. The method that we proposed will
45183

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

The reason why we adopted L1 regularization [11] in all the
models is that L1 regularization is capable of punishing some
weights to 0 that L2 cannot, which is helpful for the machine
to learn which feature is irrelevant to the classification, hence
a better result can be attained. We will explain more about
selecting L1 regularization based on the experimental result
in the following section.
1) 1D CNN-BASED DFR CLASSIFIER
FIGURE 2. Overview of the preprocessing procedure.

capture the Bi-directional flow of all layers, which is the most
ideal traffic representation for DL-Based traffic classification
as evaluated in Wang’s paper [9].
Traffic Purification is the step to eliminate the interferential data in traffic packages. This includes TCP or UDP
headers and some Ethernet related data in the data link
layer, for example, the MAC address, since they are no
use for the following procedure and might even harm the
result.
Traffic Refiner will remove duplicated files and empty
files, as those files will only harm the learning ability of our
framework.
Length Unification will trim files that longer than
900 bytes to 900 bytes, and add 0x00s at the end of files that
shorter than 900 bytes to complement it to 900 bytes.
IDX Fill Generation is when we will convert those lengthunified PCAP files into 30 bytes × 30bytes two-dimensional
format IDX files. IDX format is a common file format in DL
field [10], which is as well ideal for our framework. Those
files are regarded as gray-scale images if mapped to [0,1].
In Fig.2, we can see the preprocessing result as gray-scale
images.
Further details of the Preprocessing Procedure is presented
in Alg. 1. After this procedure, a dataset full of traffic-graph
is generated for future use.
Algorithm 1 Preprocessing Algorithm
Input:
RT 1 , RT 2 , ..., RT t , ..., RT T
Output:
Preprocessed Dataset G(1, 2, ...j, ...J )
1: for each t in (1, T ) do
2:
Split the RT t into PT1t , PT2t , ...PTit , ...
3:
for each i do
4:
Purify PTit following ‘Traffic Purification’
5:
end for
6:
remove duplicated packet from PT1t , PT2t , ...PTit , ...
7:
for each i do
8:
Cut the length of PTit to 900 bytes
9:
Generate traffic-graph G
10:
end for
11: end for

B. DFR PROCEDURE

As shown in Fig.1, the DFR procedure is based on three
DL models, which are CNN, LSTM, and SAE respectively.
45184

We develop the first encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection identifier based on one dimensional CNN.
So far, CNN has been mainly applied in the computer vision
respect, say image classification, object detection. CNN has
a strong ability to learn the spatial properties of a graph pixel
by pixel. We intended to use CNN to find features that help
machine to classify traffic from spatial range. We picked
1D CNN over the popular 2D version because of the original
traffic format is a sequential form organized by hierarchical
structure rather an image. As shown in a relevant work based
on CNN to classify traffic [9], it is proved that 1D CNN can
attain a higher accuracy than 2D CNN.
The 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier is illustrated in Fig.3.
It consists of two convolutional layers, 2 Maxpooling layers, 2 Local Response Normalization (LRN) [5] layers,
and a densely connected layer with Softmax classifier.
In the first stage, we will reshape the input data as 1 ×
900 shape, then we will discard height and focus on processing the 1D data. The classification process is defined as
follows:
The first convolutional layer processes the input data with
32 filters, where each filter has a size of [25, 1]. Each filter
moves 1 step after one convolution operation. The results of
the convolutional layer are inputted to an activation function.
We adopted ReLU [12] activation function in our 1D CNNBased DFR Classifier. Then, the results are processed through
max pooling. In each step, the max pooling processes a [3, 1]
input as follows:
maxpooling [x1, x2, x3] = max(x1, x2, x3)

(1)

And the stride of the maxpooling process is 3. At the end
of the first convolutional layer, an LRN layer is added to
punish those abnormal responses or out layers in order to
attain a better generalization. Then the output will go through
a second convolutional layer which is similar to the first one.
The only difference between those two convolutional layers
is that the second convolutional layer has 64 filers. Finally,
the data will go through a densely connected layer. This layer
is gained by applying dropout on a fully connected layer.
Then the output label is attained by the softmax classifier
at the end of 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier. The softmax
classifier is defined as follows:
exp(Out j )
ŷ = P
exp(Out i )

(2)

where Out j is the output
of jth neuron in the densely con
nected layer. Ŷ = ŷ1 , ŷ2 , ŷ3 , ..., ŷN is the complete set of
VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

FIGURE 3. Overview of the 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier.

classes, and N denotes the total number of classes. The output
with the highest probability indicates the class of the input
value. To be notified that we used Adam [13] optimizer in
this DFR.
For the training process, hyperparameters are set as
{Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}, where the definition of those parameters are descripted in Table 1. Further details of training a 1D CNN-Based DFR is explained
in Alg. 2.
Algorithm 2 1D CNN-Based DFR Training Algorithm
Input:
GTrain ,
{Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}
Output:
1D CNN-Based DFR
1: for each epoch in (1, Epoch) do
2:
for each batch of Minbatch data do
3:
for each G in batch do
4:
Reshape G to 1 × 900 form
5:
Compute convolution with 32 filters
6:
Compute the result through ReLU
7:
Max pooling referring Eq. 1
8:
Punish the result through the LRN layer
9:
Compute convolution with 64 filters
10:
Compute the result through ReLU
11:
Max pooling referring Eq. 1
12:
Punish the result through the LRN layer
13:
Run through a densely connected layer
14:
Output the result according to Eq. 2
15:
Update the weight & bias
16:
end for
17:
end for
18: end for
2) LSTM-BASED DFR CLASSIFIER

The second DFR is developed based on LSTM [6], a kind
of network which is designed to deal with sequential-formdata. LSTM is one kind of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
that can utilize the time-related information. Taken that a
segment of traffic is built up byte by byte and package by

VOLUME 7, 2019

package, which is time-related, traffic from similar classes
must share some similarity in the time-related characteristics. We apply LSTM in DFR to help the machine to
learn the time-related characteristics on its own. Previously,
only a few works mentioned using RNN to classify network
traffic. Torres et al. [14] transformed the traffic byte-data
into character-data then LSTM is applied to learn the connections between characters. Yet, in our proposed LSTMBased DFR Classifier, the input will be a graph. Fig.4
illustrates the overview of our proposed LSTM-Based DFR
Classifier.

FIGURE 4. Overview of the LSTM-Based DFR classifier.

As shown in Fig.4, the LSTM-Based DFR Classifier is
actually based on a three-layered LSTM model. For each
layer, LSTM-Based DFR Classifier havs 256 LSTM cells.
And we also applied dropout in every layer of the LSTM
model in order to gain a better generalization. After the
LSTM model learned the time-related characteristics, the data
will go through a softmax classifier which is described
in Equation (2). Finally, the result label can be checked
at the end of the DFR. It is worth to mention that we
used Adam optimizer in this DFR as well. Training a
LSTM-Based DFR Classifier can use the same hyperparameters that defined in 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier, which
are set as {Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}. The
training of the LSTM-Based DFR Classifier is explained
in Alg. 3.

45185

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

Algorithm 3 LSTM-Based DFR Training Algorithm
Input:
GTrain ,
{Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}
Output:
LSTM-Based DFR
1: for each epoch in (1, Epoch) do
2:
for each batch of Minbatch data do
3:
for each G in batch do
4:
Compute G through the 3-layered LSTM
5:
Dropout according to KeepP
6:
Output the result according to Eq. 2
7:
Update the weight & bias
8:
end for
9:
end for
10: end for

3) SAE-BASED DFR CLASSIFIER

The last DFR’s core is two SAEs. In general, autoencoder
is a kind of semi-supervised learning method that used for
automatic features extraction. SAE is one of the variations
of autoencoder, which has the ability to scan through the
data byte by byte to find the coding characteristics. Fig.5
demonstrates the overview of our SAE-Based DFR Classifier.

FIGURE 5. Overview of the SAE-Based DFR classifier.

The first step is reshaping the graph to have a form of
1 × 900, hence we can fully connect our input with the
first encoder. Fig.6 shows the process of training those two
SAEs. We can tell from Fig.6 that those two SAEs are trained
separately. The first encoder has 1000 neurons which are
densely connected with the 900 inputs and 900 outputs. The
goal of training Encoder 1 is to gain an encoder which can
generate 900 outputs that have the minimum variance with
the 900 inputs. After the Encoder 1 is trained, we will stack
it in the DFR and apply a sigmoid [15] activation function.
Encoder 2 have 1500 neurons, which will be densely connected with the outputs from Encoder 1. Then we will train
the Encoder 2 by reducing the variance between input 2 and
output 2, which is similar to the training of Encoder 1. We will
stack it in the DFR with a sigmoid activation function applied
as well. Finally, the data will go through the softmax classifier
which defined in Equation (2) and output the results. To be
noticed that after those two SAEs stacked into the DFR, a fine
tune training procedure will start in order to attain the final
model.
45186

FIGURE 6. The training process of the two encoders.

Since the two training processes of SAEs are separated,
some of the hyperparameters are different from the previous two DFRs. All the hyperparameters will be set as
{Epoch, EpochFin, Lambda, LambdaFin} and Setsame =
{Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N }, where Setsame share the same
definition with the previous two DFRs. Epoch is the number
of epochs of the two-SAEs training process, which cannot
be set as a very large number. A large Epoch in the twoSAEs training process can misguide the model to overfit with
the training data. EpochFin is the number of epochs in the
fine tune process, this number does not have the limitation
as Epoch. Lambda is the lambda parameter of the L1 regularization in the two-SAEs training process, which need to
be set as a number much bigger than the lambda parameter
of the L1 regularization in the fine tune process, namely
LambdaFin. The reason is that a small Lambda is not effective
with the two SAEs training process. The training of a SAEBased DFR is summarized in Alg. 4.
Algorithm 4 SAE-Based DFR Training Algorithm
Input:
GTrain ,
Setsame = {Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N },
{Epoch, EpochFin, Lambda, LambdaFin}
Output:
SAE-Based DFR
1: for each one of the two encoders do
2:
for each epoch in (1, Epoch) do
3:
for each batch of Minbatch data do
4:
for each G in batch do
5:
Compute the output of Autoencoder
6:
Process Sigmoid
7:
Dropout according to KeepP
8:
Compute the cost between output and input
9:
Update the weight & bias
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
Current Encoder connects with the successive layer
14: end for
15: for each epoch in (1, EpochFin) do
16:
Output the result according to Eq. 2
17:
Update the weight & bias
18: end for
VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

4) SELECT AND SAVE

After those three DFRs are trained with training data, we will
exam those DFRs with testing data. The DFR that holds the
highest accuracy is believed to be the model that best fits with
the current traffic environment. Where accuracy is defined as
follows:
TP+TN
Accuracy = TP+FP+FN
+TN

(3)

where TP is True Positive, namely the number of correctly
classified cases as a specific class; FP is False Positive,
namely the number of misclassified cases that classified as
that class; FN, False Negative, which is the number of cases
that are supposed to be classified as that class, yet misclassified as other classes; TN, True Negative, which is the number
of cases that correctly classified as not that specific class.
Hence, this model will be the model that we saved and
conduct the following classification and identification tasks
for this time units. DFR will be trained in an online fashion,
which means DFR has the ability to update itself in order to
fit with the traffic environment automatically. Alg. 5 explains
other details in the processes of the online-fashioned DFR
framework.
Algorithm 5 Online-Fashioned DFR Algorithm
Input:
RT 1 , RT 2 , ..., RT t , ..., RT T
Output:
The DFR model that best fits with the current traffic environment
1: for each t in (1, T ) do
2:
Apply Alg. 1 to gain G(1, 2, ...j, ...J )
3:
Randomly separate G(1, 2, ...j, ...J ) according to 9:1;
4:
Use GTrain to train the three DFRs;
5:
Use GTest to select the highest-accuracy DFR;
6:
Run the current-using DFR on the same GTest ;
7:
if the current-using DFR’s accuracy is smaller then
8:
Save the new DFR;
9:
Transmit the new DFR to other units
10:
end if
11: end for

public datasets, ISCX VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset [16] and
ISCX 2012 IDS dataset [17] respectively.
The first selected dataset is regenerated from ISCX
VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset [16] in order to evaluate the
effectiveness of DFR on encrypted traffic classification.
ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset originally has 7 types of regular encrypted traffic and 7 types of protocol encapsulated
traffic. Since we mainly focus on evaluating the efficiency
on encrypted traffic classification, we will select and label
data from those 7 types of regular encrypted traffic, which are
Web Browsing, Email, Chat, Streaming, File Transfer, VoIP,
and P2P. To be noticed that all other six types of encrypted
traffic are related to Web Browsing, hence we abandoned
this class of encrypted traffic referring to Wang’s work [9].
Moreover, some of the classes in the original dataset have
much more instances than others, which might misguide the
model in the training process. Hence we cut them short to
gain a balanced dataset. The structure of our selected dataset
is shown in Table 2. After normalization applied, each class
of traffic have a quantity around 10000 cases. This dataset
will be automatically divided into the training dataset and
the testing dataset according to 9:1. As a result, the training
dataset will have 52916 cases, and the testing dataset will
have 5880 cases.
TABLE 2. Structure of the selected dataset 1.

TABLE 3. Structure of the selected dataset 2.

III. EVALUATION

In this section, we will evaluate the DFR framework from
three aspects, which are the efficiency of encrypted traffic
classification, the efficiency of intrusion detection, and the
storage resource requirement.
A. EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

We will first describe the two selected datasets that we used.
Then, the setup of the experiment is revealed with details
of hyperparameters in the training process. Finally, we will
explain the metrics that we used.
1) DATASETS FOR EVALUATION

Currently, we have not yet found an available public dataset
that has both encrypted traffic and malware traffic, hence we
decide to evaluate the DFR framework using two selected
VOLUME 7, 2019

The second dataset is regenerated from ISCX 2012 IDS
dataset [17] in order to evaluate the effectiveness of DFR
on intrusion detection. This dataset contains the network
traffic of seven days, which can be divided into 5 classes,
Normal, Brute Force SSH, DDoS, HttpDoS, and Infiltrating
respectively. We select the data that only from days that
have malware traffic for simplification. Since malware traffic
is expected to have a relatively smaller scale compared to
normal traffic in real life, no normalization approach on the
dataset is applied. Table 3 demonstrates the structure of the
selected dataset. Finally, this selected dataset is divided into
the training dataset and the testing dataset according to 9:1 for
each class.
45187

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

2) EXPERIMENT SETUP

Tensorflow is used as the experiment ML software framework. We run the evaluation on Ubuntu 18.04 64 bit OS. The
processor is an 8 cores Intel I7-7700K CPU with 32 GB of
memory. Two chips of Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080 Ti is used
as the GPU accelerator. The hyperparameters for the DFR
training process is shown in Table 4.
TABLE 4. Settings of hyperparameters.

As we can tell from Table 5, DL models can attain an averaging 3.37 percents higher accuracy after replacing L2 regularization with L1 regularization. This has proved our analysis
of L1 and L2 regularization in section II-B, hence we will
only apply L1 regularization in our DFR framework. The 1D
CDD-Based, attained the highest accuracy, 99.85%, therefore
we will save this model as the optimum DFR classifier for the
current network traffic environment.
We also compare the performance of our DFR framework with two state-of-art methods on the same dataset.
The first method is from the work [16], C4.5 DT. This
is a ML-Based classification method that requires humanengineered features. The second method is the 1D-CNN classification method that proposed in the work [9], which is
a similar model as we used in DFR, yet no regularization
approach and LRN applied in their 1D-CNN.

3) EVALUATION METRICS

We use the Accuracy that defined in Equation (3) to select the
optimum DFR. We evaluate and compare the performance
of the selected DFR with state-of-art methods using three
metrics. Namely, Precision, Recall, and F1 score, which are
defined as follows:
TP
TP + FP
TP
Recall =
TP + FN
2 × Precision × Recall
F1_score =
Precision + Recall
Precision =

(4)
(5)
(6)

where the definition of TP, FP, and FN can be viewed at the
section II-B.4.
B. EXPERIMENT RESULT

We will first present the evaluation of the encrypted traffic
classification efficiency. The reason why L1 regularization
is adopted is explained with experimental results. Then,
the intrusion detection efficiency is evaluated. Finally, a comparison of storage resource requirement is presented.
1) ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION EFFICIENCY

The accuracy of three trained DFR on the testing dataset of
dataset 1 is shown in Table 5. We also evaluate the effectiveness of applying L1 regularization in this experiment.
TABLE 5. Accuracy of DFRs on encrypted traffic.

FIGURE 7. Comparison of the classification efficiency.

As shown in Fig.7, we can tell the DFR framework can
attain a much accurate and robust classification result than
ML-Based C4.5 method and DL-Based 1D-CNN method.
The averaging F1 score of the DFR framework is 0.9987,
which is kind of impressive comparing to the averaging
F1 score of the C4.5 DT and 1D-CNN. The averaging
improvement of precision compared to C4.5 is 11.6 percents,
to 1D-CNN is 14.9 percents. All these data are supporting
the fact that the DFR framework is capable of classifying
encrypted traffic accurately.
2) INTRUSION DETECTION EFFICIENCY

As for the dataset 2, the LSTM-Based DFR Classifier attained
an accuracy of 99.41 %, which is the highest of the three
DFR classifiers. We then compared the DFR framework
with two state-of-art ML-Based methods that demonstrated
in Atli’s work [2], namely DT, and KNN respectively.
45188

VOLUME 7, 2019

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

REFERENCES

FIGURE 8. Comparison of the intrusion detection efficiency.

Those are two kinds of ML-Based methods for intrusion
detection.
As shown in Fig.8, DFR is able to maintain a robust
and high detection performance on real-life malware traffic.
The averaging improvement on the F1 score is 0.137 and
0.106 comparing to those two methods. It is worth to mention that, the proposed framework is able to identify the
HttpDoS malware traffic at a 1 out of 1 F1 score, which
has major improvement compared with DT and KNN. All
these data demonstrate the capability of an accurate intrusion
detection.
3) STORAGE REQUIREMENT COMPARISON

Finally, we compare the storage resource requirement of the
aforementioned methods. An 1D CDD-Based DFR Classifier’s trained file is 1534KB, LSTM-Based DFR Classifier
requires 186KB to store, and the SAE-Based DFR Classifier’s
trained file is 12732KB. Comparing to the averaging file
size of KNN model and DT model, which are 67548KB
and 34247KB, a dramatic drop in the storage requirement is
met.

[1] S. Kumar, S. Dharmapurikar, F. Yu, P. Crowley, and J. Turner, ‘‘Algorithms to accelerate multiple regular expressions matching for deep packet
inspection,’’ ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36, no. 4,
pp. 339–350, 2006.
[2] B. G. Atli, Y. Miche, A. Kalliola, I. Oliver, S. Holtmanns, and A. Lendasse,
‘‘Anomaly-based intrusion detection using extreme learning machine and
aggregation of network traffic statistics in probability space,’’ Cogn. Comput., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 848–863, 2018.
[3] Y. Zeng, M. Qiu, Z. Ming, and M. Liu, ‘‘Senior2Local: A machine learning
based intrusion detection method for vanets,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart
Comput. Commun., 2018, pp. 417–426.
[4] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, ‘‘Datanet: Deep learning based
encrypted network traffic classification in sdn home gateway,’’ IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
[5] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, ‘‘ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,’’ in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[6] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, ‘‘Long short-term memory,’’ Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[7] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol,
‘‘Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a
deep network with a local denoising criterion,’’ J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 3371–3408, Dec. 2010.
[8] A. Orebaugh, G. Ramirez, and J. Beale, Wireshark & Ethereal Network
Protocol Analyzer Toolkit. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2006.
[9] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, ‘‘End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Inform. (ISI), Jul. 2017,
pp. 43–48.
[10] M. Fatahi, ‘‘Mnist handwritten digits,’’ Tech. Rep., 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273124795_MNIST_
handwritten_digits_Description_and_using
[11] M. Y. Park and T. Hastie, ‘‘L1 -regularization path algorithm for generalized
linear models,’’ J. Roy. Stat. Soc., B (Stat. Methodol.), vol. 69, no. 4,
pp. 659–677, 2007.
[12] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, ‘‘Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines,’’ in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2010,
pp. 807–814.
[13] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. (2014). ‘‘Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization.’’
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
6980
[14] P. Torres, C. Catania, S. Garcia, and C. G. Garino, ‘‘An analysis of recurrent neural networks for botnet detection behavior,’’ in
Proc. IEEE Biennial Congr. Argentina (ARGENCON), Jun. 2016,
pp. 1–6.
[15] X. Yin, J. Goudriaan, E. A. Lantinga, J. Vos, and H. J. Spiertz, ‘‘A flexible
sigmoid function of determinate growth,’’ Ann. Botany, vol. 91, no. 3,
pp. 361–371, 2003.
[16] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, ‘‘Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related,’’
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[17] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, ‘‘Toward
developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for
intrusion detection,’’ Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374,
2012.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented a novel DL-Based framework
which is capable of classifying encrypted traffic and detecting
malware traffic. Compared to state-of-art ML-Based methods, our DFR framework does not require the heavy work
of selecting features and private featured details. Moreover,
based on the results over two public datasets, it is proved that
DFR can attain a much more robust and accurate performance
on both encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection than state-of-art methods with a less storage resource
requirement.
VOLUME 7, 2019

YI ZENG is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
degree, majoring in electronic and information
engineering, with Xidian University. He has been
with The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks (ISN), Xidian University, since
2017. His main research interests include machine
learning, cyber systems’ security issues, network
traffic recognition, and network virtualization.

45189

Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

HUAXI GU received the B.E. degree and the M.E.
and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunication engineering and telecommunication and information
systems from Xidian University, Xidian, China,
in 2000, 2003, and 2005, respectively, where he
is currently a Full Professor with The State Key
Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks (ISN),
Telecommunication Department. He has authored
or coauthored more than 100 publications in
refereed journals and conferences. His current
interests include interconnection networks, networks-on-chip, and optical
inter-chip communication. He is a Reviewer for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
COMPUTER, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING,
the IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, IEEE COMMUNICATION LETTERS, Information Sciences, the Journal of Supercomputing, the Journal of System Architecture,
the Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, and Microprocessors and
Microsystems.

YANTAO GUO received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Hebei Technology University, Tianjin, China, in 1990, and the Ph.D. degree
in system and network from Xi’an University,
Xi’an, China, in 2008. He is currently the Deputy
Director of the National Key Laboratory on Communication Networks, The 54th Research Institute, CETC. His current research interests include
networks and communication system designing.

WENTING WEI received the M.E. degree from
the School of Telecommunications Engineering,
Xidian University, in 2014. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication and
information systems with The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks (ISN), Xidian
University. Her main research interests include
data center networks, optical interconnected networks, and network virtualization.

45190

VOLUME 7, 2019