M IRAGE:
Mobile-app Trafﬁc Capture and Ground-truth Creation
Giuseppe Aceto1,2 , Domenico Ciuonzo1 , Antonio Montieri1 , Valerio Persico1 , Antonio Pescapé1,2
1

University of Napoli “Federico II” (Italy) and 2 NM2 s.r.l. (Italy)
{giuseppe.aceto, domenico.ciuonzo, antonio.montieri, valerio.persico, pescape}@unina.it

Abstract—Network trafﬁc analysis, i.e. the umbrella of procedures for distilling information from network trafﬁc, represents
the enabler for highly-valuable proﬁling information, other than
being the workhorse for several key network management tasks.
While it is currently being revolutionized in its nature by the
rising share of trafﬁc generated by mobile and hand-held devices,
existing design solutions are mainly evaluated on private trafﬁc
traces, and only a few public datasets are available, thus clearly
limiting repeatability and further advances on the topic. To this
end, this paper introduces and describes M IRAGE, a reproducible
architecture for mobile-app trafﬁc capture and ground-truth
creation. The outcome of this system is M IRAGE -2019, a humangenerated dataset for mobile trafﬁc analysis (with associated
ground-truth) having the goal of advancing the state-of-the-art
in mobile app trafﬁc analysis. A ﬁrst statistical characterization
of the mobile-app trafﬁc in the dataset is provided in this paper.
Still, M IRAGE is expected to be capitalized by the networking
community for different tasks related to mobile trafﬁc analysis.
Index Terms—Android apps; encrypted trafﬁc; mobile apps;
mobile trafﬁc; reproducible research; open dataset; trafﬁc classiﬁcation;

I. I NTRODUCTION
As in almost all experimental-research ﬁelds, replicability
and reproducibility are critical concerns in achieving significant and grounded progress [1]. Accordingly, a strong push
for them is currently observed, with research artefacts being
also evaluated in the standard peer-review process [2]. In
fact, provisioning datasets as well as carefully documenting
workﬂows for obtaining them, are critical to foster replicability and reproducibility, respectively, with both fueling
research dissemination. Indeed, by leveraging wisely sourced
and constructed datasets that are available to the research
community, research outcomes become (i) easier to reproduce,
(ii) comparable against other studies, and (iii) generalizable
to other data/systems not studied yet.
These possibilities have been sorely missing for a long
time [3] in the ﬁeld of network trafﬁc analysis (i.e., distilling
information to perform key management and proﬁling tasks,
such as trafﬁc classiﬁcation, modeling, and prediction). In spite
of this huge interest, the availability of data for performing
research within this ﬁeld has remained quite limited. Many
appealing research solutions have been (and are) mostly validated on private datasets, thus precluding repeatability and
safe advances on the topic. Still, it is shared opinion that this
aspect contributes to slow down and limit the understanding
of the tackled problems, since it constitutes a severe drawback
in both design and experimental validation phases.

Even worse, in recent years new challenges have arisen.
Smartphones have become the main medium of communication, providing means for connecting groups of users as
well as users to services. According to Ericsson mobility
report [4], the number of smartphone subscriptions is expected
to reach 7.2 billions by 2024, with a corresponding +30%
predicted compound annual growth rate of trafﬁc generated
by mobile networks. Due to the users massive shift toward
mobile devices and the mobile applications (in short, apps)
running on them, overall network trafﬁc reached huge volumes
and started evolving at an unprecedented pace. Such rate of
change is further increased for mobile apps due to the software
distribution systems (the apps marketplaces), that have fostered one-click installation and quick-paced automatic updates.
The encryption mechanisms being increasingly adopted further
impair the analysis, while unprecedented privacy concerns
limit the collection and publishing of raw mobile trafﬁc traces.
These challenges call even more for the availability of mobiletrafﬁc datasets, considering that even when they are made
available to the community, the presence of bot-generated
trafﬁc or experiments run in controlled environments limit the
validity of the proposed analysis or design solutions.
The contribution of this paper is fourfold: (i) we survey the
encrypted-trafﬁc datasets publicly available, highlighting their
main characteristics as well as main shortcomings and limitations; (ii) we present and describe our reproducible M IRAGE
architecture for generating new mobile-app trafﬁc datasets and
automatically creating the related high accurate ground-truth.
The focus is on apps running on Android, currently retaining
the 76% of the whole market share1 ; (iii) we release the
M IRAGE -2019 dataset2 , thus fostering the replicability of the
analysis and its extension to multiple use cases; (iv) we provide
a characterization for M IRAGE -2019, according to metrics
of interest at three different granularities (ﬂows, packets, and
metadata), thus proving its suitability for a wide range of tasks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. II
reviews current publicly-available datasets for encrypted (and
possibly mobile) trafﬁc analysis; Sec. III describes the whole
M IRAGE architecture involved (including capture and groundtruth building phases), with Sec. IV describing the release
format of the M IRAGE -2019 dataset. Then, Sec. V presents
example tasks enabled by M IRAGE -2019, by means of mobile
1 http://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-share/mobile/worldwide
2 M IRAGE -2019 is publicly released at http://trafﬁc.comics.unina.it/mirage.

978-1-7281-0875-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Capture Span



♂

TO

Mar. ’15 - Jun. ’15
Lug. ’15 - Feb. ’16
’14 - ’17
Mar. ’18
Oct. ’16 - Mar. ’17
Oct. ’16 - Apr. ’17
Apr. ’18 - May ’18
Aug. ’15 - May ’16
Sep. ’17 - Feb. ’18
Oct. ’18 - Feb. ’19
May ’17 - May ’19


























B
B
F
B
B
B
W
F
P
F
B














Meta

ISCXVPN2016
ISCXTor2016
Anon17
QUIC
MTD
UNSWIoT
NTD Reddit
Video Streams
Youtube Video
Netﬂix UE
M IRAGE -2019

TO stats

Dataset

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
Ours

Pkt

Ref

Raw

Table I: Summary of previous datasets on encrypted trafﬁc analysis.

















Task

Diversity

R

TI&TC
TI&TC
TI&TC
TI&TC
TI&TC
DevID
WebAN
VidID
VT-QoE
VT-QoE
TI&TC

7 TTs
8 TTs / 18 apps
3 ATs / 8 TTs / 21 apps
5 QUIC services
12 Apps / 10 DEVs / 10 EXPs
28 DEVs
5 BWs
2.1k VTLs
3 VTLs / 374 h
10 LOCs / 2.6k VTLs
40 apps / 3 DEVs / 280+ EXPs




















Trafﬁc Nature:  = Mobile, ♂ = Human-generated. Trafﬁc Object (TO): BF = Biﬂow, F = Flow, P = Packet, W = Webpage. Released Data: Raw = PCAP
ﬁles, Pkt = Packet-level data, TO stats = TO statistics, Meta = Metadata. Task: DevID = Device Identiﬁcation, TI&TC = Trafﬁc Identiﬁcation and
Classiﬁcation, VidID = Video Identiﬁcation, VT-QoE = Quality-of-Experience in Video Trafﬁc, WebAN = Website Analysis. Diversity: AT = Anonymity
Tool, BW = Browser, DEV = Device, EXP = Experimenter, LOC = Location, TT = Trafﬁc Type, VTL = Video Title. Reproducibility (R).

trafﬁc characterization & modeling attempts, whereas Sec. VI
discusses the ethical considerations concerning the acquisition
phase. Finally, Sec. VII provides concluding remarks.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This section reviews the most related public trafﬁc datasets
and categorizes them according to the taxonomy deﬁned in
Tab. I. Only datasets collecting encrypted network trafﬁc
have been considered. Other datasets e.g., related to networkanomaly detection or attack classiﬁcation have not been taken
into account, due to their peculiar focus on network security.
In detail, we categorize each dataset based on whether (a)
it focuses on the mobile scenario, (b) it is generated by real
human experimenters (as opposed to bots or scripts) and (c)
the description of the capture system employed for generating
the trafﬁc makes it partially/completely reproducible. As a
complementary information, we also provide the capture span
for each dataset, either explicitly speciﬁed in the corresponding
paper or obtained by direct inspection of the artifacts. Additionally, we surface (i) the trafﬁc object considered (i.e. the
trafﬁc segmentation criterion used), (ii) the type(s) of released
data, and (iii) the diversity of the collection space. Speciﬁcally,
with respect to point (ii), we classify the form of released
data in Raw (PCAP ﬁles are available), Pkt (ﬁelds from each
packet are available), TO stats (i.e. summarizing statistics for
each trafﬁc object are available) and meta (complementary
metadata are available). Differently, referring to point (iii),
we provide the number of different services/applications or
types of objects considered. Finally, an explicit mention to the
main intended task approached is provided.
First, referring to the capture span, we observe that all the
datasets considered have been collected in the last ﬁve years
(2014–19), reﬂecting the only recent trend toward the growing
adoption of encrypted protocols (e.g., TLS) [15]. Further, we
observe that the experimental campaigns last from months
to years, with longer ones typically associated with human
interaction (see later discussion). A similar rationale applies

to M IRAGE -2019, collected in the last two years and expected
to reﬂect better the current nature of mobile trafﬁc.
Differently, focusing on network trafﬁc generated exclusively by mobile (handheld) devices, it is apparent that only
the datasets MTD [9] and M IRAGE -2019 (ours) have captured
this type of trafﬁc. The only exceptions are represented by
UNSWIoT [10] (in which some background trafﬁc is generated from mobile devices) and Youtube Video [13] (where
streaming video was analyzed on smartphones).
As anticipated, not all the considered datasets have been
generated by human users. Indeed, we point out that the
above feature may be crucial when analyzing trafﬁc generated
by complex interaction patterns from the users, as in the case
of anonymity tools [5, 7] and mobile applications (object of
this work) [9] with automated tools non reﬂecting completely
the above complex behaviour. For example, [8, 11, 12, 14]
have employed Selenium3 for automating web browsing.
Referring to trafﬁc object segmentation, most of the works
consider either ﬂows [7] or biﬂows as the relevant trafﬁc
analysis unit, with the sole exception of [11] using webpages
as the relevant object of analysis.
Referring to the main task approached, most of the datasets
have been collected with the aim of performing and evaluating
trafﬁc identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation, with speciﬁc focus on
anonymity tools (to assess their degree of anonymity) [6, 7],
speciﬁc trafﬁc services (e.g. Google QUIC protocol) [8],
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) [5] or mobile apps classiﬁcation [9]. Differently, other datasets are speciﬁcally focusing on
(encrypted) video trafﬁc analysis, with either considering title
ﬁngerprinting [12] or Quality-of-Experience (QoE) prediction
[13, 14]. Finally, some works focus on identifying speciﬁc
devices generating trafﬁc, e.g. IoT devices [10], and other
delve into website analysis [11].
Referring to diversity, datasets provide information with
different degrees of variety, also according to the goal and
the scope of the work they are proposed with. Overall,
3 https://www.seleniumhq.org

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

different applications/services/contents are considered, as well
as multiple experimenters (in case of human-generated trafﬁc),
capture devices, and locations. For instance, ISCXTor2016 [6]
contains 8 different trafﬁc trafﬁc types (browsing, audio, etc.)
corresponding to 18 applications which are run under two
different scenarios (one to detect Tor trafﬁc ﬂows and the
other to detect the application type). Differently, Anon17 [7]
contains info about the trafﬁc types and applications running
on Tor, I2P and JonDonym is provided in the form of 3level labels for each ﬂow. However, each dataset focuses on
a limited set of the mentioned aspects in line with the nature
of the problem to investigate. In fact, none of those surveyed
covers all these aspects at best. At most, 21 applications [7],
28 devices [10], and 10 experimenters [9] are considered.
M IRAGE -2019 takes into consideration trafﬁc generated by
280+ experimenters using 40 applications via 3 devices.
Finally, referring to reproducibility, it is apparent that not
in all the cases the details, the setup and the procedures
required to reproduce the same experimental setup for the
capture have been reported. Nonetheless, in some cases, a
detailed description of the whole experimental setup has been
provided, see e.g. [10, 12, 13].
III. T HE M IRAGE A RCHITECTURE
At a high level, the M IRAGE system architecture consists of
two main components: the Capture System and the Analysis
System. Figure 1(a) shows the architecture of the Capture
System. The capture server is a workstation equipped with
an IEEE 802.11g access point, which provides connectivity
to the mobile devices that generate the trafﬁc when human
experimenters operate the apps. A wired connection brings
the access of the capture server to the public Internet, performing Network Address Translation (NAT). Notably, the
upstream connections to the public Internet do not constitute

Capture server

Capture System

Rooted Android device
Experimenter

WiFi access point
Internet

Analysis System
USB hub

(a) M IRAGE architecture.
GT building phase

Capture phase

Dataset extraction phase

PCAP
trace

Experimenter

Trafﬁc
segmentation
Trafﬁc
generation

Trafﬁc
capture

MIRAGE-2019
dataset
Labeling

Dataset
extraction

System-call
ﬁltering
strace
log-ﬁle

(b) M IRAGE -2019 dataset building.

Figure 1: The M IRAGE architecture: (a) diagram of main components
and (b) workﬂow of dataset building.

a bottleneck in terms of bandwidth, thus not impacting the
properties of the trafﬁc stream ﬂowing through the access
WLAN. Each mobile device is also physically attached to the
capture server through the USB hub; this allows leveraging the
Android Debug Bridge (ADB) to send commands from the
capture server to the attached devices and receive responses
on an off-band channel. Such procedure requires the devices
to be rooted in order to successfully run the trafﬁc capture.
Notably, our architecture is able to handle trafﬁc capture of
multiple devices simultaneously. The captured trafﬁc is then
processed by the Analysis System (in our prototype, hosted
on the capture server itself) to produce M IRAGE -2019.
In detail, the M IRAGE architecture builds the dataset in three
phases as shown in Fig. 1(b): (1) Capture phase: trafﬁc traces
are collected in PCAP format together with strace log–
ﬁles keeping track of network system-calls. (2) GT building
phase: PCAP traces are segmented and log-ﬁles are ﬁltered.
this information is then combined to produce labeled trafﬁc
objects. (3) Dataset extraction phase: labeled trafﬁc objects
are processed to extract the information of interest (including
statistical features) to be used as input data for exploratory
analysis or machine learning tasks. The next subsections
provide details about these three phases.
A. Capture phase
A capture session begins when an experimenter connects a
mobile device to the USB hub: this procedure automatically
kicks off the capture of the network trafﬁc as well as the logging of the system calls. In detail, the trafﬁc is captured on the
wired interface of the capture server by means of tcpdump4
Leveraging trafﬁc ﬁlters based on the MAC address of the
connected devices allows to collect the trafﬁc generated by
multiple devices at the same time, without any ambiguity. On
the other hand, the system-call tracing is enabled on the mobile
device itself by using the strace utility via ADB5 strace
is set to log network-related and process-management system
calls (e.g., connect, bind, getsockname, fork, wait,
exec, etc.), also logging the related <IP:port> pairs and
associating each socket descriptor to the name of the Android
package which originates the call.6 As a result, this phase
provides an strace log-ﬁle with ground-truth information
for each PCAP trace collected (see Fig. 1b). This kernel-based
mechanism for gathering information being given, the ﬁnest
granularity we can achieve is the (bi)ﬂow level.
The described capturing system allows the capture of
mobile-app trafﬁc when accessing the Internet through a WiFi channel. In principle, the behavior of the apps could be
different from the one shown when connecting through 3G/4G
channel. Indeed, Android applications may detect the type
of network that is used to transport their data, telling apart
Wi-Fi, Mobile, and VPN connections and potentially acting
4 http://www.tcpdump.org/.
5 https://developer.android.com/studio/command-line/adb.html
6 To this aim, we monitor the Android zygote process that handles the
forking of each new application process. Then we extract the Android package
names from the PIDs returned by the fork system calls.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. GT building phase
In the GT building phase, ﬁrst the PCAP traces are segmented to obtain trafﬁc objects. Then, each of these objects
is labeled taking advantage of the information extracted from
the associated strace log-ﬁle.
PCAP traces are segmented into biﬂows, that is we group
together all the packets having the same 5-tuple (source IP and
port, destination IP and port, and transport-level protocol),
with source and destination addresses and ports that can
be swapped. As opposed to common heuristics leveraged to
deﬁne the 5-tuple that identiﬁes each biﬂow (i.e. ﬁrst packet
captured, TCP SYN, etc.) [3], we are able to order the items
consituting the 5-tuple based on the knowledge of IP addresses
of the Android devices used for the captures. Therefore, in the
dataset the addresses in biﬂows are ordered in the upstream
direction (i.e. local-to-remote, with reference to the mobile
terminal). Note that biﬂow segmentation is a common choice
for trafﬁc objects [3, 16] and perfectly ﬁts the metadata
extracted from the network (viz. socket) system-calls.
Then, each biﬂow is labeled with the Android packagename that exactly matches the 5-tuple in the strace logﬁle, considering getsockname and connect system calls.
In the case a perfect match cannot be found in the log-ﬁle
for some biﬂows8 , the procedure assigns labels according to
a heuristic, i.e. labeling these biﬂows with the most-common
label (i.e. package name) in the PCAP trace. As this approach
can potentially cause mislabeling, the case of heuristic labeling
is explicitly marked as such in the dataset, allowing the ﬁnal
user to decide between considering in the GT all trafﬁc objects
(possibly noisy) or keep only strict matching ones.
C. Dataset extraction phase
This phase is in charge of taking each labeled trafﬁc object
and extract the relevant information to feed any potential
application of the collected data (e.g., exploratory mobileapp trafﬁc analysis or machine learning algorithms to solve
7 The ConnectivityManager method getType() returns, among
the others, TYPE_WIFI, TYPE_MOBILE, TYPE_VPN according to the
active connection type (see https://developer.android.com/reference/android/
net/ConnectivityManager for API level before 21, or https://developer.android.
com/reference/android/net/NetworkCapabilities for the analogous constants
preﬁxed with TRANSPORT_ in API level 21 and following).
8 This could be caused by either the pre-existence of these biﬂows before the
capture started or by a failure of the strace in following the corresponding
child-processes forked by zygote.

1
0.8

CDF

in different ways according to that.7 Other mobile-app trafﬁc
capture approaches leverage an encrypted connection (VPN)
that tunnels the trafﬁc over 3G/4G to a gateway/capture server
[9]. Compared to our method, the VPN-based ones not only
suffer from the identical issue (apps are able to know if the
transport network is a VPN the same way), but possibly add
uncontrolled changes to the statistical properties of captured
trafﬁc due to the underlying tunneling protocol mechanics
and the network between the mobile device and the capture
gateway, resulting in a trafﬁc timing less accurate and possibly
traces less representative of plain 3G/4G setups.

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
10

100

1000

10000

PCAP-trace duration [s]

Figure 2: Cumulative distribution of the duration (s in log-scale) of
the PCAP traces collected. The diamond marker reports the average,
whereas the shaded box highlights the (5, 95)th percentile region.

speciﬁc tasks). The output of this phase constitutes the ﬁnal
M IRAGE -2019 dataset. Since the trafﬁc objects here considered correspond to biﬂows, information can be drawn in the
form of summarizing statistics from the whole trafﬁc object, of
from a subset of the constituting packets. The speciﬁc types
of information provided for M IRAGE -2019 and the related
context are described in full details in the following section.
IV. DATASET D ESCRIPTION
We have collected the M IRAGE -2019 dataset in the ARCLAB laboratory at the University of Napoli “Federico II”.
The capture sessions (cf. Sec. III-A) span from May 2017 to
May 2019. We employed three devices to generate the mobile
trafﬁc, namely: (i) Xiaomi Mi5, (ii) Google Nexus 7, and
(iii) Samsung Galaxy A5. In detail, we installed the custom
ﬁrmware CyanogenMod v13.0 (corresponding to the Android
version 6.0.1) on all the devices and enabled the root mode.
More than 280 experimenters took part to the dataset
construction on a voluntary basis, by performing one or two
experimental sessions each. The experimenters involved in this
activity were students of three different courses9 held at the
University of Napoli “Federico II”, aged 19 ÷ 25 years, with a
85/15% share between males and females. Each experimental
session lasted two hours, at most. Altogether, during each
experimental session, each experimenter performed 12 capture
sessions of 5 ÷ 10 minutes (each resulting in one PCAP trafﬁc
trace and one strace log-ﬁle, cf. Sec. III). In each capture
session the experimenter was asked to perform activities
mimicking common uses of a single app with the intent to
explore its functionalities in addition to ﬁrst-time install, login,
registration. We report the ethical considerations underlying
the aforementioned trafﬁc-capture procedure in Sec. VI.
Overall, the M IRAGE -2019 dataset gathers the trafﬁc generated by 40 Android apps belonging to 16 different categories
according to Google Play apps distribution portal [17]. Before
each experimental session, the exercised app is updated to
the latest version available on the Italian Play Store. The
M IRAGE website (http://trafﬁc.comics.unina.it/mirage) reports
the detailed app metadata together with the links to their pages
9 Namely: Computer Architectures, Computer Networks, and Internet Analysis and Performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

biow
[Table III]

packet
data
[Table II]

5-tuple

packet
length

ow
features
ow
metadata
[Table IV]

upstream
ow
[Table III]
downstream
ow
[Table III]
biow
[Table III]

iat
upstream
ow
[Table III]
downstream
ow
[Table III]

Figure 3: Structure of the JSON ﬁles constituting M IRAGE -2019.

on Google Play. As a whole, a total of 4606 PCAP traces were
collected within M IRAGE -201910 .
Figure 2 shows the cumulative distribution of the duration
of the traces collected, having an average duration of 370 s.
It can be noted that the majority of traces has a duration
corresponding to that prescribed for capture sessions (i.e.
5 ÷ 10 min.), being the median equal to 329 s and the
5- and 95-percentile equal to 213 s and 674 s, respectively.
Differently, outliers are due to unintended disconnections from
the trafﬁc capture system, erroneous procedures carried out
by the experimenters, but also speciﬁc experimental scenarios
(e.g., prolonged video-playing, calls, etc.).
We release the M IRAGE -2019 dataset in JSON format to
foster its compatibility and increase its usability: one JSON ﬁle
corresponds to one PCAP trace captured (i.e. a self-contained
capture session). In detail, for each biﬂow—identiﬁed by its
5-tuple—we have extracted: (i) per-packet data, (ii) per-ﬂow
features, and (iii) per-ﬂow metadata. Figure 3 shows the
structure of each JSON ﬁle. The successive paragraphs provide
details about released data and their format.
Per-packet data: We extract 6 informative header ﬁelds and
the L4 payload of the ﬁrst 32 packets of each biﬂow. Table IIa
describes the data Di extracted. In detail, each Di identiﬁes
a list of up to 32 elements. Researchers performing trafﬁc
classiﬁcation [18, 19] and website ﬁngerprinting [20] via
machine and deep learning used these inputs in their works.
Per-ﬂow features: To provide information on the whole biﬂow
and corresponding upstream and downstream ﬂows, we select
17 statistical features computed on the sets of upstream,
downstream, and complete (i.e. both of them) IP packet lengths
and inter-arrival times, for a total of 102 per-ﬂow features.
Table IIb reports the per-ﬂow features Fi extracted. Previous
works in the ﬁeld of trafﬁc classiﬁcation via machine learning
successfully leveraged these features to feed the classiﬁcation
algorithms they devised [16, 21–23].
Per-ﬂow metadata: Table IIc describes per-ﬂow metadata
complementing per-ﬂow features, being also related to complete biﬂow and upstream/downstream ﬂows. GT (viz. the
10 We have ﬁltered out the PCAP traces having an strace log-ﬁle less
than 200 kB or a duration less than 10 seconds. We plan to continue the
experimental activities and update the M IRAGE -2019 dataset over time.

Table II: The M IRAGE -2019 dataset. Di , Fi , and Mi report the
dict-keys in the released JSON ﬁles.
(a) Per-packet data extracted from the ﬁrst 32 packets of each biﬂow.
Di
src_port
dst_port
packet_dir
L4_payload_bytes
iat
TCP_win_size
L4_raw_payload

Description
Source transport-layer port
Destination transport-layer port
Packet direction (0 upstream, 1 downstream)
Number of bytes in L4 payload
Inter-arrival time
TCP window size (0 for UDP packets)
Byte-wise raw L4 payload (integer ∈ [0, 255])

(b) Per-ﬂow features extracted from the sets of upstream, downstream,
and complete IP packet lengths and inter-arrival times.
Fi
min
max
mean
std
var
mad
skew
kurtosis
q_percentile

Description
Minimum
Maximum
Arithmetic mean
Standard deviation
Variance
Mean absolute deviation
Unbiased sample skewness
Unbiased Fisher kurtosis
q th percentile (q ∈ [10 : 10 : 90])

(c) Per-ﬂow metadata Mi related to the complete biﬂow (BF) and
upstream (UF) and downstream (DF) ﬂows.
Mi
BF_label
BF_labeling_type
{BF,UF,DF}_num_packets
{BF,UF,DF}_IP_packet_bytes
{BF,UF,DF}_L4_payload_bytes
{BF,UF,DF}_duration

Description
Android-package name
Exact or most-common labeling
Number of packets
Total bytes in IP packets
Total bytes in L4 payloads
(Bi)ﬂow duration in seconds

biﬂow-label extracted) granularity (i.e. exact or most-common)
refers to the GT-building procedures described in Sec. III-B.
V. E XAMPLE TASKS E NABLED BY M IRAGE -2019
The dataset we release can suit different kinds of tasks,
ranging from app trafﬁc modeling and prediction, to biﬂowbased trafﬁc classiﬁcation. Herein, we present an app trafﬁc
characterization that can be directly derived from the dataset,
concerning per-packet data (Sec. V-A), per-ﬂow features
(Sec. V-B), and per-ﬂow metadata (Sec. V-C). While providing
a detailed characterization of M IRAGE -2019, our analyses
also point at tasks enabled by the released dataset.
A. Per-app modeling based on per-packet data
Modeling network trafﬁc represents a key task in the study
and design of Internet architectures, as realistic (yet manageable) trafﬁc models are needed to predict, interpret, and solve
performance-related issues of current and future networks.
To prove the suitability of M IRAGE -2019 to support this
class of tasks, we provide a preliminary study aimed at
devising per-app trafﬁc models by means of Markov Models,
similarly as done in [24]. In detail, for each app we consider
the sequence of the L4_payload_bytes of each biﬂow (i.e.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) com.dropbox.android.

(b) air.com.hypah.io.slither.

Figure 4: Transition matrices of payload lengths. Axes are divided in
two different linear scales. The color-bar is in log-scale.

focusing on the ﬁrst 32 packets, see Sec. IV) and derive the socalled transition matrix, whose (X, Y )th entry represents the
probability that next packet comes with Y bytes of payload
if the last observed packet has a payload of X bytes (save
from rounding errors due to binning). Notably: (i) packets
with null payload are ﬁltered out (i.e. only packets transferring
contents generated by the application layer are retained [22],
while signaling such as TCP SYNs, RSTs, and pure ACKs
are discarded, as not of interest for this analysis); (ii) the
payload-size interval between 1 B and 1500 B is divided in 33
non-uniform bins, namely: bins from 1 to 20 (resp. from 21 to
33) are 10 B (resp. 100 B) wide. This scheme allows to better
appreciate the model dynamics by mitigating the impact of the
high presence of packets with null or very-small payload.
As an example, Fig. 4 reports the transition matrices for
Dropbox (Fig. 4a) and Slither.io (Fig. 4b). By looking at
the two matrices, the following observations can be derived:
(i) the presence of high values (darker colors) along the
diagonal witnesses the tendency to remain in the same state,
i.e. sending/receiving consecutive packets of similar sizes. This
observation holds for both apps, and becomes evident for verysmall values (top-left corner) as well as for very-large values
(bottom-right corner). (ii) Vertical patterns highlight the trend
in entering to a speciﬁc state, whichever the current payload
length. This is particularly evident for Fig. 4a (next expected
payload length is within 30–40 B when current payload length
lies within 300–1400 B) and in both apps when the current
payload belongs to 1400–1500 B. (iii) Finally, scattered darker
points highlight app-speciﬁc patterns.
B. Per-ﬂow statistic characterization
Characterizing mobile-app trafﬁc based on its statistical
features is a capability of the utmost importance that mitigates
a number of issues and beneﬁts different tasks in network
administration. For instance, trends in network applications
and protocol design (e.g., protocol encapsulation, encrypted
transmission, use of non-standard ports, concerns about users’
privacy) heavily challenge trafﬁc classiﬁcation when exploiting some of the developed techniques (e.g., port-numbers and

payload inspection). In fact, approaches based on statistical
properties of network trafﬁc provide viable alternatives [3, 22].
Leveraging the information directly provided by M IRAGE 2019, the mobile-app trafﬁc can be modeled at different granularities, considering both the apps and the related categories.
As an interesting example, Fig. 5 reports the joint scatter
plot (per biﬂow) of the mean packet lengths and inter-arrival
times for three different app categories: Productivity
(Fig. 5a), Sports (Fig. 5b), and Games (Fig. 5c). Each ﬁgure
reports the apps with different colors, while the kernel density
estimation of the marginal distributions is shown in the side
plots. Several considerations can be drawn from this analysis.
First, given the different spatial concentration of the points
over the plane, different categories result in different joint
scatter plots. For instance, while points in Games mostly lie
within [50, 400] B (x-axis) and [10 ms, 100 s] (y-axis), the same
does not apply for the other two categories.
Secondly, apps within the same category often show their
own peculiar statistical proﬁle. For example, in Fig. 5b,
OneFootball (de.motain.iliga) updates generate points
mostly concentrated at 100 B and 100 ms, as opposed to
Diretta (eu.livesport.Diretta_it). Differently, for
Games (Fig. 5c), while inter-arrival time does not hold great
discriminating power, the packet length allows to separate
biﬂows associated to the two considered games easily enough.
Finally, this rationale is not as much evident for apps
within Productivity (see Fig. 5a, except for Dropbox).
Indeed, the presence of trafﬁc generated by several (similar)
apps is one of the main challenges of mobile-app trafﬁc
analysis. This results in very-complex patterns of current trafﬁc
which cannot be appropriately captured by common statistical
features. Accordingly, the application of novel machine- and
deep-learning based techniques is foreseen to be the effective
workhorse to cope with this challenge [16].
C. Per-ﬂow volume distribution
The info in M IRAGE -2019 also enables a characterization
of the trafﬁc based on the transferred volumes. Figure 6a shows
the volume of the biﬂows in M IRAGE -2019, reporting the
histogram of their sizes (bin width: 2 MB) which range from
few bytes to several megabytes. In general terms, voluminous
ﬂows are less frequent than (possibly short-lived) biﬂows
transferring a limited amount of bytes (e.g., due to requestresponse interactions). As more than 88% of the biﬂows have
volumes ≤ 100 kB, Fig. 6b reports the histogram (bin width:
1 kB) for such dataset portion, revealing that biﬂows with
volumes within [5, 10] kB are the most common.
To deepen the nature of the exchange, Fig. 6c reports (in
the form of cumulative distributions) the share ρd of the
d
, where
downstream bytes for each biﬂow (i.e. ρd  BdB+B
u
Bd and Bu are the number of downstream and upstream
bytes of the biﬂow, respectively) for the whole M IRAGE -2019
(≈ 270k biﬂows). On average, downstream trafﬁc accounts for
≈ 65% of the volume of the whole biﬂow trafﬁc. However,
a clear pattern can be noticed when considering biﬂows with
different volumes: the smaller the biﬂow volume, the smaller

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1000 s

1000 s

100 s

100 s

10 s

10 s

10 s

Mean Inter-Arrival Time

Mean Inter-Arrival Time

100 s

1s
100 ms
10 ms
1 ms

com.dropbox.android
com.trello
com.microsoft.skydrive
com.google.android.apps.docs

100 μs
10 μs

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1s
100 ms
10 ms
1 ms
100 μs

1 μs

1400

1s
100 ms
10 ms
1 ms
100 μs

eu.livesport.Diretta it
de.motain.iliga

10 μs

1 μs
0

Mean Inter-Arrival Time

1000 s

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

air.com.hypah.io.slither
com.miniclip.eightballpool

10 μs
1 μs

1400

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Mean IP Packet Length [B]

Mean IP Packet Length [B]

Mean IP Packet Length [B]

(a) Productivity.

(b) Sports.

(c) Games.

1200

1400

Figure 5: Joint scatter-plot of mean (payload length, inter-arrival time) of each biﬂow for three different app categories. The packet length
is reported in linear scale (x-axis), whereas the inter-arrival time is shown using a log-scale (10 log10 (x)).
10000
1000

1

100

1

Total (276871)
< 1k (42914)

10

0.8

1
0

25M

50M

75M

100M

125M

150M

175M

0.8

≥ 10k (106693)
≥ 100k (32680)

Biﬂow Volume [B]
0.6

CDF

(a) Volume histogram of all biﬂows (bin width: 2
MB).

< 10k (170178)

CCDF

#Biﬂows

100000

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

#Biﬂows

100000

10000

1000

0
0

0.2

100
0

20k

40k

60k

80k

0.4

ρd

0.6

0.8

1

0
0

Comics
Communication
Education
Games
Google Play Store
Lifestyle
Maps&Navigation
Music&Audio

0.2

0.4

News&Magazines
Productivity
Shopping
Social
Sports
Travel&Local
Video Players
Weather

ρd

0.6

0.8

1

100k

Biﬂow Volume [B]

(b) Volume histogram of biﬂows with volume ≤
100 kB (bin width: 1 kB).

(c) Cumulative distribution of ρd . Diamonds
mark the average.

(d) Complementary cumulative distribution of
ρd for each app category (biﬂows with volume
≥ 10 kB). Diamonds mark the average.

Figure 6: Per-ﬂow characterization of M IRAGE -2019 biﬂows in terms of byte volume (a-b) and downstream volume share ρd (c-d).

the share of downstream trafﬁc (ρd ≤ 0.5). Indeed, for biﬂows
very small in volume (i.e. ≤ 1 kB) ρd = 0.35 on average.
Notably, for around 5% of the biﬂows no downstream packets
were captured. As expected, all these communications are
very small in volume (i.e. ≤ 10 kB) and are the results of
anomalous conditions, with the mobile app asking for services
to external servers and no reply returned due to failures
possibly at the communication endpoint or along the path.
Differently, when only ﬂows with larger sizes are retained
(≥ 10 kB and ≥ 100 kB), the downstream trafﬁc accounts
for most of the volume (mean ρd equals to 0.77 and 0.89).
The analysis of the exchanged trafﬁc volumes and of the
downstream-upstream (un)balance has an impact on access
link dimensioning (for the operator) and per-app trafﬁc volume
costs, and transmission power consumed (for the user). Indeed,
breaking the above results down by different app categories
(see Fig. 6d), it is possible to quantify the expected difference
of transmission resources required. According to this analysis,

two categories (Comics and Maps&Navigation) show a
distinct distribution of ρd from the other ones (a higher mean
value and only ≈ 5% of the biﬂows with ρd ≤ 0.5).
VI. E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
Based on both the presented design choices and the experimental setup, the capture process and the collected dataset
do not imply any ethical concern [1]. We remark that experimenters involved in the acquisition phase have been beforehand informed and warned about the objectives of their
activities (e.g. network trafﬁc analysis) and the possible public
release of the corresponding traces for research purposes, even
in a complete form. Additionally, each experimenter received
a thirty-minutes training phase (with the help of a written
document listing all the instructions) regarding the capture
technologies employed and the related working principles.
Moreover, the employed mobile devices were provided and
used within the ARCLAB. The logged source IP addresses

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

belong to the private IPv4 space, with no privacy implications.
Equally important, purposedly-created app accounts were employed for the capture sessions. The GT building phase is automated and does not contribute any additional experimenterrelated information. Hence, no personal information of the
experimenters was involved at any time from the capture phase
to the dataset creation. Collected traces were made available
to experimenters that captured them for educational purposes
as well as to verify the non-sensitive nature of their contents.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper introduces and details the reproducible M IRAGE
architecture for capturing mobile-app trafﬁc and building the
related ground-truth. Leveraging the implemented architecture,
we collected mobile-app trafﬁc for two years and release the
M IRAGE -2019 dataset, supporting and fostering replicable
trafﬁc analysis. Example tasks enabled by the released dataset
with focus on trafﬁc characterization and modeling are also
shown in this paper. We expect that the proposed dataset will
be used as a benchmark for future studies concerning mobile
trafﬁc analysis. Our intention is to periodically release updated
(and enriched) versions of the dataset.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the students of ’17/’18 and ’18/’19
classes of “Internet Analysis and Performance”, “Computer
Architectures” and “Computer Networks” held at University of
Napoli “Federico II” for willingly participating to the capture
campaign needed to generate M IRAGE -2019.
R EFERENCES
[1] V. Bajpai, A. Brunstrom, A. Feldmann, W. Kellerer,
A. Pras, H. Schulzrinne, G. Smaragdakis, M. Wählisch,
and K. Wehrle. The Dagstuhl beginners guide to reproducibility for experimental networking research. ACM
SIGCOMM CCR, 49(1), 2019.
[2] A. Dainotti, R. Holz, M. Kühlewind, A. Lutu, J. Sommers, and B. Trammell. Open collaborative hyperpapers:
a call to action. ACM SIGCOMM CCR, 49(1), 2019.
[3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapè, and K. C. Claffy. Issues and
future directions in trafﬁc classiﬁcation. IEEE Network,
26(1), 2012.
[4] F. Jejdling et al. Ericsson mobility report. Ericsson AB,
Business Area Networks, Stockholm, Sweden, Tech. Rep.
EAB-19, 3442, 2019.
[5] G. D. Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. Mamun, and A. A.
Ghorbani. Characterization of encrypted and VPN trafﬁc
using time-related features. In SciTePress ICISSP’16.
[6] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. Mamun, I. Saiful, and
A. A. Ghorbani. Characterization of Tor trafﬁc using time
based features. In SciTePress ICISSP’17.
[7] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood. Packet momentum for identiﬁcation of anonymity networks. Journal of
Cyber Security and Mobility, 6(1), 2017.
[8] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk. A novel
QUIC trafﬁc classiﬁer based on convolutional neural
networks. In IEEE GlobeCom’18.

[9] R. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Cai, D. Tang, J. Yang, and Z. Yang.
Benchmark data for mobile app trafﬁc research. In ACM
MobiQuitous’18.
[10] A. Sivanathan, H. H. Gharakheili, F. Loi, A. Radford,
C. Wijenayake, A. Vishwanath, and V. Sivaraman. Classifying IoT devices in smart environments using network
trafﬁc characteristics. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
2018.
[11] M. Lescisin and Q. H. Mahmoud. Dataset for web trafﬁc
security analysis. In IEEE IECON’18.
[12] R. Dubin, A. Dvir, O. Pele, and O. Hadar. I know what
you saw last minute-encrypted HTTP adaptive video
streaming title classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, 12(12), 2017.
[13] T. Karagkioules, D. Tsilimantos, S. Valentin, F. Wamser,
B. Zeidler, M. Seufert, F. Loh, and P. Tran-Gia. A
public dataset for YouTube’s mobile streaming client. In
IEEE/IFIP MNM Workshop’18.
[14] S. C. Madanapalli, H. H. Gharakhieli, and V. Sivaraman.
Inferring netﬂix user experience from broadband network
measurement. In IEEE/ACM TMA’19.
[15] Sandvine. Global Internet Phenomena Spotlight: Encrypted Internet Trafﬁc., 2016.
[16] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè. Mobile encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning:
Experimental evaluation, lessons learned, and challenges.
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., 16(2), jun 2019.
[17] 42matters.
Google play categories.
https:
//42matters.com/docs/app-market-data/android/apps/
google-play-categories, 2019.
[18] Z. Wang. The applications of Deep Learning on trafﬁc
identiﬁcation. BlackHat USA, 2015.
[19] A. Dainotti, F. Gargiulo, L. I. Kuncheva, A. Pescapé, and
C. Sansone. Identiﬁcation of trafﬁc ﬂows hiding behind
tcp port 80. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Communications, May 2010.
[20] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. V. Goethem,
and W. Joosen. Automated feature extraction for website
ﬁngerprinting through deep learning. In NDSS’18.
[21] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic. Robust smartphone app identiﬁcation via encrypted network
trafﬁc analysis. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, 13
(1), 2018.
[22] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè.
Multi-classiﬁcation approaches for classifying mobile
app trafﬁc. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 103, 2018.
[23] V. Carela-Español, P. Barlet-Ros, M. Solé-Simó, A. Dainotti, W. de Donato, and A. Pescapé. K-dimensional trees
for continuous trafﬁc classiﬁcation. In Trafﬁc Monitoring
and Analysis, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010.
[24] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapé, P. Salvo Rossi, F. Palmieri, and
G. Ventre. Internet trafﬁc modeling by means of hidden
Markov models. Computer Networks, 52(14), 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.