1988

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

Towards the Deployment of Machine Learning
Solutions in Network Traffic Classification: A
Systematic Survey
Fannia Pacheco , Ernesto Exposito, Mathieu Gineste, Cedric Baudoin, and Jose Aguilar

Abstract—Traffic analysis is a compound of strategies intended
to find relationships, patterns, anomalies, and misconfigurations,
among others things, in Internet traffic. In particular, traffic
classification is a subgroup of strategies in this field that aims
at identifying the application’s name or type of Internet traffic.
Nowadays, traffic classification has become a challenging task due
to the rise of new technologies, such as traffic encryption and
encapsulation, which decrease the performance of classical traffic classification strategies. Machine learning (ML) gains interest
as a new direction in this field, showing signs of future success,
such as knowledge extraction from encrypted traffic, and more
accurate Quality of Service management. ML is fast becoming
a key tool to build traffic classification solutions in real network
traffic scenarios; in this sense, the purpose of this investigation is
to explore the elements that allow this technique to work in the
traffic classification field. Therefore, a systematic review is introduced based on the steps to achieve traffic classification by using
ML techniques. The main aim is to understand and to identify
the procedures followed by the existing works to achieve their
goals. As a result, this survey paper finds a set of trends derived
from the analysis performed on this domain; in this manner, the
authors expect to outline future directions for ML-based traffic
classification.
Index Terms—Internet traffic, traffic classification, machine
learning, traffic monitoring.

I. I NTRODUCTION
RAFFIC analysis is the complete process that starts
from intercepting traffic data to finding relationships, patterns, anomalies, and misconfigurations, among others things,
in the Internet network. Particularly, traffic classification is
a subgroup of strategies in this field that aims at classifying the Internet traffic into predefined categories, such as
normal or abnormal traffic, the type of application (streaming, Web browsing, VoIP, etc) or the name of the application (YouTube, Netflix, Facebook, etc). Network traffic
classification is important because of several reasons that

T

Manuscript received February 27, 2018; revised July 11, 2018 and
October 12, 2018; accepted November 21, 2018. Date of publication
November 23, 2018; date of current version May 31, 2019. (Corresponding
author: Fannia Pacheco.)
F. Pacheco and E. Exposito are with the Universite de Pau et des Pays de
l’Adour, E2S UPPA, LIUPPA, 64600 Anglet, France (e-mail: f.pacheco@univpau.fr; ernesto.exposito-garcia@univ-pau.fr).
M. Gineste and C. Baudoin are with the D’epartement: Business
Line Telecommunication, Research and Development Department,
Thales Alenia Space, 31100 Toulouse, France (e-mail: mathieu.gineste@thalesaleniaspace.com; cedric.baudoin@thalesaleniaspace.com).
J. Aguilar is with CEMISID, Dpto. de Computacion, Facultad de Ingenieria,
Universidad de Los Andes, Merida 5101, Venezuela (e-mail: aguilar@ula.ve).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/COMST.2018.2883147

involve: a) Troubleshooting tasks: the main objective is to
locate faulty network devices, device/software misconfigurations, locate the point of packet losses, network errors, etc.
b) Security: avoid malware or prevent intrusion to private
information. c) Quality of Service (QoS) management to guarantee the overall acceptability of an application or service
perceived by end-users. In this field, identifying or classifying
the name or type of application in the network helps to treat
some of the beforehand aspects. For instance, identifying different applications from traffic is critical to manage bandwidth
resources and to ensure QoS requirements.
In the past, traffic classification relied on the port-based
approach where each application was identified by its registered and known port, defined by the Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority (IANA) [1]. This approach became unreliable and inaccurate due to, among other factors, the proliferation of new applications with unregistered or random
generated ports. Another approach that gained a lot of popularity in this field is called Deep Packet Inspection (DPI).
DPI performs a matching between the packet payload and a
set of stored signatures to classify network traffic. However,
DPI fails when privacy policies and laws prevent accessing to
the packet content, as well as the case of protocol obfuscation or encapsulation. In order to overcome the former issues,
Machine Learning (ML) emerged as a suitable solution, not
only for the traffic classification task, but also for prediction
and new knowledge discovery, among other things. In this context, statistical features of IP flows are commonly extracted
from network traces, and they are stored to generate historical
data. In this way, different ML models can be trained with this
historical data, and new incoming flows can be analyzed with
such models.
A. Related Works
In this section, several review papers are studied in order
to find trends, challenges and general steps to perform traffic
analysis, and in particular, traffic classification. Traffic analysis with ML started being used in 2005, however, several
problems persist due to the traffic evolution and scalability,
among others. The work in [2] presents a review of the traffic classification advances using ML in its early years. Even
though, most of the presented works were deployed in an
offline manner, the authors also addressed to online deployments, establishing some critical operational requirements for
the ML models. A more recent review, presented in [3],

c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1553-877X 
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

identifies several of these problems and presents some future
directions in this field. On one hand, this work studies some
of the main traffic classification problems, which can be summarized as follows: i) the data available with their ground
truth is limited, ii) the scalability of traffic classification solutions is a challenge, iii) adaptive solutions are required due to
the dynamism and evolution of the network, and iv) the solutions require a correct validation. On the other hand, these
future directions encourage to the execution of more rigorous evaluations and comparisons of the ML approaches, to
the development of tools for the ground truth definition, and
to the use of multiclassifier systems, among other things.
Moreover, the ML approaches require to fulfill different challenges, such as a provided performance, the management of
the increasing amount of traffic and transmission rates, and
the reconfiguration capabilities, as it is exposed in [4], and
similarly in [5].
Recent advances in this field are presented by [6], focused
on supervised and unsupervised techniques for traffic classification. The authors studied several works using Bayes
based classifiers, Neural Networks (NNs), and Decision Trees
(DT). Additionally, clustering techniques, such as DBSCAN,
Expectation Maximization (EM) based approach and K-means,
were studied for traffic classification. Some advantages and
disadvantages are identified, in order to outline the necessary
improvements for each approach.
Encrypted traffic has become a new way to prevent intrusion into transmitted information in the Internet network. ML
is highly suitable for analyzing these type of communications
due to it does not intrude into the packet content; for instance,
in some cases the statistical behavior of the connection might
be sufficient. In this context, [7] reports a comprehensive
review of several studies focused on encrypted traffic. The
survey studies some of the encryption protocols, their packet
structure and standard behavior in the network, as well as, the
observable features that can be extracted for traffic analysis.
In addition, [8] surveys the most common methodologies for
traffic classification.
Nowadays, abnormal traffic detection in the network has
become one of the most important topics in traffic analysis.
The purpose is to discover or to characterize anomalies that
might come from malicious or unintentional sources affecting
the network infrastructure, business or personal privacy, and
digital economy, among others. Traffic analysis is necessary
for this particular domain. Reference [9] presents a comprehensive study where the ML techniques represent more than
30% of the solutions found in this review. More works in this
field are found in [10]–[12].
In general, traffic classification can be achieved by a variety of ML techniques, in different domains, and with different
objectives. However, one of the main concerns, in all the
survey papers, is the lack of public data, which can be considered as a core resource for applying ML approaches. The
difficulty of defining the ground truth values of the data collected, and the implementation of the ML solutions, represent
some challenges and limitations. Additionally, another important aspect is the evolution of the Internet network that requires
adaptive or self-configuring solutions to assure reliable traffic

1989

analysis procedures. Conversely, more efforts are required by
the research community in order to propose ML solutions that
can deal with the drawbacks beforehand discussed.
B. Contributions
The present survey paper tries to gather together different
approaches, strategies and procedures about how and when to
use ML techniques for traffic classification. It will study the
process from the monitoring stage to the implementation of
ML solutions. The main aim is to offer a comprehensive guide
to practitioners in the field that intend to use ML techniques for
traffic classification. In this sense, this paper is focused on the
steps to achieve traffic classification based on the experience
found by the scientific community. It is important to mention
that the study is focused on the traffic classification at the
IP level. For instance, this research will offer an overview of
approaches that can be used to improve the QoS at the operator
network level. In brief, the main contributions are summarized
as follows.
• It provides a comprehensive workflow to understand how
to achieve traffic classification with ML techniques over
IP flows.
• It studies each step of the workflow correlated with the
efforts found in the literature.
• It provides a set of paths that current approaches follow
based on the workflow defined.
• As a final result, it provides a general overview of the traffic classification problem, and future directions according
with the previous results.
To conclude this section, it is worth remarking the main
difference of this systematic review to other related works is
the approach proposed to present the papers. The reviewed
papers are organized following the general procedures to apply
ML techniques in the Internet traffic classification domain.
C. Organization
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II briefly presents the problem of traffic classification.
This section presents at first some basis of the ML techniques and network traffic, to finally conclude with some of
the most common approaches. Section III presents the methodology deployed by the authors for reviewing the papers, which
is based on the ML procedures for knowledge extraction.
Following the guidelines in the former section, Section IV
reports common approaches to perform data collection in the
Internet network. Section V reports strategies to extract features from the observed traffic. Section VI presents some
methods used to reduce or to select the extracted features.
In Section VII, it is studied how the works select the ML
algorithms for traffic classification. Section VIII is intended
to know the efforts found in the literature for implementing
the ML solutions. Section IX analyses the results of the review,
and Section X outlines the conclusions of the survey paper.
II. BACKGROUND
In Section II-A, a synthesis of the ML basis, general
steps and classical algorithms, are presented. Following,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1990

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

in Section II-B, an overview of the traffic classification
approaches is given.
A. Machine Learning Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) techniques are very popular
approaches to identify and to classify patterns in different
domains. Its main objective is to give to the computers automatic learning capabilities, where the machines are able to
extract knowledge from a process under certain conditions.
ML tries to extract knowledge from a set of features or
attributes, which represents the measurable properties of a process or observed phenomena. In this way, the learning process
is performed by training different models, i.e., classification,
prediction or clustering model; and their use depends on the
problem characteristics. The knowledge extraction is handled
by a ML model, which is built with historical experiences
recorded from case studies.
Different methodologies can be found in the literature to
apply ML; for instance, [13] presents a set of iterative steps
to discover knowledge in big databases. The work reports
the traditional method of turning data into knowledge, called
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD). The main steps of
the KDD comprise data selection, processing, transformation,
mining and interpretation/evaluation. The data mining component refers to the application of data mining methods, which
determine patterns from the data. The majority of the data
mining methods are based on the ML techniques. We present
as follows, the general steps to achieve knowledge discovery
with ML techniques.
1) Data Collection: This step aims at gathering information
regarding a case study. Measuring procedures are established, in order to capture data either from physical or
digital sensors. Such data describes the current or historical status, which is used to define the experimental testbed.
A testbed is composed of all the software, hardware, and
networking components, among others held by the process
of interest. This testbed is necessary for building the model
(learning and testing) with the ML techniques. Samples are
captured and gathered from multiple scenarios set in the
testbed.
2) Feature Extraction (FE): It is one of the most important steps due to it allows measuring or computing features that
might give information about the state of the process. In brief,
a FE procedure computes different metrics that reflect specific
properties in the data collected. The main aim is to obtain
descriptors that better characterize the problem. The result
of the FE process is a structured table formed by columns
of attributes where each row is a sample, with an additional
optional column with the current status of each sample (commonly called label or class). In case that the status is unknown,
the samples are unlabeled.
Data processing procedures can be performed in order to
delete unwanted missing values and to clean the data, among
other things. This last one is related to outliers detection that
might disrupt into the ML solution performance. Also, the data
can be transformed through normalization or aggregation operations over the attributes values. In the aggregation procedures,

the features are combined into a single feature that would be
more meaningful to the problem.
At this stage, one could start with an initial study to comprehend the data. For instance, with labeled data, the table
can be treated to find class-imbalance, which is the scenario
where there are one or more classes with a considerable higher
amount of samples than another class(es). Class-imbalance
data can bias some ML models to learn more from a class than
another. One way to treat the class-imbalance data is reducing
the number of irrelevant samples from a class, if possible, as
it is exposed in [14].
Finally, it is important to mention that the FE process can be
embedded in the ML algorithm; moreover, an historical dataset
might not be available, and the ML model should learn from
scratch. These particularities will be extended in Section II-A4.
3) Feature Reduction (FR) and Selection (FS): This is an
optional step that allows selecting or reducing the number
of extracted features. FR is to create new attributes using
the original ones, while FS is to find a low set of attributes
that better describes a process. These steps aim at decreasing
problems such as time consumption and curse of dimensionality, among others. Surveys about the performance and
comprehension of the FR and FS processes are presented
by [15] and [16]. FR and FS are commonly divided into
Filter, Wrapper and Embedded approaches, which in turn
can be developed by supervised and unsupervised strategies. In the supervised strategy, the objective is to find
the features that most contribute to define the classification decision. In the unsupervised strategy, the main aim
is to determine the features that allow the grouping of the
data.
In the filter approach, a score is given to each feature using
a metric that measure their relevance. The features are ranked
and the most relevant are those ones that meet an accepted
threshold. Correlation analysis is a simple filter approach
where relationships between pair of features are found by computing a correlation coefficient. Other techniques categorized
as filter are the Gini Index [17], the Information Gain [18],
the Laplacian Score and the Sparsity Scores [19], [20], among
others. Unsupervised learning can be used by filter algorithms
in order to find the best basis features [21]–[24], or to select
the features through structured sparsity regularization models,
which preserve the cluster structure of the instances composing
the dataset [25]–[27]. On the other hand, supervised learning
is commonly used by wrapper approaches where an objective
function is defined in order to determine the effect of different
feature sets over a classifier’s accuracy. The features that provide the best classification performance are selected. Genetic
algorithms and sequential search strategies have been widely
used as wrapper methods [28], [29].
Moreover, some ML algorithms include the FS process
embedded into their model design, such as regularized regression models and decision trees based models [30], [31].
Finally, other techniques are focused on generating more representative features based on the original ones [32], [33]. These
techniques can be found in a procedure, commonly denominated as Feature Generation, explicitly separated from the FR
and FS processes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

4) Algorithm Selection and Model Construction: The
results of the previous phases lead to a dataset that contains historical information about the case study. The historical
dataset is a key resource for building ML models. Different
ML algorithms have been developed and tested for solving
tasks, such as classification, clustering and regression. The
selection of the ML algorithm is related to the problem to
solve or the type of knowledge, that the practitioners want to
discover.
In ML, there are two classical types of learning, supervised
and unsupervised learning. Most of the supervised learning
algorithms adjust their model parameters minimizing the error
between the model output and the real expected output of an
input. This means that the historical data has to be labeled.
On the other hand, unsupervised algorithms try to find relationships between the inputs without beforehand knowledge of
the outputs. These relationships can be similarities, proximities, and statistical relationships, among others. As a derived
consequence of the learning process, the supervised algorithms
are commonly used to perform classification tasks, while the
unsupervised ones are rather used to cluster inputs in order to
find anomalous or similar behaviors between themselves. In
general, the ML model and the type of learning is associated
with the type of problem to solve.
Different categorizations of the ML algorithms can be
found [34]–[36]. For instance, a general classification groups
the classical supervised algorithms based on statistical model,
trees, rules, and neural networks (NNs), among others. In
addition, several approaches do not necessarily belong to the
groups mentioned above, and can be grouped into parametric and non parametric. For instance, in a parametric model
the aim is to determine the parameters that minimize a cost
function, such as Support Vector Machine (SVM). A nonparametric algorithm is the K Nearest Neighbors (KNN),
which gather together similar samples through measuring
their distance. In the unsupervised approach, one categorization divides the techniques into clustering based on prototypes, hierarchical methods and density based methods, among
others.
Nowadays, there is a big variety of ML algorithms not only
based on supervised and unsupervised learning. For instance,
semi-supervised algorithms take advantage of unlabeled data
to train classifiers, either training a classifier with the labeled
samples and then evaluating the unlabeled ones in the classifier, or using unsupervised approaches for the unlabeled
samples. Hybrid approaches are also found through the combination between supervised and unsupervised learning, due to
the presence of labeled and unlabeled samples in datasets [37].
Moreover, ensemble techniques use a variety of ML models
(commonly classifiers) and combine their results through a
combination strategy. Strategies such as Bagging and Boosting
are widely used to build ensemble models [38]. There are
more advanced techniques such as, incremental learning that
aims at updating in an online manner the ML models with
new incoming inputs [39]. Finally, reinforcement learning
is focused on the on-line performance (commonly cumulative reward) that is maximized any time that an action is
taken [40].

1991

5) Validation of Classification Models: This segment
overviews the most common validation approaches for the
classification solutions. Supervised learning requires the
beforehand knowledge of the sample labels, which are key
information to validate the ML models. The usual approach
is to divide the dataset into a training and a test set. The
ML models are built with the training set, while the resulting models are assessed by the test set in order to evaluate
their prediction capabilities. Given the model predictions and
the ground truth labels of the test set, several performance
metrics can be deployed to quantify the classification capability of a ML solution. For instance, [41] presents a study of
the classification performance metrics divided into the type of
classification to achieve: binary, multi-class, multi-labeled and
hierarchical. Binary classification occurs when an input sample can be classified into only one of two distinct classes. On
the contrary, multi-class classification implies that the input
can be classified into only one class within a pool of classes.
Multi-labeled classification allows the classification of an input
sample into more than one class in the pool of classes. Finally,
hierarchical classification is similar to the multi-class classification but with more granularity, in the sense that the principal
classes are divided into lower levels of subclasses.
In order to validate ML models, one of the most common
approaches is to measure their performance in terms of the
classification capabilities. Several relationships can be found
among the model predictions and the ground truth labels, such
as the number of samples correctly and incorrectly assigned
to a class, among others. These counts allow computing metrics, such as Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F-score, Receiver
Operating Characteristic (ROC), etc. For instance, for binary
classification with a positive and a negative class, the counts
of true positives (TP), false negatives (FN), true negatives
(TN), and false positives (FP) can be used to compute the
performance of the classifier through the sensitivity and the
specificity metrics. A combination of these metrics, such as
the F-score and the ROC, offers more precise information
about the performance of the classifiers for both classes.
Particularly, the ROC curve is obtained by computing the sensitivity and specificity varying the classifier’s discrimination
threshold [42]. In the ROC curve, the ideal value represents
a lot of sensitivity and specificity (a very good diagnostic
method). The result is an interpretable figure that illustrates the
performance of the classifier in different operating points; in
addition, the Area Under the Curve (AUC) can be computed to
obtain a compact measure from the ROC. The analysis above
can be mapped to multiclass-problems by computing overall
performance measures with micro or macro averages of the
binary performances. Each of these metrics exposes different
aspects of the model performance [43], [44].
The traditional model evaluation approach is to use a training and test set in order to train a model and to compute the
performance metrics, respectively. Moreover, cross-validation
is an alternative approach for model validation that divides
the data in k subsets. One subset is used as the test set, and
the rest for training the model. The same procedure is performed for the k folds, and the global performance is given
by the combination (average) of the evaluation score of each

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1992

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

test set. Different variations of the cross-validation approach
are available such as the leave-p-out and the leave-one-out.
In closing, there are more advanced approaches that measure
the statistical significance of the classifier performance given
different test scenarios, such as the Friedman test, Wilcoxon
test, among others. These scenarios propose different partitions
of the dataset, different initial conditions on the classifier’s
setting, or embedded random initializations in the training process. These approaches are mainly used to compare a set of
classifiers, and to select the one with the highest performance
under different conditions, as it is exposed in [45].
B. Traffic Classification
In traffic classification, several trends can be found to
classify, comprehend, diagnose or observe the status of the
network. A complete taxonomy of traffic classification can be
found in [46]. Nonetheless, a modification of this taxonomy is
proposed in Fig. 1, which in turn is focused on the branch of
interest, Machine learning. This figure counts with five main
divisions: Data, Techniques, Feature engineering, Algorithm
selection and Output. A brief description of each component
is given as follows.
• Data: it refers to the type of input data used to create
the traffic classification solution. It is noticeable that the
traffic data can be encrypted or unencrypted. The traffic
can be labeled either by DPI tools or real time captures.
More details about this component will be provided in
Section IV.
• Techniques: four main branches are detected, such as
Machine learning, Statistical based, Behavioral based and
Payload inspection. In this section, these four approaches
are briefly described in order to have a general idea of
how they work. However, the ML branch will be extended
throughout the survey paper.
• Feature engineering: this component concerns only to
the ML branch, and presents the potential and existing trends of the feature analysis techniques applied
over IP flows, according to the strategies presented
in Sections II-A2 and II-A3. This section will be extended
in Section V, while a formal definition of an IP flow is
given in Section II-B1.
• Algorithm selection: This component depicts the available
approaches for building ML solutions, according to the
learning process used (supervised, unsupervised, hybrids,
etc), and the task to accomplish (classification, clustering,
etc).
• Output: Finally, the output principally depends on the
objective to achieve, such as classifying the flows into
categories or application names, system status, etc.
Following the items above, it is introduced this section as
follows. Section II-B1 formally defines an IP flow; which
is the most common representation of communication sessions in the Internet network. Following, the classical traffic
classification techniques are described: Payload inspection in
Section II-B2, Statistical based techniques in Section II-B3,
Behavioral techniques in Section II-B4 and ML techniques in
Section II-B5.

1) IP Flow Definition: In traffic classification, it is commonly used the term “flow” to describe a set of packets that
are transmitted from a source to a destination. An IP flow,
according to [47], is a set of packets or frames in the network
that can be intercepted at a point in the network during a time
interval. The packets belonging to the same flow share several common properties, such as: a) one or more packets, with
transport or application header fields (e.g., source and destination IP address, port number and type, among others), b)
characteristics of the packets as the number of MPLS labels,
and c) additional fields, such as next-hop IP address, etc.
Therefore, it can be outlined the following classical definition
of an unicast flow Fi :
Definition 1: An IP flow Fi is described by the set,
Fi = {Hi , Pi }

(1)

where Hi is the header of the flow i, and Pi = {pi1 , . . . , pin }
is a set of packets belonging to the flow i.
Definition 2: A flow header Hi is described by the tuple,
Hi = (IPsrc , IPdest , portsrc , portdest , proto)

(2)

where IPsrc and IPdest are the IP source and destination
addresses; portsrc and portdest are the source and destination transport ports, respectively; and proto is the transport
protocol.
Additionally, it is defined Pi as in expression (3). P is the
complete set of packets passing through a monitoring point.
hk is the header of the packet pk , and Hi the header of the
flow studied.
Pi = {pk ∈ P |hk == Hi }

(3)

For an unicast bidirectional flow (assuming that a is the
client and b is the server), the definition above is extended in
the sense that,
Definition 3: An IP flow Fab is bidirectional when,
Fab = Fa ∪ Fb

(4)

where the union of the unidirectional flows is achieved through
the matching of some elements in their tuples.
In Definition 2, some port numbers can be reserved for type
of applications as it is established by IANA, however, the random generation of the ports is often deployed for most of
the applications. In addition, several ports can be opened for a
communication session (denoted as a multicast session), which
in turn may affect the definition above. In the past, the dimension of the Internet traffic allowed using a matching between
an opened port and registered ports (using IANA) to obtain
the name of the application. However, the proliferation of new
applications with random ports, and the growth of the Internet
network, provoked inaccuracies over the port-based approach.
They became obsolete, and new means of traffic classification
appeared.
2) Payload Inspection: Also called Deep Packet Inspection
(DPI), this technique analyzes the content of the Internet
packets, i.e., the IP header and payload. DPI compares the
information extracted from the packets with a set of signatures

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

Fig. 1.

1993

General view of the traffic classification approaches focused on the ML branch.

(previously defined and known) to identify different application protocols. Some of the DPI tools are nDPI, Libprotoident,
PACE, L7-filter, and NBAR, among others.
Recently, DPI tools have suffered several drawbacks due
to the growing number of new applications and protocols.
Particularly, when a new protocol is created, then the DPI tools
must be updated; otherwise, they will fail in their prediction
getting as result an unknown or an erroneous signature. As a
consequence, the list of the tools’ signatures has to be constantly updated. On the other hand, DPI is not adequate when
a) packet encryption is used to protect the content in communication sessions, b) HTTP2 is deployed for multiplexing
the packet content, c) NAT networks are utilized because they
unable to differentiate between communication sessions, and
d) Virtual private networks (VPNs) are deployed for data
privacy and integrity, among others.
Even though, it is clear that DPI tools have particular deficiencies, they are still widely used for traffic classification.
Several studies report their accuracy and popularity for traffic classification [48], [49]. Some works have tried to solve
the manual setting of signatures when new protocols are
detected by the DPI tools [50], [51]. The work in [52] proposes the automatic generation of traffic signatures based on
a fixed bit offset mechanism. The work proposes to randomly
select packets from flows, and to compare from pair to pair
every bit of the packets in the same bit offset. The signatures are taken from a fixed length, recorded and counted, to
generate the final signatures. The same authors, in [53], propose another approach using a clustering technique to gather
together similar flow behaviors. From the resulting clusters,
a set of flows is taken in order to apply a token-based algorithm (Hamsa) and MSA (t-coffee algorithm); both algorithms
have been used to extract regular expressions in biology,

and adopted for extracting signatures in binary sequences.
These new strategies can help to support traffic classification
with DPI.
3) Statistical Based Techniques: The main aim is to
find statistical differences between flows, communicating end
systems and network configurations, among others. Such differences can be the result of two or more different applications
or behaviors, characterized by the statistical properties. In
some contexts, statistical distributions can be used to model
the network traffic patterns. The construction of probabilistic
models has been applied by several works to know different
status of the network. The work in [54] introduces a monitoring scenario with public and private IP addresses, and
measures statistics for each profile, such as the number of TCP
and UDP packets, as well as the number of failed flows. The
objective is to construct different statistical distributions, such
as negative exponential or Gaussian, to detect the reachability
in P2P communications. In a similar manner, the work in [55]
proposes the categorization of the flows using statistical distributions. On the other hand, the work in [51] introduces text
classification over the packet headers, the result is evaluated
by a statistical binary model that will determinate if it is a new
signature. The main deficiency of this approach is the static
construction of statistical models that do not integrate learning
processes. As the previous approach, this disadvantage affects
its performance in the presence of dynamic growing and evolution of the Internet traffic patterns. In addition, some of the
statistical based approaches are adapted and improved by the
ML techniques.
4) Behavioral Techniques: This approach commonly tries
to find patterns among end-to-end communications in a
network. It also studies community patterns where the communities are conformed of hosts at different points.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1994

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

The most common representation of behavioral patterns in
the network is through graph modeling, in which graph theory is used to find highly connected nodes (hosts), number
of connections, and opened ports, among others [56]. As an
example, [57] analyzes traffic behavior to identify P2P traffic.
The first step is to cluster together similar flows through a
k-means model. Following, the clusters are represented by a
Traffic Dispersion Graph (TDG), where the nodes are represented by the IP addresses and the link between the nodes are
the registered flows. Finally, a set of rules is applied over the
graphs to detect the name of the application. These rules take
into account features, such as the percentage of nodes and the
average node degree of the graph. The work in [58] proposes
an approach to identify P2P communities, where the interactions in the network are represented by graphs. The nodes
are formed by the tuple (IP, port), and the connections are
given by the number of packets interchanged between nodes.
P2P networks are identified by using the port distribution of
known remote peers, in order to do so, a multinomial classifier
is built to decide whether a graph represents one of the known
networks.
A different target that is normally studied by these techniques is identifying the traffic activity patterns, such as the
works in [59] and [60]. For instance, [59] presents the Traffic
Analysis Graphs (TAGs) for visually unveiling the behavior
of different type of applications. In a TAG, the nodes are the
IP addresses and the edges are the flows of interest; the flows
of interest are defined according to the purpose of the study,
in order to build TAGs that capture relevant traffic activities
among hosts. Reference [60] builds bipartite graphs and compute their similarity matrix. This matrix will serve as input
to a clustering algorithm (k-means) that will gather together
similar nodes.
This approach has also been reported for detecting anomalies. The work in [61] present a general overview of the state
of the art in this area.
5) Machine Learning: For this particular domain, one of
the main goals is to classify traffic based on the status of
the Internet network. For such case, IP flows are reported as
the most common representation of Internet communications,
where representative features can be extracted and used for
traffic classification. As it is denoted in Fig. 1, some of the FE
approaches used can be divided into statistical flow features,
time-series, and graph based, among others. The FR or FS
processes are optional. They are normally applied along ML,
and it has been demonstrated the benefits added to the ML
models in terms of performance [16].
The ML algorithms can be supervised, unsupervised, semisupervised or hybrids, and it will depend on the ML task
to perform and the data available. The ML task is directly
linked to the objective of the study. One of the most popular objectives is anomaly detection to prevent network attacks
that may cause severe damage among service providers and
final users. Moreover, anomaly detection can also be used to
identify failure or misconfiguration in the network [9]. On the
other hand, application protocol detection also attracts interest
in this field, in particular to service providers that want to
improve the service offered to their costumers. For instance,

improving the QoS is one of main objectives in network
resource management.
It is important to mention that the ML approach is able
to handle encrypted communication thanks to the FE process deployed. Normally, the features extracted from IP flows
do not intrude in the packet content, which allows creating classification models for encrypted communications.
However, this approach can encounter problems with the use
of HTTP2, VPNs and NAT networks, due to the separation of
communication sessions is not explicit.
To conclude this section, in Fig. 1 is noticeable that most of
the traffic classification works are focused on and grouped into
different objectives, such as detecting the application protocol,
category or anomalies. In order to achieve traffic classification,
the techniques beforehand discussed can be used; however, this
survey paper will only extend the ML branch. In this branch,
we will study several works that try to achieve different traffic
classification objectives.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
This survey paper differs from the survey papers reviewed,
in the way that the works are presented. They are mainly organized following the general procedures defined in Section II-A,
which are mapped to the traffic classification problem. In this
section, the methodology to survey the papers is detailed,
which follows the workflow proposed in Fig. 2. In this figure, a distinction between the blocks that can be performed in
an offline (green arrows) and online (yellow arrows) manner
is made.
Generally speaking, the offline procedures treat historical
datasets stored by the Data collection block at one or more
monitoring points in the network. The Data Collection step
allows measuring different scenarios in Internet. This block
mainly collects IP flows within a time window. Additionally,
this block carries several steps, such as packet management,
flow reconstruction and storage. In Section IV, the works
related to this step are reviewed. In the offline run, a historical
dataset must be collected; on the contrary, in the online run,
streams of packets are continuously treated.
Once the data that characterizes the problem is recorded,
relevant features are extracted following the approaches in
Section V. Likewise, in online and offline phases, the features
are computed from the historical dataset and the streams of
packets, respectively. At this point, the resulting features can
be treated by either FS or FR approaches, to obtain a reduced
space or a set of new features. The most common procedures
and works are reported in Section VI. The FR or FS procedure
also has a connection with the Algorithm Selection and Model
deployment blocks, due to some approaches select the most
relevant features based on the performance given by the ML
models.
Now, from the original dataset, a new dataset is obtained
based on the selected features. In the offline run, the new
dataset is used to build models that will allow performing classification and regression tasks, among other things.
The Algorithm Selection block refers to the procedures and
methods intended to select the most adequate ML algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

1995

Fig. 2. Workflow for surveying the papers for traffic classification with ML.

Several works deploy different means of comparison to justify or validate their selection, as it will be pointed out in
Section VII. Finally, the Model Construction block is focused
on the efforts found in the literature for implementing such
models on the Internet network. These two last blocks can also
be evaluated in an online manner, mainly to offer evolving or
upgraded ML solutions. It is also important to mention that
this workflow represents a guide that comprises the general
steps to use ML for traffic classification. However, the order
of these steps may vary, and can be also found combined.
More concisely stated, particular characteristics are taken
from each block in Fig. 2. These characteristics are detailed
in Fig. 3, likewise they represent some paths that the reviewed
papers commonly follow for traffic classification. In this figure, it can be noticed that for the Data collection block, it
will be studied if the Internet traffic is: real or emulated, publicly available, encrypted and labeled (ground truth). These
aspects will become very important for characterizing the
problem. The Feature Engineering block comprises the FE
and FS approaches used by the reviewed papers. In this sense,
four FE approaches were found as the most common ones,
such as statistical based (STATsB), graph based (GRAPH),
time series based and hybrids approaches. In the FS block, it
will be denoted if the reviewed papers performed or not this
procedure. Following, for the Algorithm selection block, the
ML approach used and the objective to achieve are defined.
The trends studied are classical classification (CClass), Multiclassification and ensemble approach (MClass&E), clustering
for classification and anomaly detection (Clust), and hybrids
and advances techniques (H&A). Among the classification
objectives studied were found application name (AppN), application category (AppC) and anomaly detection (AD). Also,
other objectives are considered, such as user behavior detection
and community search, among others. Finally, in the Model
deployment block, it is differentiated the papers that implemented the ML solution (YES), and the ones that do not do
it or do not specify it (NNS). The reconfiguration of the solution will be a key aspect to study, in this sense, it is verified
if the reviewed papers offer either a retraining (RTraining), a
self-learning or evolving (SLE), or other/non-specified (ONS)
process.

Fig. 3. Workflow of the most important characteristics that will be reviewed
in each section.

The paper search was performed over the most important
academic databases. The documents selected have either on
their title, abstract or the keywords, terms such as “traffic
monitoring”, “traffic analysis”, “Internet classification”, and
“encrypted traffic classification”, among others. The papers
considered were published between 2010 and 2017, and they
were located in academic databases, such as ScienceDirect,
ACM, IEEE Xplore and Scopus. It is important to notice that
works from conference proceedings and journals were equally
taken into account.
IV. DATA C OLLECTION
Traditionally, historical data is a very important source
of knowledge for building ML solutions. A rich and complete set of observations regarding a problem can improve the
performance and generalization of the ML models. However,
in the traffic classification domain, this aspect is critical due
to: complexity and scalability of the Internet network, constant
evolution of the traffic, and privacy policies that do not allow
data collection, among others. In consequence, real Internet
traffic data is hardly available for analysis and knowledge
extraction. Several tools and strategies have been developed
to cope with this gap, some of these will be studied in this
section.
The overall structure of the data collection procedure takes
the form of Figure 4. In this figure, an abstraction of three
levels is given in the following order : i) the network environment that is defined by the conditions in which the traffic is
triggered, such as real, generated or emulated, ii) the Internet
network itself, and iii) the data measurement procedure, which
refers to how network packets can be collected. The main

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1996

Fig. 4.

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

Main data collection components for traffic classification.

issues addressed in this section concern to the components
that help finding good traffic classification results. First at all,
in Section IV-A, a distinction between the network environments to monitor traffic is made. Following, in Section IV-B,
the data measurement procedure will be reviewed. This procedure is indifferent to the environment adopted, and takes into
account steps such as packet extraction, flow reconstruction
and storage, among others. Finally, Section IV-C will outline
the importance of labeling traffic flows with their ground truth
values.
A. Network Environment
In particular, three main trends were found in the reviewed
papers: real traffic acquisition, traffic generation and emulation. Real traffic is normally collected from the network,
obfuscating private information among communication entities (e.g., clients-servers). Traffic generation tries to simulate
similar real traffic conditions by copying or modeling real
interactions through scripts. Finally, traffic emulation aims at
setting scenarios as close as real ones, where one or more
actors can intentionally emulate common interactions in the
network.
The optimal solution is to capture real traffic from the
network in order to have a reliable source of realistic data;
however, this solution is hard to conduct, mainly due to privacy
matters. Even though some works manage to obtain realistic conditions for monitoring traffic, the data is hardly ever
publicly available for the research community. Some of the
publicly available data are listed in Appendix A.
Traffic generation solutions are mainly destined to evaluate network device performance, communication security,
resource management, etc. In the literature can be found
several works to generate traffic, where their strategies are
mainly divided into: flow-based generation and model-based
generation. Flow-based generation is to reproduce the content and arrival times of flows captured in real scenarios, the
packet content is given by dummy or random payload for

technical tests. Some of the flow-based generation tools are
BRUTE [62], iPerf [63], and Ostinato [64], among others. For
instance, BRUTE is designed to generate Ethernet traffic either
IPv4 or IPv6. Ipref measures the maximum achievable bandwidth on IP networks by tuning parameters such as timing,
protocols, and buffers. In the same manner, the Ostinato tool
can generate traffic with different protocols at different rates.
In contrast, model-based approaches for traffic generation try
to reproduce the statistical properties of realistic traffic and to
represent them into a model, which will later generate traffic
for experimental tests. For instance, [65] generates client workload by training a Hidden Markov Model (HMM). The model
is built with real human interactions in a network testbed, the
main objective is to send a sequence of events to each application via the operating system in order to create synthetic
data. The training data is conformed of the event ID, a process IP and the arrival time between events. Finally, the model
can inject realistic client-server interactions to create synthetic
traffic data. Moreover, the model based generation can be performed at the packet level instead of the application level; as
an example, [66] proposes a HMM for synthetic series generation of both packet time and packet size. The work in [67]
reviews some of the most popular tools for traffic generation,
and proposes a synthetic workload generator that can be used
as a platform to place both flow and model based generation
approaches. One limitation about these tools is that they are
not commonly able to generate encrypted traffic. Encrypted
traffic covers a big volume of the current Internet traffic, and
it is important to consider its collection for its analysis.
Another approach, to model the communication behaviors,
is based on network emulation systems. An emulated network
environment involves the construction of a communication
configuration between two or more end-points. The general
architecture is to set several clients at different virtual or
physical machines, to configure monitoring points for each
client, and to set data storage components. Traffic can be
induced in order to record backward and upward IP flows.
The works in [68]–[71] present frameworks for traffic emulation, such tools are publicly available, and require adaptation
into the traffic classification interests. The platform in [68]
presents a framework based on automatic user behavior emulation for emulating the network traffic. Several scenarios, that
represent series of user’s actions for interacting with applications, are mimicked; this is achieved through a tool that
creates automation scripts or macros for Microsoft Windows
programs. Similarly, the works in [69] and [70] emulate user
behavior recording the graphical user interface, for the generation of Internet traffic. In contrast to the traffic generation
approach, emulation of traffic can cover applications that use
encryption or traffic encapsulation; this feature is desirable for
traffic classification with ML.
B. Data Measurement
In this section, it will be presented the common approaches
for performing data measurement over the Internet network.
Moreover, how the traffic observation is done at monitoring
points. These two aspects are considered in order to easily

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

understand how the labeling assignment can be performed,
and how the ML solution can be implemented in real network
environments. Normally, one of the most common strategies
for network traffic monitoring is extracting a set of packets
within a time window; this approach is the most used for the
reviewed papers, and it will be studied in this section.
Once a network traffic environment is adopted, the following issue to address is how to export the packets, construct IP
flows, and assign the application name (if needed) of such
flows, in order to finally store or use this data. The work
in [72] presents a comprehensive procedure for flow extraction using NetFlow and IPFIX. That work defines the steps for
data measurement as: i) packet capturing, ii) flow metering and
exportation, and iii) data collection. The packet capturing step
refers to the procedure of extracting the binary data from monitoring points, in this step each packet is considered as a single
independent entity. The key aspects to be considered at this
stage are the size of the sample and the sampling time [73].
Following, the flow metering process aims at aggregating the
packets into flows as defined in Section II-B1. The exportation
process occurs when it is considered that a flow is culminated,
meaning that a communication was finished. The metering and
exportation processes are related and can be united. Finally,
the data collection is to store the flows exported. Having as a
reference the same schema described by work in [72], only one
additional component might be necessary for traffic classification with ML, which is the Label assignment. This additional
component is normally placed within the traffic classification
step, and aims at defining the application name per flow, or
any other identifier needed to enrich the knowledge base, in
particular for supervised ML techniques. The label assignment
importance will be discussed in Section IV-C.
Regarding the data measurement steps, several works
try to improve separately each of their deficiencies. For
instance, [73] presents a taxonomy to categorize the packet
sampling techniques, this work aims at giving guidelines to
select the most adequate method according to the objectives
to achieve. The work in [74] presents packet capture engines
running on commodity hardware, which are useful for reducing the time response in traffic classification. Using commodity
hardware, the works in [75] and [76] show implementations
for packet capture.
Traffic observation at a monitoring point starts with the
packet capture. In this component, sampling and filtering procedures are involved. These packets are aggregated into flows
through a metering process, to later be exported for their
use. The flows collected can be stored for further analysis or
directly used by the system analyzer. Some implementations
of traffic monitoring are found in the literature. The work
in [77] shows an implementation over industrial networks,
while [78], [79] apply it over home networks. The work
in [80] reports the most common implementations of popular
network monitoring approaches for packet capture (Tcpdumb,
Wireshark, etc), flow metering (nProbe, YAF, QoF, etc), and
data collecting (nProbe, flowd, nfdumb, etc).
One of the main challenges regarding traffic observation
relies on capturing packets in real time. Large volume of data
at high speed is involved. In order to deal with streaming

1997

data, classically batch-based methods are deployed; however,
these methods do not offer fast responses in critical environments, such as multimedia monitoring [81] or network threats.
Classically, the batch-based method is deployed after the Flow
metering & exportation block. Its main purpose is to manage and store the exported flows, usually in interval of time
batches into binary files (e.g., pcap files). The batch-based
method must fulfill certain requirements such as data processing speed and fault tolerance. In the case of the stream-based
approach, the former requirements must be accomplished with
more exigent demands, in particular, the data processing speed.
For instance, the work in [82] analyzes the traffic observation
process in a streaming way to reduce delays for traffic classification. The authors propose a workflow that distributes the
exported flows by using a messaging system. The IP flows are
transformed into a data serialization format. The selected data
serialization format was the Binary JavaScript Object Notation
(BSON). The final aim is to offer a distributed data system
that is more efficient that a batch-based method. The work
in [83] evaluated the performance of one of the most used distributed stream processing systems for traffic monitoring. The
authors propose an architectural benchmark, which is publicly
available for such as task. The same authors extended this
work to compare three stream processing systems, in order
to find the suitability of each one for real time network flow
processing [83].
C. Label Assignment
The label assignment procedure refers to set an identifier
for each flow; this identifier is related to particular patterns
in a communication session, e.g., name or type of application. Associate ground truth information with traffic traces
can be a tedious task due to the complexity of tracking the
flows belonging to specific applications; moreover, this procedure is a key task for validating traffic classifiers. For the
best of our knowledge, few works implement a reliable ground
truth assignment, due to the most common approach is to use
DPI tools for such task. For instance, the work in [84] proposes a tool that is able to establish the label for each flow
by using a socketing process. However, this solution is also
complemented with a DPI tool.
Given the network environment and the data measurement
process, the label assignment can be established by the emulation or generation systems. The emulation and generation
systems are controlled environments; in this sense, it is known
the type of traffic that is triggered and it can be recorded
to be matched with the flows collected. Therefore, the labeling process can be performed while the monitoring process
is running, or in the traffic classification system by itself.
For real traffic monitoring, DPI or port-based tools are still
used for this task. However, it is been demonstrated that these
techniques add incertitude and error to further analysis, in particular to ML. Reference [85] quantifies the error obtained
when using port analysis and DPI tools to associate protocol labels with flows. The study reveals that port analysis is
accurate only for a set of protocols; while, DPI tools provide
better results. The authors demonstrated experimentally that

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1998

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

DPI tools dramatically fails for more than 14% for P2P traffic, and for almost 100% for Skype on TCP and Streaming
applications. Nonetheless, it can be found different opinions
on this topic. For instance, the study made by [86] shows a
performance comparison between several DPI tools, where the
error between the ground truth labels and the DPI label results
is low for the majority of the cases. It is important to consider
that for all these comparisons, the data used plays a major
impact on the results; as well as, the version of the DPI tools
and the years in which the studies were performed. In general,
the traffic traces show an important increase in communication
patterns urging traffic classifiers (such as DPI) to constantly
upgrade their engines. Additionally, DPI tools are inaccurate
in presence of encrypted traffic, this scenario makes them very
inadequate for the labeling task.
Several works try to propose strategies or architectures to
correctly define the ground truth labels. The work in [87] evaluates the most common approaches for measuring traffic data
focused on malicious detection, and proposes a semi-manual
practice to define the ground truth. Additionally, different tools
have emerged to support traffic monitoring and labeling, such
as Tsat [88] and Volunteer based system [89], among others.
Moreover, [90] proposes a framework to large-scale network
monitoring and analysis, called DBStream, which is a data
repository of network monitoring data capable of processing
data streams coming from a wide variety of sources. Finally,
EventFlow is proposed as a new strategy to label flows, in
order to retain semantic relations based on user’s actions [91].

measurements from observation points. Depending on the
objectives to achieve or the FE process selected, the data
to be measured can be a set of packets, only their headers, or only events related to them, among others (refer
to Section V).
• It is important to establish the labeling mechanism for the
collected data. In specific, this is a very important procedure not only for supervised ML techniques, but also for
validating unsupervised models. A reliable strategy has
to be outlined, considering its goodness and deficiencies.
V. F EATURE E XTRACTION
This section will define some FE approaches in traffic classification with ML. Four main groups of FE procedures were
established, along with some works that studied them. This
study will allow us to outline discussions about each approach,
as well as to guide the reader to chose the most convenient one.
Three main groups were found in the reviewed papers: statistical based features, graph based features and time-series based
features, which will be presented in the next sections; additionally, Section V-D covers some miscellaneous and hybrid
approaches. For a more detailed study refer to the work in [92],
which specifies the procedures of data construction, FE and
FR from protocol, packet and flow levels. Additionally, the
work in [93] proposes an automatic process to perform feature engineering. Despite of the work presented in [93] is
mainly focused on detecting tunneled connections, it provides
a logic work-flow for extracting and processing flows to obtain
features, which can be used by ML techniques.

D. Discussion
In view of the most important aspects to fulfill in this section, one can remark some recommendations and highlight
future works as follows.
• Real world measurements and tests on the network
are difficult to achieve due to the reasons previously
discussed in Section IV-A. Therefore, it is recommendable instead to set an emulated network, which may
help to reproduce current application and user behavior.
Additionally, it would help to serve as a testbed to set
the traffic classification solutions.
• Traffic generation solutions might help creating synthetic
data and reducing the amount of experimental tests for
data collection. Therefore, a combination between traces
captured from an emulated network, and traces from traffic generator tools might offer a great deal of network
traffic data.
• The emulated network or traffic generation solutions also
have to move at the same rate as the evolution of the
network. Upgrading strategies need to be established
for achieving this task. For instance, semi-supervised or
incremental learning techniques could feed information
regarding new patterns or anomalies to the data collection
step.
• In order to set a traffic monitoring strategy, it is necessary to study which is the information needed from the
network. The resources and time consuming will be key
factors to minimize, in order to get fast and reliable data

A. Statistical Based Features
The features extracted from packet flows are mainly statistical based features, which are defined under the assumption
that traffic at the network layer has statistical properties (such
as the distribution of the flow duration, flow idle time, packet
inter-arrival time and packet lengths) that are unique for certain
type of applications, and enable different source applications
to be distinguished from each other. Under this assumption,
the work in [94] proposes 249 statistical features, which can
be extracted from flow network traffic.
Properties such as inter-arrival time (IAT) and packets length
seem to be the most important characteristics considered, with
their metrics such as maximum, minimum, mean and standard
deviation, among others. Additionally, the amount of packets
sent from a to b and vice versa, control packets, and some
other properties in the packet header as the transport protocol,
can be used to model communication networks.
The majority of the reviewed papers show a preference for
statistical based features, as it will be noticed in Section IX.
In practice, statistical features from IP flows are largely used
due to its simplicity. Traffic characterization based on statistical features has been largely reported and demonstrated. For
instance, for anomaly detection, the work in [92] lists all the
classical statistical features for unidirectional and bidirectional
flows, as well as content type. Reference [10] presents a similar work, remarking the FE approaches from the flow and the
packet level.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

The work in [95] presents a complete study about statistical features. The authors tested ten classifiers to get into
the conclusion that these features allow the classifier to get
a good performance. On the other hand, [96] shows that with
only the counts of packets and byte exchange in a session
is enough to identify some applications, specifically the P2P
applications.
The work in [97] studies the abnormality caused by packet
retransmission in TCP connections. Packet retransmission can
change the packet sequence, and in consequence, unable
statistical based approaches to perform an accurate classification. The authors proposed a system to discard retransmitted
packets, detecting and using the original packets.
In general, statistical based features are commonly preferred
in this field because of their computational simplicity, which is
very important when dealing with high speed communications.
Additionally, this approach does not intrude into the packet
content, enabling its use for both non-encrypted and encrypted
traffic while respecting privacy.
B. Graph Based Features
The intrinsic composition of the Internet network
allows modeling or representing its interactions into big
interconnected graphs. In consequence, this approach uses
graph theory to find valuable information from the network.
A network can be viewed as a set of interconnected nodes
based on the assumption that the nodes are the hosts, and
the edges represent the interaction between the hosts. These
interactions can be viewed as communication sessions where
packets are exchanged. The common procedure is to set a
monitoring point, for instance a router. Groups of packets
passing through the monitoring point can be aggregated into
flows. The work in [98] presents the Traffic Dispersion Graph
(TDG), how to build it, and how to find quantitative metrics to
extract information. In a TDG, the metrics used are normally
the cardinality of the graph, counting the nodes that only have
incoming and outgoing edges, symmetry and connectivity of
the graph, and the average degree of a node, among others.
These metrics are used to train a classifier that groups the
applications into collaborative or not. On the other hand, in
order to compare two or more TDGs, the authors proposed
to compute the relative inclusion, edge similarities and edge
volatility of a graph regarding one another. These metrics are
used to detect applications, such as games and DNS.
From a different point of view, the graphs can be used to
represent traffic activities in the network. For instance, the
work in [59] presents the Traffic Activity Graphs (TAGs) to
unveil behaviors between hosts. As the previous cases, the
nodes can be viewed as the hosts, and the edges the flows in
opened sessions. Different variations can be found to create
the links between the edges; for example, the work in [58]
proposes the edges as the pair IP and port, motivated by the
application behaviors that can open more than one port for
P2P communications.
Statistical graph decomposition techniques are widely used
by these approaches to extract the most dominant subgraphs.
For instance, the nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) or

1999

the orthogonal nonnegative matrix tri-factorization (tNMF)
aims at extracting the dominant substructures and characterizing their structural properties, in order to analyze network
applications. K-means is applied to find distinct application
behaviors using these structural properties [60].
In summary, the main aim of this approach is to model
application behaviors through graph representations, and to try
to find similarities between Internet network graphs. These
similarities will allow grouping graphs into pools of applications. Such similarities can be based on different features;
the most common features extracted are graph structural
properties, graph connectivity metrics, and community based
features, such as density or similarities between well connected
graphs [99], [100].
C. Time-Series Based Features
Generally speaking, a time-series data can be viewed as a
sequence of events indexed in time order. In this sense, the
FE process is normally performed over a discrete-time data.
The network traffic problem has suitable characteristics
to be treated as an event-driven problem. The interaction
between a pair (e.g., client-server) is strongly dependent on
events ordered in time, such as to open or close communication sessions, initiate or finish transmission of data, among
other things. Such scenarios motivate to use time-series features or data-driven approaches to discover patterns in the
network.
Most of the time-based approaches in this field try to find
relationships between the inter arrival times (IATs) and packets
sizes belonging to a flow, in order to characterize application
patterns through time-series representations. As an example,
the work in [101] proposes a time activity vector for unidirectional flows, which takes into account characteristics such as,
active time of a flow, maximum and minimum amount of consecutive seconds that the flow does and does not show activity,
among others. Also, it can be found different approaches
that intent to use the temporal behavior of the network, such
as [102].
Particularly, signal processing approaches can be used to
transform the inputs in time domain to frequency domain. The
main aim is to obtain the equivalent magnitude and phase of
the signal data to unveil new features that can be used for
traffic classification. For instance, the work in [103] presents
a method to detect anomalies with a Fourier-based method,
for such case the packets sent and received in a period of time
are analyzed as time series inputs. Similarly, [104] addresses
the FE process based on the Wavelet Leaders (WL) technique. Bidirectional flows are transformed into time series of
transferred byte numbers in time windows, to later obtain multifractal features with WL. Multifractal representation refers to
a spacial or time-domain statistical scaling, where its main aim
is to describe the irregular or fragmented shape of features,
as well as other complex objects that traditional Euclidean
geometry fails to analyze.
Usually, this FE approach is not conventionally applied for
traffic classification; however, these features are widely use to
identify anomalies, as it is explored in [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2000

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

D. Miscellaneous and Hybrids
The categorization below mentioned some of the approaches
founded, however, there are other interesting methods to
perform FE. Such approaches try to combine or to propose
new features that better suit the classification problem. For
instance, Bag of Flows (BoFs) derives from the statistical
based approach, and it only differs in the way that the bidirectional flows are built. A BoFs comprises a set of traffic
flows that are injected by the same application. A BoF can be
defined as a group of flows that shares the same destination
and source IP, and that presents variations in the opened ports
of a connection. This behavior is commonly seen in communication sessions. The statistical features are computed for all
the flows in the BoFs. A ML model is trained with all the
flows, and each bag has a label defined through some criteria; for example, the higher occurrence of a label in the
bag. For a new incoming flow, the class label is obtained
with the ML model; following the flow can be associated to
a BoFs. Several works already tested the advantages of using
BoFs to improve the performance using ML classification and
clustering approaches [105]–[107].
On the other hand, statistical based features can be combined with graph based features to find better classification
performance as it is proposed in a framework for traffic classification in [57]; and similarly in [54] for anomaly
detection.
Studying the order, sequence and time in which packets
are sent from a source to a destination, may help to characterize applications with correlated behaviors in time and event
based approaches. As an example, the work in [108] uses only
the sequence inter-packets times and payload size, to build
sequences of the flows as input features of a classification
model. On the other hand, [109] presents time series combined with statistical based features for their work. The time
series features are obtained through the syntactic structure of
the applications. The syntactic structures are represented by
finite state machines. The main aim is to model the packet
sequence of flows along with the packet length and packet
orientation (forward and backward) by the machine states.
E. Discussion
This section presents in essence a synthesis of the reviewed
FE approaches with a qualitative description and comparison,
and with a brief discussion of future directions.
1) Comparison: Table I summarizes the FE trends studied
in this section. In addition, their advantages and disadvantages are remarked, as well as several works that applied
these approaches for traffic classification. From the table, it
is noticeable that statistical based features are the most used
in traffic classification. Moreover, they are suitable to deal with
encrypted and unencrypted traffic.
2) Guidelines and Future Trends: To summarize, it is possible to find different categorizations for FE processes, and
this will mainly depend on the objective to achieve. In this
sense, we outline some comments regarding the FE process.
• The FE process has to be defined in accordance to the
objective to achieve and the ML approach to select, and

it also has to consider the computational and response
time.
• One might consider to compute better descriptors that
prevent misclassifications and class imbalance behaviors.
For instance, in the statistical based approach, additional
metrics –such as a variation of the mean and variance
computation– can be taken into account (e.g., moving
average [150]).
• Hybrids FE approaches can be proposed to better characterize the process. For instance, the statistical features
comprise time based behaviors with the IATs statistics.
Moreover, studying the time and event based behavior
seems to be a logical approach to exploit in this field.

VI. F EATURE R EDUCTION AND S ELECTION
ML models might face problems when a large number of
features is given. The models are pruned to increasing computational burden, decreasing accuracy, increasing overfitting,
among others. These problems are typically related to the curse
of dimensionality. In general, FS is widely applied in this field
to select the most relevant features and to improve the accuracy
of the ML models.
ML processes might or might not count with a FR or FS
process. Several studies state that a low amount of features is
needed to wholly obtain patterns that differentiate an application to another. The works in [151]–[153] study the most
relevant statistical features for traffic classification. In [152],
several FS techniques are used to obtain the most important
features, while a new proposed method select the smallest set.
The results were crossed validated with three datasets measuring the goodness, similarity and stability of each feature;
giving as a result a small set, between 6 and 14 statistical features, that offers the best performance measured through the
accuracy.
The work in [152] studies the importance of FS and FR
for traffic classification using ML. Ten network traffic datasets
were used to show the advantages and disadvantages of different well-known FS techniques, such as Information Gain, Gain
radio, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and Correlationbased Feature Selection, among others. The authors proposed
three new metrics to measure the performance of the resulting
features. These metrics are based on the classifier accuracy,
the stability of the results every time that a test is performed
under different conditions, and the similarity between the set
of features given by the FS and FR techniques. The results
shows that none of the techniques provide a good performance
with the new metrics; therefore, a new method that combines
the FS and FR solutions is proposed. The former study is
extended in [153] with an optimization process, called the
Global Optimization Approach (GOA), to estimate the optimal
and stable features. GOA combines multiple well-known FS
techniques that yield to a possible optimal feature subsets
across different traffic datasets; then the optimum entropy
threshold will select the stable features.
Multi-class imbalance behavior in data is normally found in
traffic classification. In this sense, the work in [143] remarks

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

2001

TABLE I
S UMMARY TABLE AND R ELATED PAPERS FOR THE F EATURE E XTRACTION P ROCESS

this problem when using traffic data for training ML models. The authors proposed to select a set of features for each
class by using a metric based on the entropy measure. The
most relevant features for class are the ones with values upper
than a predefined threshold, the subset of features are sent
to an ensemble classifier. Similarly, [154] proposes a new
FS method that aims at obtaining the most relevant features,
and at the same time at decreasing the multi-class imbalance. Reference [155] proposed a model that can discriminate
among the most relevant and irrelevant features. Such model
is based on the representative deep architecture Deep Belief
Networks (DBNs). One of the main characteristics of the DBN
design is that from the first layer high-level features representations can be obtained, while to the latest low-level feature
representations. This characteristic makes them suitable for
feature generation as it was reported by this work.
A. Discussion
Due to the dynamism of the network, the traffic data can
influence the results of ML from one dataset to another, affecting several aspects, among which the performance is one of
the most important. Therefore, we can state the following
discussion:
• Using the most significant features in ML impacts the
run time response, improves the classifier performance
and complexity for training and retraining procedures,
and discards redundancy in the data. In this sense, it is
recommended to always perform a previous study of the
extracted features with FS or FR approaches. This process
can also help treating class imbalance and discarding non
significant features.
• One interesting approach to exploit is the dynamic selection of the features. In such a case, the FS process should
adapt to the current condition in which the process is.
Therefore, the most adequate features can be selected
following a set of guidelines; for instance, the features
that provide the higher entropy or information gain to
the classes.
• Additionally, determining in an unsupervised manner, the
features that provide with more information to the ML
problem is a challenging task. This approach will lead to
find a more adaptive algorithm for the dynamic selection
of the features according to the current state.

VII. A LGORITHM S ELECTION
It is common to find in this field different solutions using a
variety of ML algorithms. Given the wide number of ML algorithms, finding the most adequate is very important in traffic
classification. Particularly, most of the works have based their
selection on building and testing several models until finding
the one with the highest performance. In this section, selected
works are detailed to outline the challenges in the moment to
select a ML algorithm.
Along the review, it will be noticed that the studies are
focused on particular objectives to achieve: either to identify
the type of application, the protocol application, anomalies or
tunneled connections. The reader will notice that the majority of the papers aim at performing the classification task
(see Section VII-A). Additionally, specific works that uses
multi-classification and ensemble approaches are presented in
Section VII-B. Moreover, some of the papers treat the classification problem in a unsupervised manner in Section VII-C.
Finally, hybrids and advanced approaches will be studied in
Section VII-D.
It is important to mention that the works that treat unencrypted and encrypted traces are commonly described separately. This distinction is normally set due to the behavior of
unencrypted traffic may differ from the encrypted one; this is
motivated for the use of different communication protocols.
However, in this section, the aim is to mainly study the traffic
classification problem from the ML point of view. In consequence, an emphasis on the ML algorithm selected is given,
and works that studied encrypted and unencrypted traffic will
be explicitly separated in Section VII-E.
A. Classical Classification
Labeled datasets are used to train supervised algorithms
in order to select the best model, which in turn is obtained
measuring the classification performance. For instance, for
unencrypted traffic, the works in [95] and [117] present a comparison between several classifiers using statistical features.
The comparison was performed using the classifier accuracy
and computational cost. The best performance was given by
different classifiers given a variety of datasets; in general, it is
possible to find classifiers that behave better than others, given
certain characteristics of the dataset. This case is common
among the ML algorithms due to their model structures and

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2002

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

learning procedures are more suitable for one type of problem
than another.
The work in [123] groups flows into application categories
(video streaming, VoIP, etc) to improve the QoS. Several
experiments were carried on varying the condition in which
the data is collected (e.g., packet loss and high or low latency).
Several performance metrics were computed getting as a result
that the classifiers were good depending on the class (category)
that is evaluated. One of the main reasons stated in the work
was the class-imbalance presence; in addition, the drop outs of
Internet communications that generate noise to the classifiers.
In relation with the class-imbalance behavior normally found
in the Internet traffic, Yuan et al. [126] proposed to compare
the results of SVM classifiers trained with biased and unbiased data. Biased data contains a large number of samples
belonging to only one class(es) than the rest of classes; on the
contrary, in the unbiased data all the classes have a similar
number of samples. The results showed that the classes with
lower amount of samples provided more than 10% of false
negative, while the global accuracy did not vary significantly
in the biased case. On the other hand, [156] proposes to use
cost-sensitive learning for solving the multi-class imbalance
problem. The idea is to compute the cost of misclassifying
a flow in a class. The result lead to a confusion matrix like
structure that contains the prior weighted probabilities of each
class. The weight is defined as an heuristic function depending on the geometry mean of the flow rates. The cost function
helps to obtain better performance when training a tree based
classifier with imbalance data.
In [109], statistical features are combined with time-series
features in order to construct a Hidden Markov model for
traffic classification. They illustrate the syntactic structure
of the chosen applications, such as Bit torrent, Skype and
Emule, among others. The results showed that the proposal
had higher classification accuracy than some statistic-based
methods; however, the construction of the model requires
labeled data and re-training when new applications appear in
the network.
For anomalous or malicious traffic detection, supervised
approaches and statistical based features are widely deployed,
such as [116] that exposes common threats in the Web to be
identified, and [157] that compares several ML models for
intrusion detection. Lalitha and Josna [158] implemented a
wireless sensor network scenario to capture traffic for specific environmental conditions. Following, a Gaussian Mixture
Model is trained to detect normal and abnormal behavior
in the network. On the other hand, several works try to
deploy classification solutions in mobile/cellular networks.
For instance, [130] collected IP traffic extracted from mobile
networks in a fixed time windows. Statistical based features from normal and abnormal traffic are computed, and a
Bayesian classifier is trained for the analysis of the massive
network users’ traffic behaviors. The work in [136] collected
network traces from Wi-Fi controllers at a large university
campus. These controllers connected access points to the campus backbone network, allowing the wireless devices to access
Internet. The traces come from network traffic to/from malicious and benign domains, and statistical based features were

computed over these traces. A binary ML classifier was trained
for detecting malicious domains.
The proliferation of encrypted traffic over the network
is clearly growing exponentially. Unveiling encrypted traffic
attracts attention to different actors in the network, in the same
manner as the non-encrypted case. Also, supervised learning is
the most popular approach for encrypted traffic. In this sense,
the work in [7] presents a theoretical comparison between
several works that created ML models for encrypted traffic
classification. In the comparison, it is noticed the difficulty of
comparing the approaches due to each of them uses different and private datasets, in which the labeling process is not
clearly identified for most of the datasets.
One can imagine that all the approaches deployed for
unencrypted traffic should be valid for the encrypted case,
particularly the works that do not intrude in the packet content during the FE process (such as the statistical based).
However, it is possible to find that the new encryption methods or protocols also differ in behavior from one application
to another. For instance, the work in [159] demonstrated
that two encrypted applications can be classified using supervised learning. Secure Sell (SSH) and Skype traces were
selected to evaluate several classifiers using statistical features (such as IAT and packets size), without considering
the payload information, IP addresses and port numbers, due
to the nature of the encrypted traffic. In the same context,
Alshammari and Zincir-Heywood [111] tested different ML
approaches to classify VoIP encrypted traffic. They proposed
a FE process using only the statistical based features. Other
approaches follow the same process, keeping the statistical
features as a common point, and varying the classifier or the
dataset, such as in [115] with Naive Bayes and in [114] with
Decision trees.
One of the particularities found in the reviewed papers
is that they are normally focused on detecting a type of
encryption at certain level. For instance, the work in [129]
proposes a two phase method that: 1) Identify the flows
under Secure Socket Layer protocol (SSL) or Transport Layer
Security protocol (TLS) by using signature matching methods,
and 2) Compute statistical features to classify the application
within these flows. One of the deficiencies is that the signature
matching method is based on standard protocol specifications
and documentations, or on manual observation and analysis.
VoIP communications have risen in popularity and their
identification is a key factor in the telecommunication field
either to prioritize or unable them. In consequence, several approaches have been proposed, such as the works
in [114], [118], [128], [160], and [161]. Some of these works
tries to characterize and identify Skype, one of the most complex VoIP applications in the network due to its intricate
communication protocol.
Classifying applications within HTTP2 or IPsec connections
is highly complex. For instance, the works in [162]–[164] train
ML classifiers with encrypted traffic data. Several applications
are launched and without a VPN and statistical based features
are captured. Following, several ML models are trained and
tested getting satisfactory results. On the other hand, for tunneled connections, reviewing the characteristics of a flow in

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

Definition 2, the classical FE process cannot be applied. The
tunneled connection may be identified as only one flow, when
in reality there are more flows embedded. This scenario has not
been largely studied, however, some works aim at identifying
just a tunneled connection at first, such as in [93] and [110].
An interesting method, based on ML techniques aims at
detecting Denial of Service (DoS) attack in HTTP2 connections [112]. The authors prepared a network environment with
normal traffic and attacked traffic. The dataset obtained is
passed through a FE process where statistical features are
computed, following a FS process to reduce the characteristic space. Finally, several classifiers were tested to detect the
attacks in a binary classification manner.
B. Multi-Classification and Ensemble Approaches
The combination of several classifiers might solve the generalization problem encountered by the classical classifiers in
the traffic classification field. These types of solutions aim
at creating more specialized classifiers. For instance, [149]
presents a combination of several ML models to get a better performance. Several classifiers (two tree based, one rule
based, two statistical based and SVM) are trained with the
same data; in addition, a DPI tool is included as classifier. A
new incoming input is evaluated by all the classifiers, and
following the results are merged by means of a combination method, such as Maximum likelihood, DempsterShafer,
Enhanced DempsterShafer and perfect combination, among
others. For example, in the maximum likelihood combination,
all the classifiers vote on one class, and the most voted class
is the output. The work in [165] compares the performance of
seven ensemble algorithms based on decision trees. The study
demonstrated that most of the ensemble algorithms overcome
the classical single classifier approach in terms of performance.
The main deficiency found in the experiments is the time cost
for the training of the models and the online classification.
The work in [121] proposes to compute the FE process and
to divide them into subsets; this procedure is applied over
three different case studies. These cases vary from the original dataset, such as with and without the zero-payload packets.
Statistical features are computed for each case, and a dedicated
classifier is trained. On the other hand, the work in [143]
defines multiple feature subsets through a FS process; each
subset of features is defined regarding a specific application
protocol class. A classifier is trained for each subset, and the
output is given by a voting process. In this work, it is considered that relevant features might vary from class to class,
and how it can affect the classifier performance in presence
of class-imbalance data.
C. Clustering for Classification and Anomaly Detection
Unsupervised approaches are normally associated with
anomalous detection, due to its capabilities to detect patterns
that are not similar to normal or nominal conditions; but,
also to perform classification tasks. In this sense, clustering
techniques are widely used for network traffic classification.
This section is dedicated to the works that apply unsupervised
learning for Internet traffic classification.

2003

One of the most common methods, to classify network
traffic using unsupervised learning, is K-means, which builds
K clusters based on the similarity between the samples and
the centroids of the cluster. The work in [106] uses K-means
and several properties of the flows for network classification.
In [140], the classic random initialization of the clusters when
using K-means is improved. The initial clusters are defined by
the variance between the flow attributes. After the clusters are
built, a mapping process cluster-application is performed with
a probabilistic assignment. The maximum likelihood estimates
the membership of labeled samples to the K clusters. One of
the main deficiencies of this approach is that the number of
clusters K must be defined beforehand, tying the solution to
a fixed number of labels. Moreover, noisy samples and new
label appearance are not considered.
For encrypted traffic, the work in [145] uses K-means
model to identify encrypted video streaming in HTTPS connections, obtaining a good average accuracy. The dataset was
extracted with different bit rates, in order to prove the classifier performance under different scenarios (change of the
IATs). Similarly, the work in [166] uses K-means for P2P traffic identification. Several comparisons between unsupervised
techniques are presented in [167] and [168], which in turn
could give insights of the approach to use when facing unlabeled encrypted traffic. Finally, due to the ground truth class is
unknown, an adequate guidance must be deployed for using
clustering techniques. For instance, [169] proposes a framework that allows the unsupervised approach to work for traffic
classification considering the ground truth class.
D. Hybrids and Advanced Techniques
In this section, it will be presented some of the works that
use hybrid, semi-supervised, and novel approaches for traffic
classification.
To start, there are approaches that apply a two-phase process
to classify network traffic, combining supervised and unsupervised learning. The first phase is in charge of clustering
traffic classes with the same type (e.g., Video streaming, P2P
torrent, etc), and the second phase uses supervised models
to classify the applications (Youtube, Neflix, etc). The work
in [137] proposes a two-phase clustering, one using the statistical flow features and the other one using the packet payload
features. A third phase integrates both clustering results to create a classifier. A bag-of-words (BoWs) model is constructed
to represent the content of the clusters obtained with the flow
statistical features, and then a latent semantic analysis (LSA)
is applied to aggregate similar traffic clusters based on their
payload content. The work in [122] groups the traffic classes
using K-means, and a decision tree classifies the applications
in order to provide more granularity to the results. Similarly, a
hybrid algorithm that combines K-means and KNN for online
classification of encrypted traffic is proposed by [113]. The
combination is given as a two phase process, where K-means
clusters the traffic in a real time embedded environment. The
performance was evaluated through a cache-based mechanism
that combines elements of port-based and statistical based
classification.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2004

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

Also, more specialized algorithms are used to obtain
more fine grained performance. As an example, [120] proposes a classification system based on the Online Sequential
Extreme Learning Machine (OS-ELM) for intrusion detection. Irrelevant features are discarded using an ensemble of FS
techniques. The work in [144] presents a traffic classification
approach using Wavelet Kernel Extreme Machine Learning
(WK-EML) and Genetic Algorithm (GA) combined to classify flows using statistical based features. GA allows optimally
finding the parameters needed to use WK-EML, and in consequence, to train the model instead of using a classical random
setting approach.
A novel approach to identify encrypted applications is given
by [170], which presents the traffic classification problem
without an explicit FE process. Instead of using the classical
statistical features, the authors build a deep learning architecture that will learn from the packet content. The approach do
not inspect the packet content for keywords as DPI techniques,
instead, it aims at learning new features for each application
with the deep learning architecture. The FE process is embedded and these new features have not a real meaning, instead
they are binary data with relationships found by the deep
neural network. This last characteristic makes it suitable for
encrypted traffic, and presents an alternative approach to statistical based features. However, it has not been quantified its
boundaries against classical FE and classification approaches.

E. Discussion
A summary of this section is presented with a short description of the results obtained in the papers. In addition, a brief
discussion of future directions is given.
1) Comparison: The tables II and III summarizes the classification approaches trends for unencrypted and encrypted
traffic, respectively. Their advantages and disadvantages are
remarked, as well as several works that applied these
approaches for traffic classification.
2) Guidelines and Future Trends: Some approaches select
the algorithm based on either: i) the experience of former
works, ii) performance comparison with different datasets,
or iii) qualitative advantages and disadvantages between the
algorithms. Some specific conclusions are:
• Selecting the most adequate algorithm is highly related
to the available data. Hence, it is necessary to make a
preliminary study of the conditions in which the ML
model works optimally, and the type of data that is able
to receive. It was noticed that one or several classifiers
might not generalize all the classes, and this might be
caused by the class-imbalance presence in the historical
data.
• One of the most common approaches found to select
the ML approach is by comparing their classification
performance. This comparison is normally based on the
accuracy metric. However, a more accurate approach is
to perform a multiple or pairwise comparison with parametric and nonparametric tests that measure the statistical
significance of the classifier’s performance [45].

•

More flexible solutions given by ensemble classifiers
might provide more accurate results with class-imbalance
data. Additionally, the variability of the features for the
ensemble classifiers can reinforce the solution.
• The unsupervised approaches are mainly exploited for
performing anomaly detection. However, an evident challenge is the discovery of novel classes that might be
represented by new clusters constructions.
• Finally, one interesting approach that might support all
the deficiencies –related to imbalanced-class data, new
application discovery and generalization– is proposing
meta-learning processes for the selection and construction
of the ML solutions.
VIII. M ODEL D EPLOYMENT
The main objective of this section is to inspect the implementation and reconfiguration attempts of the ML solutions
in real network scenarios. This study was done only taking as
reference the papers reviewed.
Along the papers, several FE, FS and ML approaches were
studied, which in turn all together comprise the necessary steps
to classify traffic. The main question that arise is how the
ML solutions can be deployed into real scenarios. In most
of the paper reviewed, the implementation of ML solution
is not performed and they normally show a proof of concept. However, some of the works above give some hints
about how the ML approach can be deployed. In addition,
it is analyzed the importance of the ML solution reconfiguration; which plays an important role in the traffic classification
task.
A. On-Line Implementation
One of the most important features, that the Internet network
has, is that transmission rates are normally very high and the
dimension of the network is big. These main characteristics
make the classifier implementation efforts challenging. The
most common approach is to deploy the ML solutions over
the traffic monitoring tools (see Section IV-B); hence, each
time that a packet flow is observed, it is possible to perform
the classification. For instance, [180] uses a NetFlow enabled
router for monitoring the traces, which are forwarded in an
online manner to a ML classifier. NetFlow is a Cisco protocol that aims at exporting IP flow information from routers
and switches. Similarly, DBSstream [90] integrates the traffic
classification solutions into its monitoring platform. Another
approach is to implement the ML solution in a stand-alone
classification module; for example, the work in [133] implements the ML solution into a Field-Programmable Gate Array
(FPGA) based embedded system. The FPGA device uses
information at the network layer, such as the packet sizes and
IATs.
However, the monitoring module may or may not contain
the classification model directly; the captured information can
be sent to a server or traffic controller where the operations
needed to classify the traffic are performed [139], [158]. The
work in [110] proposes an implementation using a simple
proxy server. Several hosts are connected to this server, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

2005

TABLE II
S UMMARY TABLE AND R ELATED PAPERS U SING U NENCRYPTED T RAFFIC FOR THE A LGORITHM S ELECTION T RENDS

TABLE III
S UMMARY TABLE AND R ELATED PAPERS U SING E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC FOR THE A LGORITHM S ELECTION T RENDS

VoIP and other traffic are injected into it. Particularly, a VoIP
detection algorithm is placed at the proxy in order to give
priority to this traffic. The work in [113] implemented their
ML solution into a Service Control Engine (SCE), which is a
Cisco platform designed for session-based classification and
control of all network traffic. Reference [127] presented a
QoS-aware traffic classification framework implemented in a
network controller. This controller is placed in a SoftwareDefine Networking (SDN) technology that allows performing
monitoring and traffic classification.
B. Reconfiguration
One of the main issues, founded in most of the ML solutions studied so far, is that when new patterns are appearing in
the network, the ML models must be updated. The ML based
classification is pruned to rapidly be out-of-date due to the
dynamism of the network. Therefore, self-learning, evolving or
retraining strategies must be taken into account. In general, for
most of the ML techniques an update implies a model retraining with a new historical dataset (commonly labeled). This
means that the model has to be constantly retrained any time
that a new application or behavior appears on the network. The
cost of performing this step can be significant; nonetheless, if

this point is not considered then the model performance is in
risk.
On this subject, [181] presents a Self-Learning Traffic
Classifier (SLTC) for P2P identification. The authors propose an architecture where passive monitoring components
observe the network at specific links. The distributed monitoring components have embedded the classifier (based on
payload inspection). If this component can correctly classify
the flow, then this will be marked as known, otherwise, the
flows are sent to a logic server. The logic server is in charge of
more fine operations to identify the traffic when the monitoring
component fails. Additionally, the logic server forward policies
rules to feed the monitoring component with new behaviors.
It is important to mention that the operations performed in the
logic server are based on a statistical based approach, payload
inspection and application analysis; however, this proposal
can be modified replacing their solution by a ML solution,
defining retraining or updating policies for online ML based
classifiers. Comparably, the work in [107] proposes a SelfLearning Intelligent Classifier (SLIC) for traffic classification.
SLIC requires only a small number of labeled flows for its
learning process, the system is able to evolve to a new configuration with unlabeled data. SLIC uses BoFs structure to
classify a set of flows into the same group using KNN. First

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2006

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

at all, a KNN model is trained with the labeled samples. After
the training is performed, unlabeled samples can be marked
by the system as possible new training samples, and they are
saved in a batch. When the batch reaches a defined threshold, a retraining process is activated inducing the new training
samples to the KNN model. The decision to induce new training samples or not resides in the prediction step, where two
conditions, based on the distance between the samples and
their two nearest classes, will allow taking the final decision.
Although, the system presents a good performance in term of
traffic classification with two dataset, it might present problems with imbalance or high dimensional data where distance
based methods tend to fail. Additionally, the computational
cost of this approach should be quantified.
In the ML field, semi-supervised learning may help to
deal with the evolving feature of the network, and with the
lack of labeled data. A semi-supervised work-flow may deal
with the updating of the ML models in a online manner.
For instance, [141] proposed a semi-supervised approach for
traffic clustering. As a first step, a Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) with set-based equivalence constraint is used, and
following the clustering algorithm based on the Expectation
Maximization (EM) method. The semi-supervised process is
handled with side information, which aims at building a set of
flows given some constraints with a Gaussian model. The side
information principle is based on the BoFs definition. Finally,
classical statistical features of the flows in the sets are used
to cluster the application protocol with EM. Reference [135]
also addressed the traffic classification problem using a semisupervised approach. Support vectors machines (SVMs) are
built using the co-training approach, in which multiple classifiers are trained on different sets of features. This approach
is used when the historical dataset counts with both labeled
and unlabeled data; where taking into account the unlabeled
data can also provide more knowledge to the model. The work
in [131] presents a similar approach. The work in [146] analyses time based and host based features for intrusion detection
in the network. The proposal is based on a semi-supervised
approach that trains a classifier with labeled samples. A membership vector is obtained for the unlabeled data with the
classifier. The membership vector is used to obtain fuzzy
groups that are further incorporated into the training set for a
re-training of the classifier.
C. Traffic Classification in Cellular, WiFi and
Satellite Networks
In this section, we make an overview of the application/implementation of traffic classification in three important
network infrastructures. In this sense, we perform a short
analysis about the IP traffic classification with ML in these
domains.
In cellular networks, the mobile IP traffic classification can
be performed at different levels either using the port, the packet
payload [182], [183] or the flow statistical distribution. On this
subject, ML learning is applied when statistical attributes are
available from cellular network traces. For instance, [130] collected IP traffic extracted from mobile networks in a fixed time

windows. Statistical based features from normal and abnormal
traffic are computed, and a Bayesian classifier is trained for
the analysis of the massive network users’ traffic behaviors.
The work in [184] presents an approach to correctly collect
and label mobile IP network traces, while in [24] a taxonomy to define the labels is proposed in the same domain. The
work in [185] presents a fine grain process to correctly extract
the IP flows from mobile networks in view of the ML solution implementation. More on this subject, it can be found
in [186] and [187], where dedicated surveys are presented. For
instance, the work in [186] exposed a generic architecture of
a cellular network, and the possible positions where passive
monitoring can be deployed, such as in a Packet Switched
(PS) Core. To this end, IP-based data in passive monitoring points can be analyzed by ML classifiers following the
complete process exposed along this survey paper.
In a similar manner, in WiFi networks, IP-data can be
extracted in order to apply ML approaches for the traffic classification. For instance, the work in [136] collected network
traces from Wi-Fi controllers at a large university campus.
These controllers connected access points to the campus backbone network, allowing the wireless devices to access Internet.
The traces come from network traffic to/from malicious and
benign domains, and statistical based features were computed
over these traces. A binary ML classifier was trained for
detecting malicious domains. Similar approaches can be found
in [158], [187], and [188]. The difference with cellular/mobile
networks and WiFi network resides in the technology used for
the data exchange that might affect the speed, cost and security.
Finally, in satellite networks, the traffic management is a
key task due to it allows improving the QoS. Commonly, traffic data is captured form satellite Internet Service Providers
(ISPs). The works in this area aim to classify and to analyze
Internet traffic in large networks [189]–[192]. The principle is the same as the previous cases, passive monitoring
is deployed in order to perform traffic classification. These
monitoring points can be at routers [189], [190] or point of
presence (PoP) [191] of large ISP networks. Another emerging approach is the use of Software-defined networks(SDNs)
in satellite-terrestrial networks. In SDNs, traffic classification
can be easily deployed in the SDN’ master controllers as it is
exposed in [193] and [194].
To conclude, this section presented possible applications of
ML-based traffic classification in three related Internet network
infrastructures, where the methodological steps presented by
this survey paper can be used.

D. Discussion
To conclude, it is presented as follows some important
challenges and comments regarding the content of this section.
• A fast response of the ML models and the monitoring
process are required for traffic classification solutions.
Measuring the effective time that the complete classification process will take, is critical in this field. Normally,
the Internet communications take place in milliseconds to
open and close sessions, and to transfer data. The traffic

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

identification has to be faster, in order to take actions and
to validate results.
• Commonly, the ML solutions are validated when the
training of the model is executed, and it is based on
the validation techniques reviewed in Section II-A5. In
order to measure the performance of the ML solution in
an online context, it is necessary to establish a framework that provides the ground truth applications. In this
sense, metrics such as the accuracy and the F-score can
be computed for ensuring the reliability of the traffic
classification.
• An important challenge, when using and implementing
ML in the networking field, is the scalability of the
solution due the size of the Internet network.
• Finally, ML solutions that allow considering the
dynamism of the network must be deployed. The development of autonomic architectures [195]–[197], allowing
context adaptation (behavioral or structural adaptation),
can be applied by using ML models.

IX. A NALYSIS
This study has organized its structure in a manner that
remarks some important procedures and challenges for achieving knowledge extraction with ML techniques. The proposed
procedures involve data collection, feature engineering (FE,
FR and FS), algorithm selection and model deployment. The
question that arises is: which is the best path to take or how to
start looking for related references? 49 papers were selected
as they present the complete procedure in Appendix A using
a variety of strategies for traffic classification, compelling to
show the challenges remarked in the previous sections. The
results of the present review are summarized in Figure 2. A
path is drawn in order to know the procedural trends commonly taken. The most important remarks concerning Figure 5
are listed as follows.
A. Data Collection Phase
This block in Fig. 5 is related to the characteristics observed
in Section IV. First at all, the papers are divided into two:
the papers that used Real and Emulated scenarios for traffic
observation. Traffic generation is not considered due to is not
a common method used for traffic classification with ML. It
is noticeable that the amount of papers in both cases is similar. Following, it is studied if the data is publicly available or
not. The patterns remain the same as the previous case; however, most of the papers with real traffic have used well-known
datasets, some listed in Appendix A.
Regarding encryption, it was found that most of the
approaches start with a non-encrypted study before proposing a mapping to the encrypted case. The review is mainly
conformed of 60% papers with non-encrypted data, and the
remaining for encrypted studies. Continuing, the ground truth
is normally defined by DPI tools, where few papers defined
a strict process for labeling the flows. The general conclusion
of this block is that the tendency is to use real traffic measurement for well-known public data, but also to set network

2007

architectures to emulate traffic. Most the traffic is unencrypted
and the ground truth of the flows is not commonly available.
B. Feature Engineering Phase
In this block, Sections V and VI are comprised. The first
aspect considered is the type of FE performed, while the second one reports if the FS process is performed or not. It is
noticeable from the Fig. 5 that the most common trend is the
FE process by using statistical based (STATsB) features. This
result is expected due to these features can be interchangeable between encrypted and non-encrypted traffic analysis,
besides they do not intrude into the packet content, and their
computation is lightweight.
C. Algorithm Selection
In algorithm selection, the classical classification (CClass)
is dominant, which is an expected outcome because this study
is focused on traffic classification. However, some approaches
have made some efforts in the multi-classification and ensemble approaches (MClass&E). This last one motivated from the
class-imbalance and generalization problems. Also, it can be
found some efforts to use clustering (Clust) and hybrid or
advances (H&A) techniques for traffic classification. In terms
of the objective to achieve, the application category (ApPC)
and protocol (AppN) are commonly searched, but anomaly
detection (AD) is also an interest. Others objectives are to
detect the behavior of the users, find communities, and create
user profiles, among others.
D. Model Deployment
Finally, in the model deployment block, the interest is to
show the amount of papers that implements the solution. In
addition, it is important to know the reconfiguration strategies
proposed by the papers selected. This last one is important due
to the constant dynamism of the network that causes problems
to some ML approaches.
From Fig. 5, it is noticeable that more than 65% do not
specified (NNS) the implementation of the solution. In the
same manner, most of the solutions do not offer reconfiguration methods (ONS); although, some of the works propose
scheduled retraining processes to upgrade their solution. Selflearning or evolving (SLE) is not found in the reviewed papers;
however, this is a challenging topic for the ML techniques in
general.
E. Future Trends
Finally, to conclude the analysis, it is remarked in red the
approaches less taken by the reviewed papers. It is noticeable from Fig. 5, that most of the works studied did not
use encrypted data, and the ground truth establishment was
not commonly performed. In the feature engineering process,
few works applied FS for their solution. In terms of the
ML approach used, the less explored are the unsupervised
techniques, the multi-classification and ensemble approaches.
Finally, for the model deployment phase, there are few
works that implemented the solution in real world scenarios.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2008

Fig. 5.

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

Trends of the selected papers for classifying traffic with ML.

Moreover, the reconfiguration processes do not handle evolving or autonomic reconfigurations. Given these scenarios and
the discussions of the previous section, the following future
trends are concluded.
• The proposition of emulated traffic architectures, oriented to create ML solutions, can allow the generation of
encrypted and unencrypted traffic, as well as a reliable
flow labeling process.
• Given the efficiency of the statistical based approach,
an exploration to improve its computation will provide
robust classification solutions. In the case of the FS, an
efficient dynamic selection of the features might offer a
higher classification performance.
• In the algorithm selection block, the future trends to
exploit are the deployment of multi-classification and
ensemble approaches, which are very promising path
given the characteristics of the Internet data.
• For the ML solutions, more experimental tests are needed
to measure the performance in term of response time and
complexity. In this particular case, it is necessary to propose distributed and scalable ML solutions that can deal
with the dimension of the Internet network.

•

In terms of the Model reconfiguration, an alternative
solution will be to deploy the concept of incremental
learning, in order to deal with the dynamism of the
Internet network.
X. C ONCLUSION

This survey paper presented the general procedure to
achieve traffic classification through ML techniques. Each step
of the procedure has some relevant works that follow different
paths to achieve the results. In this way, the reviewed papers
were organized, where each step defines the category to which
each paper belongs. These categories were displayed into a
graphic that illustrates the most common trends in the field.
Discussions were settled in each section, in order to identify
its most common trends and challenges.
This study tried to unveil several challenges in the traffic classification field. For instance, working with encrypted
traffic is challenging, where the type of features should lead
to correct classifications in absence of the packet content.
The current publicly labeled data is scarce, which make it
hard for comparing ML solutions. Following, for knowledge

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

2009

TABLE IV
M OST C OMMON P UBLICLY AVAILABLE DATASETS F OUND IN THE PAPERS R EVIEWED

TABLE V
T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE DATA C OLLECTION P HASE

TABLE VI
T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE F EATURE E NGINEERING P HASE

extraction with ML, the classification task was found as
the most popular. However, multi-classification and ensemble
approaches present some advantages that make them compelling for dealing with some problems in traffic classification,
such as class-imbalance and generalization. The clustering
approach can help to find new or anomalous behavior in
the Internet traffic; therefore, its study in this field should
be extended. Finally, the implementation of such solutions
remains as an important task to achieve, due to different factors, mostly related to performance and adaptability of the
solutions.
The difference of the present review, regarding most of the
surveys found in the literature, is that it shows the whole
picture of the steps needed for network traffic classification.

Moreover, it analyses the challenges at each stage of the
process and outlines future directions. To summarize, some
of the most important directions that this works want to
emphasize are:
• Reliable label assignment, this procedure will play a key
role for the construction and validation of the ML models
• Dynamic feature selection, this will try to create adaptive models that use the most suitable features given the
context and the objective to achieve
• Integration of meta-learning processes for dealing with
the imbalance and the dynamism of the Internet network
data
• Strategies for the online reconfiguration of the ML
solutions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2010

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

TABLE VII
T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE A LGORITHM S ELECTION P HASE

TABLE VIII
T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE M ODEL D EPLOYMENT T REND

A PPENDIX A
This section lists in Table IV the most common public
available datasets found for traffic analysis.
A PPENDIX B
Table V depicts the trends for the observation process.
Table VI depicts the trends for the feature engineering process.
Table VII depicts the trends for the algorithm selection process. Table VIII depicts the trends for the model construction
process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is sponsored by Thales Alenia Space, Toulouse,
France. The authors would like to thank the Département:
Business Line Telecommunication, R&D Department, for their
assistance.
R EFERENCES
[1] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA). Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iana.org/
[2] T. T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for Internet
traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, 4th Quart., 2008.
[3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40,
Jan./Feb. 2012.
[4] N. A. Khater and R. E. Overill, “Network traffic classification techniques and challenges,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Digit. Inf. Manag.
(ICDIM), 2015, pp. 43–48.
[5] P. Foremski, “On different ways to classify Internet traffic: A short
review of selected publications,” Theor. Appl. Informat., vol. 25, no. 2,
pp. 1–19, 2013.
[6] N. Namdev, S. Agrawal, and S. Silkari, “Recent advancement
in machine learning based Internet traffic classification,” Procedia
Comput. Sci., vol. 60, pp. 784–791, 2015.

[7] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of methods
for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” Int. J. Netw. Manag.,
vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–374, 2015.
[8] H. Alizadeh and A. Zúquete, “Traffic classification for managing applications’ networking profiles,” Security Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 14,
pp. 2557–2575, 2016.
[9] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Network
anomaly detection: Methods, systems and tools,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 303–336, 1st Quart., 2014.
[10] A. Marnerides, A. Schaeffer-Filho, and A. Mauthe, “Traffic anomaly
diagnosis in Internet backbone networks: A survey,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 73, pp. 224–243, Nov. 2014.
[11] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and
machine learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2nd Quart.,
2016.
[12] M. F. Umer, M. Sher, and Y. Bi, “Flow-based intrusion detection:
Techniques and challenges,” Comput. Security, vol. 70, pp. 238–254,
Sep. 2017.
[13] U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, “Advances in
knowledge discovery and data mining,” in From Data Mining to
Knowledge Discovery: An Overview, U. M. Fayyad, G. PiatetskyShapiro, P. Smyth, and R. Uthurusamy, Eds. Menlo Park, CA, USA:
Amer. Assoc. Artif. Intell., 1996, pp. 1–34.
[14] G. Haixiang et al., “Learning from class-imbalanced data: Review of
methods and applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 73, pp. 220–239,
May 2017.
[15] H. Liu and H. Motoda, Computational Methods of Feature Selection.
Boca Raton, FL, USA: Chapman and Hall, 2008.
[16] G. Chandrashekar and F. Sahin, “A survey on feature selection
methods,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 16–28, 2014.
[17] W. Shang et al., “A novel feature selection algorithm for text categorization,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1–5, 2007.
[18] L. E. Raileanu and K. Stoffel, “Theoretical comparison between the
Gini index and information gain criteria,” Ann. Math. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 77–93, 2004.
[19] X. He, D. Cai, and P. Niyogi, “Laplacian score for feature selection,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2005, pp. 507–514.
[20] M. Liu and D. Zhang, “Feature selection with effective distance,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 215, pp. 100–109, Nov. 2016.
[21] S. Wang, W. Pedrycz, Q. Zhu, and W. Zhu, “Unsupervised feature
selection via maximum projection and minimum redundancy,” Knowl.
Based Syst., vol. 75, pp. 19–29, Feb. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

[22] N. Zhou, H. Cheng, W. Pedrycz, Y. Zhang, and H. Liu, “Discriminative
sparse subspace learning and its application to unsupervised feature
selection,” ISA Trans., vol. 61, pp. 104–118, Mar. 2016.
[23] D. Wang, H. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Liu, and J. Wang, “Unsupervised
feature selection through Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization—A word
co-occurrence perspective,” Neurocomputing, vol. 173, pp. 845–854,
Jan. 2016.
[24] Y. Liu, K. Liu, C. Zhang, J. Wang, and X. Wang, “Unsupervised feature
selection via diversity-induced self-representation,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 219, pp. 350–363, Jan. 2016.
[25] C.-H. Chen, “Feature selection for clustering using instance-based
learning by exploring the nearest and farthest neighbors,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 318, pp. 14–27, Oct. 2015.
[26] S. Maldonado, E. Carrizosa, and R. Weber, “Kernel penalized K-means:
A feature selection method based on kernel K-means,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 322, pp. 150–160, Nov. 2015.
[27] Y. Wu, C. Wang, J. Bu, and C. Chen, “Group sparse feature selection on local learning based clustering,” Neurocomputing, vol. 171,
pp. 1118–1130, Jan. 2016.
[28] W. Siedlecki and J. Sklansky, “A note on genetic algorithms for
large-scale feature selection,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 10, no. 5,
pp. 335–347, 1989.
[29] A. Klepaczko and A. Materka, “Combining evolutionary and sequential
search strategies for unsupervised feature selection,” in Proc. 10th Int.
Conf. Artif. Intell. Soft Comput. (ICAISC), 2010, pp. 149–156.
[30] A. Y. Ng, “Feature selection, L1 vs. L2 regularization, and rotational
invariance,” in Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2004, p. 78.
[31] R. Genuer, J.-M. Poggi, and C. Tuleau-Malot, “Variable selection
using random forests,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 31, no. 14,
pp. 2225–2236, 2010.
[32] G. Katz, E. C. R. Shin, and D. Song, “ExploreKit: Automatic feature
generation and selection,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Min.
(ICDM), Dec. 2016, pp. 979–984.
[33] Y. Kim, H. Lee, and E. M. Provost, “Deep learning for robust feature generation in audiovisual emotion recognition,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., Vancouver, BC, Canada,
May 2013, pp. 3687–3691.
[34] M. H. Dunham, Data Mining: Introductory and Advanced Topics.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[35] I. H. Witten and E. Frank, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning,
Tools and Techniques. Boston, MA, USA: Morgan Kaufman, 2005.
[36] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. H. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical
Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction (Springer Series in
Statistics), 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009.
[37] M. A. F. Pimentel, D. A. Clifton, L. Clifton, and L. Tarassenko, “A
review of novelty detection,” Signal Process., vol. 99, pp. 215–249,
Jun. 2014.
[38] R. Polikar, “Ensemble based systems in decision making,” IEEE
Circuits Syst. Mag., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 21–45, 3rd Quart., 2006.
[39] V. Losing, B. Hammer, and H. Wersing, “Incremental on-line learning: A review and comparison of state of the art algorithms,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 275, pp. 1261–1274, Jan. 2018.
[40] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Introduction to Reinforcement Learning,
1st ed. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1998.
[41] M. Sokolova and G. Lapalme, “A systematic analysis of performance
measures for classification tasks,” Inf. Process. Manag., vol. 45, no. 4,
pp. 427–437, 2009.
[42] T. Fawcett, “An introduction to ROC analysis,” Pattern Recognit. Lett.,
vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 861–874, 2006.
[43] D. M. W. Powers, “Evaluation: From precision, recall and F-measure
to ROC,” J. Mach. Learn. Technol., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 37–63, 2006.
[44] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284, Sep. 2009.
[45] F. Pacheco et al., “A statistical comparison of neuroclassifiers and
feature selection methods for gearbox fault diagnosis under realistic
conditions,” Neurocomputing, vol. 194, pp. 192–206, Jun. 2016.
[46] J. Khalife, A. Hajjar, and J. Diaz-Verdejo, “A multilevel taxonomy and
requirements for an optimal traffic-classification model,” Int. J. Netw.
Manag., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 101–120, 2014.
[47] B. Claise, B. Trammell, and P. Aitken, “Specification of the IP
flow information export (IPFIX) protocol for the exchange of flow
information,” Internet Eng. Task Force, Fremont, CA, USA, Rep. 7011,
2013.
[48] R. Antonello et al., “Deep packet inspection tools and techniques in
commodity platforms: Challenges and trends,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1863–1878, 2012.

2011

[49] T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Independent comparison of popular DPI tools for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 76, pp. 75–89, Jan. 2015.
[50] C. Xu, S. Chen, J. Su, S. M. Yiu, and L. C. K. Hui, “A survey on
regular expression matching for deep packet inspection: Applications,
algorithms, and hardware platforms,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2991–3029, 4th Quart., 2016.
[51] A. Tongaonkar, R. Torres, M. Iliofotou, R. Keralapura, and A. Nucci,
“Towards self adaptive network traffic classification,” Comput.
Commun., vol. 56, pp. 35–46, Feb. 2015.
[52] C. Mu, X. H. Huang, X. Tian, Y. Ma, and J.-L. Qi, “Automatic traffic
signature extraction based on fixed bit offset algorithm for traffic classification,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 79–85,
2011.
[53] C. Mu, X. Tian, X. H. Huang, and Y. Ma, “FlowAntEater: Network traffic automatic signature generator,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun.,
vol. 20, pp. 69–74, Aug. 2013.
[54] E. Bocchi et al., “MAGMA network behavior classifier for malware
traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 109, pp. 142–156, Nov. 2016.
[55] D. Muelas, M. Gordo, J. L. García-Dorado, and J. E. L. de Vergara,
“Dictyogram: A statistical approach for the definition and visualization
of network flow categories,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Netw. Service
Manag. (CNSM), 2015, pp. 219–227.
[56] G. Levchuk, “Function and activity classification in network traffic
data: Existing methods, their weaknesses, and a path forward,” in Proc.
SPIE, vol. 9850, 2016, p. 9850.
[57] M. Iliofotou et al., “Graption: A graph-based P2P traffic classification
framework for the Internet backbone,” Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 8,
pp. 1909–1920, 2011.
[58] J. Jusko and M. Rehak, “Identifying peer-to-peer communities in the
network by connection graph analysis,” Int. J. Netw. Manag., vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 235–252, 2014.
[59] Y. Jin, E. Sharafuddin, and Z.-L. Zhang, “Unveiling core networkwide communication patterns through application traffic activity graph
decomposition,” SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 37, no. 1,
pp. 49–60, Jun. 2009.
[60] K. Xu, F. Wang, and L. Gu, “Behavior analysis of Internet traffic via
bipartite graphs and one-mode projections,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 931–942, Jun. 2014.
[61] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection
and description: A survey,” Data Min. Knowl. Disc., vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 626–688, May 2015.
[62] N. Secchi, R. Bonelli, S. Giordano, and G. Procissi, “BRUTE: A high
performance and extensible traffic generator,” in Proc. SPECTS, 2005,
pp. 839–845.
[63] iPerf—The Ultimate Speed Test Tool for TCP, UDP and SCTP.
Accessed: Jul. 18, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://iperf.fr/
[64] OSTINATO Network Traffic Generator and Analizer. Accessed: Jul. 18,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://ostinato.org/
[65] C. V. Wright et al., “Generating client workloads and high-fidelity
network traffic for controllable, repeatable experiments in computer security,” in Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, S. Jha,
R. Sommer, and C. Kreibich, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010,
pp. 218–237.
[66] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapé, P. S. Rossi, F. Palmieri, and G. Ventre,
“Internet traffic modeling by means of hidden Markov models,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 52, no. 14, pp. 2645–2662, 2008.
[67] A. Botta, A. Dainotti, and A. Pescapé, “A tool for the generation of realistic network workload for emerging networking scenarios,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 56, no. 15, pp. 3531–3547, 2012.
[68] P. Megyesi, G. Szabó, and S. Molnár, “User behavior based traffic
emulator: A framework for generating test data for DPI tools,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 92, pp. 41–54, Dec. 2015.
[69] S. Molnar, P. Megyesi, and G. Szabo, “Multi-functional traffic generation framework based on accurate user behavior emulation,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS),
2013, pp. 13–14.
[70] L. Vassio, I. Drago, and M. Mellia, “Detecting user actions from HTTP
traces: Toward an automatic approach,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun.
Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Sep. 2016, pp. 50–55.
[71] Openbach. Accessed: Dec. 18, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.openbach.org/
[72] R. Hofstede et al., “Flow monitoring explained: From packet capture
to data analysis with NetFlow and IPFIX,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2037–2064, 4th Quart., 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2012

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

[73] S. M. C. Silva, P. Carvalho, and S. R. Lima, “Inside packet sampling
techniques: Exploring modularity to enhance network measurements,”
Int. J. Commun. Syst., vol. 30, no. 6, 2017, Art. no. e3135.
[74] V. Moreno et al., “Commodity packet capture engines: Tutorial, cookbook and applicability,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 1364–1390, 3rd Quart., 2015.
[75] P. Velan and V. Puš, “High-density network flow monitoring,” in
Proc. IFIP/IEEE Int. Symp. Integr. Netw. Manag. (IM), May 2015,
pp. 996–1001.
[76] T. Wellem, Y.-K. Lai, C.-Y. Huang, and W.-Y. Chung, “A hardwareaccelerated infrastructure for flexible sketch-based network traffic
monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Conf. High Perform. Switching
Routing (HPSR), Jun. 2016, pp. 162–167.
[77] A. Neumann, M. Ehrlich, L. Wisniewski, and J. Jasperneite, “Towards
monitoring of hybrid industrial networks,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int.
Workshop Factory Commun. Syst. (WFCS), May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[78] Z. Aouini, A. Kortebi, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Traffic monitoring
in home networks: Enhancing diagnosis and performance tracking,”
in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC),
Aug. 2015, pp. 545–550.
[79] A. Kortebi, Z. Aouini, M. Juren, and J. Pazdera, “Home networks
traffic monitoring case study: Anomaly detection,” in Proc. Glob. Inf.
Infrastruct. Netw. Symp. (GIIS), Oct. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[80] I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, J. Svoboda, and M. Hammoudeh, “A survey on
network security monitoring systems,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf.
Future Internet Things Cloud Workshops (FiCloudW), Aug. 2016,
pp. 77–82.
[81] W. Robitza et al., “Challenges of future multimedia QoE monitoring
for Internet service providers,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 76, no. 21,
pp. 22243–22266, 2017.
[82] T. Jirsik, M. Cermak, D. Tovarnak, and P. Celeda, “Toward streambased IP flow analysis,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 7,
pp. 70–76, Jul. 2017.
[83] M. Cermák, T. Jirsík, and M. Laštovička, “Real-time analysis of
NetFlow data for generating network traffic statistics using Apache
Spark,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp. (NOMS),
Apr. 2016, pp. 1019–1020.
[84] F. Gringoli et al., “GT: Picking up the truth from the ground for Internet
traffic,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 12–18,
Oct. 2009.
[85] M. Dusi, F. Gringoli, and L. Salgarelli, “Quantifying the accuracy of
the ground truth associated with Internet traffic traces,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1158–1167, 2011.
[86] V. Carela-Español, T. Bujlow, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Is our ground-truth
for traffic classification reliable?” in Passive and Active Measurement,
M. Faloutsos and A. Kuzmanovic, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
Int., 2014, pp. 98–108.
[87] M. Stevanovic, J. M. Pedersen, A. D’Alconzo, S. Ruehrup, and
A. Berger, “On the ground truth problem of malicious DNS traffic
analysis,” Comput. Security, vol. 55, pp. 142–158, Nov. 2015.
[88] A. Finamore et al., “Experiences of Internet traffic monitoring with
tstat,” IEEE Netw., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 8–14, May/Jun. 2011.
[89] T. Bujlow, K. Balachandran, T. Riaz, and J. M. Pedersen, “Volunteerbased system for classification of traffic in computer networks,” in
Proc. 19th Telecommun. Forum (TELFOR), Nov. 2011, pp. 210–213.
[90] A. Baer et al., “DBStream: A holistic approach to large-scale network
traffic monitoring and analysis,” Comput. Netw., vol. 107, pp. 5–19,
Oct. 2016.
[91] P. Velan, “EventFlow: Network flow aggregation based on user actions,”
in Proc. NOMS IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., Apr. 2016,
pp. 767–771.
[92] J. J. Davis and A. J. Clark, “Data preprocessing for anomaly based
network intrusion detection: A review,” Comput. Security, vol. 30,
nos. 6–7, pp. 353–375, 2011.
[93] J. J. Davis and E. Foo, “Automated feature engineering for HTTP tunnel
detection,” Comput. Security, vol. 59, pp. 166–185, Jun. 2016.
[94] A. Moore et al., “Discriminators for use in flow-based classification,”
Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. London, London, U.K., Rep. RR-05-13,
2005.
[95] L. Peng, B. Yang, Y. Chen, and Z. Chen, “Effectiveness of statistical
features for early stage Internet traffic identification,” Int. J. Parallel
Program., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 181–197, 2016.
[96] P. Bermolen, M. Mellia, M. Meo, D. Rossi, and S. Valenti, “Abacus:
Accurate behavioral classification of P2P-TV traffic,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1394–1411, 2011.

[97] H.-M. An, S.-K. Lee, J.-H. Ham, and M.-S. Kim, “Traffic identification
based on applications using statistical signature free from abnormal
TCP behavior,” J. Inf. Sci. Eng., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1669–1692, 2015.
[98] M. Iliofotou, M. Faloutsos, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Exploiting dynamicity in graph-based traffic analysis: Techniques and applications,” in
Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol. (CoNEXT), 2009,
pp. 241–252.
[99] M. Berlingerio, D. Koutra, T. Eliassi-Rad, and C. Faloutsos,
“NetSimile: A scalable approach to size-independent network
similarity,” CoRR, vol. abs/1209.2684, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.2684
[100] A. Jakalan, J. Gong, Q. Su, X. Hu, and A. M. S. Abdelgder, “Social
relationship discovery of IP addresses in the managed IP networks
by observing traffic at network boundary,” Comput. Netw., vol. 100,
pp. 12–27, May 2016.
[101] F. Iglesias and T. Zseby, “Time-activity footprints in IP traffic,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 107, pp. 64–75, Oct. 2016.
[102] A. Hajjar, J. Khalife, and J. Díaz-Verdejo, “Network traffic application
identification based on message size analysis,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 58, pp. 130–143, Dec. 2015.
[103] V. Bandara, A. Pezeshki, and P. J. Anura, “Modeling spatial and temporal behavior of Internet traffic anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE Local Comput.
Netw. Conf., 2010, pp. 384–391.
[104] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and W. Wu, “Efficient and robust
feature extraction and selection for traffic classification,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 119, pp. 1–16, Jun. 2017.
[105] J. Zhang et al., “Network traffic classification using correlation
information,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 104–117, Jan. 2013.
[106] Y. Wang, Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, and S. Yu, “A novel semi-supervised
approach for network traffic clustering,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Netw.
Syst. Security, 2011, pp. 169–175.
[107] D. M. Divakaran, L. Su, Y. S. Liau, and V. L. L. Thing, “SLIC:
Self-learning intelligent classifier for network traffic,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 91, pp. 283–297, Nov. 2015.
[108] A. Dainotti, W. de Donato, A. Pescape, and P. S. Rossi, “Classification
of network traffic via packet-level hidden Markov models,” in Proc.
IEEE Glob. Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2008, pp. 1–5.
[109] C. Yin, S. Li, and Q. Li, “Network traffic classification via HMM
under the guidance of syntactic structure,” Comput. Netw., vol. 56,
no. 6, pp. 1814–1825, 2012.
[110] T. Yildirim and P. J. Radcliffe, “VoIP traffic classification in IPSec
tunnels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Eng., vol. 1, Aug. 2010,
pp. 151–157.
[111] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Identification of VoIP
encrypted traffic using a machine learning approach,” J. King Saud
Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 77–92, 2015.
[112] E. Adi, Z. Baig, and P. Hingston, “Stealthy denial of service (DoS)
attack modelling and detection for HTTP/2 services,” J. Netw. Comput.
Appl., vol. 91, pp. 1–13, Aug. 2017.
[113] R. Bar Yanai, M. Langberg, D. Peleg, and L. Roditty, “Realtime
classification for encrypted traffic,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Exp.
Algorithms (SEA), 2010, pp. 373–385.
[114] P. Branch and J. But, “Rapid and generalized identification of packetized voice traffic flows,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE Conf. Local
Comput. Netw., 2012, pp. 85–92.
[115] Y. Okada, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I. Oka, “Application
identification from encrypted traffic based on characteristic changes by
encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Tech. Committee Commun.
Qual. Rel. (CQR), May 2011, pp. 1–6.
[116] K. Goseva-Popstojanova, G. Anastasovski, A. Dimitrijevikj, R. Pantev,
and B. Miller, “Characterization and classification of malicious Web
traffic,” Comput. Security, vol. 42, pp. 92–115, May 2014.
[117] M. Soysal and E. G. Schmidt, “Machine learning algorithms for
accurate flow-based network traffic classification: Evaluation and comparison,” Perform. Eval., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 451–467, 2010.
[118] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Classifying service flows in the
encrypted Skype traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
Jun. 2012, pp. 1064–1068.
[119] Y.-N. Dong, J.-J. Zhao, and J. Jin, “Novel feature selection and classification of Internet video traffic based on a hierarchical scheme,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 119, pp. 102–111, Jul. 2017.
[120] R. Singh, H. Kumar, and R. Singla, “An intrusion detection system
using network traffic profiling and online sequential extreme learning
machine,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 42, no. 22, pp. 8609–8624, 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY

[121] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Multiclassification approaches for classifying mobile app traffic,” J. Netw.
Comput. Appl., vol. 103, pp. 131–145, Feb. 2017.
[122] T. Bakhshi and B. Ghita, “On Internet traffic classification: A twophased machine learning approach,” J. Comput. Netw. Commun.,
vol. 2016, May 2016, Art. no. 2048302.
[123] S. E. Middleton and S. Modafferi, “Scalable classification of QoS
for real-time interactive applications from IP traffic measurements,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 107, pp. 121–132, Oct. 2016.
[124] M. Mohammadi, B. Raahemi, A. Akbari, H. Moeinzadeh, and
B. Nasersharif, “Genetic-based minimum classification error mapping
for accurate identifying peer-to-peer applications in the Internet traffic,”
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 6417–6423, 2011.
[125] S. M.-Feng and C. J.-Tao, “Research of the traffic characteristics
for the real time online traffic classification,” J. China Univ. Posts
Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 92–98, 2011.
[126] R. Yuan, Z. Li, X. Guan, and L. Xu, “An SVM-based machine learning method for accurate Internet traffic classification,” Inf. Syst. Front.,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 149–156, 2010.
[127] P. Wang, S.-C. Lin, and M. Luo, “A framework for QoS-aware traffic classification using semi-supervised machine learning in SDNs,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Services Comput. (SCC), 2016, pp. 760–765.
[128] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “How robust can a machine
learning approach be for classifying encrypted VoIP?” J. Netw. Syst.
Manag., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 830–869, Oct. 2015.
[129] G.-L. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, and C. Li, “A novel hybrid
method for effectively classifying encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE
Glob. Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[130] Y. Lai, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Z. Yang, and X. Li, “On monitoring and
predicting mobile network traffic abnormality,” Simulat. Model. Pract.
Theory, vol. 50, pp. 176–188, Jan. 2015.
[131] R. Lin, O. Li, Q. Li, and Y. Liu, “Unknown network protocol classification method based on semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Commun. (ICCC), 2015, pp. 300–308.
[132] L. Peng, B. Yang, and Y. Chen, “Effective packet number for early stage
Internet traffic identification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 156, pp. 252–267,
May 2015.
[133] A. Rizzi, A. Iacovazzi, A. Baiocchi, and S. Colabrese, “A low complexity real-time Internet traffic flows neuro-fuzzy classifier,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 91, pp. 752–771, Nov. 2015.
[134] M. H. Bhuyan, D. Bhattacharyya, and J. Kalita, “A multi-step outlierbased anomaly detection approach to network-wide traffic,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 348, pp. 243–271, Jun. 2016.
[135] X. Li, F. Qi, D. Xu, and X. S. Qiu, “An Internet traffic classification
method based on semi-supervised support vector machine,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2011, pp. 1–5.
[136] A. Raghuramu et al., “Uncovering the footprints of malicious traffic
in wireless/mobile networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 95, pp. 95–107,
Dec. 2016.
[137] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Wang, “Unsupervised traffic classification using flow statistical properties and IP packet payload,” J.
Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 79, no. 5, pp. 573–585, Aug. 2013.
[138] J. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Xiang, “Internet traffic
classification by aggregating correlated naive Bayes predictions,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 5–15, Jan. 2013.
[139] J. Yang, L. Yuan, Y. He, and L. Y. Chen, “Timely traffic identification
on P2P streaming media,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun., vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 67–73, 2012.
[140] G.-Z. Lin, Y. Xin, X.-X. Niu, and H.-B. Jiang, “Network traffic classification based on semi-supervised clustering,” J. China Univ. Posts
Telecommun., vol. 17, pp. 84–88, Dec. 2010.
[141] Y. Wang, Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, W. Zhou, and B. Xie, “Internet traffic
clustering with side information,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 80, no. 5,
pp. 1021–1036, 2014.
[142] R. Raveendran and R. Menon, “An efficient method for Internet traffic
classification and identification using statistical features,” Int. J. Eng.
Res. Technol., vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 297–303, 2015.
[143] Z. Liu, R. Wang, M. Tao, and X. Cai, “A class-oriented feature
selection approach for multi-class imbalanced network traffic datasets
based on local and global metrics fusion,” Neurocomputing, vol. 168,
pp. 365–381, Nov. 2015.
[144] F. Ertam and E. Avcı, “A new approach for Internet traffic classification:
GA-WK-ELM,” Measurement, vol. 95, pp. 135–142, Jan. 2017.
[145] R. Dubin et al., “Real time video quality representation classification of encrypted HTTP adaptive video streaming—The case
of Safari,” CoRR, vol. abs/1602.00489, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.00489

2013

[146] R. A. R. Ashfaq, X.-Z. Wang, J. Z. Huang, H. Abbas, and Y.-L. He,
“Fuzziness based semi-supervised learning approach for intrusion
detection system,” Inf. Sci., vol. 378, pp. 484–497, Feb. 2017.
[147] A. Juvonen, T. Sipola, and T. Hämäläinen, “Online anomaly detection using dimensionality reduction techniques for HTTP log analysis,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 91, pp. 46–56, Nov. 2015.
[148] N.-F. Huang, G.-Y. Jai, H.-C. Chao, Y.-J. Tzang, and H.-Y. Chang,
“Application traffic classification at the early stage by characterizing
application rounds,” Inf. Sci., vol. 232, pp. 130–142, May 2013.
[149] A. Callado, J. Kelner, D. Sadok, C. A. Kamienski, and S. Fernandes,
“Better network traffic identification through the independent combination of techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 433–446,
2010.
[150] L. Wang, Data Mining With Computational Intelligence. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2009.
[151] H. Zhang, G. Lu, M. T. Qassrawi, Y. Zhang, and X. Yu, “Feature selection for optimizing traffic classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 35,
no. 12, pp. 1457–1471, 2012.
[152] A. Fahad, Z. Tari, I. Khalil, I. Habib, and H. Alnuweiri, “Toward
an efficient and scalable feature selection approach for Internet traffic
classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2040–2057, 2013.
[153] A. Fahad, Z. Tari, I. Khalil, A. Almalawi, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An
optimal and stable feature selection approach for traffic classification
based on multi-criterion fusion,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 36,
pp. 156–169, Jul. 2014.
[154] L. Zhen and L. Qiong, “A new feature selection method for
Internet traffic classification using ML,” Phys. Procedia, vol. 33,
pp. 1338–1345, 2012.
[155] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and X. Cao, “An efficient feature
generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection techniques for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 132, pp. 81–98,
Feb. 2018.
[156] Z. Liu and Q. Liu, “Studying cost-sensitive learning for multi-class
imbalance in Internet traffic classification,” J. China Univ. Posts
Telecommun., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 63–72, 2012.
[157] M. C. Belavagi and B. Muniyal, “Performance evaluation of supervised
machine learning algorithms for intrusion detection,” Procedia Comput.
Sci., vol. 89, pp. 117–123, Aug. 2016.
[158] K. V. Lalitha and V. R. Josna, “Traffic verification for network
anomaly detection in sensor networks,” Procedia Technol., vol. 24,
pp. 1400–1405, Jul. 2016.
[159] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?”
Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, 2011.
[160] M. M. U. Rathore, “Threshold-based generic scheme for encrypted and
tunneled voice flows detection over IP networks,” J. King Saud Univ.
Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 305–314, 2015.
[161] D. Zhang, C. Zheng, H. Zhang, and H. Yu, “Identification and analysis
of Skype peer-to-peer traffic,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Internet Web Appl.
Services, 2010, pp. 200–206.
[162] J. A. Caicedo-Muñoz, A. L. Espino, J. C. Corrales, and A. Rendón,
“QoS-classifier for VPN and non-VPN traffic based on timerelated features,” Comput. Netw., vol. 144, pp. 271–279, Oct. 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1389128618307321
[163] S. Miller, K. Curran, and T. Lunney, “Multilayer perceptron neural
network for detection of encrypted VPN network traffic,” in Proc.
CiberSA, 2018, doi: 10.1109/CyberSA.2018.8551395.
[164] G. Draper-Gil, A. Habibi, M. Saiful, and A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISS),
2016, pp. 407–414.
[165] S. E. Gómez, B. C. Martínez, A. J. Sánchez-Esguevillas, and
L. H. Callejo, “Ensemble network traffic classification: Algorithm comparison and novel ensemble scheme proposal,” Comput. Netw., vol. 127,
pp. 68–80, Nov. 2017.
[166] Y. Du and R. Zhang, “Design of a method for encrypted P2P traffic
identification using K-means algorithm,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 53,
no. 1, pp. 163–168, 2013.
[167] D. J. Arndt and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “A comparison of three
machine learning techniques for encrypted network traffic analysis,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Security Defense Appl. (CISDA),
Apr. 2011, pp. 107–114.
[168] H. Singh, “Performance analysis of unsupervised machine learning
techniques for network traffic classification,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
Adv. Comput. Commun. Technol., 2015, pp. 401–404.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

[169] P. V. Amoli and T. Hämäläinen, “A real time unsupervised NIDS
for detecting unknown and encrypted network attacks in high speed
network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Meas. Netw. (M&N), Oct. 2013,
pp. 149–154.
[170] M. Lotfollahi, R. S. H. Zade, M. J. Siavoshani, and M. Saberian, “Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using
deep learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1709.02656, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.02656
[171] T. Bujlow, T. Riaz, and J. M. Pedersen, “A method for classification
of network traffic based on C5.0 machine learning algorithm,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Jan. 2012, pp. 237–241.
[172] B. Huifeng, Z. Xianlong, Z. Hongfeng, and Z. Likun, “Traffic-load
prediction based on echo state network improved by Bayesian theory in 10G-EPON,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun., vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 69–73, 2015.
[173] G. Münz, H. Dai, L. Braun, and G. Carle, TCP Traffic Classification
Using Markov Models. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2010,
pp. 127–140.
[174] E. M. R. Oliveira, A. C. Viana, K. P. Naveen, and C. Sarraute,
“Mobile data traffic modeling: Revealing temporal facets,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 112, pp. 176–193, Jan. 2017.
[175] K.-W. Lim, S. Secci, L. Tabourier, and B. Tebbani, “Characterizing
and predicting mobile application usage,” Comput. Commun., vol. 95,
pp. 82–94, Dec. 2016.
[176] M.-Y. Su, “Using clustering to improve the KNN-based classifiers for
online anomaly network traffic identification,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 722–730, 2011.
[177] N. Kheir, “Behavioral classification and detection of malware through
HTTP user agent anomalies,” J. Inf. Security Appl., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 2–13, 2013.
[178] B. Schmidt, A. Al-Fuqaha, A. Gupta, and D. Kountanis, “Optimizing
an artificial immune system algorithm in support of flow-based Internet
traffic classification,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 54, pp. 1–22, May 2017.
[179] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Informat. (ISI),
Jul. 2017, pp. 43–48.
[180] V. Carela-Español, P. Barlet-Ros, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and
J. Solé-Pareta, “Analysis of the impact of sampling on NetFlow
traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1083–1099,
2011.
[181] R. Keralapura, A. Nucci, and C.-N. Chuah, “A novel self-learning architecture for P2P traffic classification in high speed networks,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1055–1068, 2010.
[182] Z. Xu, L. Ma, and J. Sun, “Efficient tri-ary search tree based packet
classification algorithm,” in Proc. IET Conf., Jan. 2007, pp. 833–836.
[183] W. Pak and Y.-J. Choi, “High performance and high scalable packet
classification algorithm for network security systems,” IEEE Trans.
Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 37–49, Jan. 2017.
[184] Z. Liu, R. Wang, and D. Tang, “Extending labeled mobile network
traffic data by three levels traffic identification fusion,” Future Gener.
Comput. Syst., vol. 88, pp. 453–466, Nov. 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X17309937
[185] A. Satoh et al., “Traffic classification in mobile IP network,” in
Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Inf. Technol. Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
[186] D. Naboulsi, M. Fiore, S. Ribot, and R. Stanica, “Large-scale mobile
traffic analysis: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 124–161, 1st Quart., 2016.
[187] C. Zhang, P. Patras, and H. Haddadi, “Deep learning in mobile and
wireless networking: A survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/1803.04311, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.04311

[188] J. Riihijarvi and P. Mahonen, “Machine learning for performance
prediction in mobile cellular networks,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag.,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 51–60, Feb. 2018.
[189] Y. Jin et al., “A modular machine learning system for flow-level traffic
classification in large networks,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–4, Mar. 2012.
[190] I. Trestian, S. Ranjan, A. Kuzmanovic, and A. Nucci, “Googling
the Internet: Profiling Internet endpoints via the World Wide Web,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 666–679, Apr. 2010.
[191] M. Pietrzyk, J.-L. Costeux, G. Urvoy-Keller, and T. En-Najjary,
“Challenging statistical classification for operational usage: The ADSL
case,” in Proc. 9th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas. (IMC), 2009,
pp. 122–135.
[192] L. Grimaudo, M. Mellia, E. Baralis, and R. Keralapura, “SeLeCT:
Self-learning classifier for Internet traffic,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 144–157, Jun. 2014.
[193] B. Ng, M. Hayes, and W. K. G. Seah, “Developing a traffic classification platform for enterprise networks with SDN: Experiences & lessons
learned,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf. (IFIP Netw.), May 2015, pp. 1–9.
[194] L. Bertaux et al., “Software defined networking and virtualization for
broadband satellite networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 54–60, Mar. 2015.
[195] E. Exposito, Advanced Transport Protocols: Designing the Next
Generation. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2013.
[196] E. Exposito and C. Diop, Smart SOA Platforms in Cloud Computing
Architectures. London, U.K.: Wiley, 2014.
[197] J. Aguilar, J. Torres, and K. Aguilar, “Autonomic communication
system based on cognitive techniques,” KES J., vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 17–37, 2018.
[198] ULAKNET Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://ulakbim.tubitak.gov.tr/en/hizmetlerimiz/data-warehouse
[199] K. Cho, K. Mitsuya, and A. Kato, “Traffic data repository at the wide
project,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (ATEC),
Berkeley, CA, USA, 2000, p. 51.
[200] MWG of the WIDE Project. MAWI Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017.
[Online]. Available: http://mawi.wide.ad.jp/mawi/
[201] CAIDA. CAIDA Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://www.caida.org/data/
[202] The University of Waikato. Traffic Traces. Accessed: Sep. 27,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://wand.net.nz/wits/waikato/1/20040507233830-64.php
[203] The University of Auckland. Traffic Traces. Accessed: Sep. 27,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://wand.net.nz/wits/auck/8/20031202090000.php
[204] RIPE Network Coordination Centre. Traffic Traces. Accessed: Sep. 27,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://labs.ripe.net/datarepository/datasets/nlanr-pma-data
[205] TSTAT Telecommunication Networks Group—Politecnico Di Torino.
Accessed: Jul. 18, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://ostinato.org/
[206] DATCAT Internet Measurement Data Catalog. Accessed: Mar. 10,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://imdc.datcat.org/collection/1-070W6=tcrsg-collection
[207] The Telecommunication Networks Group UNIBS. Accessed: Jul. 18,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://netweb.ing.unibs.it/ntw/
[208] LBNL/ICSI Enterprise Tracing Project. Accessed: Jul. 18,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.icir.org/enterprisetracing/Overview.html
[209] KDD Cup 1999 Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kddcup99.html
[210] DARPA Intrusion Detection Data Sets. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://ll.mit.edu/ideval/data/

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.