IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 7, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2020

1043

A Dive into the Dark Web: Hierarchical Traffic
Classification of Anonymity Tools
Antonio Montieri , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Domenico Ciuonzo , Senior Member, IEEE,
Giampaolo Bovenzi , Valerio Persico , and Antonio Pescape , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Privacy-preserving protocols and tools are
increasingly adopted by Internet users nowadays. These
mechanisms are challenged by the process of traffic classification
(TC) which, other than being an important workhorse for several
network management tasks, becomes a key factor in the
assessment of their privacy level, both from offensive (malign)
and defensive (benign) standpoints. In this paper, we propose TC
of anonymity tools (and deeper, of their running services and
applications) via a truly hierarchical approach. Capitalizing a
public dataset released in 2017 containing anonymity traffic, we
provide an in-depth analysis of TC and we compare the proposed
hierarchical approach with a flat counterpart. The proposed
framework is investigated in both the usual TC setup and its
“early” variant (i.e., only the first segments of traffic aggregate
are used to take a decision). Results highlight a general
improvement over the flat approach in terms of all the
classification metrics. Further performance gains are also
accomplished by tuning the thresholds ensuring progressive
censoring. Finally, fine-grain performance investigation allows us
to demonstrate lower severity of errors incurred by the
hierarchical approach (as opposed to the flat case) and highlight
poorly classifiable services/applications of each anonymity tool,
gathering useful feedback on their privacy level.
Index Terms—Dark web, dark net, Tor, I2P, JonDonym, traffic
classification, hierarchical classification, anonymity, privacy,
security.

I. INTRODUCTION

I

N line with the growing criticality of the activities users
perform online, privacy is today a key concern. In particular, preserving the anonymity of users is an aspect that has
gathered the attention of the research community, that over
last years put the effort in designing and developing tools able
to achieve privacy at varying degrees. As a result, at present a
number of Anonymity Tools (ATs) are freely available, able
to hide—besides the content of the communication itself, via
encryption—the identity of the parties (source and destination)
involved in the communication.
Manuscript received October 2, 2018; revised January 14, 2019; accepted
February 21, 2019. Date of publication March 8, 2019; date of current version
September 2, 2020. This work was partially funded by art. 11 DM 593/2000 for
NM2 s.r.l. (Italy). Recommended for acceptance by S. Xu. (Corresponding
author: Antonio Pescap
e.)
A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, and G. Bovenzi are with the University of
Napoli Federico II, 80125 Napoli, Italy (e-mail: antonio.montieri@unina.it;
domenico.ciuonzo@ieee.org; giampaolo.bovenzi@gmail.com).
V. Persico and A. Pescape are with the University of Napoli Federico
II, 80125 Napoli, Italy, and also with NM2 s.r.l. 80143, Napoli, Italy (email: valerio.persico@unina.it; pescape@unina.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2019.2901994

The most popular ATs developed in recent years are The
Onion Router (Tor),1 the Invisible Internet Project (I2P),2 and
JonDonym3 (formerly known as Java Anon Proxy or WebMix). These tools allow users to preserve their anonymity, e.g.
encrypting data multiple times and routing it through multiple
stations, providing each with just a piece of the information.
From the user viewpoint, ATs allow browsing and running
applications (also circumventing restrictions enforced at either
providers or governmental level) keeping their identity and
location secret to any intermediary entity observing the traffic.
Accordingly, tracing users and their activities across these networks is a complex task.
ATs have been investigated in recent years by several studies from different perspectives including design improvement,
AT delay and performance analysis, feasibility of effective
attacks to ATs, users’ behavior profiling and identity disclosure risk, and censoring policies enforced for ATs [1]. Among
these crucial aspects, a cardinal issue is understanding to what
extent (encrypted) ATs traffic can be classified, i.e. at which
granularity ATs and related applications can be accurately recognized by external entities. Accordingly, in this paper, we
focus on ATs Traffic Classification (TC).
Indeed, TC—consisting in associating traffic aggregates to
specific applications or groups of applications (viz. labeling
them)—is of utmost importance in Internet traffic engineering,
along with related methodologies & tools, as they jointly support activities such as network monitoring, security assessment,
application identification, anomaly detection, accounting,
advertising, and service differentiation [2], [3]. For these reasons, TC has gained importance in recent years due to growing
incentives to disguise certain applications [4], comprising those
generating anonymous traffic [5].
On the one hand, investigating TC of ATs is useful to
designers, as it puts their effectiveness to the test, reveals
shortcomings, and leads the way to robustify them. On the
other hand, these studies are of interest to providers as well as
governmental entities, providing knowledge e.g. to enforce
informed engineering policies or to prevent users performing
unwanted actions. Hence, classifying ATs traffic is a particularly appealing and challenging research field whose state-ofart solutions leave room for improvement.

1

Tor Project. https://www.torproject.org.
The Invisible Internet Project. https://geti2p.net.
JonDonym. http://anonymous-proxy-servers.net.

2
3

2327-4697 ß 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 7, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2020

Because of the specific nature of ATs encrypted traffic,
Machine Learning (ML) classifiers represent the natural
enabler, able to provide decisions based on the sole trafficflow features [5] and to overcome shortcomings due to the
application of common solutions (e.g., those based on payload
inspection or earlier port-based ones [6]).
On the top of that, hierarchical classification represents a
perfect match for TC of ATs, as (i) it allows fine-grained tuning and design, potentially leading to classification performance gains; (ii) it also brings a number of “practical”
benefits by design, at cost of moderate complexity increase.
For example, re-training does not involve all the nodes in the
hierarchy when new applications leveraging anonymity networks are released. Also, distributed deployment of TC tasks,
thanks to the modularity of the framework, is enabled in the
network (thus hierarchical classification could be achieved
through chaining of virtualized network functions, each associated to a classifier). Albeit these benefits are granted by the
hierarchical approach itself, research efforts are needed to
deepen the aspects of design optimization (to obtain enhanced
performance) and fine-grain evaluation to delve into privacylevel assessment of ATs.
A. Related Works
Up to our knowledge, there are no studies focused on classification of different anonymity services at various levels of
granularity via hierarchical learning. Accordingly, this section first discusses the (few) works tackling standard TC (i.e.
not focusing on traffic generated by ATs) via a hierarchical
approach. Then, literature on TC of ATs via a “flat” (viz. nonhierarchical) approach is reviewed, including the conceptually-related Website Fingerprinting (WF) problem.
1) Hierarchical Traffic Classification: A first approach to
hierarchical TC is described in [7], where a three-level system
for Peer-to-Peer (P2P) biflow-based traffic categorization is
proposed to discern among 11 P2P and 5 non-P2P apps. The
first-level classifier adopts a Support Vector Machine (SVM)
for P2P/non-P2P recognition, whereas Support Vector Data
Descriptions are employed at the other two levels for P2P-type
(i.e. file-sharing, messenger, and TV) and P2P plus non-P2P
app TC, respectively. Results (pertaining to each single classifier in the hierarchy separately) show that the proposed
approach achieves precision and recall  95% in P2P/nonP2P recognition and  93% in P2P-type classification, while a
recall drop down to 71% is observed at last level. Similarly,
[8] propose the adoption of a hierarchical classifier to allow
Internet TC (into  20 fine-grained classes), showing a comparison with flat-learning results. The proposed tree-structured
(three-level) taxonomy introduces also a first level which identifies known/unseen traffic. Both (per-classifier) feature selection (from a set of 200, as proposed by past literature) and
(coarse-grained) optimization w.r.t. different classifiers (such
as Decision Trees, Neural Networks, and SVMs) are considered. Results show that the proposed hierarchical system outperforms off-the-shelf flat classification, with an average
recall > 95% for most popular traffic classes.

In [9] a novel multilateral (viz. multi-view) and hierarchical
approach for Internet TC is proposed, further refined into
FORMULA framework [10], operating on biflow-segmented
traffic. Specifically, the devised approach relies on a taxonomy
that provides multilateral identification based on four different
classification criteria (i.e. service, application, protocol, and
function) via a hierarchical structure (whose working principle
is however not detailed), supporting roll-up and drill-down
operations on the classification results. Unfortunately, the collected traffic lacks a ground truth, precluding a verification of
the reported results.
In [11], the authors propose a fine-grained scheme for hierarchical TC of video traffic based on clustering. A hierarchical
version of k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) is fed with the most discriminative statistical features selected among 40 extracted
from downstream/upstream data, ranked by the information
gain ratio. The dataset, including six types of (symmetric and
asymmetric) traffic, is collected on the campus network of Nanjing University. Experimental results report  97% F-measure in
discriminating among all the considered (video) traffic and superior performance w.r.t. existing alternatives, while providing
only a slight time-complexity increase. Recently, in [12] a twolevel hierarchical classification framework is presented to identify the services running within HTTPS connections leveraging
a set of features robust to alteration (e.g., statistics of interarrival times and packet/payload sizes). The proposed evaluation method, based on real traffic traces, achieves a recall within
½95; 100% in 50 out of the 68 HTTPS services considered.
2) (Flat) Traffic Classification of Anonymity Tools: The
analysis of ATs has been initially carried in private networks,
e.g. with the aim of discriminating between HTTPS and Tor
traffic [13]. In detail, by leveraging a dataset made of
(i) regular HTTPS traffic, (ii) HTTP and (iii) HTTPS over a
private Tor network, authors show that HTTP/HTTPS traffic
over Tor can be detected with  93% accuracy, employing
Random Forest (RF), C4.5, and AdaBoost classifiers.
On the other hand, a few works focus on TC analyzing real
traffic from anonymity networks, as most of the “experimental”
literature explores anonymous WF, whose aim is to identify a
web-page accessed by a client of encrypted and anonymized
connections by observing patterns of data flows (e.g., packet
size and direction). Herrmann et al. [14] propose a Multinomial
Na€ıve Bayes (MNB) that relies on the normalized frequency
distribution of IP packet sizes to tackle the WF problem in the
context of different privacy-enhancing technologies (in a
closed-world scenario) including Tor and JonDonym. Although
Tor and JonDonym guarantee a better protection than other privacy-enhancing technologies (i.e. OpenSSL, OpenVPN), they
prove to be not perfect (3% and 20% average accuracy, respectively). In [15] the same problem is tackled via a Support Vector
Classifier, obtaining a gain of detection rate over [14] from 3%
to 55% (resp. from 20% to 80%) in Tor (resp. JonDonym) network. On the other hand, in an open-world case, the detection
rate drops with a maximum of 73% and 0:05% false-positive
rate. More recently, in [16] a WF approach aimed to overcome
limitation of previously-devised alternatives is proposed and
tested on a huge real-world representative dataset, exploring the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI et al.: A DIVE INTO THE DARK WEB: HIERARCHICAL TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION OF ANONYMITY TOOLS

Fig. 1.

Sketch of the proposed HC framework.

limits of WF at Internet scale. Specifically, these are highlighted
by a precision/recall drop with the size of the background sites
which the monitored pages need to be distinguished from.
Finally, we mention that the adoption of Deep Learning (DL) to
WF is also a currently-investigated topic. A novel DL-based
method to deanonymize Tor traffic is proposed in [17] and
tested on a dataset made of  3  106 network traces, with the
best-performing DL model being þ2% accurate than stateof-the-art attacks. In [18] a WF attack against Tor is developed,
leveraging a Convolutional Neural Network and evaluated
against state-of-the-art defenses (i.e. WTF-PAD and WalkieTalkie). Results report an accuracy > 98% on undefended Tor
traffic, while reaching > 90% accuracy (resp. 49:7%) when
WTF-PAD (resp. Walkie-Talkie) is employed, with the attack
remaining effective also in an open-world setting.
Moving to pure TC of ATs (based on real-data), [19] devise
an approach based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) to classify four categories of Tor traffic (P2P, FTP, IM, and Web).
HMMs are employed to build inbound and output models of the
application types considered, and are fed with features based on
burst volumes and directions of Tor flows, obtaining an accuracy up to 92%. AlSabah et al. [20] present a ML-based method
employing Naive Bayes (NB), Bayesian Network (BN), functional and logistic model trees to recognize applications used by
Tor users. Both circuit-level and cell-level information is leveraged for offline and offline/online classification, respectively.
The highest accuracy achieved in online (resp. offline) case
equals 97:8% (resp. 91%). A similar setup is proposed
in [21] for user activity recognition by means of four classifiers
(NB, BN, RF, and C4.5) fed with traffic-flow and circuit-level
features. Both approaches reach  100% accuracy, with flowbased TC being less demanding and based on data that could be
captured anywhere between the user and the Tor’s relay. Along
the same lines, [22] employ flow-based (statistical) traffic analysis to prove whether Tor Pluggable Transports (PTs) can evade
censorship systems. Adopting a C4.5 classifier (and based on a
thorough analysis), authors show that Tor PTs usage is recognizable, as PT-based obfuscation changes the content shape in a
distinct way w.r.t. Tor (i.e. conferring to flows distinctive

1045

fingerprints). The effects of bandwidth sharing on I2P is analyzed by the same authors in [23] considering both application
and user profiling achievable by an attacker. Using a C4.5 classifier fed with flow-based features, results show that users and
applications on I2P can be profiled, with a harmful (resp. beneficial) effect of the shared bandwidth increase on applications
(resp. users) profiling accuracy.
Recently, [24] describe Anon17 public dataset comprising
directional traffic-flows obtained by collecting data from three
ATs (i.e. Tor, I2P, and JonDonym). Besides, detailed information about the traffic types and applications running on Tor
and I2P is provided in the form of three-level labels for each
flow. Up to our knowledge, the sole public dataset similar to
Anon17 is that described in [25], containing however only Tor
traffic of eight applications (browsing, audio, chat, mail, P2P,
FT, VoIP, and video). Anon17 dataset is leveraged in [5],
where three flat classifiers (that is, one per level, i.e. Anonymity Network, Traffic Type, and Application), are employed to
perform TC, also in its “early” variant [26]. In detail, at each
level the performance of five ML classifiers (NB, MNB, BN,
C4.5, and RF) is compared, highlighting insights about the
number and nature of relevant features needed for an accurate
TC. Results show that the anonymity networks (i.e. Tor, I2P,
and JonDonym) can be easily distinguished (up to 99% Fmeasure). Differently, the specific application generating the
traffic can be classified with up to 69% F-measure. At both
levels, early TC achieves worse results.
These findings highlight the need for delving into the problem via successive splits and devising a more sophisticated
classification framework for harder classification tasks.
B. Summary of Contributions
The main contribution of this paper is a detailed study on
TC of ATs by proposing a general Hierarchical Classification
(HC) framework (see Fig. 1). The novelty of this work has a
two-fold significance: it (i) investigates the unexplored adoption of hierarchical approaches to TC of ATs (as opposed to
existing flat learning approaches) and (ii) overcomes the limitations of earlier hierarchical proposals dealing with standard
TC. Such framework uniquely suits to encrypted traffic and
naturally allows for both coarsening & narrowing of classification results. Our study includes its design, implementation,
optimization and evaluation.
Specifically, the hierarchical approach resorts to a structure
of (potentially different) classifiers arranged in a tree fashion,
each specialized in labeling a subset of classes. Such framework exploits the “divide-et-impera” principle, enabling the
partition of workload among several classifiers, almost-naturally enabling a distributed implementation. Hence, the
obtained HC structure grants scalability, enables both pernode tuning and performance analysis, and supports roll-up
and drill-down operations of the results, which are provided at
different levels of detail. Per-node performance figures also
allow to accurately evaluate per-node behaviors, and allow to
identify potential causes of performance degradation, and thus
prove useful in guiding feedback-driven design improvement.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 7, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2020

Besided, HC design supports incremental-update (e.g., only a
minor additional training is required when a new part of the
application traffic is needed, instead of re-training the whole
system). Finally, the proposed architecture allows progressive
censoring of “unsure” instances, implementing a per-classifier
reject option via (a set of) independently-tunable thresholds.
The key issue researchers encounter in the collection of AT
traffic datasets and the resulting lack of data publicly available
in this field is herein overcome by leveraging the recently
released Anon17 dataset [24], representing an important
shared workbench for research studies on anonymity and consisting of a collection of traces gathered by different ATs, at
different granularities: anonymous network, traffic type, and
application. Although our HC strategy is encouraged by the
nature of the classification problem defined on this dataset, the
underlying HC principle generally suits to the varying degrees
of privacy ensured by a certain AT, including its identification
within “normal” traffic.
The results show that the proposed HC approach proves to
be a very good fit to the problem of classification of ATs traffic. The HC approach is able to discern among ATs looking at
their encrypted traffic, also when considering only the features
extracted from the first K packets of each flow (i.e., implementing early TC). Compared to flat approaches we have
recently proposed [5], the hierarchical framework also provides performance gains at application level. This result holds
both when considering classic performance indexes at macroscopic level (typically adopted in the TC literature) and by
accurately breaking it down and evaluating it along multiple
facets (i.e. by introducing metrics able to capture error
severity).
The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows: Section II
describes the considered hierarchical TC framework of ATs;
the experimental environment and the corresponding classification results are reported in Sections III and IV, respectively;
finally, Section V provides conclusions and future directions.
II. HIERARCHICAL TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION
OF ANONYMITY TOOLS
In this section we introduce the proposed framework for HC
of AT traffic, as streamlined in Fig. 1, whose main components are discussed in the following. In detail, preliminaries
on HC are discussed first, together with a general overview of
the proposed approach (Section II-A). Then, terms and concepts regarding traffic objects are introduced, along with a
description of the feature sets (Section II-B). The dissertation
ends with the classification algorithms (Section II-C) which
could be adopted for AT (hierarchical) traffic analysis.
A. Preliminaries and Proposed HC Framework
In what follows we provide HC preliminaries needed to
understand the design choices adopted for the TC framework
here proposed and investigated in the context of TC of ATs.
First, we remark that our classification framework focuses
on classes whose relationship can be summarized in the form
of a tree (each class has one parent class, at most) with T

classification levels and Lt classes to discriminate from at tth
level (whose number increases with the depth), organized in
the corresponding set Lt , f1; . . . ; Lt g.
The tree structure can be explored with three alternative
approaches [27]: (i) top-down approach, i.e., the system
employs a set of local classifiers each tackled to a specific
sub-problem; (ii) big-bang (or global) approach, when a single
classifier copes with the entire class hierarchy (i.e., it is trained
by considering the entire class hierarchy at once); (iii) flat
classification approach, ignoring the class relationships at different levels (solving a classification task at each level of the
hierarchy in an independent fashion), as adopted in [5]. In this
paper, we adopt the top-down choice (similarly to [8]). In this
case, for each instance to be classified, the HC framework first
predicts its first-level (most generic) class, then it uses that
predicted class to narrow the choices of classes to be predicted
at the second level (i.e., allowed second-level predicted classes are the children of that predicted at the first level), and so
on. Although errors at a certain class level could propagate
downwards the hierarchy, this choice promotes the architecture modularity, which is crucial in TC, as opposed to bigbang and flat classifiers.
Further, three different ways of using the local information
can be employed, mainly differing in their training phase [27]:
(i) Local Classifier per Node (LCN); (ii) Local Classifier per
Level (LCL); (iii) Local Classifier per Parent Node (LCPN).
LCN and LCL consist in training one binary classifier for each
node and a multi-class classifier for each level of the class
hierarchy, respectively. Unluckily, since these two approaches
suffer from class-membership inconsistency and have higher
complexity, in this work we adopt LCPN, that is widely used
in the literature [8], [11] and requires a multi-class classifier
for each parent node in the class hierarchy, trained to distinguish among its children nodes (usually less than Lt , with t
being node classification level).
Fig. 1 reports a sketch of the proposed HC framework. We
highlight that the indexing of a node reflects the ordered list of
its ancestors (except the root C0 ), e.g. Cij denotes the jth L3
classifier having C0 and Ci , as grandparent and parent, respectively. Classifier Cij is in charge of discriminating from
Lij < L3 classes, grouped within the set Vij , based on the
associated prediction probabilities p1; . . . pLij .
The proposed HC framework is trained by recursively splitting the training set according to the tree structure. Specifically, the procedure starts from the root classifier C0 trained
using the whole set. On the other hand, each node concurring
to t > 1 level classification uses a training set corresponding
to a subset of Lt , the elements all belonging to the same class
at ðt  1Þ. Reducing the number of classes per classifier hopefully simplifies the resulting problem and reduces the error
scope of flat classification.
In addition, the proposed framework adopts a progressivecensoring (viz. non-mandatory leaf node prediction [27]) policy, accomplished by equipping each classifier node with a
“reject option” that censors “unsure” classification outcomes
at intermediate layers (RO blocks in Fig. 1). In other words,
the reject option forces the classification process to stop for a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI et al.: A DIVE INTO THE DARK WEB: HIERARCHICAL TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION OF ANONYMITY TOOLS

1047

B. Traffic Object and Feature Design

Fig. 2. Anon17 Classification Levels: Anonymous network (L1), Traffic
Type (L2) and Application (L3), with total number of samples per class and
class label at each level.

The definition of a specific traffic object (also known as traffic
view) determines how raw traffic is segmented into multiple discrete traffic units [2] which are then labeled by the classifier. We
remark that, although several proposals exist and have been considered in the (ATs) TC literature, flows and biflows are the most
commonly used traffic objects [5], [24]. In more detail, a flow is
a set of packets with the same 5-tuple (i.e. source IP, source
port, destination IP, destination port, and transport-level protocol). On the other hand, a biflow includes both directions of traffic. In other words, in the latter case, (IP address, port)
pairs of source and destination are interchangeable. Referring
to the hierarchical approach illustrated in Fig. 1, we assume that
all the classifiers in the hierarchy shall operate on a common TC
object, although not restricted to a specific one.
As previously explained, different sets of features (of different sizes) can be considered to feed the classifiers in the hierarchical architecture (to achieve accurate TC), as shown in
Fig. 1. For instance, referring to the example in Section II-A,
classifier Cij is assumed to rely on Mij features, collected in
the vector f ij . Finally, given a set of features, feature selection/extraction techniques are adopted to extract only a subset
among them, with the aim of improving further TC performance, while reducing the computational complexity.
C. Classification Algorithms

given instance when a classifier node (e.g., Ci;j ) does not reach
a clear verdict, i.e. when the highest class prediction probability (e.g., max‘¼1;...Li;j p‘ ) is below a threshold (e.g., g ij ). This
design choice—already introduced and justified in the mobile
context in a flat scenario [28]—here avoids that misclassifications are propagated downwards, at the expense of coarsergrained predictions.
By looking at the hierarchy of classifiers reported in
Fig. 1, it is apparent that its naivest implementation resorts
to the same classification algorithm and feature set throughout all the hierarchy. Nonetheless, although HC can achieve
a potential performance gain w.r.t. a flat approach even in
this case (due to the decomposition of the classification task
into sub-problems), the proposed framework allows for further optimization [27]. Indeed, classification performance is
expected to improve with more refined implementations,
leveraging a specific selection of features for classification,
and/or using different classification algorithms at different
nodes of the class hierarchy (e.g., chosen from a pool of
classifiers available). This work investigates both these
optimization degrees-of-freedom. In case both the classifier
and the feature set are optimized at each node, the combinatorial explosion of the resulting optimization is herein circumvented by a decoupled design resorting to per-node
performance, e.g. selecting the pair corresponding to the
classifier and the number of features ensuring the highest
score for the sub-classification problem the classifier node is
in charge to solve. Nonetheless, we remark that an optimization based on complete enumeration or alternative heuristics
does not contrast with HC architecture in Fig. 1.

As in the case of set of features, the proposed HC approach
allows for a different classifier to be employed at each node
(see Fig. 1). Therefore, any ML/DL-based (as ATs traffic is
encrypted) supervised classifier can be adopted. For example,
referring to classifier Cij in the example of Section II-A, any
ML/DL-based classifiers could be used to discriminate from
Lij classes within the set Vij . The sole requirement for each
classifier is to be able to provide its soft-output vector, required
by the censoring mechanism described in Section II-A.
III. EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT
Hereinafter, we first report the main details of Anon17
dataset and the pre-processing operations carried out on it
(Section III-A); then we discuss the design choices made to
implement the HC system, matching the characteristics of the
dataset (Section III-B); finally, we introduce the performance
metrics employed to evaluate our solution (Section III-C).
A. Dataset Description
Anon17 was collected in a real-network environment at the
NIMS Lab [24] during 2014–17 and gathers traffic from Tor,
I2P, and JonDonym. The dataset has been labeled leveraging
the information provided by the anonymity services themselves.
Indeed, it provides labels at different levels: (i) Anonymous Network Level (L1 ¼ 3 classes); (ii) Traffic Type Level (L2 ¼ 7
classes); (iii) and Application Level (L3 ¼ 21 classes). This
label organization promotes analyses of ATs traffic at different
levels of granularity, as well as the implementation of hierarchical approaches, as remarked in Fig. 2. We point to [24] for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1048

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 7, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2020

obtaining exhaustive information on Anon17 dataset. In this
study, we down-sample to 5% the most-populated traffic-type
classes of the original dataset, adopting a pre-processing strategy similar to [5], so as to mitigate class imbalance. This represents a safe choice due to the high number of samples of
“majority” classes.4
According to the above dataset description, we tackle the
problem of classification of ATs traffic assuming that we are
in the presence of AT traffic only, similarly to [5]. The
depicted scenario refers to a context where an upstream classifier has been able to separate AT traffic from clear or standardencrypted one (e.g., as shown by [13] for Tor network).
Hence, the aim of the proposed approach is to assess discrimination of anonymity services and related applications once
this AT traffic has been separated from other traffic. More
generally, the results of our analysis can be intended as an
upper bound on the ATs classification performance in the case
of an open-world assumption. Indeed, the use of an upstream
classifier would perfectly fit within the hierarchical approach
proposed in this paper, with design and evaluation of the
whole AT-TC system (truly operating in an open-world scenario) left as future work.
B. HC Implementation Choices
Hereinafter, we briefly discuss how the general HC framework described in Section II is specialized in the case of its
adoption on Anon17 dataset, with the following paragraphs
covering all the different aspects needing specification. HC
framework specialized for classification of Anon17 trafficflows has been implemented in Python, leveraging Weka
wrapper and Scikit-learn utilities. A Virtual Machine (OS
Ubuntu Server 16.04) equipped with 32 VCPUs and 64 GB
RAM, running on private OpenStack cloud platform, has been
employed for evaluating the HC framework. Finally, the code
used for the analyses has been made available on GitHub5 to
foster reproducibility of the experiments.
1) HC Architecture: Based on the nature of the traffic in
Anon17 dataset, the TC here considered is arranged in three levels, corresponding to anonymity networks, traffic types, and specific applications. As a whole, the HC framework resorts on one
classifier at L1, two classifiers at L2 and five classifiers at L3.
2) Traffic Object and Feature Sets: Anonymous traffic
contained in Anon17 is split into different flows (see Section IIB), by means of the flow-exporting tool Tranalyzer2 [29], constituting the TC object here employed. We highlight that the
direction of each flow (considered as a feature) is indicated as
“A” or “B” for client-to-server and vice versa, respectively. We
note that the proposed HC approach could even operate at the
packet-level, in principle (viz. the TC object could be the single
packet6). For each traffic flow, Anon17 provides different sets of
features extracted via Tranalyzer2 [29]. In this work, we
4
Experimental results, not shown, have highlighted negligible difference
with the (additional) use of oversampling of “minority” classes.
5
https://github.com/NM2/hierarchical-tc-at.
6
Up to our knowledge, there is no work in literature tackling anonymous TC
at this granularity.

consider two different feature sets, referred hereinafter to as
TC_set and EarlyTC_set. In brief, TC_set capitalizes
complete traffic flows, while EarlyTC_set only relies on the
first K packets of each flow, thus enabling early TC.7
In detail, TC_set originally refers to 81 per-flow statistical
features. Repeated fields (such as those related to packet
length and packet size) and (initial/final) timestamps have
been removed to avoid overestimated results.8 As a result, the
employed feature set consists of 74 statistics comprising: (i)
flow direction and duration, (ii) packet length (PL) and interarrival time (IAT) statistics (mean, min, max, median, quartiles, etc.), (iii) TCP9 and IP header-related features (window
size, sequence number, TCP and IP options, etc.), (iv) number
of Tx/Rx bytes and packets, (v) number of distinct hosts connected to flow source or destination IP (during its lifetime),
(vi) number of concurrent flows sharing the same (source IP,
destination IP) pair (regardless of source & destination
ports).10 Differently, EarlyTC_set is made of the sequence
of pairs (PL, IAT) of the first K packets of each flow. In the
rest of the paper, we will employ TC_set when referring to
standard TC, whereas adoption of EarlyTC_set will be
assumed just for early TC.
Finally, for TC_set features, we consider feature selection, based on a filtering approach, ranking the elements
of the set based on the relative importance of each feature
(so as to skim the more informative ones), in terms of
mutual information with the class (random) variable,
whereas for EarlyTC_set features, ranking is performed
according to a time-constraint (i.e. only the first K packets
are employed). We remark that, for the TC_set, feature
extraction techniques, such as PCA, could be easily
adopted in the proposed HC framework without any substantial change.
3) Classification Algorithms: Herein, we consider as
potential nodes four different ML-based classifiers, i.e., the
C4.5, the RF, the NB, and the BN. Indeed, these classifiers
have been successfully employed in several works tackling
TC of anonymous traffic [20], [21], [23]. Nonetheless, as the
proposed HC framework is general, other ML (e.g., SVM,
Gradient Boosting, etc.) or even DL classifiers could be
adopted with no substantial change.
Specifically, the first two belong to the family of decision
trees, whereas the second two to the Bayesian family. In brief,
C4.5 is an algorithm employed to generate a decision tree
used for classification based on the distribution entropy concept and trained via a top-down recursive and greedy procedure, whereas RF is a classifier based on an ensemble of
different decision trees built at training time exploiting the
ideas of “bootstrap aggregating” and random-feature selection
7
We highlight that other feature sets (e.g., histograms), leading to lower performance, have been considered in [5].
8
Timestamp values depend upon the process adopted for collecting traces,
potentially introducing to classification artifacts.
9
TCP-related features have zero-value if the flow leverages UDP as transport protocol (e.g., I2P network works on both TCP and UDP).
10
We point to the user manual of Tranalyzer2 (https://tranalyzer.com) for
further details about these features.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI et al.: A DIVE INTO THE DARK WEB: HIERARCHICAL TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION OF ANONYMITY TOOLS

TABLE I
ACCURACY, F-MEASURE, AND G-MEAN (%) OF THE BEST FLAT CLASSIFIER
(RF) WITH {OPTIMAL NUMBER OF FEATURES} AT EACH LEVEL COMPARED
TO NAIVE HIERARCHICAL CONFIGURATION. RESULTS ARE IN THE FORMAT
AVG. ( STD.) OVER 10-FOLDS

Legend: Best Accuracy ($ ), F-Measure (y), and G-Mean () Per Level

to mitigate overfitting. Differently, NB is a simple probabilistic classifier that assumes class conditional independence of
the features, being not the case for real-world problems, but
working well in practice and leading to low complexity. Such
stringent assumption is mitigated by the BN classifier, modeling dependence relationships between features and classes
usually via a direct acyclic graph. In this work, for the latter
two algorithms we will adopt the variants shown to perform
better in [5], i.e. NB_SD (supervised discretization is used for
numerical features) and BN_TAN (the dependence model is
reduced to a simpler tree).

1049

assumption) of each performance measure as a result of the
evaluation on the ten different folds.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section, we show experimental results aimed at investigating anonymous TC performance via the proposed hierarchical framework, also when considering early TC. First, the
performance of the proposed approach is analyzed and compared with the best flat classifier, showing that the usage of a
“naive” hierarchical architecture is able to introduce non-negligible improvements, being the result of decomposition in simpler TC sub-tasks. Then, the results of design improvements are
shown, deepening the impact of both rough- and fine-grained
optimization choices—the former consisting in varying the
number of features of the classifiers (keeping the classifier type
fixed) in the hierarchy with the same increment, while the latter
involving changes to both features and classifier types. Concerning the early-TC scenario, only final results pertaining to
fine-grained optimization are reported, for brevity. Also, the
evaluation contains finer-grained analyses of the error patterns
of these two different classification “philosophies” along with
the severity of errors (thus leading to interesting conclusions on
the ATs considered). Finally, a first investigation of classification performance obtained by resorting to progressive censoring
in the hierarchical case is reported, and compared with the
effects of censoring on a flat classifier baseline.
A. Naive Hierarchical vs. Best Flat Classifier

C. Performance Metrics
Performance evaluation process is based on the following
main performance metrics: accuracy, precision (prec), recall
(rec), and specificity (spec). For conciseness, out of the
latter three metrics, we consider the F-measure, F ,
ð2  prec  recÞ=ðprec þ recÞ, and the G-mean, G ,
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rec  spec. Since these two arise from three metrics defined
on a per-class basis, we employ their arithmetically averaged
(viz. macro) versions. Also, confusion matrices (breaking the
results down by class) are leveraged to provide a representation of the results of the investigated classification approaches,
also highlighting misclassification patterns at fine grain. To
detect performance bottlenecks of our HC approach, we also
provide per-node metrics (i.e. not considering classification
errors introduced by upper levels), also deriving useful guidelines for system design and evaluation.
Considering that in our design each classifier implements a
reject option, we also deepen the impact of this design choice
on performance. In more detail, we investigate the impact of
varying the thresholds (see Section II-A), whose tuning can be
effective to improve classification performance trading it off
with the reduction of the classified instances (viz. the ratio of
classified instances, CR).
For each considered analysis, our evaluation is based on a
(stratified) ten-fold cross-validation, representing a stable performance evaluation setup. As a consequence, we report both
the mean and the standard deviation (in the form of a 3s
interval, corresponding to 99:7% confidence under a Gaussian

In Table I we report the performance of the best flat classifiers
(e.g., the configurations with an optimal number of features in
terms of F-measure) as derived from [5] and resulting in a RF
fed with 50, 35, and 65 features at L1, L2, and L3, respectively.
Performance is reported in terms of accuracy, F-measure, and
G-mean at each classification level.11 Such optimal setup is
compared with a first naive implementation of our HC
approach, obtained by using the best L3 flat configuration (RF +
65 features) in all the classifier nodes of the hierarchy. Unsurprisingly, L1 performance metrics report a score  99:7%: traffic generated through different anonymity networks is easily
distinguishable from each other, confirming that these tools are
designed to provide anonymity but not to hide the usage of the
tool itself. Also, results show that even a naive hierarchical solution improves L3 performance (up to þ2:68% F-measure)12 w.r.
t. the best L3 flat classifier, and performs on a par in terms of
L1–L2 levels when compared to level-optimized best flat classifiers. This is due to split of the original TC task (21 classes at
L3) into smaller tasks (at most, 5 classes).
B. Impact of Feature Selection
As a first step towards the optimization of the proposed
approach, we investigate here the performance of the
11
“n.d.” points out unavailable performance for flat classifiers at levels
deeper than that considered for classification.
12
Also, from a statistical significance viewpoint, we observed a gain of HC
approach in 100% of the cases over the considered folds.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 7, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2020

Fig. 3. F-measure (a)–(c) and G-mean (d)–(f) [%] of hierarchical and flat classifiers: RF fed with different subsets of features in TC_set (from 5 to 74 with
increments of 5). Average on 10-folds and corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

framework when varying the number of features used by each
classifier but considering a common number of features (here
denoted M) for each node in the tree, and keeping the classification algorithm fixed to RF (that is, the best-performing one
in the flat case [5]). We remark that although there is a common M for all nodes, the specific set of features may differ.
Fig. 3 summarizes the obtained results—with a view to finding the optimal value M for the entire hierarchy—also providing a comparison against the three flat classifier counterparts (in
terms of F-measure and G-mean, as accuracy showed similar
trends). First, results highlight that there is no appreciable performance difference among L1–L3 flat classifiers and the hierarchical approach by looking at L1 metrics, and only a slight
performance improvement is observed with a high number of
features (performance saturation is observed with at least 10
features) is achieved. On the other hand, at L2 slightly higher
performance are obtained by the hierarchical approach with a
lower number of employed features per node (approximately
10–20), whereas at L3 (being the harder task) the following key
observations can be made: (i) the hierarchical approach provides a non-negligible improvement over the L3 flat classifier
for all the range considered, (ii) the best performance of the HC
is attained with a smaller number of features. These considerations apply to both F-measure and G-mean.

explosion of the optimization problem, we resort to the pernode optimization rationale described in Section II-A. Based on
the above rationale, in Fig. 4 we report the classification performance in terms of accuracy (Fig. 4(a)), F-measure (Fig. 4(b))
and G-mean (Fig. 4(c)), by comparing the flat classification
approaches with the per-node optimized hierarchical classifier.
The proposed (optimized) hierarchical classifier is able, at least,
to perform at tth (t ¼ 1; 2; 3) level as well as the corresponding
flat classifier explicitly designed to solve the classification task
of the same level. In detail, such optimized hierarchical
approach is able to achieve 99:81% (resp. 99:83%), 95:81%
(resp. 97:44%) and 75:56% (resp. 85:89%) F-measure (resp. Gmean) score at L1, L2, and L3, respectively. These results
(almost) represent a tie at L1, whereas þ1:51% (resp. þ1:73%)
and þ4:42% (resp. þ3:16%) gains are experienced at L2 and
L3, respectively.13 The details of optimized HC are reported in
Fig. 5(a), where for each classifier node the employed classifier
and the number of features are reported. Remarkably, RF
denotes the best classifier for each node-specific classification
task, while only for the classifier of Tor App applications
BN_TAN provides higher performance. Instead, the variability
of the optimal number of features underlines no clear trend,
except that usually I2P-related node classifiers require a lower
number of features, at least when leveraging those in TC_set.

C. Fine-Grained Optimization

D. Optimization for Early TC

Herein the fine-grained framework optimization, in case of
features from TC_set, is discussed. In detail, with the aim of
trading off design complexity with performance, we remove the
constraints previously introduced, and allow each node in the
hierarchy to be optimized in terms of both the number of features and the classifier type. As remarked in Section III-B, we
consider four different ML-based classifiers (C4.5, RF, NB_SD
and BN_TAN). We remark that, to avoid a combinatorial

Herein we evaluate the hierarchical framework when
the classifiers are fed with features in EarlyTC_set (see
Section III-B), i.e. considering PLs and IATs of the first K ¼
1; . . . ; 16 (non-zero payload) packets. This analysis helps
assessing the framework capability in supporting early TC,
13
Also, from a statistical significance viewpoint, we observed a gain of HC
approach in 97:5% of the cases over the considered folds.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI et al.: A DIVE INTO THE DARK WEB: HIERARCHICAL TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION OF ANONYMITY TOOLS

1051

Fig. 4. Accuracy (a), F-measure (b) and G-mean (c) of the best classifiers and of their early-TC counterparts (d, e, and f). Average on 10-folds and
corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

Fig. 5. Fine-grained optimized hierarchical structure with (a) TC_set and (b) EarlyTC_set. Optimal number of features for each classifier (node) is shown
in square brackets. Lighter colors point to worse performance. Related per-node metrics are shown in (c) and (d), respectively (with < 60% F-measure nodes
highlighted in gray).

i.e., to evaluate how soon and to which degree ATs and related
services can be identified. To this end, we have paralleled the
previous investigations in the early-TC scenario. Nonetheless,
herein we omit the details for brevity, and comment only the
final results. We remark that the main difference with the previous analysis concerns the feature selection process, herein
performed on a time-basis (i.e. only the features drawn from
the first K packets are considered).
First, results show that a naive hierarchical “extension” of
best flat L3 classifier (in this case a BN_TAN with K ¼ 11

packets) is not able to provide improved performance (e.g.,
48:80% F-measure at L3, as opposed to 50:23% in the flat
case). This result highlights a key difference with respect to
the scenario leveraging TC_set and emphasizes the need for
hierarchical-specific optimization in such case. Secondly, we
investigate (as in Fig. 3) how varying the features corresponding to the first K packets could improve the performance of
the naive hierarchical extension, and compare it with the best
flat counterpart. Our investigations reveal that a performance
saturation is observed after  10 packets, and that the HC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1052

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 7, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2020

L3 Confusion matrices ([%] in log scale) of best flat and hierarchical classifiers in standard TC (red) and early TC (blue).

approach is able to improve best flat L3 approach in terms of
G-mean, whereas an F-measure drop is observed for all values
of K considered. Finally, fine-grained optimization (see Fig. 4
(d), (e), and (f)) provides higher performance with respect to
the optimized flat case, e.g., þ1:71% F-measure and þ1:59%
G-mean at L3.14
The corresponding optimized hierarchical structure is
shown in Fig. 5(b) and—when compared to Fig. 5(a)—clearly
shows that per-node optimized classifiers significantly differ
in type and number of features, thus motivating the need for
fine-tuned optimization of the proposed HC. Although the HC
gain is not significant, its operating principle allows to delve
into the “information structure” of the TC problem and highlight critical points, by excluding potential performance drops
due to the size of the classification task, as shown by the following per-node performance analysis.
E. Per-Node Detailed Classification Performance
For completeness, we report in Fig. 5(c) and (d) the detailed
per-node classification performance, corresponding to TC_set
and EarlyTC_set, respectively.
The following interesting observations can be made on the
reported tree representation. First, with respect to Anonymous
Network Level classification (L1) nodes present near-ideal performance both when relying on TC_set and EarlyTC_set,
thus showing (almost) no errors propagating from HC of ATs.
Secondly, at Traffic Type Level (L2) both approaches based on
TC_set and EarlyTC_set present near-ideal performance
in classifying Tor traffic types, whereas some performance degradation is observed in classification of I2P traffic types; this
phenomenon is more penalizing in the early-TC case, e.g., with
I2P F-measure dropping down to 60:61%. This represents one
of the main causes of performance difference among the two
scenarios, as all these errors are propagated downwards.
Finally, at Application Level (L3), the behavior of the classifier
nodes is more varied. Indeed, referring to approach based on
TC_set, it is apparent that Tor nodes (TorApp and TorPT)
work well, whereas on I2P nodes significant degradations
(higher than those at L2) are observed, with I2PApp80BW the
most significant. Differently, discrimination within each I2P
traffic type and TorApp is only possible with < 65% F-measure
14
Also, from a statistical significance viewpoint, we observed a gain of HC
approach in 90:0% of the cases over the considered folds.

with features in EarlyTC_set. Therefore, classification
within I2PApp80BW cannot be accurately attained with neither
of the considered feature sets (confirming the intuition that
I2PApp80BW represents traffic obtained by mixing different
apps), and the advantage of the classification task split into subproblems cannot exceed a certain threshold in this case, due to
the impossibility of discerning applications within this traffic
type, resorting to the set of the available features.
F. Per-Class Performance Breakdown
Since classification at L3 is a challenging task (but also the
most interesting from a user’s privacy perspective), we report
in Fig. 6 the per-class performance breakdown of HC results
in terms of confusion matrices at L3, comparing them against
results obtained with flat approach. We recall that for these
matrices the higher the concentration toward the main diagonal, the better the overall performance. Further, to highlight
how errors at L3 which do not imply misclassifications at L1/
L2 are less severe and should be promoted as opposed to the
others, in the same figures we also highlight the error patterns
corresponding to the same traffic type (solid boxes) and the
same AT (dashed boxes).
First, comparing flat and hierarchical approaches (Fig. 6(a)
and (b), respectively), we can observe a reduction of errorpatterns in the latter case, highlighting the beneficial “divideet-impera” principle of HC. Secondly, confusion matrices at L1
(dashed boxes) show that classifiers based on both approaches
(with different quantitative outcomes) present error patterns
which almost entirely lead to a misclassification of the traffic
type within the same anonymous network. Differently, referring
to L2 standpoint (solid boxes), HC provides improved capabilities in confining errors to the same traffic type (especially in the
case of I2P traffic). A similar consideration applies to early TC
results (Fig. 6(c) and (d)) and, in particular, to errors concerning
the applications of I2P Apps and Tor Apps. Hence HC approach
performance clearly highlights the inability, not depending on
the size of the classification task, in satisfactorily discriminating
(with an early TC setup in mind) among I2P traffic types and
within their corresponding applications, along with those in
Tor Apps. On the other hand, results confirm the outcomes of
[30], witnessing that obfuscation implemented by Tor Pluggable Transports induces a class fingerprint easily distinguishable ( 99% accuracy, see C2 classifier in Fig. 5) from
both Normal Tor Traffic and Tor Apps.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI et al.: A DIVE INTO THE DARK WEB: HIERARCHICAL TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION OF ANONYMITY TOOLS

Fig. 7.

1053

F-measures and Classified Ratios (CR) of best classifiers vs. g.

G. Performance With Reject Option
Finally, in Fig. 7 we focus on the adoption of censoring
threshold(s) for flat classification and HC of ATs. Specifically,
we report L3 performance, being the hardest task considered.
We recall that, although in the flat case there is only a single tunable g (referred to as FC 3 ), HC allows to set a different threshold
value at each node (e.g., for Cij the threshold g ij can be adjusted
independently from the others, see Section II-A). Nonetheless,
as a preliminary investigation toward the censored behavior of
HC approach—to avoid cumbersome analyses—we consider
two simplified options: considering only a common g value
shared by (i) by all the nodes in the hierarchy (HC all ) and
(ii) solely by the classifier nodes concurring to L3 classification
(HC 3 ). Accordingly, we report the F-measure vs. g (similar
trends have been observed for other metrics) along with the
corresponding trend of the ratio of classified samples (CR).
Although using such thresholds cannot be intended as a panacea able to cope with high-confidence wrong predictions, results
pertaining to the adoption of TC_set show performance
improvement with increasing g. In detail, both hierarchical variants offer performance gain with higher CR (less discarded
flows) w.r.t. FC 3 (e.g.,  80% F-measure is attained with 
80% CR), with HC all having slightly improved performance
(while incurring in a slightly higher CR, due to the presence of
non-zero thresholds for nodes at higher levels in the hierarchy).
On the other hand, in the early-TC scenario, the CR is lower for
hierarchical approaches, while HC all provides slightly
improved performance than FC 3 , whose performance do not
benefit from a g increase. Nonetheless, such results underline
how progressive censoring via per-node thresholds may be a
viable option for further performance improvement.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we tackled TC of Tor, I2P, and JonDonym via
a hierarchical approach that, beyond classification performance gains, carries by design several advantages in terms of
modularity, training efficiency, distributed deployment, and
“tunable view” of classification outputs. In detail, the proposed framework was designed with varying constraints,
resulting in implementations with different degrees of complexity (in terms of classifiers, features, and reject option).
Our experimental analysis—carried on the Anon17 public
dataset—allowed reasoning on which degree ATs traffic can
be told apart, considering different granularities such as the
anonymity network adopted (L1), the traffic type tunneled in

the network (L2), and the application category generating
such traffic (L3). Moving from naive to fine-grain optimized
implementations for the hierarchical classifier, results at different granularities highlighted how HC guarantees interesting
performance gains, especially at the finest level (L3). More
specifically, applications were classified with up to 75:56% Fmeasure, obtaining a gain of up to þ4:5% with respect to an
optimized flat implementation [5].
Further, it was proved that these errors can be mitigated further with outcome censoring mechanisms (avoiding error
propagation), e.g. by discarding  20% of classified flows, the
proposed approach is able to guarantee  80% F-measure.
Also, per-node and per-class performance evaluation allowed
to delve into misclassification patterns and their severity,
proving that HC approach better confines misclassifications in
the same AT and even the same traffic type. These evaluations
witnessed the appeal and effectiveness of HC framework also
in real environments and provided insights in identifying performance bottlenecks which lie on a very limited set of nodes
in the hierarchy. Specifically, applications running within I2P
correspond to the hardest to be classified each other, thus confirming the common thinking that such AT provides a higher
privacy level (from TC viewpoint) w.r.t. Tor, at the expenses
of increased latency.
The proposed HC framework suggests the following future
directions: (i) use of sophisticated nodes and alternative hierarchical approaches; (ii) advanced HC optimization, e.g.,
automatic computation of reject thresholds possibly differing
at each node; (iii) hierarchical architectures having nodes
operating with different TC objects and with applications
arranged in “multi-view” structures; (iv) HC implementation
in the community-oriented TC platform TIE [31], allowing
live (anonymous and not) traffic evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Aceto and A. Pescape, “Internet censorship detection: A survey,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 83, pp. 381–421, 2015.
[2] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions
in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40,
Jan./Feb. 2012.
[3] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescape, “Multi-classification approaches for classifying mobile app traffic,” J. Netw. Comput.
Appl., vol. 103, pp. 131–145, 2018.
[4] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and G. Ventre, “Worm traffic analysis and characterization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2007, pp. 1435–1442.
[5] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Aceto, and A. Pescape, “Anonymity services
Tor, I2P, JonDonym: Classifying in the dark (web),” IEEE Trans. Depend.
Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 662–675, May-Jun. 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 7, NO. 3, JULY-SEPTEMBER 2020

[6] N. Cascarano, A. Este, F. Gringoli, F. Risso, and L. Salgarelli, “An
experimental evaluation of the computational cost of a DPI traffic classifier,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., 2009, pp. 1–8.
[7] J. Yu, H. Lee, Y. Im, M.-S. Kim, and D. Park, “Real-time classification
of internet application traffic using a hierarchical multi-class SVM,”
KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 859–876, 2010.
[8] L. Grimaudo, M. Mellia, and E. Baralis, “Hierarchical learning for fine
grained internet traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Wireless
Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf., 2012, pp. 463–468.
[9] J.-h. Kim, S.-H. Yoon, and M.-S. Kim, “Study on traffic classification
taxonomy for multilateral and hierarchical traffic classification,” in
Proc. IEEE 14th Asia-Pac. Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., 2012, pp. 1–4.
[10] S.-H. Yoon, K.-S. Shim, S.-K. Lee, and M.-S. Kim, “Framework for
multi-level application traffic identification,” in Proc. IEEE 17th AsiaPac. Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., 2015, pp. 424–427.
[11] Y. N. Dong, J. J. Zhao, and J. Jin, “Novel feature selection and classification of internet video traffic based on a hierarchical scheme,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 119, pp. 102–111, 2017.
[12] W. M. Shbair, T. Cholez, J. François, and I. Chrisment, “A multi-level
framework to identify HTTPS services,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw.
Oper. Manage. Symp., 2016, pp. 240–248.
[13] J. Barker, P. Hannay, and P. Szewczyk, “Using traffic analysis to identify the second generation onion router,” in Proc. IFIP 9th Int. Conf.
Embedded Ubiquitous Comput., 2011, pp. 72–78.
[14] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial
Na€ıve-Bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Secur.,
2009, pp. 31–42.
[15] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. 10th
Annu. ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2011, pp. 103–114.
[16] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc.
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016.
[17] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. Van Goethem, and W. Joosen,
“Automated feature extraction for website fingerprinting through deep
learning,” 2018, arXiv:1708.06376v2.
[18] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in Proc.
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[19] G. He, M. Yang, J. Luo, and X. Gu, “Inferring application type information from Tor encrypted traffic,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Cloud Big
Data, 2014, pp. 220–227.
[20] M. AlSabah, K. Bauer, and I. Goldberg, “Enhancing Tor’s performance
using real-time traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., 2012, pp. 73–84.
[21] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Benchmarking two techniques
for Tor classification: Flow level and circuit level classification,” in
Proc. IEEE CICS, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[22] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “An analysis of Tor pluggable
transports under adversarial conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell., 2017.
[23] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Effects of shared bandwidth on
anonymity of the I2P network users,” in Proc. IEEE Secur. Privacy
Workshops, 2017, pp. 235–240.
[24] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Packet momentum for identification of anonymity networks,” J. Cyber Secur. Mobility, vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 27–56, 2017.
[25] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. Mamun, I. Saiful, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[26] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, I. Akodkenou, A. Soule, and K. Salamatian,
“Traffic classification on the fly,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun.
Rev., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 23–26, 2006.
[27] C. N. Silla and A. A. Freitas, “A survey of hierarchical classification
across different application domains,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery,
vol. 22, no. 1/2, pp. 31–72, 2011.
[28] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[29] S. Burschka and B. Dupasquier, “Tranalyzer: Versatile high performance network traffic analyser,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput.
Intell., 2016, pp. 1–8.
[30] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Traffic flow analysis of Tor
pluggable transports,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Netw. Serv. Manage., 2015, pp. 178–181.

[31] W. De Donato, A. Pescape, and A. Dainotti, “Traffic identification
engine: An open platform for traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 28,
no. 2, pp. 56–64, Mar./Apr. 2014.

Antonio Montieri (GS’18) received the M.S. degree,
in 2015, from the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies, University of
Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy, where he has been
working toward the Ph.D. degree since 2017. His
work is focused on network measurements,
(encrypted and mobile) traffic classification and
modeling, monitoring of cloud network performance.
He has coauthored 16 papers and 5 posters accepted
for publication in international journals and conference proceedings.

Domenico Ciuonzo (S’11–M’14–SM’16) received
the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from the
University of Campania “L. Vanvitelli,” Caserta,
Italy. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technologies, University of Napoli “Federico
II,” Naples, Italy. His work focuses on data fusion,
wireless sensor networks, machine learning, and network analytics, Since 2014, he has been on the editorial board of different IEEE and Elsevier journals.

Giampaolo Bovenzi received the M.S. degree
(summa cum laude), in October 2018, from the University of Napoli “Federico II,” where he has been
working toward the Ph.D. degree in information technology and electrical engineering with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information
Technologies, since November 2018. His research
interests focus on (anonymized and encrypted) traffic
classification, network security (with applications to
IoT), and blockchain.

Valerio Persico received the Ph.D. degree in computer and automation engineering from the University of Napoli “Federico II,” Naples, Italy, in 2016.
He is a post-doc with the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Information Technologies, University of Napoli “Federico II.” His work focuses on
Internet measurements, cloud network performance,
and traffic analysis and classification. He was the
recipient of the Best Student Paper Award at ACM
CoNext 2013.

Antonio Pescape (SM’09) is a full Professor in computer engineering with the University of Napoli
“Federico II,” Naples, Italy. His work focuses on
Internet technologies and specifically on measurement, monitoring, and analysis of the Internet.
Recently, he is working on bioinformatic and ICTs
for a smarter health. He has coauthored more than
200 conference and journal papers and is the recipient of a number of research awards.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:01:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.