662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

Anonymity Services Tor, I2P, JonDonym:
Classifying in the Dark (Web)
Antonio Montieri , Domenico Ciuonzo , Senior Member, IEEE,
 , Senior Member, IEEE
Giuseppe Aceto , and Antonio Pescape
Abstract—Traffic Classification (TC) is an important tool for several tasks, applied in different fields (security, management, traffic
engineering, R&D). This process is impaired or prevented by privacy-preserving protocols and tools, that encrypt the communication
content, and (in case of anonymity tools) additionally hide the source, the destination, and the nature of the communication. In this
paper, leveraging a public dataset released in 2017, we provide classification results with the aim of investigating to which degree the
specific anonymity tool (and the traffic it hides) can be identified, when compared to the traffic of other considered anonymity tools,
using five machine learning classifiers. Initially, flow-based TC is considered, and the effects of feature importance and
temporal-related features to the network are investigated. Additionally, the role of finer-grained features, such as the (joint) histogram of
packet lengths (and inter-arrival times), is determined. Successively, “early” TC of anonymous networks is analyzed. Results show that
the considered anonymity networks (Tor, I2P, JonDonym) can be easily distinguished (with an accuracy of 99.87% and 99.80%, in
case of flow-based and early-TC, respectively), telling even the specific application generating the traffic (with an accuracy of 73.99%
and 66.76%, in case of flow-based and early-TC, respectively).
Index Terms—Dark web, dark net, Tor, I2P, JonDonym, traffic classification, anonymity, privacy, security

Ç
1

INTRODUCTION

T

HE increasing amount of people’s online activities over

last years has lead to a growing concern on their privacy and anonymity. As a consequence, Anonymity Tools
(ATs) have been increasingly employed by Internet users
to achieve privacy in varying degrees, i.e., to hide the
source, the destination, and the nature of the communication, besides encrypting the content itself. Additionally, in
many cases they are even capable of hiding the users’
identity to the final destination (i.e., the web-server). These
services provide anonymity to the users by forwarding
their traffic through multiple stations, encrypting and
decrypting it multiple times, until the users’ data reach
their destination. By doing so, users’ data preserve their
anonymity since each station being part of the path knows
only part of the information. Hence, tracing of users’ data
within these networks is extremely difficult. Indeed, from
users’ perspective, these tools allow browsing the web circumventing provider-enforced restrictions or running
applications without revealing users’ identity and location
to any intermediary observing the traffic. Among the several ATs developed in recent years, The Onion Router



A. Montieri is with the University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, NA
80138, Italy. E-mail: antonio.montieri@unina.it.
 D. Ciuonzo is with the NM2 s.r.l., Napoli, NA 80143, Italy.
E-mail: ciuonzo@nm-2.com.
 G. Aceto and A. Pescape are with the University of Napoli Federico II,
Napoli, NA 80138, Italy and with the NM2 s.r.l., Napoli, NA 80143, Italy.
E-mail: {giuseppe.aceto, pescape}@unina.it.
Manuscript received 6 Oct. 2017; accepted 27 Jan. 2018. Date of publication
9 Feb. 2018; date of current version 13 May 2020.
(Corresponding author: Antonio Pescape.)
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TDSC.2018.2804394

(Tor) [1], the Invisible Internet Project (I2P) [2] and JonDonym (formerly known as Java Anon Proxy, JAP, or WebMix) [3] are the most popular. In recent years, ATs have
been investigated in several studies from disparate perspectives, collectively covering a wide spectrum of topics.
These included very narrow aspects of anonymity
“realm”, such as the design improvement of a specific AT,
its performance and delay analysis, development of effective attacks to be performed on it, users’ behavior analysis
and identity disclosure risk, censoring policies for ATs [4],
so to name a few.
Although many important aspects of ATs equally
deserve attention, a key issue is to understand whether their
(encrypted) traffic data can be classified and, if so, to which depth.
More specifically, it is interesting to ascertain to which
degree an external observer can recognize an AT and how
fine would be the fingerprinting granularity achievable,
that is, whether traffic types and/or services hidden into
them could be inferred. This investigation is equally useful
to designers of anonymity networks, as it suggests how privacy of anonymity networks could be further robustified.
Indeed, Traffic Classification (TC) is an important part of
Internet traffic engineering and has applications in several
fields such as network monitoring, security, application
identification, anomaly detection, accounting, advertising,
and service differentiation [5], [6]. From an operational
standpoint, TC mechanisms consist in associating (labeling)
traffic flows with specific application types. TC has gained
on importance in recent years due to growing incentives to
disguise certain applications [7], comprising those generating anonymous traffic. Therefore, TC of ATs traffic is an
appealing (and open) research field.

1545-5971 ß 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See ht_tps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB)

TC methods range from (earlier) port-based methods, to
those based on payload inspection (termed Deep Packet
Inspection techniques, DPI [8], [9]) and, more recently, to
those based on Machine Learning (ML) classifiers (either
supervised and unsupervised). The latter class of TC
approaches provides decisions based on the sole observation of traffic-flow [10] or packet-based features [11], [12].
Thus, ML-based techniques uniquely suit to anonymous
(encrypted) traffic analysis.
Exacerbating the lack of data for experimenting with TC
approaches, it is worth mentioning that one of the main
issues of research efforts in anonymity field is given by the
fact that real data are hardly publicly available, which prevents
experiments repeatability and, as a matter of fact, precludes
unanimous and shared conclusions. Indeed, previous works
on ATs have been based on: (i) data collected within a simulated environment [13]; (ii) data generated from private
anonymous networks [14]; (iii) data generated from real traffic on anonymous networks by researchers1 themselves [15],
[16], [17], [18]. Unfortunately, in the latter case, researchers
have been reluctant to making the collected data publicly
available for reasons of users’ privacy.
A fundamental opportunity in this direction, allowing to
answer the question constituting the basis of the present
study (i.e., whether identifiability of anonymous networks
is possible), is represented by the recently released Anon17
dataset [19]. Indeed, this public dataset consists of a collection of traces gathered by different anonymity networks, as
well as related services and applications running inside
them. To the best of authors’ knowledge, no similar datasets
have been made available online up to date. Hence, Anon17
represents an important (shared) workbench for research
studies on the topic.
In view of these reasons, the main contribution of this
paper is a detailed study on whether anonymity networks
(such as Tor, JonDonym, and I2P) can be discerned.2 Our
analysis is carried out at different levels of granularity, as
we try to infer whether the Anonymity Network being
observed (referred to as L1 in what follows) can be classified
and, in affirmative case, whether the Traffic Type (L2) and
Application (L3) transported hidden within them could be
inferred. To this end, we consider five ML classifiers: three
of them are based on the Bayesian approach (i.e., Na€ıve Bayes,
Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes, and Bayesian Networks),
whereas the other two on the well-known decision trees (i.e.,
C4.5 and Random Forest). The adoption of a pool of classifiers (as opposed to a single one) is not only motivated by
an obvious need for comparison, but also to investigate
minutely the (number and nature of) relevant features
needed for an accurate classification, as well as the need to
reach conclusions not coupled to a specific classifier. The
present analysis is devoted both to the development and
analysis of classifiers based on flow-originated features or
1. As mentioned earlier, the traffic on anonymity networks relies on
passing the users’ data through multiple nodes on the network. Since
these nodes relay traffic for multiple users, collecting the data from
these nodes will include traffic from several other users. This means
that data are collected running a node and filtering its data so as to
include only the “desired” traffic.
2. Preliminary results in the same framework of this study have
been published as a conference publication [20].

663

pertaining to a short (early) sequence of packets. To the best
of our knowledge, there is no similar classification-based
analysis of ATs in the literature, both in terms of a similar
viewpoint and detail of the analysis. The obtained results
show that anonymity networks can be easily discerned, and
the traffic type and the service running within it can be reasonably inferred as well (by a judicious use of the appropriate classifier and optimized set of features).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 discusses related works, whereas Section 3 describes the considered TC framework of ATs; experimental
results are reported in Section 4; finally, Section 5 provides
conclusions and future directions.

2

RELATED WORK

Up to authors’ knowledge, there are no studies focused on
the classification and identification of different anonymity
services at various levels of granularity, that is discerning in
the ET they generate: the specific Anonymous Network
(L1), the Traffic Type (L2), and the Application (L3). The
principal reason is the lack of suitable and available datasets. As a consequence, henceforth, we provide a wider discussion on the state-of-the-art of anonymous (encrypted)
traffic investigation, being subject of many works in last
years. Then, in the ending part of the section, we specifically
focus on works dealing with anonymous TC to underline
their difference with respect to the present study.
First attempts of analyzing anonymity networks are made
by means of emulation tools [13] or in private networks [14],
focusing on Tor case. In detail, Tor network requires all its
traffic to be relayed at least through three nodes before reaching its destination. The entry point of Tor network is usually
denoted as entry node, whereas the last relay before reaching
the destination (i.e., the exit node) “lends” its IP address,
which is interpreted as the source of the traffic by the destination. On the other hand, middle nodes add to the speed and
robustness of the Tor network without making the owner of
the relay look like the source of the traffic. When using Tor in
its standard setting, Tor utilization can be inferred by monitoring connections to (known) entry nodes. To this end, Tor
bridges are alternative entry points to the Tor network that
are not all listed publicly. Nonetheless, since Tor communications operate on a cell-basis of a fixed length, they can be
still identified even in the presence of bridges. For this reason, Tor Pluggable Transports (PTs) have been recently developed to disguise identification of traffic generated by the
users connected to a certain Tor bridge, making it look like
random (or something different from Tor traffic).
Specifically, in [13] a network emulator (called ExperimenTor) is presented, representing a test environment which
allows modeling of relevant “actors” (i.e. Tor routers, bandwidth, users, and applications). On the other hand, a private
network environment is set up in [14], with the intent of discriminating between (encrypted) HTTPS and Tor traffic.
The reported comparison is based on the collection of the
following traffic types: (i) regular HTTPS traffic; (ii) HTTP
over a private Tor network; (iii) HTTPS over a private Tor
network. Three ML classifiers (i.e., Random Forest, J48/
C4.5 and AdaBoost) are there adopted, and shows that
HTTP/HTTPS traffic over Tor can be detected with a score
 93% (when a 3.7% false-positive rate is ensured).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

More recently, Rao et al. [21] propose an unsupervised
approach, based on gravitational clustering, to detect flows
of Tor network from mixed anonymous/non-anonymous
traffic data. The experimental analysis is based on a dataset
obtained by mixing (real-traffic) flows generated from different services (e.g., DNS, HTTP, HTTPS and SSH) and Toremulated flows obtained via ExperimenToR. Results provided
report an average accuracy of 88% for gravitational clustering, outperforming other unsupervised techniques, such as
K-means, expectation-maximization, and DBSCAN.
We mention that several other works have analyzed Tor,
JonDonym, and I2P based on real data [15], [16], [18], [22],
[23], focusing however on some other (equally-important
though) aspects, such as evaluating the volume of traffic run
within [15], designing the attack type [16], [23], discovering
“anonymous” routers [18] or providing guidelines for evaluating privacy level of a generic AT [22]. For example, Ling
et al. [23] propose a combination of an active attack and a
detection mechanism to break Tor users’ privacy, based on
the size of transmitted packet from the web server to the
user, through the router. Since Tor has a fixed cell size
(512 bytes) but accommodates varying packet sizes, the
modulation of buffer size at the sender (and hence of payload size) will reflect on a different (known) number of Tor
cells: using big and small buffer sizes, a binary signal is thus
encoded with the connection (in the form of controlled
number of cells) so as to recover it back at the receiver (web
client) side, effectively identifying the client involved in the
connection. Equally important, a delay is added in between
buffered packets before transmission to ensure correct
detection of the encoded bit at the receiver. Indeed, this step
obviates effects due to packets congestion, retransmission
or any normal traffic behavior during the server-client path.
Reported results show that this method requires only
10 packets to reach a 90% detection rate (when a 4% falsepositive rate is ensured). Differently, the authors in [22]
define five different key factors for determining the anonymity level of any generic AT (taking however Tor, I2P,
and JonDonym as specific case studies) from the user’s
perspective. Then, a synthetic measure is proposed as a
weighted combination of these factors, with weights arising
from a pairwise comparison technique. The analysis highlights that although these ATs aim to provide total users
anonymity, some users info contained in these ATs is available to the operators of the services.
More recently, a few works have analyzed real traffic
from anonymity networks, focusing on TC aspect; we now
discuss them in detail.
First, there is a corpus of literature pertaining to a specific
application of TC, known as website fingerprinting, whose
aim is to identify a specific web-page accessed by a client of
encrypted and anonymized connections by observing patterns of data flows such as packet size and direction.
Herrmann et al. [24] tackle the problem of website fingerprinting in the context of different privacy-enhancing technologies based on both single-hop (OpenSSL, OpenVPN)
and multi-hop (Tor, JonDonym) systems, by proposing a
multinomial Na€ıve Bayes classifier (along with a few additional variants), that relies on the normalized frequency distribution of IP packet sizes. The proposed classifier correctly
identifies (in closed world) up to 97% of requests on a sample

of 775 sites (and over 300,000 real-world traffic dumps
recorded over a two-month period) in single-hop systems,
while performs poorly with multi-hop systems. Nonetheless,
this study highlights that the latter networks are not capable
of providing perfect protection against the proposed technique (3% and 20% of average accuracy in Tor and JonDonym networks, respectively). The above finding is further
explored in [25], where a Support Vector Classifier is
employed for the same problem over Tor and JonDonym
(separately), underlining their incomplete anonymity. The
traffic features comprise those based on volume, time, and
direction, such as the number of packets/transmitted bytes
in both directions and the percentage of incoming packets.
The training set consists of 15500 instances related to 775
websites (20 instances each) on either Tor or JonDonym. The
results show that (over a known set of websites) the detection
rate improves over [24] from 3% to 55% (resp. from 20% to
80%) in Tor (resp. JonDonym) network. On the other
hand, in the open-world (unknown websites) scenario,
the training set includes 4000 URLs chosen from the 1
million most popular websites in Alexa ranking and other
1000 URLs (not included in the training set) are added to
the test data. In this case, the detection rate is 73% (with
0.05% false-positive rate).
More recently, in [26] an improved (repeatable) website
fingerprinting approach is proposed, and showed to be
superior both in terms of detection accuracy and computational efficiency to existing alternatives. To provide a closer
analysis to a realistic case, a huge representative dataset is
collected, with the intent of avoiding simplified assumptions made in the previous works, allowing for the first time
the evaluation of the website fingerprinting attack against
Tor using realistic background noise. Using this data, the
practical limits of website fingerprinting at Internet scale
are explored (in an open-world setup), showing that webpage fingerprinting effectiveness does not scale for any considered page in the considered datasets and any state-ofthe-art classifier. Specifically, this is underlined by a
decrease of recall/precision pair with the size of the background sites to distinguish the monitored pages from.
Almubayed et al. [27] also use supervised classifiers (e.g.,
Na€ıve Bayes, Bayesian Network, C4.5, Random Forest, and
Support Vector Machine), to develop an identification
method for discovering Tor-encrypted web-pages (belonging to the top 5 from Alexa web-site) from HTTPS (background) traffic, represented by top 100 sites from Alexa.
Results (pertaining to identification of each single web page
from those considered as HTTPS background) report very
high (resp. low) TP (resp. FP) rates for all the identification
problems analyzed and all the classifiers there employed
( 99% and  1% for TP and FP rates, respectively).
Differently, Springall et al. [28] present two novel methods (pertaining to HTTP and SSH traffic) to identify, at a
Tor exit node, network connections originated behind the
Tor network from those that have not, so as to allow a content provider filtering on a per-connection basis rather than
per-IP basis. The proposed methods identify Tor inbound
connections through the use of delay and round-trip time
features, respectively. In order to evaluate performance,
results are presented for two small-scale experiments (testing performance with HTTP and SSH traffic, respectively),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB)

showing very high identification rates (100% and 98.99%
respectively) when partitioning network connections into
Tor and non-Tor originating connections.
Similarly, Bai et al. [29] propose a fingerprinting method
to identify Tor and Web-Mix (viz. JonDonym) networks.
Their method uses specific strings, packet length, and frequency of the packets. The proposed approach is tested on
simulated networks and achieves  95% of accuracy in identifying both systems (Tor and Web-Mix). In [30] the authors
propose a method based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
to classify encrypted Tor traffic in four categories: P2P, FTP,
IM, and Web. The features employed are based on burst volumes and directions, extracted from Tor flows. Then, HMMs
are employed to build inbound and output models of
the application types considered. The proposed method is
reported to obtain a maximum accuracy of 92%.
AlSabah et al. [17] propose another ML-based approach
for recognizing applications (browsing, streaming, and BitTorrent) used by Tor’s users based on the adoption of different classifiers (Na€ıve Bayes, Bayesian Network, functional
and logistic model trees), leveraging circuit-level (circuit lifetime and the corresponding amount of data transferred)
and cell-level info (inter-arrival time of the cells, including
their statistics). Both online (cell-level info is used to classify
the circuit while it is in use) and offline (cell- and circuit-level
info is both capitalized to classify the circuit) approaches are
considered, with the highest accuracy achieved for online
(resp. offline) case equal to 97.8% (resp. 91%). Then, a similar setup is considered in [31], where four classifiers (Na€ıve
Bayes, Bayesian Network, Random Forest, and C4.5) based
on traffic-flow features are exploited to recognize user activities, and compared with classification based on circuit-level
features. The results underline near-ideal accuracy (up to
100%) with both approaches, flow-based classification being
nevertheless less demanding.3
Similarly, Shahbar and Zincir-Heywood [32] investigate
whether Tor PTs can evade censorship systems based on
flow-based (statistical) traffic analysis. Sadly, PTs are designed to hide the content of Tor connections only; thus, a
flow-based analysis, in principle, can identify Tor traffic even
when these obfuscation techniques are applied. The authors
adopt a C4.5 classifier and demonstrate that PT-based obfuscation changes the content shape in a distinct way from Tor,
conferring them their own unique fingerprints, hence making
them recognizable via a statistical-based traffic classifier. The
aforementioned analysis is then elaborated in [33], where the
aim is effective flow-based recognition of Tor PTs in terms of
describing the proper features, the sufficient amount of data,
and the effect of data collection. The same authors analyze
the effects of bandwidth sharing on I2P in [34], investigating
both application and user profiling achievable by an attacker.
The analysis resorts to a C4.5 classifier fed with flow-based
features. The experimental results highlight that users and
applications on I2P can be profiled. More specifically, a detrimental (resp. beneficial) effect of the shared bandwidth
increase on applications (resp. users) profiling accuracy is
observed. Moreover, it is noticed that the avoidance of shared
3. Indeed, circuit-level classification uses the data collected at Tor’s
relay, whereas flow-level classification is based on data that could be
captured anywhere between the user and the Tor’s relay.

665

client tunnels for all applications seems to boost applications
profiling.
More recently, Anon17 dataset is presented in [19]. As
anticipated in Section 1, the dataset is composed by directional traffic-flows obtained by gathering data from three
different ATs, namely Tor, I2P, and JonDonym. Furthermore, it provides information at increasing detail (i.e., traffic
type and application levels), by providing labels for traffic
flows pertaining to applications running on Tor and I2P (in
different flavors), such as “Browsing” and “EEpsites”,
respectively, as well as the PTs employed on the Tor network. Up to authors’ knowledge, no similar datasets are
available publicly up to date. The sole exception is represented by the dataset described/analyzed in [35], containing however only Tor-traffic, belonging to eight different
applications (Browsing, Audio, CHAT, Mail, P2P, FT, VOIP,
and Video), and providing only time-related features.

3

TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

In the following, first terms and concepts regarding traffic
objects are introduced (Section 3.1), together with an overview of the classification features available in the Anon17
dataset (Section 3.2) and how these are capitalized, when
automatic feature selection is exploited (Section 3.3); then
the last part (Section 3.4) describes the classification algorithms adopted (with corresponding feature sets employed)
for anonymous traffic analysis.

3.1 Traffic View
According to [19], the anonymous traffic contained in Anon17
is split into different flows [6], obtained as result of the application of the flow-exporting tool Tranalyzer2 [36]. The direction
of each flow is then marked as a feature (see details in
Section 3.2), i.e., “A” and “B” for client-to-server and serverto-client, respectively. According to Tranalyzer2 documentation, the termination (segmentation) of an active flow
depends on the activity or the lifetime of a connection [36].
3.2 Classification Features
The traffic features available in Anon17 dataset are obtained
starting from Tranalyzer2 [36]. More specifically, the latter is
an open source tool that generates flows from a captured
traffic dump or directly by working on the network interface,
based on the libpcap library. Tranalyzer2 tool is bundled with
different basic plugins, being able to extract a plethora of
features per flow.4 However, the dataset provides only a subset of these features, since some of them have been removed
(such as ICMP and VLAN features) because they do not provide useful fingerprinting information. Additionally, aiming
at protecting users’ privacy (and simulate a true ET scenario),
IP addresses and payloads of the packets have also been
removed from the dataset.
Therefore, Anon17 is provided in the form of a subset of
81 fields corresponding to features per flow extracted by the
aforementioned tool [19]. For our classification problem we
have removed the fields min_pl, max_pl, and mean_pl,
as they seem repeated with respect to minPktSz,
4. Tranalyzer2 also enables development of user-defined plugins,
thus virtually allowing to extract any desired feature.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

maxPktSz, and avePktSize, respectively, considering the
specific configuration adopted in Tranalyzer2 for capturing
the traffic. Additionally, as opposed to [20], we have discarded the initial/final timestamps of each flow (time_
first and time_last) to avoid biased results, as this pair
of features may be influenced by a sequential collection of
the traffic traces belonging to different ATs and/or application types. Therefore, we have considered a reduced set of
76 fields, that has been exploited to extract four different types
of features set, with the aim of providing a comprehensive
analysis of TC of ATs.
The first set of features considered comprises 74 summarizing flow-based statistics, such as:



Flow direction (A/B) and duration;
No. of bytes/packets Tx/Rx (including bytes/packets Tx rate and stream asymmetry measures);
 Packet Length (PL) statistics (mean, min, max,
median, quartiles, etc.);
 Inter-Arrival Time (IAT) statistics (mean, min, max,
median, quartiles, etc.);
 TCP header-related features (window size, sequence
number, TCP options, etc.);
 IP header-related features (type-of-service, time-tolive, IP flags, etc.);
 No. of connections (i) from source (destination) IP to
different hosts and (ii) between source and destination IP during the lifetime of the flow.
As underlined in [19], since I2P network works on both
TCP and UDP, for UDP connections over I2P the TCPrelated features may have zero value.
The second and third sets of features are based on a (finer)
histogram representation of PL and joint PL-IAT, respectively. These sets are obtained through an appropriate format conversion and/or marginalization [37] from the field
ps_iat_histo. This field, as provided by Tranalyzer2,
contains precise (non-binned) PL info, whereas applies a
non-uniform binning to the (continuous-valued) IAT information.5 Their use will be investigated similarly to [11] to
understand whether finer-grained features can improve
classification performance.
Finally, the fourth set of features corresponds to the
sequence of pairs (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K packets of each flow. This set is extracted from the field
nfp_pl_iat,6 containing the info corresponding to the first
K ¼ 20 packets, as set by Tranalyzer2 default options [38].
This set will be later employed to investigate the design of
effective algorithms for early TC [39], [40] of ATs.
Note that each set of M features adopted by each classifier will be generically indicated with f1 ; . . . ; fM (or collectively as f , ½ f1 . . . fM T ) and the set of classes as V ,
fc1 ; . . . ; cL g. Finally, relative importance (based on statistical
rankings) of features’ within the first set will be later analyzed in Section 4.3.
5. More precisely, the IAT range is divided in 91 bins with the following ranges: bins 0  39 covering ½0; 200Þ ms with 5 ms width, bins
40  59 covering ½200; 400Þ ms with 10 ms width, bins 60  89 covering
½400; 1000Þ ms with 20 ms width and bin 90 for IAT values higher than
1 s [38].
6. Only in this case, the pl acronym is referred to the Payload
Length, in accordance to Tranalyzer2 nomenclature [38].

3.3 Feature Selection
In what follows, we will adopt the classifiers being considered along with feature selection techniques, allowing to
extract only the most informative features from a larger set
(in our case, the first set of features considered, being composed of 74 flow-based statistics). The aim is to (possibly)
improve further their performance, while reducing their
computational complexity. To this end, in this study, we
will consider feature selection based on a filtering approach,
since wrapper methods may be considerably more complex
and coupled to a specific classification algorithm [41]. More
specifically, the approach adopted ranks the elements
within the set based on the relative importance of each feature, evaluated as the Pearson’s correlation with the class
(random) variable. We remark that other feature selection
measures have been also tried (e.g., the normalized/unnormalized mutual information or the symmetric uncertainty).
Nonetheless, since we have obtained similar trends (and
slightly worse performance), those are not included in this
study for the sake of brevity.
3.4 Classification Algorithms
In this section we review five supervised classification algorithms successfully employed in several works tackling TC
of anonymous traffic [17], [31], [32], [34], that are applied to
the scenario investigated in this work: (i) Na€ıve Bayes, (ii)
Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes, (iii) Bayesian Networks, (iv)
C4.5, and (v) Random Forest.
Na€ıve Bayes (NB)
The NB is a simple probabilistic classifier that assumes class
conditional independence of the features, being not the case
for real-world problems, but working well in practice and
leading to reduced complexity.
More specifically, NB evaluates the probability that an
unlabeled test instance f T belongs to each class ci , i.e., the
posterior probability P ðci jff T Þ, through the Bayes’ theorem
and returns the label corresponding to the maximum
posteQ
rior among the classes, that is P ðci jff T Þ / P ðci Þ M
m¼1 P ðfT;m j
ci Þ. Here “/” means proportionality and P ðci Þ denotes the
(prior) probability of class ci (estimated from the training
set). On the other hand, each distribution P ðfm jci Þ is estimated by resorting to a PMF when the feature is categorical,
whereas common alternatives for numerical features include:
(i) Moment Matching to a Gaussian PDF (NB), (ii) Supervised Discretization (NB_SD), and (iii) Kernel-based Density
Estimation (NB_KDE) [42].
In this work, each NB classifier will be fed either with the
first set of features (flow-based statistics) or with the fourth
set of features (sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the
first K packets).
Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes (MNB)
The MNB classifier adopts sample histograms as a different
set of features. Specifically, the MNB classifier treats the fm s
as frequencies of a certain value of a categorical random
variable and compares the sample histogram of each test
instance with the aggregated histogram of all training
instances per class. Then, the evaluation
of the conditional
Q
fT;m
ðr
, where rm
PMF P ðff T jci Þ is proportional to M
m¼1 m Þ

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB)

denotes the probability of sampling the mth feature. In particular, we will employ a variant of MNB classifier, adopting term frequency transformation with cosine normalization, as
successfully exploited in Herrmann et al. [24] for website
fingerprinting in anonymous networks.7
As introduced earlier, since the MNB classifier works on a
set of features in the form of histograms, the second (PL histogram) and third (joint PL-IAT histogram) set of features
described in Section 3.2 will be employed.

Bayesian Networks (BNs)
BNs are graphical representations which model dependence
relationships between features and classes [43], collectively
represented as the set of random variables U , ff1 ; . . . ;
fM ; Cg ¼ ½ U1    UMþ1 T . Unlike the NB classifier, they
are not based on the conditional independence assumption
for the features.
Formally, a BN for U is a pair B , hG; Qi, which is learned
during the training phase. The first component (G) is a
Directed Acyclic Graph that encodes a joint probability distribution over U , where each vertex represents a random variable
among U1 ; . . . ; UMþ1 and edges represent their dependencies.
The second component (Q) represents the set of parameters
modeling the BN, uniquely determining the local conditional
distributions associated to the BN, which allow to encode the
joint distribution PB ðf1 ; . . . ; fM ; CÞ. Finally, during the testing
phase, for each instance f T , the BN classifier returns the label
c^ , arg maxci 2V PB ðci jff T Þ, based on Bayes’ theorem.
In this study, we will either consider a BN classifier with
(default) K2 search (BN_K2) for structure learning, or impose
the network to have a tree-augmented form (BN_TAN) where
the tree is formed by calculating the maximum weight spanning tree. Each BN classifier will be fed either with the first
set of features (flow-based statistics) or with the fourth set of
features (sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K
packets).

667

the majority class in the subset); (iii) there are no examples
left.9
In our analysis, C4.5 will be fed either with the first feature set (flow-based statistics) or with the fourth set of features (sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K
packets).

Random Forest (RF)
RF is a classification method based on an ensemble of B
several decision trees (the number of trees is a free parameter
tuned by cross-validation or via the “out-of-bag” error), built
at training time exploiting the ideas of “bootstrap aggregating” (bagging) and random-feature selection to mitigate
over-fitting [45]. Specifically, during the training phase, each
decision tree in the RF classifier is grown based on a bootstrap (i.e., a uniformly random sampling procedure with
replacement) sample set of the training data available. RF
adds to the above scheme a modified tree learning algorithm
named “feature bagging” (to further reduce overfitting) that
selects, at each candidate split in the learning process, only a
random subset (whose size is another free tunable parameter) of the features. Finally, after training, decision on testing
samples can be made by taking the majority vote or soft combination of the responses of B trees.
In this work, RF will be fed either with the first feature set
(flow-based statistics) or with the fourth set of features
(sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K packets).

4

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

This section reports details about the Anon17 dataset and
the pre-processing operations carried out on it (Section 4.1),
introduces the performance metrics employed for evaluation (Section 4.2) and shows the results of the (anonymous)
TC investigations performed (Section 4.3).

C4.5
C4.5 is an algorithm employed to generate a decision tree
used (mainly) for classification purposes [44], based on the
concept of entropy of a distribution [37]. The training algorithm obviates to the NP-hardness of optimal tree search by
means of a greedy procedure, based on a top-down recursive
construction, with all the data of the training set in the root
as the init. Then, instances are partitioned recursively based
on the chosen feature whose values most effectively split so
as to maximize a purity8 measure in the data, such as the
“gain ratio”, that avoids bias toward features with a larger
support [44]. Thus, the splitting criterion is triggered by the
feature ensuring the highest gain ratio (i.e., purity). C4.5
recurs on the smaller sublists, until the following termination criteria are met: (i) all the instances in the list belong to
the same class (a leaf node is here created with a label associated to that class); (ii) there are no remaining features for
further partitioning (in such case, each leaf is labeled with

4.1 Dataset Description
Anon17 was collected at the Network Information Management and Security Lab [46] between 2014 and 2017 in a real
network environment. The dataset is labeled based on the
information available on the anonymity services themselves
(e.g., IP addresses of the Tor nodes) without relying on any
application classification tool. The data are stored in ARFF format used in the data mining software tool Weka [42] and report
features (discussed in Section 3.2) either on a per-flow basis or
pertaining to the IAT/Payload-Length sequence of the first K
packets of each flow. Unfortunately, the unavailability of the
whole sequence of payload lengths and IATs prevents additional interesting analyses, such as the evaluation of the
impact of packet sampling on the classification accuracy [47].
We refer to [19] for further details on Anon17 dataset.
Given the available dataset, we tackle classification of
anonymity networks (as well as traffic types and applications) by making the assumption that we are in presence of
anonymous traffic only, based on a two-fold motivation.
First, this refers to an application context in which a traffic

7. It is worth noting that the numerical analysis reported in Section 4
has also underlined highest performance of the considered variant with
respect to the others analyzed in [24].
8. A subset of data is said “pure” if all instances belong to the same
class.

9. Refinements introduced by C4.5 to reduce over-fitting include (a)
pre-pruning (i.e., stop growing a branch when information becomes
unreliable) and (b) post-pruning (i.e., growing a decision tree that correctly classifies all training data and then simplify it later by replacing
some nodes with leaves), with the latter preferred in practice.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

TABLE 1
Classification Levels: Anonymous Network (L1), Traffic Type (L2) and Application (L3), with Total Number
of Samples per Class, and Class Label for L3 Granularity
L1 - Anonymous Network
Tor (358919, a)

I2P (645708, b)

L2 - Traffic Type

L3 - Application

Normal Tor Traffic (5283, a)
Tor Apps (252, b)
Tor Pluggable Transports (353384, c)

Tor (5283, a)
Streaming (84, b), Torrent (84, c), Browsing (84, d)
Flash proxy (172324, e), FTE (106237, f),
Meek (43152, g), Obfs3 (14718, h), Scramble suit (16953, i)

I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
[0% Bandwidth] (195081, d)

I2PSnark (127349, j), jIRCii (29357, k), Eepsites (38375, l)

I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
[80% Bandwidth] (449987, e)

I2PSnark (149992, m), jIRCii (149998, n), Eepsites (149997, o)

I2P Apps (640, f)
JonDonym (6335, c)

JonDonym (6335, g)

classifier tool has been able to provide accurate screening of
clear and standard encrypted traffic, as demonstrated, for
example by Barker et al. [14] and more recently by Rao
et al. [21] for Tor network. Once the instances of anonymous
traffic have been labeled, the aim of the proposed approach
is to assess potential discrimination of different anonymity
services within such instances. Therefore, the current study
represents a further step toward the development of a hierarchical classification framework for traffic analysis of
clear/encrypted/anonymous data. Second, the results of
the present analysis can be intended as an upper bound on
the classification performance of anonymity networks in the
case of an open-world assumption. Indeed, a negative answer
to our question (i.e., an unsatisfactory performance in classifying anonymous traffic only) would lead to the conclusion
that anonymous traffic, even though perfectly screened
from the remaining traffic bulk, would still remain an unobservable black-box to an eavesdropping user. Our results
will show that this is not the case, and confirm that there is
room for classification of ATs in an open-world assumption.
As explained in Section 1, our analysis of ATs is conducted
at different levels of granularity, that is Anonymous Network
Level (L1), Traffic Type Level (L2), and Application Level (L3).
More specifically, we try to ascertain the granularity of the
identifiability of these tools by performing classification. The
hierarchical categorization of L1, L2, and L3 is reported in
detail in Table 1. The total number of applications (L3 classes)
identified for each anonymous network (three L1 classes) and
traffic type (seven L2 classes) is 21 and constitutes the finest
level of our TC task. Specifically, (normal) Tor Traffic includes

Fig. 1. Down-sampling of Anon17 dataset: Upper barplot (original Full
dataset), middle barplot (down-sampling to 5%, D5 ), lower barplot
 5 ).
(removal of “all-zero-payload” flows, D

I2PSnark (62, p), jIRCii (221, q), Eepsites (145, r),
Exploratory Tunnels (86, s), Participating Tunnels (126, t)
JonDonym (6335, u)

the circuit establishment and the user activities, whereas Tor
Apps refer to flows running three applications on the Tor network (i.e., L3 classes: Browsing, Video streaming, and Torrent
file sharing). On the other hand, Tor PTs contain flows for five
different obfuscation techniques (i.e., L3 classes: Flash proxy,
FTE, Meek, Obfs3, and Scramble suit). Flows belonging to L2
I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels are collected by running
three applications (L3 classes) on the I2P network: I2Psnark
(file sharing), jIRCii (Internet Relay Chat), and Eepsites (websites browsing). The difference between 0% and 80% bandwidth is in the amount of sharing rate of the user bandwidth.
I2P Apps contain traffic flows for the same three applications.
However, in the latter case, management tunnels belong to
separate L3 classes (i.e., Exploratory Tunnels and Participating Tunnels). Lastly, JonDonym dataset contains flows for the
whole free mixes on the JonDonym network.
Anon17 exhibits a (majority) class imbalance problem, as
shown by the total number of samples in Table 1 (and
graphically depicted in the top bar of Fig. 1). To cope with
it, we have randomly down-sampled10 (without replacement) by applying a pre-processing filter11 to the instances
of the following highly-populated traffic types (so as to
keep their number comparable with the others): (i) Tor
Pluggable Transports, (ii) I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels [0% BW], and (iii) I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
[80% BW]. The considered filter also preserves the proportions of the contained L3 applications.
In this study, we will consider a configuration corresponding to the down-sampling to 5% of the original dataset
of each traffic type set.12 Fig. 1 shows the percentage of flows
labeled with different traffic types after performing the
aforementioned down-sampling (D5 ). We underline that we
have chosen to down-sample the whole dataset, as opposed
to the sole training set, since the latter choice would have
10. Over-sampling methods (e.g., SMOTE, ROSE, etc.) are not considered here as Anon17 dataset does not show a minority class imbalance problem.
11. Adopted filter is implemented in the Weka environment by
means of weka.filters.supervised.instance.Resample Java
class.
12. We recall that in our previous work [20], we have considered
two down-sampling configurations (corresponding to 5% and 10%) of
each traffic type set, showing a non-relevant difference in performance
between them. However, aiming at a fairer investigation, here we have
opted for the more balanced configuration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB)

669

Fig. 2. Accuracy and F-measure of NB (a-b) and BN (c-d) classifiers for different subsets of features (from 5 to 74 with increments of 5) for L3
(Application) level. Average on 10-folds and corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

biased the overall accuracy measure (evaluated from the test
set) toward the performance of the majority classes.
Finally, to perform TC of sole informative flows, we have
discarded from D5 all the instances containing only zeropayload packets. The latter filtering procedure has been conducted implicitly by the inspection of the field maxPktSz, as
Anon17 does not provide the complete sequence of packet
lengths (see [19]). The bottom barplot in Fig. 1 shows the final
 5 ) considered in the
resulting dataset (here denoted with D
following flow-based TC. On the other hand, for the earlyTC, a different filtering procedure has been pursued, as
explained in detail later in Section 4.3.

4.2 Performance Measures
Our comparison will be based on the following performance
measures [41]: overall accuracy, precision, and recall. Since these
last two metrics are defined on a per-class basis, their averaged (macro) versions (denoted with “prec” and “rec”, respectively) will be employed as synthetic measures and, to
account for the effects of both in a concise fashion, we will
consider the F-measure (F , ð2  prec  recÞ=ðprec þ recÞ). Moreover, to provide a complete performance “picture” of each
classifier, we will also show their confusion matrices so as to
identify the most frequent misclassification patterns. Clearly,
a higher concentration of the confusion matrix toward the
diagonal (where predicted class equals the actual one) implies
better performance of the generic classifier.
Finally, for each considered analysis, our evaluation will be
based on a (stratified) 10-fold cross-validation.13 Indeed,
K-fold validation represents a stable performance evaluation
framework as it produces less variance in the results. For completeness, we will report both the mean and the variance (in
the form of a 3s interval, corresponding to 99.7% confidence
13. Although preliminary results in [20] have shown negligible difference in performance with respect to a random training-test set splitting, the present evaluation is intended to highlight statisticallysignificant trends.

under a Gaussian assumption) of each performance measure
as a result of the evaluation on the ten different folds.

4.3 Classification Results
In this section, we show results pertaining to several sets of
experiments aimed at investigating TC of ATs. More specifically, the first part of the numerical analysis is focused on
flow-based TC (even in the case of “finer” histogram-based
features), while the second part pertains to early TC. In both
cases, feature relevance is also assessed for all the classifiers
considered. The section ends with a finer-grained analysis
of the pattern errors of the two classification “philosophies”.
Flow-Based Classification
First, we investigate flow-based TC based on the first feature
set (i.e., comprising summarizing flow-based statistics)
described in Section 3.2. However, before proceeding with a
rigorous comparison of the classifiers here considered, we
first focus on relative performance evaluation of different variants of NB and BN considered in this paper (cf. Section 3.4).
To this end, Fig. 2 shows the accuracy and F-measure of
NB, NB_SD, and NB_KDE (resp. BN_K2 and BN_TAN) in top
(resp. bottom) plots. Note that the results pertain to L3,
being the hardest classification task, but similar trends have
been observed also for the other (two) levels. Furthermore,
the performance has been evaluated by training/testing the
classifiers with a varying subset of features, ranked (in
decreasing importance) by resorting to the Pearson’s correlation (cf. Section 3.2) so as to draw general conclusions.14
From inspection of the figure, it is apparent that both
NB_SD and NB_KDE outperform NB over all the range of feature subsets, with NB_SD achieving higher performance
even in the case of a smaller set. Similarly, BN_TAN
14. Using the Weka filter CorrelationAttributeEval,
employed in conjunction with a Ranker utility which allows obtaining
the top M? (most informative) features, with M? as input parameter.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

Fig. 3. Accuracy (a-c) and F-measure (d-f) of flow-based classifiers for different subsets of features (from 5 to 74 with increments of 5) for each classification level. Average on 10-folds and corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

significantly outperforms BN_K2. The former result can be
explained as density estimation of each feature, either in a
discretized (NB_SD) or “kernelized” (NB_KDE) fashion, is
beneficial since the Gaussian assumption represents an
overly simplified assumption, whereas in the latter case it is
apparent that constraining BN structure learning to a treeaugmented form (as opposed to a greedy sub-optimal learning) provides improved generalization capabilities.
Thus, in the remainder of this section, only the variants
NB_SD and BN_TAN will be considered in our comparison,
being the best-performing Na€ıve Bayes and Bayesian Networks classifiers variants observed, respectively.
Then, with the aim of selecting the best subset (viz. an
optimized number) of features and provide a comparison of
the supervised techniques considered, in Fig. 3 we show the
performance of all the classifiers described in Section 3.4
(except for MNB, whose performance relies on histogrambased features and will be thus discussed later) when varying the (ranked) subset of features for both training and test
sets. As apparent from the results, all the classifiers obtain
excellent results in L1 classification, i.e., all achieving both
> 95% accuracy and F-measure when approximately the
top 25 features are employed. On the other hand, performance metrics generally degrade with the increasing

granularity of the classification task (i.e., moving from L1 to
L3). This intuitive trend can be attributed to the increasing
difficulty of the classification task being tackled. Indeed, the
discrimination of anonymous traffic at L3 is harder than trying to discern merely the anonymity network. Interestingly,
the degradation level varies with the classifier and it is
observed to be milder for C4.5 and RF, whereas it is higher
for NB_SD. This finding can be explained as the conditional
independence assumption of the features for NB_SD is limiting when tackling harder classification tasks (i.e., L3). Overall, from figures inspection, the performance of all classifiers
(approximately) reaches a steady value around the top 30
features (as already observed for NB_SD and BN_TAN).
Collectively, the highest performance (with an optimized
number of features) is obtained by RF and C4.5, corresponding to 99.87% (resp. 99.87%), 96.87% (resp. 94.17%) and
73.99% (resp. 69.05%) at L1, L2, and L3, respectively, in terms
of accuracy (resp. F-measure), as shown by the summarizing
results reported in Table 2.
Additionally, to investigate whether the most relevant
features are mostly related to packet lengths or are also timerelated, in Fig. 4 we compare the accuracy (Fig. 4a) and the
F-measure (Fig. 4b) of the same pool of classifiers when (a)
all the (74) features of the first feature set are employed and

TABLE 2
 5 Obtained with Different [Optimal Number of Features] Employed
Best Overall Accuracy and Macro F-Measure for Dataset D
Flow-Based Classifier

Metric

L1

L2

L3

NB_SD

Accuracy
F-measure

97.74% [70]
97.28% [70]

84.92% [15]
77.86% [20]

62.97% [35]
53.23% [30]

BN_TAN

Accuracy
F-measure

99.83% [65]
99.81% [65]

95.18% [20]
91.57% [20]

71.39% [35]
61.31% [40]

C4.5

Accuracy
F-measure

99.56% [65]
99.55% [65]

96.87% [70]
94.17% [65]

73.41% [30]
68.60% [74]

RF

Accuracy
F-measure

99.87% [74]
99.87% [74]

96.87% [65]
94.06% [20]

73.99% [70]
69.05% [30]

Highlighted values: maximum accuracy and maximum F-measure for each level.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB)

671

Fig. 4. Accuracy (a) and F-measure (b) of considered flow-based classifiers fed with the full set of (All) features (74) and Non Time-related (NT)
features only (52). Average on 10-folds and corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

(b) Not Time-related (NT) features (52) are considered. The
analysis is conducted at the three different levels of classification granularity allowed by Anon17. From inspection of both
figures, it is apparent that the contribution of time-related
features (within first dataset) to classification performance is
only marginal. This observation applies to all the levels of
granularity and to all the classifiers being employed in
our investigation, with a maximum improvement of just
þ1:21% (resp. þ1:40%) in terms of accuracy (resp. F-measure) obtained for NB_SD at L2 using NT features.
We now focus on investigating whether (i) finer-grained
features, such as histograms, would improve performance
and (ii) whether these finer-grained features would require
time-related features. We recall that the appeal of histogrambased features has been highlighted by different works on
TC [7], [48]. Based on this reason, in Fig. 5 we report the performance (in terms of both accuracy and F-measure) of MNB
in conjunction with the use of the second (PL histogram) and
third (joint Payload Length-IAT histogram) feature sets
described in Section 3.2. Similar to the previous analyses, the
performance is evaluated at the three levels of granularity
for the sake of a complete comparison. First, it is apparent
that considering histogram-based features does not improve
classification performance, as evident from comparison of
Figs. 3 and 4. The lack of improved performance may be due
to a two-fold reason: (i) in MNB case, features pertaining to
IP/TCP headers and number of connections are not taken
into consideration and (ii) the histogram discretization
provided by Anon17 may be not adequate for developing
an accurate fingerprint. Interestingly, time-related features do not improve appreciably classification performance at first two levels. This trend is similar to that
observed for classifiers fed with the first feature set, see
Fig. 4. The only exception is represented by the increase
of F-measure at L3 (þ6:85%) when the PL histogram feature set. This trend may be attributed to the harder classification task to be solved.

Early Traffic Classification
We now investigate the possibility of performing “early”
classification of anonymous traffic. To this end, we consider
the fourth set of features extracted by Anon17, i.e., the
sequence of the first K ¼ 20 Payload Lengths & IATs (as
described in Section 3.2).
For the present analysis, we remove from dataset D5 (see
Fig. 1) all the instances whose first K ¼ 20 packets have all
zero payload. We recall that these correspond to a super-set of

those removed in the case of flow-based TC (i.e., the resulting
 5 ), as we are removing also the instances with some
dataset D
payload exchange after the first 20 (zero-payload) packets.
The reason for a different filtering procedure is to avoid submitting “non-informative” (referring to the first K ¼ 20
packets) instances to the considered classifiers.
This allows us training the classifiers considered in this
paper15 with the Payload Lengths & IATs of the first
N < K (non-zero payload) packets so as to assess the possibility of accurately classifying ATs with a few packets, as
shown for the Internet traffic scenario [39], [40]. We underline that, in case of flows having less than N payloadcarrying packets, the remaining packets are treated as missing values [41] by the supervised classifiers.
For this reason, Fig. 6 reports the accuracy and F-measure
at the three considered levels when the classifiers are
trained/tested on the Payload Lengths & IATs of the first
N ¼ 1; . . . ; 16 (non-zero payload) packets, so as to assess to
which degree ATs (and services running within them) can be
identified “on-the-fly”. As apparent from the results shown,
5 7 packets are usually sufficient to (approximately) allow
the classifiers to achieve their highest performance. This consideration applies to each of the three levels of granularity
considered. Remarkably, the reported results agree qualitatively with those in [39], [40] pertaining to non-anonymous
traffic. Additionally, we remark that a similar analysis (not
shown for brevity) has been conducted by feeding the classifiers with Payload Lengths only (without considering IATs).
In the latter case, results have shown almost equal performance at the first level, whereas a rough 5% drop has been
observed for F-measure at L2 and L3.
In detail, performance at L1 is extremely satisfactory
( 99% with only three payload-carrying packets),
whereas there is a significant degradation with respect to
flow-based TC (see Fig. 3) in the case of L2 and L3. Specifically, as summarized in Table 3, the highest accuracy
(resp. F-measure) achieved at L2 is 85.80% (resp. 78.96%),
as opposed to 96.87% (resp. 94.17%) in the case of flowbased TC. Similarly, at L3 the highest accuracy (resp. Fmeasure) is 66.76% (resp. 50.10%), as opposed to 73.99%
(resp. 69.05%). Interestingly, the highest performance for
early-TC is achieved by Bayesian methods (i.e., NB_SD and
BN_TAN) as opposed to decision tree-based classifiers for
the flow-based approach.
15. Similar results to flow-based TC have been observed when comparing NB and BN variants. Therefore, in what follows, we will again
report performance of the sole NB_SD and BN_KDE, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

Fig. 5. Accuracy (a) and F-measure (b) of MNB classifier [24] leveraging PL and PL-IAT histograms as features. Average on 10-folds and
corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

The observed performance loss corresponds to the price
paid for trying to classify with only a few packets at an
extremely thin level of detail. The degradation at L2/L3 underlines the need for further investigations on early-TC, and the
need for developing deeper (viz. structured) representations
of the sequence of the first few packets.

Fine-Grained Performance
Since classification at increasing level of granularity reveals
to be a challenging task (but also the most interesting from a
user’s privacy perspective), henceforth we analyze the confusion matrices of flow-based and “early” classifiers, shown
in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively, so as to highlight interesting
error patterns. We recall that for these matrices the higher
the concentration toward the main diagonal, the better the
overall performance. More specifically, for each classification level, we report the confusion matrices of the optimal
(in terms of F-measure) combination of classifier and number
of employed features (or of the first N packets), based on
previous analyses.
First, by looking at L1 performance, error patterns look
scattered for both approaches. However, in case of flow-based

classification, it is interesting to note that I2P is never misclassified with JonDonym, as opposed to the corresponding best
early classifier. Second, by looking at L2 confusion matrices, it
is apparent that the classifiers based on both approaches
(with different quantitative outcomes) present error patterns
which almost entirely lead to a misclassification of the traffic
type within the same anonymous network. Nonetheless, it is
worth noticing that while this applies to I2P traffic types
(“d”, “e”, and “f”) for both approaches, misclassification of
Tor traffic types (“a”, “b”, and “c”) is only observed in early
classifiers. In the latter case, the error-patterns are mostly due
to misclassification of Tor Apps (“b”) with Normal Tor
Traffic (“a”).
Moving to a further detail, we discuss in what follows L3
confusion matrices. From inspection of the results at the finest level of ATs granularity, it can be concluded that the best
flow-based classifier has the same high discrimination capability when trying to discern applications running within
Tor. Such result qualitatively agrees with [31], where a high
accuracy is achieved in classifying Tor applications (i.e.,
browsing, streaming, and BitTorrent, corresponding to “b”,
“c”, and “d”, respectively) via flow-based classification based
on Tranalyzer2. The results shown in Fig. 7 are compatible

Fig. 6. Accuracy (a-c) and F-measure (d-f) considering the first N non-zero payload packets in terms of Payload Length & IATs (from 1 to 16) for each
classification level.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB)

673

TABLE 3
Best Overall Accuracy and Macro F-Measure for Early Traffic Classification Obtained
with Different [Optimal Value of the First N Packets] Employed
Early Classifier

Metric

L1

L2

L3

NB_SD

Accuracy
F-measure

99.80% [14]
99.78% [12]

83.50% [06]
73.31% [06]

66.07% [11]
48.52% [11]

BN_TAN

Accuracy
F-measure

99.76% [16]
99.68% [16]

85.80% [16]
78.96% [13]

66.76% [11]
50.10% [10]

C4.5

Accuracy
F-measure

99.68% [03]
99.66% [06]

84.85% [10]
76.58% [04]

65.16% [10]
46.98% [05]

RF

Accuracy
F-measure

99.74% [04]
99.74% [04]

85.30% [16]
76.05% [06]

66.22% [13]
47.59% [05]

Highlighted values: maximum accuracy and maximum F-measure for each level.

with the above work (interestingly, also in our harder classification task, tree-based classifiers performed the best) and
further show that Tor app can be hardly misclassified with
apps from other anonymous networks (such as I2P).
On the other hand, the best early classifier achieves low
discrimination power for applications contained within the
traffic types Normal Tor Traffic and Tor Apps. An opposite trend is instead apparent for the case of Tor Pluggable Transports, which are easily discerned with both
flow-based and early classifiers. Differently, in [32] classification of Tor PTs was demonstrated successful in comparison to background traffic, achieving with a C4.5 classifier a
97% accuracy with a 10-fold validation. Here, we assume
that the background traffic has been already screened out,

therefore results obtained in the two cases cannot be directly
compared. However, the results in this section confirm the
unique fingerprint generated by PTs when trying to obfuscate Tor traffic.
Finally, it is apparent how performance at L3 of both
approaches are limited superiorly mostly by the error-prone
recognition of applications running within I2P, representing
(for the considered dataset), the least discernible AT in terms
of its carried services and applications. Indeed, the best flowbased classifier (being the approach leading to the highest
performance observed), is not able to discern apps within
I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels [0% Bandwidth] and I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
[80% Bandwidth], as apparent from the two clusters

Fig. 7. Confusion matrices (percentage accuracy and log scale) of the best flow-based classifier at L1 (RF with 74 features), L2 (C4.5 with
65 features), and L3 (RF with 30 features).

Fig. 8. Confusion matrices (percentage accuracy and log scale) of the best “early” classifier at L1 (NB_SD with 12 packets), L2 (BN_TAN with
13 packets), and L3 (BN_TAN with 10 packets).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

674

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

within the confusion matrix in Fig. 7. More in detail, in [22]
the effect of bandwidth participation on I2P is investigated,
showing higher application profiling with less bandwidth
sharing. This trend qualitatively agrees with the discussed
results, where the best performing flow-based classifier is
shown to be most prone to misclassification of I2P Apps
Tunnels with other Tunnels [80% bandwidth] (i.e.,
“m”, “n”, and “o”). Therefore, the results of the present
study agree with the literature. In addition, we observe that
another (although less problematic) error-cluster for the
flow-based classifier is also apparent for all the applications
belonging to the traffic type I2P Apps.
Finally, we recall that the present work provides a more
comprehensive study of traffic classification and identification of different ATs at a varying degree of granularity,
underlining the narrowness of the above studies (i.e., focusing on a particular AT or a specific aspect of it).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is partially funded by art. 11 DM 593/2000 for
NM2 s.r.l. (Italy). The authors would like to thank the Faculty of Computer Science of Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada, for publicly releasing Anon17 dataset.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

5

CONCLUSIONS

This paper tackled TC of ATs, specifically Tor, I2P, and JonDonym, reasoning on which degree they can be told apart,
considering different granularities (the anonymity network
adopted, the traffic type tunneled in the network, and the
application category generating such traffic). The analysis
has been carried on the public dataset Anon17, processed
with random down-sampling (to cope with its strong class
imbalance) and by filtering out non-informative (all-zeropayload) flows. Different ML classifiers (Na€ıve Bayes,
Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes, Bayesian Networks, C4.5, and
Random Forest) have been applied to the processed dataset, based on different feature sets and by assessing the
optimal number of features to consider, by means of feature selection.
Our analysis shows that Tor, I2P, and JonDonym anonymous networks can be hardly mistaken from each other.
Indeed, results underline that all considered classifiers
obtain extremely satisfactory performance (at least 97%
accuracy when the number of features is chosen wisely)
in discriminating the anonymity networks present in
Anon17, in both cases of flow-based and early classifiers.
Furthermore, it is shown that digging down in the specific type of traffic tunneled, and the specific type of
application generating such traffic, is possible with up to
73.99% accuracy and 69.05% F-measure with a flow-based
RF. Performance of “early” classifiers at application level
is lower (66.76% and 50.10% in terms of accuracy and Fmeasure, respectively, with the early BN_TAN) and more
structured feature representations should be conceived.
Thanks to the public availability of Anon17 dataset and
the detailed description of methods and (open-source)
tools, our results are easily repeatable, comparable, and
extensible by the research community.
As future work we will investigate (i) hierarchical classification, (ii) comparison with other public labeled datasets (possibly also in an open-world assumption), should
they become available, (iii) development of classifier
fusion techniques for anonymous TC, and (iv) implementation of features and classifiers in the open-source TC
platform TIE [49] to allow researchers to evaluate them
on live traffic traces.

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]

P. Syverson, R. Dingledine, and N. Mathewson, “Tor: The second
generation onion router,” in Proc. USENIX 13th Secur. Symp., 2004,
pp. 21–21.
The Invisible Internet Project (I2P). Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://geti2p.net/en/
Project: AN.ON - Anonymity. Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://anon.inf.tu-dresden.de/index_en.html
G. Aceto and A. Pescape, “Internet censorship detection: A
survey,” Comput. Netw., vol. 83, pp. 381–421, 2015.
A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and G. Ventre, “Worm traffic analysis and
characterization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2007, pp. 1435–
1442.
A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40,
Jan./Feb. 2012.
A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and C. Sansone, “Early classification of
network traffic through multi-classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Traffic Monitoring Anal., 2011, pp. 122–135.
N. Cascarano, A. Este, F. Gringoli, F. Risso, and L. Salgarelli, “An
experimental evaluation of the computational cost of a DPI traffic
classifier,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2009, pp. 1–8.
G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. De Donato, and A. Pescape, “PortLoad:
Taking the best of two worlds in traffic classification,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2010, pp. 1–5.
T. T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for
internet traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, Oct.–Dec. 2008.
A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and H.-C. Kim, “Traffic classification
through joint distributions of packet-level statistics,” in Proc. IEEE
Global Commun. Conf., 2011, pp. 1–6.
A. Dainotti, F. Gargiulo, L. I. Kuncheva, A. Pescape, and
C. Sansone, “Identification of traffic flows hiding behind TCP port
80,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2010, pp. 1–6.
K. Bauer, M. Sherr, D. McCoy, and D. Grunwald, “ExperimenTor:
A testbed for safe and realistic Tor experimentation,” in Proc.
USENIX Workshop Cyber Secur. Experimentation Test, 2011, pp. 7–7.
J. Barker, P. Hannay, and P. Szewczyk, “Using traffic analysis to
identify the second generation onion router,” in Proc. 9th IEEE/
IFIP Int. Conf. Embedded Ubiquitous Comput., 2011, pp. 72–78.
A. Chaabane, P. Manils, and M. A. Kaafar, “Digging into anonymous traffic: A deep analysis of the Tor anonymizing network,”
in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Netw. Syst. Secur., 2010, pp. 167–174.
B. Westermann and D. Kesdogan, “Malice versus AN. ON: Possible
risks of missing replay and integrity protection,” in Proc. Springer
Int. Conf. Financial Cryptography Data Secur., 2011, pp. 62–76.
M. AlSabah, K. Bauer, and I. Goldberg, “Enhancing Tor’s performance using real-time traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2012, pp. 73–84.
P. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Tan, Q. Li, X. Wang, and J. Shi, “Empirical
measurement and analysis of I2P routers,” J. Netw., vol. 9, no. 9,
pp. 2269–2279, 2014.
K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Packet momentum for
identification of anonymity networks,” J. Cyber Secur. Mobility,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 27–56, 2017.
A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Aceto, and A. Pescape, “Anonymity
services Tor, I2P, JonDonym: Classifying in the dark,” in Proc.
IEEE 29th Int. TeleTraffic Congr., 2017, pp. 1–6.
Z. Rao, W. Niu, X. Zhang, and H. Li, “Tor anonymous traffic identification based on gravitational clustering,” Peer-to-Peer Netw.
Appl., pp. 1–10, Jun. 2017, https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s12083-017-0566-4
K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Weighted factors for
evaluating anonymity,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Found. Practice Secur.,
2017, pp. 235–240.
Z. Ling, J. Luo, W. Yu, and X. Fu, “Equal-sized cells mean equalsized packets in Tor?” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2011,
pp. 1–6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB)

[24] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting: Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with
the multinomial Na€ıve-Bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop
Cloud Comput. Secur., 2009, pp. 31–42.
[25] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in
Proc. ACM 10th Annu. Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2011,
pp. 103–114.
[26] A. Panchenko, et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 1–15.
[27] A. Almubayed, H. Ali, and J. Atoum, “A model for detecting Tor
encrypted traffic using supervised machine learning,” Int. J. Comput. Netw. Inf. Secur., vol. 7, no. 7, 2015, Art. no. 10.
[28] A. Springall, C. DeVito, and S.-H. S. Huang, “Per connection
server-side identification of connections via Tor,” in Proc. IEEE
29th Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl., 2015, pp. 727–734.
[29] X. Bai, Y. Zhang, and X. Niu, “Traffic identification of Tor and
Web-mix,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Des. Appl., 2008,
pp. 548–551.
[30] G. He, M. Yang, J. Luo, and X. Gu, “Inferring application type
information from Tor encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int.
Conf. Adv. Cloud Big Data, 2014, pp. 220–227.
[31] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Benchmarking two techniques for Tor classification: Flow level and circuit level classification,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Cyber Secur., 2014,
pp. 1–8.
[32] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Traffic flow analysis of
Tor pluggable transports,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Netw. Service Manage., 2015, pp. 178–181.
[33] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “An analysis of Tor pluggable transports under adversarial conditions,” in Proc. IEEE
Symp. Comput. Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., 2017, pp. 1–7.
[34] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Effects of shared bandwidth on anonymity of the I2P network users,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Secur. Privacy Workshop Traffic Meas. Cybersecur., 2017, pp. 235–240.
[35] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. Mamun, I. Saiful, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[36] S. Burschka and B. Dupasquier, “Tranalyzer: Versatile high performance network traffic analyser,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Series
Comput. Intell., 2016, pp. 1–8.
[37] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2012.
[38] Tranalyzer2. Sep. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://tranalyzer.com
[39] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, I. Akodkenou, A. Soule, and K. Salamatian,
“Traffic classification on the fly,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 23–26, 2006.
[40] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, and K. Salamatian, “Early application
identification,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT Conf., 2006, Art. no. 6.
[41] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, M. A. Hall, and C. J. Pal, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. San Mateo, CA, USA:
Morgan Kaufmann, 2016.
[42] M. Hall, F. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and
I. H. Witten, “The WEKA data mining software: An update,”
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10–18, 2009.
[43] N. Friedman, D. Geiger, and M. Goldszmidt, “Bayesian network
classifiers,” Mach. Learn., vol. 29, no. 2/3, pp. 131–163, 1997.
[44] J. R. Quinlan, C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2014.
[45] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–
32, 2001.
[46] NIMS: Network Information Management and Security Group.
Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://projects.cs.dal.ca/projectx/
[47] D. Tammaro, S. Valenti, D. Rossi, and A. Pescape, “Exploiting
packet-sampling measurements for traffic characterization and
classification,” Int. J. Netw. Manage., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 451–476, 2012.
[48] E. Hjelmvik and W. John, “Breaking and improving protocol
obfuscation,” Tech. Rep. 2010-05, Chalmers Univ. Technol.,
G€
oteborg, Sweden, 2010.
[49] W. De Donato, A. Pescape, and A. Dainotti, “Traffic identification
engine: An open platform for traffic classification,” IEEE Netw.,
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 56–64, Mar./Apr. 2014.

675

Antonio Montieri received the MS degree from
the University of Napoli “Federico II,” in July 2015.
He is working toward the PhD degree in the
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology (DIETI), University of Napoli
“Federico II” since February 2017. Currently, he is
part of the TRAFFIC research group whose activities are carried out in the field of Computer Networks. In detail, his work is focused on network
measurements, (encrypted and mobile) traffic classification and modeling, monitoring and assessment of cloud network performance. He has co-authored 13 papers and
4 posters in international journals and conference proceedings.
Domenico Ciuonzo (S’11-M’14-SM’16) received
the PhD degree in electronic engineering from the
Second University of Naples, Italy and, from 2011,
he has held a number of visiting researcher
appointments. He is researcher at Network Measurement and Monitoring (NM2), Naples, Italy.
Since 2014, he is member of the editorial board of
several IEEE, IET and ELSEVIER journals. His
research interests include data fusion, statistical
signal processing, wireless sensor networks, traffic analysis, and machine learning.

Giuseppe Aceto received the PhD degree in telecommunication engineering from the University of
Napoli “Federico II”. He is a post doc in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information
Technology, University of Napoli “Federico II”. His
work falls in measurement and monitoring of network performance and security, with focus on censorship. Recently, he is working on bioinformatic
and ICTs applied to health. He is the recipient of a
best paper award at IEEE ISCC 2010.
 (SM’09) is a full professor of
Antonio Pescape
computer engineering with the University of Napoli
“Federico II”. His work focuses on Internet technologies and more precisely on measurement, monitoring, and analysis of the Internet. Recently, he is
working on bioinformatic and ICTs for a smarter
health. He has co-authored more than 200 conference and journal papers and is the recipient of a
number of research awards. He is a senior member
of the IEEE.
" For more information on this or any other computing topic,
please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.