IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 16, NO. 6, JUNE 2020

4177

Blockchain and Federated Learning for
Privacy-Preserved Data Sharing in Industrial IoT
Yunlong Lu , Student Member, IEEE, Xiaohong Huang , Member, IEEE,
Yueyue Dai , Student Member, IEEE, Sabita Maharjan , Member, IEEE,
and Yan Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The rapid increase in the volume of data generated from connected devices in industrial Internet of Things
paradigm, opens up new possibilities for enhancing the
quality of service for the emerging applications through
data sharing. However, security and privacy concerns (e.g.,
data leakage) are major obstacles for data providers to
share their data in wireless networks. The leakage of
private data can lead to serious issues beyond financial
loss for the providers. In this article, we first design a
blockchain empowered secure data sharing architecture for
distributed multiple parties. Then, we formulate the data
sharing problem into a machine-learning problem by incorporating privacy-preserved federated learning. The privacy
of data is well-maintained by sharing the data model instead
of revealing the actual data. Finally, we integrate federated learning in the consensus process of permissioned
blockchain, so that the computing work for consensus can
also be used for federated training. Numerical results derived from real-world datasets show that the proposed data
sharing scheme achieves good accuracy, high efficiency,
and enhanced security.
Index Terms—Data sharing, federated learning, industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), permissioned blockchain,
privacy-preserved.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE AMOUNT of data generated by the connected devices in the industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) paradigm
has witnessed a massive growth in Industry 4.0. Along with
the value the data brings, comes serious concerns about data

T

Manuscript received May 31, 2019; revised August 13, 2019 and
September 3, 2019; accepted September 3, 2019. Date of publication
September 18, 2019; date of current version February 28, 2020. This
work was supported in part by the Joint Funds of National Natural
Science Foundation of China and Xinjiang under Project U1603261,
and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Project 61602055. Paper no. TII-19-2282. (Corresponding author: Yan
Zhang.)
Y. Lu and X. Huang are with the Institute of Network Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876,
China (e-mail:, yunlong.lu@ieee.org; huangxh@bupt.edu.cn).
Y. Dai is with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail:, yueyuedai@ieee.org).
S. Maharjan is with the Simula Metropolitan Center for Digital Engineering, Norway, and also with the University of Oslo, 1325 Oslo, Norway
(e-mail:, sabita@simula.no).
Y. Zhang is with the Department of Informatics, University of Oslo,
1325 Oslo, Norway (e-mail:, yanzhang@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2019.2942190

privacy [1]. Data leakage may take place during data storage,
data transmission and data sharing, which may lead to serious
issues for both owners and providers. In this regard, existing
work mainly focuses on utilizing aggregate information about
the data, without breaking the privacy of the participants. They
address the problem by making some modifications to the
key contributions of original data, such as k-anonymity [2],
l-diversity [3]. But most of the methods assume that the attackers only have limited background knowledge, where the data
are still vulnerable to algorithm-based attacks or background
knowledge attack. Differential privacy [4] provides the most
reliable privacy guarantee, which is generally considered strong
enough to protect data from privacy attacks. A machine learning
differentially private [5] was proposed to publish data structures instead of publishing queries and answers directly, in the
constraint of differential privacy.
Data from IIoT applications may include sensitive information. In this regard, protecting data privacy is a key issue.
In [6], the authors proposed a protection method that satisfies
differential privacy to protect location data privacy, without
reducing much utility of data in IIoT. There are also some
works exploring the use of blockchain to enhance data security
in IIoT. In [7], the authors also integrated blockchain into
edge intelligence for resource allocation in IIoT. Though the
combination is promising, the machine-learning methods can
be further improved. Therefore, some works exploited Markov
models, which can illustrate activity transactions without having
knowledge of the problem in hand [8], for resource allocation.
For example, in [9], the authors leveraged deep reinforcement
learning (DRL) for task offloading and transmission scheduling.
The using of new machine-learning technology also brings new
security threats such as cyber stealth attacks [10], which imposes
new security requirements [11] for protecting data privacy in
sharing process. In [12], the authors implemented a protocol that
turns a blockchain into an automated access-control manager,
to ensure that users can own and control their data. In [13], the
authors proposed a blockchain-enabled efficient data collection
and secure sharing scheme combining Ethereum blockchain and
DRL to create a reliable and safe environment. Among these
works, consensus protocols are a core technical component to
achieve consensus among all participating nodes. In proof-ofwork (PoW) [14], the miner that solves a mathematical puzzle
first wins the right to produce a block. However, heavy resource

1551-3203 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 16, NO. 6, JUNE 2020

requirement for solving those puzzles, limit the applicability of
PoW-based consensus mechanisms.
The concept of private multiparty data sharing has drawn
much attention recently, as a promising approach to address the
issue of computing and storage resource constraints. Several
works on data sharing applications with multiple distributed
data owners, have been published recently, including the sharing
of horizontally partitioned data [15] and monitoring over distributed data streams [16]. There is a wide range of applications
on the collaborative use of data in distributed scenarios. For
instance, the authors in [17] proposed LDPGen, a multiphase
technique, to ensure local differential privacy in decentralized
social graphs. Mobile edge computing (MEC) is a powerful technique for such resource constrained applications on distributed
data. In [18], to efficiently and fairly allocating the resources
in industrial IoT-based applications, the authors proposed a
forward central dynamic and available approach by adapting
the running time of sensing and transmission processes in IoT
devices. In [19], a method for conserving position confidentiality
of roaming position-based services users was proposed based on
MEC techniques in real-time industrial informatics. Recently,
federated learning [20] has emerged for multiple data owners
to train a global model collaboratively without sharing their
raw data, respecting the privacy concerns of sharing data.
In [21], the authors proposed an algorithm for client sided
differential privacy-preserving federated optimization, to hide
clients’ contributions during the training process. Based on
a hierarchical architecture in which the server aggregates the
users’ training updates, the authors in [22] proposed a federated
learning based proactive content caching scheme.
Yet, the presence of a centralized curator in most of the
existing data sharing schemes increases the risk of data leakage,
especially in the application of distributed multiple parties.
There are mainly two obstacles: one is, there can be a high
volume of aggregated data from different parties to be processed
by the curator, including some unknown fresh data; The other
is, none of these parties fully trust others (including the curator),
thus fearing data leakage.
To this end, the application of collaborative data sharing over
distributed multiple parties in IIoT faces several challenges. New
collaborative mechanisms for distributed data sharing among
multiple untrusted parties, are therefore for IIoT applications.
In this article, we propose a differentially private multiparty
data model sharing method based on permissioned blockchain.
Instead of sharing raw data directly, we incorporate federated
learning algorithms to map raw data into corresponding data
models, which addresses privacy concerns in the learning phase
through distributed training by local users. We also design
a distributed architecture for data sharing between multiple
parties based on blockchain, in which blockchain enables secure
data retrieval and ensures accurate model training. Our main
contributions in this article are as follows.
1) We transform the data sharing problem into a machine
learning problem by leveraging federated learning to
build data models and sharing the data models instead
of raw data.

Fig. 1.

Example of distributed data sharing.

2) We propose a new blockchain empowered collaborative
architecture to share data over distributed multiple parties to reduce the risk of data leakage, through which
data owners can further control the access to shared
data.
3) We integrate differential privacy into federated learning
to further protect data privacy. We also evaluate the
effectiveness of our proposed model with benchmark,
open real-world datasets for data categorization.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section
II, we present our system model. In Section III, we describe
permissioned blockchain and federated learning for data sharing
in detail. In Section IV, we present security analysis for our
proposed scheme, and provide illustrative numerical results.
Finally, Section V concludes this article.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
In this article, we consider a common distributed data sharing
scenario with multiple parties involved. Each participant owns
his own data and is willing to share it. Contributors can make
better use of their data by combining them together to implement
a collaborative task. For example, traffic prediction can make
greater progress by utilizing data from multiple sensors. An
illustration of data sharing among various devices is shown
in Fig. 1. Our goal is to design a secure data sharing mechanism, which can share data among distributed multiple users
intelligently while also maintaining data privacy effectively.
We consider N parties (data holders) and a union dataset D.
For any party Pi , it holds a local dataset Di ∈ D. Each of
the N parties agrees on sharing its data without revealing any
private information. Let R = r1 , r2 , . . ., rm be the data sharing
requests with queries ri submitted by a requester, instead of
return the raw data, we provide the computed results toward
these queries for sharing. Then, all the participants related to the
request work together with the corresponding learning algorithm
to train a global model M, without leaking any private data.
Finally, the trained global data model M will be returned to the
data recipient. Leveraging the received model, data recipients
can get answers R(M) toward their data sharing requests
locally.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: BLOCKCHAIN AND FEDERATED LEARNING FOR PRIVACY-PRESERVED DATA SHARING IN INDUSTRIAL IoT

Fig. 2.

4179

Architecture of secure data sharing scheme.
Fig. 3.

Working mechanism of proposed method.

A. Treat Model
We focus on collaborative data sharing, where K data
providers (owners) and one data requester work together to
accomplish a data sharing task. The data providers and data
requester are considered as dishonest. The proposed mechanism
is vulnerable to three types of threats. The first is the quality of
the provided data. Dishonest providers may provide biased and
inaccurate results to the requester, reducing the usability of the
entire shared data. The second is data privacy. Providers and
receivers may try to infer the private data of others from shared
data, which may lead to unwanted sensitive data leakage from
data providers. The threat of collusion also exists if a group of
participants try to infer the data of other participants. The third
is data authority management. Once the raw data is shared, the
data owner will lose control over these data and the data may be
shared to other unauthorized entities by a dishonest participant.
B. Our Proposed Architecture
Our proposed data sharing architecture is shown in Fig. 2.
The proposed system consists of two modules: permissioned
blockchain module and federated learning module. Permissioned blockchain establishes secure connections among all
the end IoT devices through its encrypted records, which
is maintained by the entities equipped with computing and
storage resources, named super nodes, such as base stations
and road side unites. There are two types of transactions in
our permissioned blockchain: retrieval transactions and data
sharing transactions. For the privacy concerns and due to storage
limitation, we use permissioned blockchain only to retrieve
the related data and manage the accessibility of data, instead
of recording the raw data. Moreover, permissioned blockchain
records all the sharing events of data, which can trace the use of
data for further audit.
Suppose all the parties that agreed for data sharing have
been registered in the permissioned blockchain, by uploading
retrieval records to the blocks. A data requester launches a
data sharing request Req containing a set of queries Fx =
{f1 , f2 , . . ., fx } to its nearby super node SNreq . Fig. 3 shows
the working mechanism of our scheme. Nearby super node
SNreq first searches permissioned blockchain to check whether
the request has been processed before. If there is a hit, the
request will be forwarded to the node that has cached the

results toward request Req. The cached results are then sent
to the requester as a reply. Otherwise, for a new data sharing
request, the multiparty data retrieval process is executed to find
the related parties according to the registration records. We
regard these parties as committee nodes, which are responsible
for driving the consensus in permissioned blockchain. Then,
the committee nodes train a global data model M jointly by
federated learning. Once the model is trained, the data requester
r uses Req = {f1 , f2 , . . ., fx } as the input of the M and gets
the corresponding sharing results M(Req). Data model M can
accept any query fx in the query set Fx and provide a result
M(fx ) for the query. In addition, as a machine learning model,
M can also make predictions on the fresh query that f y ∈
/ Fx .
III. BLOCKCHAIN AND FEDERATED LEARNING
FOR SECURE DATA SHARING
In this article, we consider the problem of privacy-preserving
data sharing in decentralized multiple parties. Due to the constrained resources of edge users and their privacy concerns,
we share the federated data model learned over decentralized
multiple parties instead of the original data. The data model
contains valid information toward the requests and minimized
private data of participants.
A. Normalized Weighted Graph
It is challenging for the IIoT end devices to output and
maintain structured data due to limited computing and storage
resources. Instead, they are more likely to generate unstructured data, e.g., in the form of text files. Study regarding
such data is limited. To fill this gap, we focus on the unstructured
data—textual data in our data sharing scenarios. We define a
two-step distance metric learning scheme for retrieval of the
textual data, which can quantify the similarity of specified data.
To improve the computing and storage efficiency with constrained resources, we leverage the graphs to represent original
data for further process, as defined in Definition 1, which can
retain more structure and context information.
Definition 1 (Weighted Context Graphs): A weighted context graph G = {V, E} comprises a set of nodes (key terms)
V and a set of edges E ⊆ V × V . Each node ni contains a text
term tn i and its weight win , (ni , wn i ). Each edge eij connects

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 16, NO. 6, JUNE 2020

Fig. 5.
Fig. 4.

Local retrieval table.

Records of blockchain.

node ni and nj with a weight we i j denoting the correlation
degree.
We use weight matrix A = [aij ] to represent the graph, where
aij = wn i if i = j and aij = we i j if i = j. We leverage term
frequency-inverse document frequency to construct our graphs.
Thus, all the textual files are transferred into weighted context
graphs {G1 , G2 , . . ., Gn }.
In the second step, we serialize the graphs. Although graphs
keep much context information, they are difficult to be further processed as input by machine learning algorithms. We
map the graphs into liner vectors by serializing them into a
sequenced vector. The graphs are first merged into a global
graph G = G1 ∪ G2 , . . ., ∪Gn . For global graph G = {V, E},
let k be the number of representative vertices. Then, the
size of normalized attributes for nodes will be k and the
size of normalized attributes for edges will be k × (k − 1)/2.
Thus, the normalized vector Seq = V ∪ E = {V1 , . . ., Vk } ∪
{E1 , E2 , . . ., Ek (k −1)/2 }. We leverage Jaccard similarity [23]
as the distance function to cluster documents with k-means
algorithm. With the assistance of the normalized weighted graph
and the defined distance metric, we cluster dataset {D1 , . . ., Dn }
into various categories according to textual similarity. We also
divide the participated users into different groups according to
their data.
B. Multiparty Data Retrieval
Since most of the data are sensitive and its amount is large, it is
a resource intensive and risky task to put data on the blockchain
with its limited storage space. Thus, we utilize blockchain to
retrieve data, while the real data is stored locally by its owners.
When a new data provider participates in, its unique identity (ID)
is recorded as a transaction in the blockchain, together with the
profiles of its data, including data categories, data types, and
data size. All the profiles of data from multiple participants
will be recorded in forms of transactions, and will be verified
by the blockchain nodes through adopting Merkle tree [24].
Each data sharing event is also stored in the blockchain as a
transaction. The detailed forms of the two transactions—the
retrieval transactions recording data profiles of permissioned
participants and the data sharing transactions recording all the
data sharing events—are shown in Fig. 4.

The retrieval of related participants on blockchain toward a
data sharing request is a fundamental problem to be addressed
in the proposed model. Since there are many participants, those
who possess data related to the request, should participate
in data sharing to increase the accuracy of response results.
Nonetheless, the retrieval process should not break the privacy
of each participant. A distributed retrieval scheme is needed to
quickly locate the requested data distributed among participants,
which can collaboratively response to the request.
Inspired by the previous work of Kademlia [25], we design a
multiparty retrieval mechanism in blockchain. All participants
P are partitioned into various communities according to their
data categories, that is, members of a community hold similar
categories of data. Each community maintains a local retrieval
table of log(n) records toward log(n) different communities.
As for each node in the community, it stores the IDs of all
its community members, together with the log(log(n)) nodes
for each of its log(n) closest (most related in data categories)
community. In this way, the most related participants will be
kept locally at the local retrieval table of Pi , as shown in Fig. 5.
We extract a list of key terms from the data of every participant
as the representative features in the form of hash values. Furthermore, due to the limited communication resource of IIoT
devices, the physical distance between two nodes dp (Pi , Pj )
should also be considered in the retrieval process. Then, based
on Jaccard distance, the logic distance between their key terms
will be

Pj
Pi
m ,n ∈{P i ∪P j −P i ∩P j } (am n + am n )
di (Pi , Pj ) =

Pj
Pi
m ,n ∈P i ∪P j (am n + am n )
· log(dp (Pi , Pj ))

(1)

P

where aPmin , amjn are the elements of weighted matrix for node
Pi and node Pj , respectively. The ID of each participant (device)
is generated according to the logic distance. That is, the more
relative two nodes are, the longer their common ID prefix will be.
Given two nodes Pi and Pj with IDs Pi (id) and Pj (id)),
respectively. The relevance distance between them is defined as
d(Pi , Pj ) = Pi (id) ⊕ Pj (id).

(2)

When a user submits a data sharing request to its nearby node
Pi , all nodes in the same community with Pi send the request
to the nodes in their local routing table with a certain distance

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: BLOCKCHAIN AND FEDERATED LEARNING FOR PRIVACY-PRESERVED DATA SHARING IN INDUSTRIAL IoT

to start the retrieving process. This process will be implemented
recursively until all nodes within the relevant distance have been
traversed. At the end of retrieval, we get the related subset nodes
toward the request, Ps ⊆ P, which are also the committee nodes
for running a consensus process to approve the data sharing
results.

C. Data Sharing Process
Existing methods use encryption for data security. However,
in data sharing scenarios, it is still risky for data holders to share
the original data due to various attacks toward the encryption. A
more secure method is to share the answers toward the requests,
which can provide the requesters with valid information and
protect privacy of data holders. The data providers share learned
data models with the requesters instead of the original data.
When the data requester r initiates a sharing request Req,
it submits the request to its nearby super node SNreq of the
permissioned blockchain. SNreq first searches the blockchain to
find out whether the request has been processed before. If there
is a lookup hit, then the cached data model M calculated before
is returned to the requester directly. Otherwise, node SNreq looks
up the blockchain for related nodes—committee nodes, toward
the sharing request r, through the aforementioned multiparty
data retrieval process. The committee nodes are responsible for
executing the consensus process and learn the federated data
model M collaboratively. A committee node Pi learns a local
data model mi for the requests from requesters, then it will send
model mi to other related participants, according to the local
retrieval table of Pi . This process is repeated jointly on various
related parties, until all related parties are traversed. The trained
data model M will be returned to requester r, as the answer to
its data sharing requests.
The detailed steps of our data sharing scheme are as follows.
1) Initialization: Before a data provider Pi joins, a local
clustering based on Jaccard similarity is executed to
cluster its textual data into various categories. We serialize the key terms as vectors in a certain order to
represent a category. The more similar two datasets are,
the closer their distance is. Then, its nearby super nodes,
to which Pi belongs, will search the blockchain to find
the records which are logically close (according to XOR
distance) to it. For each participant, we generate its ID
based on the hashed vectors to ensure that participants
holding similar datasets have similar IDs. In addition, to
enhance computing efficiency, we divide the participants
in advance by running a community partition process,
where all nodes are partitioned into various communities
according to their distances toward each other.
2) Registering Retrieval Records: Once Pi joins, it first
sends its public key PKr and its data profiles to the nearby
super node for registration. Then, a data retrieval record
for Pi is generated and broadcasted by the node to other
nodes in permissioned blockchain for verification. Other
nodes collect all received records and verify them before
writing them into permissioned blockchain.

4181

3) Launching Data Sharing Requests: Data requester r
posts a data sharing request Req = {f1 , f2 , . . ., fx } to
its nearby super node SNreq . Request Req contains the
ID of r, the requested data category and the timestamp,
which is signed by r with its private key SKr .
4) Data Retrieval: Once a nearby node receives the data
sharing request, it verifies the ID of requester r. Then, it
searches permissioned blockchain to confirm whether the
request has been processed before. If there is a record, the
cached model is returned as the reply. Otherwise, it runs
the multiparty retrieval process to find the related parties.
5) Data Model Learning: The related parties work collaboratively to respond to the sharing request. They run
federated learning to train a global data model M toward
the request Req. The training set is generated based on
local data D and corresponding query results f x(D),
DT = < fx , fx (D) >. The learning global model M is
then returned to the requester as a reply and is cached by
a node locally for future requests.
6) Generating Data Sharing Records: The data sharing
events between data requesters and data providers are
generated as transactions and broadcasted in permissioned blockchain. All the records are collected into
blocks, which are encrypted and signed by the collecting
node.
7) Carrying Out Consensus: The consensus process is executed by the related nodes selected for data retrieval.
Each node competes for the opportunity to write blocks
to the blockchain through PoW protocol. The node who
wins the competition broadcasts its block to other nodes
for verification. Once the verification is passed, the
block is added to the permissioned blockchain, which
is tamper-proof.
Combining federated learning with permissioned blockchain,
the requested data can be retrieved and shared securely in
industrial IoT scenarios with distributed multiple data providers,
which can improve the scale and quality of shared data. However, the PoW consensus protocol incurs both high energy
consumption and computation overhead, thus making it less
practical for IoT devices to adopt. To address this issue, we
further propose a new consensus to improve the utility and
efficiency of computing work in the consensus protocol.

D. Consensus: Proof of Training Quality (PoQ)
Transferring the data sharing problem into model sharing
brings many benefits in data sharing. Sharing the data model
only instead of original data, helps protect privacy of data
owners. In addition, the machine learning data models are more
effective to provide the required information for new sharing
requests.
Directly using existing consensus such as PoW for data
sharing either brings high cost of computing and communication resources, or makes limited additional contribution to
data sharing. To address this problem, we propose a federated
learning empowered consensus—PoQ protocol. PoQ combines

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4182

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 16, NO. 6, JUNE 2020

Overview of training in distributed scenario.

data model training with the consensus process, which can make
better use of the nodes’ computing resources.
For a specific data sharing request, we select members of
the consensus committee by retrieving the related nodes for
a request in the blockchain. The committee is responsible for
driving the consensus process, as well as for learning of data
models for requested data. The objective of federated learning
is to train a global data model M, which can provide the valid
response M(Req) for data sharing requests Req. Model M can
be trained by using a series of machine learning algorithms, e.g.,
random tree, random forest, and gradient boosting decision tree
(GBDT). Once constructed, model M can generate the answers
toward data queries, even if the queries are fresh.
1) Differentially Private Federated Learning: To protect data
privacy during multiparty decentralized learning, we incorporate a differential privacy preserved mechanism into federated
learning. For two neighboring datasets D and D with at most
one different record, and a set of outcomes S, a randomized
algorithm A achieves -differential privacy if
P r[A(D) ∈ S] ≤ exp() · P r[A(D ) ∈ S]

(3)

Algorithm 1: Differential Private Federated Learning.
Input: data request Req, related participants P, iteration
times iter = 0
Output: data model M
1: for each participant pi ∈ P do
2: while accuracy ≤ T hreshold do
3: if iter = 0 then
4:
Construct a new differential data model m̂i based on
its noise-added vector data Veci
5:
Broadcast m̂i to other related participants according
to local retrieval tables
6: else
7:
Construct differential private data model m̂i
with previously received models
8:
Broadcast m̂i to the other participants who are
engaged in the data sharing process
9:
iter = iter + 1
10:
end if 
11:
M = k1 k m̂i
12: end while
13: end for
14: return M to the requester
1) Selecting training samples: The data owner selects related
data D toward the request set R and transfer them into
normalized graph vectors V ec.
2) Differential private local model training: The noise calibrated by sensitivity s is added to local data V eci . The
local data model m̂i is trained locally at Pi , by using
machine learning algorithm on the selected noisy data
V eci .
3) Collaborative multiparty learning: The Laplace mechanism is applied on local data model mi to achieve
differential privacy
m̂i = mi + Laplace(s/)

where  is the privacy budget. The training process over distributed data owners is shown in Fig. 6. The related parties
{P1 , P2 , . . ., Pn } are selected through multiparty retrieval in
blockchain. The textual data they hold is transferred into normalized graph vectors V ecg = v1 , v2 , . . ., vk , e11 , e12 , . . ., ek k .
When there is a data sharing request R (including a series of
queries), Pi will train a local data model mi based on V ecg i
toward the request first. The V ecg i , composed of sensitive terms
and weights, is used to train a local model in the federated
learning process. Since the local model will be shared to other
participants, to protect the privacy of V ecg i , we incorporate
differential privacy in the learning phase to train a m̂i from
noised data. Then, Pi will send model m̂i to other participants.
Once m̂i is received, Pi+1 will train a new local data model mˆi+1
based on received m̂i and its local data, then broadcast mˆi+1 to
other participants. The data models are trained iteratively among
participants. Finally, the global data model M will be generated
where M = {m̂1 ∪ m̂2 . . . ∪ mˆn }.
For any participant Pi , there are following three steps to learn
the local model m̂i .

(4)

where s is the value of sensitivity, as shown in (5)
s = max ||f (D) − f (D )||1 .
D ,D

(5)

Then, the noise-added model m̂i is broadcasted as a
transaction of the blockchain to other participants for
federated learning. This process is repeated iteratively
until the performance of the federated model achieves
the threshold or the training time runs out.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the overall process of our proposed
scheme.
2) Training Quality Based Consensus: The consensus process is executed by the selected committee based on the work
of collaborative training. The committee nodes are a subset of
all the participants. The communication overhead is reduced
by sending consensus messages only to the committee nodes
instead of all the nodes. However, the reduction in the number
of nodes also makes it more challenging to achieve consensus.
In order to balance the overhead and the security, we provide
the proof of training work for consensus in data sharing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: BLOCKCHAIN AND FEDERATED LEARNING FOR PRIVACY-PRESERVED DATA SHARING IN INDUSTRIAL IoT

4183

TABLE I
RECORD TUPLE OF A MODEL TRANSACTION

Fig. 8.
Fig. 7.

Consensus process of PoQ.

Illustration of model transactions.

The committee leader is selected based on the quality of the
trained model. Since each committee node trains a local data
model, the quality of the model should be verified and measured
during the consensus process. We leverage prediction accuracy
to quantify the performance of the trained local model. More
specifically, in the classification during training, the accuracy
is denoted by the fraction of correctly classified records. While
in the task of regression, the accuracy is measured by mean
absolute error (MAE)
1
|yi − f (xi )|
n
n

MAE(mi ) =

(6)

i=1

where f (xi ) is the prediction value of model mi and yi is the
real value of the records. The lower the MAE of model mi is,
the higher the accuracy of mi will be.
After the differentially private collaborative training, we get
the trained global data model M and local model mi for each
committee node. The consensus process is executed by the committee. During responding to a data sharing request, a committee
node Pi transmits its trained model mi to the next committee
node. The transmissions are recorded as model transactions tm i ,
together with its MAE(mi ). The record tuple is shown in Table I.
The illustration of model transactions in training process is
shown in Fig. 7. To encrypt and sign the messages, Pi has a pair
of public and private keys (PKi , SKi ). Then, Pi broadcasts the
encrypted transmission E(SKi (tm ), PKi ) to other committee
nodes. A committee node Pj collects all model transactions and
stores them locally as candidate blocks. As a proof of training
work, Pj verifies all transactions it receives by calculating
the MAE defined in (6). The MAE for Pj , MAEu (Pj ) is
calculated as
1
MAEu (Pj ) = γ · MAE(mj ) +
MAE(mi )
(7)
n i
where MAE(mj ) is the MAE of the locally trained model mj ,
and γ is the weight parameter denoting the contribution of Pj
to the global model, decided by the
 training data size of Pj and
other participants γ = 1 + |dj |/ i |di |.
When the consensus process starts, the committee node with
the lowest MAEu at that time will be elected as the committee
leader through MAE-based voting. The leader is responsible
for driving the consensus process among participated nodes.

As mentioned earlier, the leader gathers all the transactions it
received at the beginning, including the final data model M,
to form a block Bk = (Hk , tm i , M), where Hk is the header
of Bk . Then, the leader broadcasts Bi to all members of the
committee for approval. In addition to the regular verification
on a block (e.g., the header format, block size, and timestamp),
the committee nodes also audit the block by verifying the model
transaction track, as what the verification nodes do to verify
a transaction’s amount in bitcoin. Each verifying node calculates
the MAE(mi ) for each model transaction and MAE(M). If the
calculated MAE is within a certain range, an approval will be
sent to the leader. If the block containing all transactions is
approved by every committee node, the leader will send the
block data signed with its signature to all nodes. Then, the
records will be stored in the blockchain, which are tamper-proof.
The process for training work based consensus is illustrated
in Fig. 8.
IV. SECURITY ANALYSIS AND NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Security Analysis
The use of permissioned blockchain establishes a secure
mechanism for multiple parties without mutual trust. We integrate federated learning into the consensus process of permissioned blockchain to address the aforementioned security
threats.
1) Achieving Differential Privacy: According to the definition of differential privacy, if each step of data processing
follows the requirement of differential privacy, i.e., (3),
the final results will satisfy differential privacy [26].
Algorithm 1 shows that the privacy budget is only consumed in step 4, where noise is added to data vectors.
The other steps, using the training methods (e.g., trained
tree) for calculating residuals, are only mapping operations that are data-independent and will not disclose
any private information. Therefore, Algorithm 1 satisfies
-differential privacy.
2) Removing Centralized Trust: The permissioned
blockchain takes the place of a trusted curator to connect
each participant through multiparty data retrieval.
The centralized trust, which incurs high risk of data
leakage, is no more required in the proposed blockchain
empowered data sharing scheme.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 16, NO. 6, JUNE 2020

3) Guaranteeing the Quality of Shared Data: To prevent the
dishonest provider from sharing invalid data, the PoQ
consensus process validates the quality of learned data
models by other data providers, and only the qualified
models are preserved.
4) Secure Data Management: Only the data retrieval is
uploaded to the permissioned blockchain while real data
is stored locally by each data provider. Data owners
can control the authority of their own data. Moreover,
permissioned blockchain uses a series of cryptographic
algorithms such as elliptic curve digital signature algorithm and asymmetric cryptography to guarantee the
security of data.

Fig. 9.

AUC in various datasets (20News).

Fig. 10.

AUC in various datasets (Reuters).

Fig. 11.

Running time in various datasets (20News).

B. Evaluation Setup
We conduct evaluations of the proposed secure data sharing
scheme on two real-world data sets, which is widely used for
evaluating text-related machine learning algorithms. The first
one is Reuters dataset [27], a benchmark dataset for classification tasks. The dataset consists of a series of short files in
various topics appeared on Reuters newswire. It contains a total
of 15 732 files in 116 categories. The second one is the 20
newsgroups dataset [28], which is a collection of approximately
20 000 newsgroup files. The data are partitioned into 20 different
groups, where each group is related to one topic. The data in the
two datasets is unstructured short text, which is quite different
from the structured data in databases. We use the two datasets
to simulate the large amount of unstructured short data pieces
in IIoT, such as the configuration files generated from various
vehicular applications and the status log files.
We divide the sorted dataset into shards and recombine
the shards into subsets to simulate the distributed multiple
participants in our data sharing scheme. Classification analysis is used to simulate the data sharing tasks. We implement our improved distributed GBDT on textual data
to execute the federated learning process over distributed
datasets.
C. Numerical Results
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve is widely used
to illustrate the diagnostic ability of a classifier scheme, whose
discrimination threshold is varied. We use the area under the
ROC curve (AUC) to evaluate the accuracy of the model. The
performance of our proposed mechanism in various distributed
datasets, compared with a benchmark method, text graph convolutional networks [29], is shown in Figs. 9 and 10. From Fig. 9,
we can conclude that compared with the benchmark method,
most of our testing groups obtain high accuracy with an average
AUC value of 0.918, which indicates that our proposed federated
learning mechanism achieves high diagnostic ability. We can
also observe that the accuracy changes not so smoothly. The
reason is that the number of files in each subset is a fixed discrete
value, and the accuracy is also related to the characteristics of
files from different subset, which can not be a continuously
changing value as the size of data increases. Fig. 10 shows
the AUC results with various number of data providers (3, 6,

and 9). It can be seen that the AUC results change little as
the number of data providers increases, which indicates our
proposed model is scalable. Since the global model in federated
learning is aggregated from all local models, and each local
model is trained on local data, the number of data providers
has little effect on the performance of the aggregated model.
Fig. 11 shows that the running time of our proposed mechanism
varies from milliseconds to seconds with an average of 880 ms
in different subdatasets. From Fig. 12, we can see that, for
the same dataset, the running time increases with the number
of data providers involved. The reason is that the more data
providers, the more time it takes to implement the collaborative
working process. Moreover, the results of running time show
that the performance of the proposed federated learning based
data sharing scheme is near real time.
Through the above evaluation, we can observe that the
increase in data providers has little effect on the accuracy of our

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: BLOCKCHAIN AND FEDERATED LEARNING FOR PRIVACY-PRESERVED DATA SHARING IN INDUSTRIAL IoT

4185

REFERENCES

Fig. 12.

Running time in various datasets (Reuters).

proposed scheme, while the running time increases evidently.
The stable accuracy is due to that our scheme can execute
parallel local training, where the federated mode ensures the
stable learning accuracy. Yet the increase in data providers
brings more local models to be updated and computed, which
increases the time for training and update transmission. Thus,
the running time increases with the increase of data providers.
Despite the slightly increased running time, the participation of
multiple data providers enlarges the scale of data for computing
results, which enables the sharing of data to improve the quality
of vehicular applications.

V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we proposed a privacy-preserving data sharing
mechanism for distributed multiple parties in IIoT applications, which incorporates federated learning into permissioned
blockchain. The illustrative numerical results, showed that our
blockchain empowered data sharing scheme enhances the security during sharing process without requiring centralized trust.
Moreover, by integrating federated learning into the consensus
process of permissioned blockchain, we not only improved
the utilization of computing resource but also increased the
efficiency of the data sharing scheme. Numerical results on two
benchmark real-world datasets corroborated that our proposed
mechanism can enable secure data sharing with high efficiency
and utility.
The combination of blockchain and federated learning is a
promising way to enable secure and intelligent data sharing
in IIoT. However, how to efficiently guarantee data privacy by
applying blockchain technique is still an open issue, which needs
to be further explored by analyzing more security threats and
developing more effective solutions. Moreover, how to improve
the utility of data models mapped from raw data, regardless of
the specific computing tasks and machine learning algorithms,
is a critical problem to be addressed in data sharing. New
intelligent mechanisms are required to improve data utility. In
addition, the limited resource of devices imposes new challenges
for improving the efficiency of data sharing in IIoT.

[1] E. Sisinni, A. Saifullah, S. Han, U. Jennehag, and M. Gidlund, “Industrial
Internet of Things: Challenges, opportunities, and directions,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 4724–4734, Nov. 2018.
[2] L. Sweeney, “k-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy,” Int. J.
Uncertainty, Fuzziness Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 10, no. 05, pp. 557–570,
2002.
[3] A. Machanavajjhala, J. Gehrke, D. Kifer, and M. Venkitasubramaniam,
“l-diversity: Privacy beyond k-anonymity,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Data
Eng., 2006, pp. 24–24.
[4] C. Dwork, “Differential privacy in new settings,” in Proc. 21st Annu.
ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 2010, pp. 174–183.
[5] T. Zhu, G. Li, W. Zhou, and S. Y. Philip, “Differentially private data
publishing and analysis: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1619–1638, Aug. 2017.
[6] C. Yin, J. Xi, R. Sun, and J. Wang, “Location privacy protection based
on differential privacy strategy for big data in industrial Internet of
Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 3628–3636,
Aug. 2018.
[7] K. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Edge intelligence and
blockchain empowered 5G beyond for industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE
Netw. Mag., to be published.
[8] C. Alcaraz, L. Cazorla, and G. Fernandez, “Context-awareness using
anomaly-based detectors for smart grid domains,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Risks
Sec. Internet Syst., 2014, pp. 17–34.
[9] K. Zhang, S. Leng, X. Peng, P. Li, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Artificial intelligence inspired transmission scheduling in cognitive vehicular
communications and networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 1987–1997, Apr. 2019.
[10] L. Cazorla, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez, “Cyber stealth attacks in critical
information infrastructures,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1778–1792,
Jun. 2018.
[11] C. Alcaraz and J. Lopez, “Analysis of requirements for critical control
systems,” Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Protection, vol. 5, nos., 3–4, pp. 137–145,
2012.
[12] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, and A. Pentland, “Decentralizing privacy: Using
blockchain to protect personal data,” in Proc. IEEE Sec. Privacy Workshops, May 2015, pp. 180–184.
[13] C. H. Liu, Q. Lin, and S. Wen, “Blockchain-enabled data collection and
sharing for industrial IoT with deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3516–3526, Jun. 2019.
[14] S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, 2008.
[Online]. Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
[15] S. Goryczka, L. Xiong, and B. C. Fung, “m-privacy for collaborative data
publishing,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 2520–
2533, Oct. 2014.
[16] A. Friedman, I. Sharfman, D. Keren, and A. Schuster, “Privacy-preserving
distributed stream monitoring,” in Proc. 35th Annu. IEEE Netw. Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp., 2014, pp. 1–9.
[17] Z. Qin, T. Yu, Y. Yang, I. Khalil, X. Xiao, and K. Ren, “Generating
synthetic decentralized social graphs with local differential privacy,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Sec, 2017, pp. 425–438.
[18] A. H. Sodhro, S. Pirbhulal, and V. H. C. de Albuquerque, “Artificial
intelligence-driven mechanism for edge computing-based industrial applications,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 4235–4243,
Jul. 2019.
[19] A. K. Sangaiah, D. V. Medhane, T. Han, M. S. Hossain, and G. Muhammad, “Enforcing position-based confidentiality with machine learning
paradigm through mobile edge computing in real-time industrial informatics,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 4189–4196,
Jul. 2019.
[20] J. Konečnỳ, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtárik, A. T. Suresh, and
D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication
efficiency,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05492
[21] R. C. Geyer, T. Klein, and M. Nabi, “Differentially private federated
learning: A client level perspective,” 2017, arXiv:1712.07557. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.07557
[22] Z. Yu et al., “Federated learning based proactive content caching in edge
computing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2018, pp. 1–6.
[23] S. Niwattanakul, J. Singthongchai, E. Naenudorn, and S. Wanapu, “Using
of jaccard coefficient for keywords similarity,” in Proc. Int. MultiConf.
Eng. Comput. Scientists, 2013, pp. 380–384.
[24] A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, and C. Papamanthou, “Hawk:
The blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart
contracts,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Sec. Privacy, 2016, pp. 839–858.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4186

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 16, NO. 6, JUNE 2020

[25] P. Maymounkov and D. Mazières, “Kademlia: A peer-to-peer information
system based on the XOR metric,” in Peer-to-Peer Systems, P. Druschel,
F. Kaashoek, and A. Rowstron, Eds., Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2002,
pp. 53–65.
[26] C. Dwork, “A firm foundation for private data analysis,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 86–95, 2011.
[27] D. D. Lewis, “Reuters dataset,” 2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.
daviddlewis.com/resources/testcollections/
[28] “20newsgroups,” 2019. [Online]. Available: http://qwone.com/jason/
20Newsgroups/
[29] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Graph convolutional networks for text
classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 7370–
7377.

Sabita Maharjan (M’09) received the Ph.D. degree in networks and distributed systems from
Simula Research Laboratory and University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway, in 2013.
She is currently a Senior Research Scientist
with the Simula Metropolitan Center for Digital
Engineering, Oslo, and an Associate Professor with the Department of Informatics, University of Oslo. Her research interests include
wireless networks, network security and resilience, smart grid communications, Internet of
Things, machine-to-machine communication, software-defined wireless
networking, and the Internet of Vehicles.

Yunlong Lu (S’18) received the B.S. degree in
electronic information science and technology
from Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China,
in 2012 and the M.S degree in computer technology from School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2015. He is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in computer
science and technology with the Institute of Network Technology, BUPT.
He is currently a Visiting Ph.D. Student with
the University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. His current research interests
include blockchain, wireless networks, and privacy-preserving machine
learning.
Xiaohong Huang (M’17) received the B.E. degree in mechanical and electronic engineering from the Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in
2000, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical and
electronic engineering from the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2005.
Since 2005, she has been with BUPT and
she is currently a Full Professor and the Director
of Network and Information Center, Institute of
Network Technology of BUPT. She has authored or coauthored more
than 50 academic papers in the area of wavelength division multiplexing
(WDM) optical networks, IP networks, and other related fields. Her current interests include Internet architecture, software-defined networking,
and network function virtualization.
Yueyue Dai (S’17) received the B.Sc. degree
in communication and information engineering in 2014, from the University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
China, where she is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree in communication and information
engineering.
She is currently a Visiting Ph.D. Student
with the University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Her
research interests include wireless network,
mobile edge computing, Internet of Vehicles,
blockchain, and deep reinforcement learning.

Yan Zhang (M’05–SM’10) received the Ph.D.
degree in electrical and electronic engineering, from Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore, in 2006.
He is currently a Full Professor with the Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway. His research interests include nextgeneration wireless networks leading to 5G Beyond, green and secure cyber-physical systems
(e.g., smart grid and transport).
Dr. Zhang is an Editor of several IEEE publications, including the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE, IEEE NETWORK,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS,
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS, IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, and IEEE VEHICULAR
TECHNOLOGY MAGAZINE. He serves as Chair positions in a number of
conferences, including the IEEE Global Communications Conference
2017, IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Communications 2016, and IEEE International Conference on
Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids
2015. He is the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society Distinguished Lecturer. He is a Fellow of Institution of Engineering and Technology. He
was the Chair of IEEE Communications Society Technical Committee
on Green Communications & Computing. He is recognized as a “Highly
Cited Researcher” in 2018 according to Web of Science.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.