PacketCGAN: Exploratory Study of Class
Imbalance for Encrypted Trafﬁc Classiﬁcation
Using CGAN
Pan Wang∗ , Shuhang Li∗ , Feng Ye† , Zixuan Wang∗ and Moxuan Zhang‡

∗ School of Modern Posts, Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, Nanjing, China

† Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA
‡ Schools of International Education, Jinling Institute of Technology, Nanjing, China

Email: ∗ wangpan@njupt.edu.cn

Abstract—With the popularity of Deep Learning (DL), researchers have begun to apply DL to tackle with encrypted trafﬁc
classiﬁcation problems. Although these methods can automatically extract trafﬁc features to improve the ability of feature
engineering of traditional methods like DPI, a large amount
of data is still needed to learn the characteristics of various
types of trafﬁc. Therefore, the performance of classiﬁcation
model always signiﬁcantly depends on the quality of datasets.
Nonetheless, the building of datasets is a time-consuming and
costly task, especially encrypted trafﬁc. Apparently, it is often
more difﬁcult to collect a large amount of trafﬁc samples of those
unpopular applications than well-known ones, which often leads
to the problem of class imbalance between major and minor
encrypted applications in datasets. In this paper, we proposed
a novel trafﬁc data augmenting method called PacketCGAN
using Conditional GAN, which can control the modes of data
to be generated. PacketCGAN exploit the beneﬁt of CGAN to
generate speciﬁed samples with the input of applications’ types
as conditional and thereby achieve data balancing . As a proof of
concept, three classical DL models including CNN were adopted
to classify four types of encrypted trafﬁc datasets augmented
by Random Over Sampling (ROS), SMOTE(Synthetic Minority
Over-sampling Techinique) , vanilla GAN and PacketCGAN
respectively using public datasets. The experimental evaluation
results demonstrate that DL based encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁer
over our new dataset augmented by PacketCGAN can achieve
better performance than the other three in terms of encrypted
trafﬁc classiﬁcation.
Index Terms—encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation, data augmentation, Conditional Generative Adversarial Network, trafﬁc identiﬁcation, class imbalance

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of network technology, the
types and quantity of trafﬁc data in cyberspace are increasing.
Network trafﬁc identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation is a crucial research task in the area of network management and security. It
is the footstone of dynamic access control, network resources
scheduling, content based billing, intrusion and malware detection etc. High efﬁcient and accurate trafﬁc classiﬁcation
is of great practical signiﬁcance to provide service quality
assurance, dynamic access control and abnormal network behaviors detection. With the widespread adoption of encryption
techniques for internet, especially 5G and IoT applications, the
growth of portion of encrypted trafﬁc has dramatically posed

a huge challenge for QoS, network management and security
monitoring. Therefore, studies on encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation not only help to improve the ﬁne-grained network resource
allocation based on application, but also enhance security level
of network and applications.
Traditionally, the evolution of encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation
technology has gone through three stages: port matching,
payload matching and ﬂow statistical characteristics based
classiﬁcation methods. Port matching based method infers
applications’ types by assuming that most applications consistently use ’well known’ TCP or UDP port numbers, however,
the emergence of port camouﬂage, dynamic port, proprietary
protocols with user-deﬁned ports and tunneling technology
makes these methods lose efﬁcacy quickly. Payload matching based methods, namely, DPI (Deep Packet Inspection)
technology cannot deal with encrypted trafﬁc because of
invisible packet content of encrypted trafﬁc, in addition, it
incurs high computational overhead and requires manual signatures maintenance [1, 2]. As a result, in order to attempt to
solve the aboved problems of encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation
, ﬂow-based methods emerged, which usually combine statistical or time series trafﬁc features with Machine Learning
(ML) algorithms, such as naive bayes(NB), support vector
machine(SVM), decision tree, Random Forest(RF), k-nearest
neighbor(KNN) [3]. Although classical machine learning
approaches can solve many issues that port and payload based
methods cannot solve, it still has some limitations, such as
handcrafted trafﬁc features driven by domain-expert, timeconsuming, lack of ability of automation, rapidly outdated
when compared to the evolution. Unlike most traditional
ML algorithms, DL performs automatic feature extraction
without human intervention, which undoubtedly makes it a
highly desirable approach for trafﬁc classiﬁcation, especially
encrypted trafﬁc. Recent research work has demonstrated the
superiority of DL methods in trafﬁc classiﬁcation [4], such as
MLP [5], CNN [6], SAE [7], LSTM [8].
However, due to the different popularity of various applications, the class imbalance problem of trafﬁc samples often
occurs when building trafﬁc datasets. That is, the number
of popular applications samples is much larger than others,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-7281-5089-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

which always leads to the misclassifying problems of minor
applications and thereby incurs deterioration of classiﬁer performance. Imbalanced class distribution of a dataset has posed
a serious challenge to most ML based classiﬁers which assume
a relatively balanced distribution. Network trafﬁc classiﬁcation
is no exception due to the imbalanced property of network
trafﬁc data [9], especially encrypted trafﬁc. Therefore, it is
very crucial to address such challenges of imbalanced class
distribution of trafﬁc datasets for network trafﬁc classiﬁcation.
However, there are very few studies focusing on trafﬁc data
augmentation for trafﬁc classiﬁcation to overcome the limitation of class imbalance.
In this paper, we proposed trafﬁc data augmentation method
called PacketCGAN using Conditional GAN, one of a genre
of GAN, which can control the modes of the data to be
generated. As a generative model, PacketCGAN exploits the
beneﬁt of CGAN to generate synthesized trafﬁc samples by
learning the characteristics of the original trafﬁc data. The
synthesized data is then combined with the original (viz. real)
data to build the new trafﬁc dataset and thereby keep balance
between major and minor classes of the dataset. As a proof
of concept, three classical DL models like CNN were adopted
and designed to classify four types of encrypted trafﬁc datasets
augmented by ROS, SMOTE, vanilla GAN and PacketCGAN
respectively using public datasets. The experimental evaluation
results demonstrate that DL based encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁer
over our new dataset augmented by PacketCGAN can achieve
better performance than the other three in terms of encrypted
trafﬁc classiﬁcation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces related works of trafﬁc classiﬁcation and some current methods for tackling with the problem of imbalanced class
data. Section III describes the principles of GAN and CGAN.
Section IV illustrates the methodology of PacketCGAN. The
experimental results are provided and discussed in Section
V. Section VI concludes our work and presents some future
works.
II. R ELATED WORKS
A. DL based approach of Trafﬁc Classiﬁcation
Unlike most traditional ML algorithms, Deep Learning
performs automatic feature extraction without human intervention, which undoubtedly makes it a highly desirable approach
for trafﬁc classiﬁcation, especially encrypted trafﬁc. Recent
research work has demonstrated the superiority of DL methods
in trafﬁc classiﬁcation [4–6, 8, 10]. The workﬂow of DL based
classﬁcation usually consists of three steps. First, model inputs
are deﬁned and designed according to some principles, such
as raw packets, PCAP ﬁles or ﬂow statistics features. Second,
models and algorithms are elaborately chosen according to
models’ characteristics and aim of the classiﬁer. Finally, the
DL classiﬁer is trained to automatically extract the features of
trafﬁc.

B. Traditional methods for handling imbalanced data
In general, there are three methods for dealing with class
imbalance problem: Modifying the objective cost function,
Sampling and Generating artiﬁcial data [11]. The approach
of modifying objective cost function alleviates the problem
by means of weighting differently the data samples in minor
and major classes, which gives higher score on the minor
samples to penalize more intensely on miss-classiﬁying of
the sample in the minor class. Sampling methods include two
different ways of under-sampling and over-sampling, which
is to reduce the size of major class by removing some major
data samples and raise the ones in the minor class, respectively.
Random under sampling (RUS) and Random over sampling
(ROS) are two main methods of under-sampling and oversampling [12]. RUS randomly removes some instances in major class, accordingly, ROS generates some copies of samples
of the minor class. However, overﬁtting problem is always the
main drawback of ROS due to generating same copies from the
minor class. A classical method for generating artiﬁcial data
is Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Techinique (SMOTE) in
which minority samples are generated by synthetic samples
rather than copies [13].
C. The application of GAN and other DL techniques in
generating trafﬁc data samples
Due to the great success of GAN applying in images,
computer vision and NLP etc., this innovative technique has
been already applied to network security recently. As for
trafﬁc classiﬁcation, some researchers have introduced some
approaches based on GAN to generate the trafﬁc samples to
overcome the imbalaced limitation of network data. In [14],
the authors proposed a novel method called auxiliary classiﬁer
GAN (AC-GAN) to generate synthesized trafﬁc samples for
balancing between the minor and major classes over a wellknown trafﬁc dataset NIMS. The AC-GAN took both a random
noise and a class label as input in order to generate the
samples of the input class label accordingly. The experimental
results has shown that their proposed method achieved better
performance compared to other methods like SMOTE. However, the NIMS dataset was only composed of SSH and nonSSH two classes. In [15], the authors proposed a novel data
augmentation approach based on the use of Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) network to learn the trafﬁc ﬂow patterns
and Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) for replicating the
sequence of packets in a ﬂow for classes with less population.
The results have shown that this method can improve the
performance of DL algorithms over augmented datasets.
III. C ONDITIONAL G ENERATIVE A DVERSARIAL
N ETWORKS
In GAN, there is no control over modes of the data to
be generated. The conditional GAN changes that by adding
the constraint condition y as an additional parameter to the
generator G and hopes that the corresponding images are
generated. For example, in MNIST, the digit generated by
GAN may be either any digit from 0-9 instead of speciﬁed

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

one or always output the same digit. Fig. 1 shows the network
structure of CGAN.

7KH:RUNIORZRI3DFNHW&*$1EDVHG(QFU\SWHG7UDIILF&ODVVLILFDWLRQ

3XEOLF'DWDVHW
Unbalanced)

,QSXW3DFNHW'DWD3UHSURFHVVLQJ

,6&;

)LOH+HDGHU
5HPRYDO
3DFNHW)LOWHULQJ
(B)

867&7)&

7UXQFDWLRQ=HUR
3DGGLQJ
(C)

1RUPDOL]DWLRQ
(D)

(A)

3DFNHW%\WH
9HFWRU

7UDIILF6DPSOHV*HQHUDWLRQ
'DWDVHW
$XJPHQWLQJ
(G)

*HQHUDWLQJ
VDPSOHV

3DFNHW&*$1
(F)

Packet
Byte
Matrix
(PBM)

&69WR0DWUL[
(E)

2XWSXW%DODQFHG
7UDIILF'DWDVHWV

7UDLQLQJ
'DWDVHW

9DOLGDWLRQ
'DWDVHW

7HVW'DWDVHW

10-fold cross validation

&110/36$(
(H)

7UDIILF&ODVVLILHU7UDLQLQJ
6RIWPD[
&ODVVLILHU
(I)

3HUIRUPDQFH
0HWULFV
(J)

Fig. 2: The workﬂow of PacketCGAN.

Fig. 1: The network structure of CGAN.
The principle, structure and training process of CGAN are
similar to GAN. The cost function is slightly different as is
shown in (1):
min max V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata (x) [log D(x|y)]
G

D

+Ez∼pz (z) [log(1 − D(G(z|y)))]

(1)

As shown in Fig. 1, CGAN’s training process includes the
following steps:
• Sampling the real data to obtain Pdata (x), obtaining the
label y corresponding to the sampling data Pdata (x), feed
Pdata (x) and y into the discriminator D, then updating
the parameters according to the output results;
• Generating random noise Pz (z), which is then fed into
generator G together with label y in the above step, and
G generates synthesized data.
• Feeding the synthesized data and the label y generated
in the above step into the discriminator D, and G will
optimize the parameters according to the output result of
D.
• Repeat the above steps until G and D reach the Nash
equilibrium.
IV. T HE M ETHODOLOGY OF PACKET CGAN
A. The Workﬂow of PacketCGAN Based Encrypted Trafﬁc
Classiﬁcation
The workﬂow of PacketCGAN based encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation is shown in Fig. 2, in which there are three phases:
packet data preprocessing, class balancing using PacketCGAN
and trafﬁc classiﬁer training.
1) Phase 1: Generally speaking, packet data preprocessing
is the fundermental task of DL modelling. As we all know,
the captured network trafﬁc data is often saved in PCAP or
PCAPNG format, in which packet bytes of trafﬁc data are
saved in hexadecimal. The bytes converted to decimal range

from 0 to 255, which resemble the pixel range of the singlechannel grayscale image. Apparently, trafﬁc classiﬁcation can
refer to DL methods of image recognition. However, packets
from PCAP ﬁles can not directly be used for model training
and need to be pre-processed.
Packet data preprocessing consists of three steps as follows:
• File header removal and packet ﬁltering as shown in (B)
of Fig. 2. The ﬁrst 24 bytes of the PCAP ﬁle header need
to be removed which only contains ﬁle information and
does not help with trafﬁc classiﬁcation. Filtering useless
packets in PCAP ﬁle for classiﬁcation is also needed,
such as ARP and DHCP packets etc., which is irrelevant
to speciﬁc trafﬁc types.
• Truncation or zero padding as shown in (C) of Fig. 2.
During the training of DL model, the input of which
needs to be converted into a vector or matrix, which
requires the length of the data input to be ﬁxed. Nevertheless, the length of captured packet in dataset tends
to be different, so it is necessary to truncate the long
packets or padding those short ones based on a ﬁxed and
predeﬁned length value [16], which is 1480 in this paper.
• Data normalization as shown in (D) of Fig. 2. Normalizing the pre-processed trafﬁc data to the range [0,1] can
improve the accuracy and enhance convergence speed of
the model training.
After all above mentioned operations, each processed packet
will be formated to a Packet Byte Vector (PBV) [5] which can
be stored in csv format.
2) Phase 2: Data balancing is the most critical problem in
this phase. It is essential to read the vectors of PBV from csv
ﬁles to build the matrix of PBM as the input of PacketCGAN
as shown in (E) of Fig. 2, which will be illustrated in detail in
Section. IV-B. Synthesized packet samples will be generated
by PacketCGAN in PBM format and then combined with the
samples of original dataset to build the new balanced trafﬁc
dataset as shown in (E) and (F) of Fig. 2.
3) Phase 3: Trafﬁc Classiﬁer Training: In this paper, we
adopted some DL trafﬁc classiﬁers to evaluate the performance
of datasets augmented by PacketCGAN. The new balanced

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

trafﬁc datasets will always be devided into three parts: training, testing and validation datasets. Finally, classiﬁer related
performance metrics will be evaluated to indirectly verify the
quality of datasets generated by different data augmentation
methods as shown in (H,I,J) of Fig. 2.
B. The Model Architecture and Algorithm Description of
PacketCGAN
1) The Description of Model Architecture: The model of
our proposed PacketCGAN is shown in Fig. 3, in which both
G and D adopted MLP as the basic architecture. Random
noise Pz (z) as the input of model with Normal Distribution
are N*100-dimentional vectors, which will be fed into G with
G(z) distribution. Different from vanilla GAN, the label of
trafﬁc/applications types with one-hot encoding will also be
fed into our PacketCGAN as conditional c. The synthesized
samples as the output of G are N*1480 vectors, which will
be compose of the matrix of PBM and fed into D with
D(x) distribution eventually. Meanwhile, PBM from original
unbalanced datasets with Pdata (x) distribution will be fed into
D with the same 1480-dimentional to compete to reach Nash
equilibrium with ﬁne-tune training.
7KH0RGHO$UFKLWHFWXUHRI3DFNHW&*$1
Normal Distribution
*HQHUDWRU
Pz ( z )

Synthesized Samples

Ċ

Ċ

Ċ

Ċ

Ċ

.
.
.

G( z)

D( x)
N*1480

N*100
Label of Traffic Type

Conditional
c

Fine Tune
Training

.
.
.

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Ċ 14
One-Hot Encoding

Prediction

'LVFULPLQDWRU

Real
Fake

Pdata ( x)
3DFNHW
%\WH
0DWUL[

.
.
.

Unbalanced
Dataset

N*1480

(3)

The model uses the Adam optimization algorithm as the
D
optimizer to update weights W1D , W2D and bias bD
1 , b2 . The
overall training process of⎛the discriminator is
shown
in
⎞
⎞
⎛ Algox11 · · · x1k
y11
⎜ .
⎜ . ⎟
.. ⎟
..
⎜
⎟
⎟
rithm. 1, in which Xτ = ⎜
.
. ⎠ ,yτ = ⎝ .. ⎠
⎝ ..
xm1 · · · xmk
ym1
,k is 1480, which is the data dimension. m is mini batch
referring to a group of packets from dataset.
Algorithm 1 The training of Discriminator of PacketCGAN
Input: real data Xτ and label yτ from Section IV-B2, τ is
the number of iterations
Output: the probability of the output data being real or false
1: Initializing the relevant parameters, e represents the training cycle: epoches.
2: for τ in e do
3:
for each batch of m input data do
4:
concatenate Xτ with yτ :
5:
Compute the output using Equation. (2);
6:
Compute the output using Equation. (3);
7:
Output discriminating results according to Equation. (3);
8:
Optimize the loss function
9:
Update weights and bias;
10:
end for
11: end for

Fine Tune
Training

Fig. 3: The Architecture of PacketCGAN.
2) The Description of Model Algorithm: In general, PacketCGAN’s training mainly includes the following three steps:
the training of discriminator D, generator G and ﬁne-tune
optimization. During the training of D in step 1, one needs
to ﬁx the parameters of G while training D. We adopt the
simple MLP to build the D model, in which there are three
layers: the input layer, a hidden layer and the output layer. The
data for the input layer is derived from the N*1480 matrix of
PBM aforementioned in Section IV-A1 with the distribution
of Pdata (x). The hidden layer consists of 128 neurons with
the notation of Dh1 .
Dh1 = ReLU (inputD · W1D + bD
1 )

Dout = Dh1 · W2D + bD
2

(2)

The inputD in (2) is composed of the real data x with
Pdata (x) and the trafﬁc/applications types label y in one-hot
encoding, such as 0 for SSH, 1 for YouTube. The hidden
layer Dh1 adopts ReLU as the activation function. The output
layer has only one neuron referring to real or fake sample as
following Equation: 3:

Step 2 is to train the generator G. The parameters of D
need to be ﬁxed like step 1. The input layer of G consists of
115 neurons, which includes stochastic noise Pz (z) with 100
neurons and sample label y with 15 neurons of applications
types. The hidden layer also has 128 neurons to update the
weight and bias of the input data:
Gh1 = ReLU (inputG · W1G + bG
1)

(4)

The ’input’ in (5) is made up of random noise Pz (z) and
the sample label y with ReLu as the activation function. The
output layer contains 1480 neurons with the same dimension
of the Pdata (x). The computed result will be activated by the
sigmoid function for discrimination of real or fake.
G out = sigmoid(Gh1 · W2D + bD
2 )

(5)

The optimization function is the same as the discriminator.
The generator training algorithm is shown in Algorithm. 2.
The sample label y in Algorithm.
2 should ⎞
be consistent with
⎛
z11 · · · z1n
⎜ .
.. ⎟
..
⎟
y in Algorithm. 1. Zτ = ⎜
.
. ⎠,n = 100.
⎝ ..
zm1 · · · zmn

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 2 The training of Generator of PacketCGAN

TABLE I: Experimental Environment Parameters

Input: random noise Zτ , and label yτ , τ is the number of
iterations
Output: synthesized data gτ
1: Set the relevant initialization parameters, e represents the
training cycle: epoches.
2: for τ in e do
3:
for each batch of m input data do
4:
concatenant Zτ with yτ :
5:
Compute the output using Equation. (4);
6:
Compute the output using Equation. (5);
7:
Output generation data according to Equation. (5);
8:
Optimal the loss function
9:
Update weights and bias;
10:
end for
11: end for

Parameters

GPU

Nvidia GPU(GeForce GTX 1050Ti)

Operating System

Win 10

Deep learning platform

TensorFlow 1.13.1 + Keras 1.0.7

CUDA Version

9.0

CuDNN Version

7.6.0

posed classiﬁcation methods, precision is the percentage
of packets that are properly attributed to the targeted
application.
nP
(6)
rp = P T P .
nT + nF
•

V. E VALUATION AND E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Settings
1) Dataset for Evaluation: Two public datasets used in this
paper are ISCX2012 [17] and USTC-TFC2016 [18], which are
both composed of PCAP ﬁles. The full name of ’ISCX2012’
dataset is ’ISCX VPNnonVPN trafﬁc dataset’, which contains
many encryption applications or protocols such as HTTPS,
SFTP, Facebook, Hangouts, etc. In addition to these applications encapsulated in regular session, some VPN tunnel’s
applications were also captured in this dataset. 15 applications
were chosen to build the original dataset. Apparently, the original chosen dataset happens to the problem of class imbalance,
in which the majority class such as Netﬂix accounting for
25.13%, while the minor class ICQ account for only 2.05%.
10 applications were chosen from USTC-TFC2016. Balanced
dataset made by different generative methods are all 10000
samples per applications.
2) Conﬁgurations of the Computing Platform: The experimental environmental parameters of this paper are shown in
Table I. The performance evaluations are conducted using a
Dell R730 server with an Intel I7-7600U CPU 2.8 GHz, 16 GB
RAM and an external GPU (Nvidia GeForce GTX 1050TI).
The software platform for deep learning is built on Keras
library with Tensorﬂow (GPU-based version 1.13.1) as the
back-end support.
3) Description of deep learning based network trafﬁc classiﬁer: To verify the feasibility and evaluate the performance
of the PacketCGAN algorithm, we adopted three classical DL
models to classify the trafﬁc over the datasets synthesized by
different generative methods, which is MLP, CNN and SAE,
respectively. The detail of these three models can be ﬁnd in
our previous works [5].
4) Performance Metrics for Classiﬁcation: The performance metrics used for evaluations of network trafﬁc classiﬁers are Precision, Recall and F1 score.
P
• Precision: precision rp is the ratio of true positives nT
P
P
over the sum of nT and false positives nF . In the pro-

Category

P
Recall: recall rc is the ratio of nP
T over the sum of nT
N
and false negatives nF or the percentage of packets in
an application class that are correctly identiﬁed.

rc =
•

nP
T
.
P
nT + nN
F

(7)

F1 -score: the F1 score rf is a widely-used metric in
information retrieval and classiﬁcation that considers both
precision and recall as follows:
rf =

2rp · rc
.
rp + r c

(8)

B. Data Augmenting using PacketCGAN
1) Data Augmenting Methods handling the problem of class
imbalance: In this paper, four methods were used to address
the problem of the unbalanced dataset for the purpose of
comparism. The ﬁrst one is random oversampling method
(ROS) mentioned in Section II-B . The essence of this method
is to randomly copy some samples of minor class to supplement the dataset. Since the simple method is only a copy
of the original data, it will lead to some wrong features be
learned by the model easily and even over-ﬁtting. The second
method is SMOTE in which minority samples are generated
by synthetic samples rather than copies. The third one is
vanilla GAN with a generator and discriminator based on
MLP. The last method is to generate minor sample data using
our PacketCGAN generator. The dataset balanced by different
methods is described in V-A1.
2) The Architecture of PacketCGAN: In our experiments,
a fully connected MLP network was adopted to design generators and discriminators. The generator’s input is a 100dimensional vector generated by random Gaussian noise with
additional 15 applications types for ISCX2012 or 10 for
USTC-TFC2016 datasets. The next three hidden layers have
128, 256, 512 neurons, and 1480 output neurons with additional 15 for ISCX2012 or 10 for USTC-TFC2016 datasets.
Therefore, input of discriminator network is 1495 or 1490
dimension vectors mixed by real trafﬁc data or generated data.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Three hidden layers and output layers are both activated by
LeakyReLU.
3) The Training of PacketCGAN: Table II shows the parameters of the optimizer, loss function, epoches, and mini batch
used in the deep training model training process.
TABLE II: Training Parameters of Packet CGAN
Training Parameters

Generator

Discriminator

Optimizer

Adma

Adma

Loss Function

Cross-Entropy

Cross-Entropy

Epoches

200000

200000

Mini batch

64

64

Figure 4 shows the trend of loss of generator and discriminator during the PacketCGAN training process. It can
be seen that PacketCGAN does not improve the unstability
characteristics of GAN. The loss of G and D always ﬂuctuates
within a range instead of convergence. Nevertheless, it is a big
improvement that only one CGAN model needs to be trained
when using PacketCGAN compared with vanilla GAN. One
can generate any samples with the additional input of the
applications types as conditional c, while vanilla GAN can
only generate one type of samples at a time, that means we
can control the output of the PacketCGAN generator so that
we can easily generate speciﬁed minor classes samples needed
to be augmented to handle the problem of class balance.

TABLE III: Classiﬁcation Performance Statistics.
data augmenting methods

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1-Score

unbalanced dataset

0.9797

0.9759

0.9775

0.9766

ROS dataset

0.9889

0.9892

0.9889

0.9891

SMOTE dataset

0.9769

0.9751

0.9789

0.971

GAN dataset

0.9766

0.9766

0.9767

0.9766

PacketCGAN dataset

0.9951

0.9936

0.9958

0.9947

VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a CGAN-based trafﬁc data
augmenting method called PacketCGAN to solve the class
imbalance problem in the dataset. After the speciﬁed sample data is generated by the generator of PacketCGAN, the
synthesized data is combined with the original data to build
a new balanced dataset. We use MLP/CNN/SAE models to
verify the classiﬁcation performance over different datasets.
The experimental results show that the balanced dataset augmented by FlowCGAN can achieve better performance than
the others including ROS, SMOTE and GAN. In the future, we
will further study other types of GAN applications in trafﬁc
classiﬁcation and try to solve the problems of unstable training
and mode collapse.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (61972211)
R EFERENCE
[1] P. Wang, F. Ye, and X. Chen, “A smart home gateway platform for data
collection and awareness,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56,
no. 9, pp. 87–93, Sep. 2018.
[2] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A smart automated signature

(a) d loss for ISCX2012

(b) g loss for ISCX2012

Fig. 4: Loss of PacketCGAN

extraction scheme for mobile phone number in human-centered smart
home systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 30 483–30 490, 2018.
[3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions
in trafﬁc classiﬁcation,” IEEE Network, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, January

Fig. 5 shows the Confusion Matrices of the CNN-based
encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation model based on 4 datasets
augmented by four different generative methods, which
are ROS/SMOTE/GAN/CGAN over USTC-TFC2016, respectively. The elements on the diagonal of Confusion Matrix refer
to the correct ones of classiﬁcation and all the others are misclassiﬁed. It can be clearly seen that the false positive rate
of minor class in Fig. 5(d) is lower than ROS as shown in
Fig. 5(a), SMOTE as shown in Fig. 5(b) and GAN as shown
in Fig. 5(c).
Fig 6 shows the performance metrics of 4 datasets augmented on ISCX2012 more clearly. As we can see from Fig 6
that PacketCGAN greatly outperforms the other three methods
for the minor class like gmail, facebook.

2012.
[4] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescap, “Mobile encrypted
trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning,” in 2018 Network Trafﬁc
Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA), June 2018, pp. 1–8.
[5] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning based
encrypted network trafﬁc classiﬁcation in sdn home gateway,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 55 380–55 391, 2018.
[6] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and
Security Informatics (ISI), pp. 43–48, 2017.
[7] Z.Wang, “The application of deep learning on trafﬁc identiﬁcation,”
Available from http:// www.blackhat.com, 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) ROS

(b) SMOTE

(c) GAN

(d) PacketCGAN

Fig. 5: Confusion Matrices of CNN-based encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation method on USTC-TFC2016

(a) ROS

(b) SMOTE

(c) GAN

(d) PacketCGAN

Fig. 6: Performance metrics of DL-based encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation method on ISCX2012

[8] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, “Net-

“Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Int.

work trafﬁc classiﬁer with convolutional and recurrent neural networks

Res., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002. [Online]. Available:

for internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18 042–18 050, 2017.

http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1622407.1622416

[9] L. Vu, C. T. Bui, and Q. U. Nguyen, “A deep learning based method

[14] L. Vu, C. Thanh Bui, and U. Nguyen, “A deep learning based method

for handling imbalanced problem in network trafﬁc classiﬁcation,” in

for handling imbalanced problem in network trafﬁc classiﬁcation,” 12

Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Information
and Communication Technology, ser. SoICT 2017.

2017, pp. 333–339.

New York,

[15] R. Hasibi, M. Shokri, and M. Dehghan, “Augmentation scheme for deal-

NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 333–339. [Online]. Available: http:

ing with imbalanced network trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning,”

//doi.acm.org/10.1145/3155133.3155175
[10] X. Chen, J. Yu, F. Ye, and P. Wang, “A hierarchical approach to
encrypted data packet classiﬁcation in smart home gateways,” in 2018

ArXiv, vol. abs/1901.00204, 2019.
[16] C. X. Wang Pan, “Encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation method based on
stacked automatic encoder,” 2018, pp. 1–8.

IEEE 16th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing,

[17] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. Mamun, and A. Ghorbani, “Char-

16th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 4th Intl Conf on

acterization of encrypted and vpn trafﬁc using time-related features,” 02

Big Data Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Science and Technology

2016.

Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), Aug 2018, pp. 41–45.

[18] and, , and and, “Malware trafﬁc classiﬁcation using convolutional neural

[11] L. Vu, D. Van Tra, and Q. U. Nguyen, “Learning from imbalanced

network for representation learning,” in 2017 International Conference

data for encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation problem,” in Proceedings of the

on Information Networking (ICOIN), Jan 2017, pp. 712–717.

Seventh Symposium on Information and Communication Technology,
ser. SoICT ’16.

New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 147–152.

[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3011077.3011132
[12] N. Japkowicz, “Learning from imbalanced data sets: A comparison of
various strategies.” AAAI Press, 2000, pp. 10–15.
[13] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.