10452

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

Embedding Blockchain Technology Into IoT for
Security: A Survey
Li Da Xu, Fellow, IEEE, Yang Lu , Member, IEEE, and Ling Li

Abstract—In recent years, the Internet of Things (IoT) has
made great progress. The interconnection between IoT and the
Internet enables real-time information processing and transaction
implementation through heterogeneous intelligent devices. But
the security, the privacy, and the reliability of IoT are key challenges that limit its development. The features of the blockchain,
such as decentralization, consensus mechanism, data encryption,
and smart contracts, are suitable for building distributed IoT
systems to prevent potential attacks and to reduce transaction
costs. As a decentralized and transparent database platform,
blockchain has the potential to raise the performance of IoT
security to a higher level. This article systematically analyzes
state of the art of IoT security based on the blockchain,
paying special attention to the security features, issues, technologies, approaches, and related scenarios in blockchain-embedded
IoT. The integration and interoperation of blockchain and IoT is
an important and foreseeable development in the computational
communication system.
Index Terms—Blockchain, decentralization, information communication technology (ICT), Internet of Things (IoT), security,
smart contract.

I. I NTRODUCTION
T PRESENT, the Internet of Things (IoT) is an enormous ecosystem. Its timeliness, convenience, inclusiveness, scalability, integration, and interoperability make IoT
an unparalleled prospect for further development. Its applications extend to a wide range of fields, such as agriculture
and food traceability, remote medicare and hospitality, location
and navigation, logistics and operations, manufacturing and
automation, smart city and home use, etc. At the same time,
more and more security vulnerabilities have arisen—urgent
issues that need to be solved. During the first half of 2017,
the number of attacks on IoT devices increased by 280%.
By 2021, corporate spending on information security related
to IoT is projected to increase from the current $83.5 billion to $119.9 billion. Based on the architecture of IoT itself,
many effective paradigms and protocols have been used to
prevent or to eliminate potential security risks. But these have
not been enough. IoT requires the assistance of appropriate

A

Manuscript received September 14, 2020; revised November 15, 2020;
accepted February 8, 2021. Date of publication February 19, 2021; date of
current version June 23, 2021. (Corresponding author: Yang Lu.)
Li Da Xu is with the IT&DS, Old Dominion University, Norfolk,
VA 23529 USA.
Yang Lu is with the Department of Information Systems and Operations
Management, University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK 73034 USA (email: ziiyuu@gmail.com).
Ling Li is with the Department of Information Technology & Decision
Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3060508

technology and mechanisms to improve its overall security
level. With the rapid development of the blockchain, its security functions have been revealed, and they have become
potential approaches for IoT security, with a special focus on
its decentralized and transparent system, as well as on its consensus mechanisms and privacy protocols, encrypted data and
management, and smart contract agreement [1]–[4].
The IoT refers to a real-time information-sharing system for
objects based, on Internet technology, using radio-frequency
identification (RFID) and product electronic coding. IoT has
gradually developed into an information industry chain, integrating the Internet as well as information and communication
technologies, such as sensors and cloud computing. At this
point in time, IoT has penetrated into many aspects of human
life, such as Industry 4.0, the smart society, artificial intelligence (AI), and 6G. IoT is a network that connects as many
things as possible, such as RFID, infrared sensors, global positioning systems, laser scanners, etc. The system connects all
possible devices to the Internet for information exchange and
communication, in order to intelligently identify, locate, track,
monitor, and manage the entire network [5]–[8].
Blockchain is a peer-to-peer (P2P) distributed ledger technology based on encryption algorithms and a shared database
technology on the Internet. Blockchain technically solves
trust-relevant issues. The secure transmission of the hash
chain-based encryption algorithm and the time stamp mechanism of the certificate value ensure data traceability and
irreversible modification. Consistency algorithms are used to
ensure the relationship between the node and the block data.
Programmable smart contracts are guaranteed, based on the
consistency of the automated script code and the Turing virtual
machine. The blockchain is a powerful security system based
on cryptography, communication technology, and the consensus mechanism. Blockchain is revolutionizing the IoT system,
in a variety of aspects. The unique features of blockchain—its
P2P decentralized network, its open and transparent multiparty
consensus, and its untampered data—give IoT the ability to
achieve higher security standards [9]–[11].
Blockchain technology can be applied to various systems,
such as identity management, supply chain management, and
the IoT. Using a P2P network of computers will run the protocols and will hold an encrypted and immutable copy of
transactions on every node on the network. Blockchain and
the related technologies have the potential to resolve several
of the key security issues of IoT.
1) Blockchain ensures security of IoT through consensus
mechanisms. The reason for the security issues is the
lack of trust mechanisms between devices within the IoT

c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2327-4662 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

10453

TABLE I
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN C ENTRALIZED AND D ECENTRALIZED S YSTEM

system. Blockchain provides a mechanism that does not
require trust between nodes.
2) Blockchain solves the reliability of IoT. The distributed
network structure of blockchain guarantees that, even
if one or more nodes are attacked, the data of the
entire network system is still reliable and safe. When
the system needs to prohibit a participant who behaves
inappropriately, the consensus mechanism can be used
to identify the participant through the 51% nodes agreement without affecting the overall performance.
3) Blockchain can significantly reduce equipment costs
and increase the effectiveness of the entire IoT system.
Blockchain makes full use of P2P computing to process hundreds of billions of transactions that occur
in IoT. Blockchain can reduce costs incurred during
the establishment and the maintenance of a centralized
database. Meanwhile, the blockchain can make full use
of the computing, storage capacity, and broadband of
idle devices distributed in IoT, reducing calculation and
storage costs.
4) Blockchain can extend the life cycle of products
or services. IoT, under the blockchain model, transfers the responsibility of maintaining equipment to a

self-maintaining community. This fact renders IoT not
obsolete, regardless whether it is in a product life cycle
or beyond a life cycle, but this will save infrastructure
costs [12]–[18].
IoT and blockchain are emerging technologies that are attracting a lot of attention but, most importantly, security is a critical
factor that affects the smooth and successful integration of
blockchain into IoT, in order to improve the performance of
IoT security. This article compares the extant survey (review)
papers about IoT security. It is better to divide the selected
papers into two categories: 1) survey papers about IoT security and 2) papers about blockchain-based IoT security. The
selected papers were culled from popular academic databases,
such as IEEE Xplore, Web of Science (WoS), and Scopus.
Based upon the recent five-year citation (Google Scholar),
15 papers were selected (Table I). Seven papers are about
IoT security and eight papers are about blockchain-based IoT
security. Specifically, the papers about IoT security focus on
IoT security and the related challenges and future directions.
Most of the papers about blockchain-based IoT security discuss the way in which blockchain can be integrated into
the IoT system for security and the relevant anti-measures
against potential attacks to IoT. However, only a few of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10454

Fig. 1.

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

Roadmap of this article.

selected papers illustrate scenarios of attacks to IoT security under blockchain. Based upon the foundation of these
papers, this article not only systematically illustrates the security related issues in IoT, but it also highlights the way in
which blockchain-based mechanisms handle security in the
entire IoT system, including features, functions, categories,
measures, scenarios, challenges, future directions, etc.
Our article is a relatively comprehensive survey of
blockchain-based IoT security. It aims to recognize and clarify
IoT security issues under blockchain, from different perspectives. The goal of this article is to provide an in-depth survey
of the use of blockchain technology to provide and improve the
performance of IoT security and privacy. A detailed roadmap
(Fig. 1) is offered, to provide readers with a clear view of the
construct.
In Section I, readers are offered a general idea about the
status of IoT development, a brief interpretation to IoT, the
potential integration of IoT and blockchain, and a summary
and comparison of survey papers about blockchain-based IoT
security.
In Section II, readers become familiar with the IoT risks in
data gathering, data transmission, embedded tags, data storing,
authentication and access control, and infrastructure.
In Section III, readers get information about the differences
between the centralized and decentralized platforms, decentralization, consensus algorithm and trust, chronological and
distributed data, data encryption, and smart contracts.

In Section IV, readers learn about the taxonomy of
blockchain-based IoT security; structural security, such
as sensor layers, network layers, and application layers;
and functional security, such as device safety upgrades,
access control, identity authentication, data assurance, antiDistributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attack, and IoT network
self-regulation.
In Section V, readers become familiar with different types
of attacks of abandon: Denial of Service (DoS), DDoS,
equipment injection, falsifying, link, modifying, public block
modifying, and time interval destruction.
In Section VI, readers recognize the three categories of
blockchain: 1) public; 2) private; and 3) consortium and
learn about the infrastructure of blockchain-based information
sharing.
In Section VII, readers are exposed to the thinking about
the framework of blockchain-based IoT security; the decentralized and disintermediated IoT platform; data processing and the provenance system; and public service, such
as the healthcare industry, the traffic management, and the
smart city.
In Section VIII, readers are exposed to two parts: 1) the
technical challenges, such as the performance of IoT data processing, the consensus mechanism, network bandwidth, unreliable data communication and 2) the inconsistency of block
recording; and research trends, such as a new blockchainbased business mode, the integration of the blockchain and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

edge computing for IoT security, a double-chained IoT security
scheme, the interoperability of IoT, blockchain, and 6G.
This article is outlined as follows: Section II addresses the
major security risks in IoT. Section III depicts blockchainembedded IoT characteristics. Section IV discusses different
categories of security issues in IoT. Section V briefly introduces blockchain-based IoT attacks. Section VI delineates
blockchain-based information sharing security mechanisms.
Section VII illustrates the IoT security framework and applications. Section VIII discusses technical challenges and research
trends. The conclusion is found in Section IX.
II. M AJOR S ECURITY R ISKS IN I OT
The IoT technology connects various appliances, equipment,
and tools implemented with sensors, truly realizing real-time
monitoring and intelligent management and operations. With
the vigorous development of IoT, its security issues have gradually become prominent. Due to the structural deficits of IoT,
the current level of security technologies and measures do
not adapt well to the IoT ecosystem. In detail, the security
issues in IoT are the risks of data gathering, data transmission, tags being embedded, data storing, authentication and
access control, and IoT infrastructure [32]–[34].
A. Risks of Data Gathering
The original data of IoT come from a terminal device
and are collected by sensors and other devices. Due to the
large number of sensing devices in the entire IoT system,
the entire sensing control system presents multisource heterogeneity. Generally, sensors are relatively simple and cannot
be monitored effectively for a long time. This brings greater
security risks. In addition, terminal devices rarely take protective measures; attackers can easily obtain key node passwords
and other identity information and can use the information to
publish and convey incorrect information. A DoS attack is one
common security attack that could affect the normal operation
of the system [35], [36].
B. Risks of Data Transmission
Since the total amount of data collected by sensors and other
devices is not large, the complicated protection measures are
usually not taken during information transmission. This gives
attackers the opportunity to invade during data transmission.
Once this happens, it will affect the IoT system, thereby damaging user rights and causing the system to fail to perform
certain functions [23]–[25].
C. Risks of Tag Being Embedded
After data collection, IoT usually transmits information
directly to the control center, in a wireless format. However,
this procedure is directly exposed, without good protection.
Thus, if some tags are embedded in other substances, the
terminal device will always be monitored. This will lead to
the monitoring of a large amount of basic information and
the leakage of personal and private information. It even raises
social and public safety issues [22], [22].

10455

D. Risks of Data Storing
The IoT collects a lot of data and will also retain many
users’ personal and private information, such as their passwords, personal preferences, etc. Regarding the stored data,
ways to prevent theft and destruction of data and ways to
prepare, in time, if the above situation occurs, all countermeasures should be considered. In addition, when stored
data are maliciously mixed with “dirty” data, the IoT system
will appear to misfunction. Therefore, it is also necessary to consider how to deal with data pollution and other
incidents [24], [27].
E. Risks of Authentication and Access Control
Network authentication is usually divided into identity
authentication and message authentication. Identity authentication requires a key to ensure reliability. However, in
communication, if one of the secret keys is stolen, the data in
the entire communication process can be stolen, causing
losses to the system. Message identification and authentication, one of commonly used authentication methods in IoT,
is a protection method to ensure the integrity and security of
information when exchanging information. However, in the
message authentication process, the message authentication
code is usually static. The intruder can obtain the correct message authentication code through exhaustive or surveillance
methods, and then pretend to be the receiver and interact with
the involved parties. This phenomenon can lead to the leakage
of a large amount of data, in the IoT system [28], [29].
F. Risks of IoT Infrastructure
The current system architecture of IoT is a centralized and
supervised architecture. In this architecture, the establishment
of a system trust mechanism is very simple and a reliable third
party is required to uniformly manage all device information
in the system. With the continuous development of IoT technology, the number of IoT terminal devices will reach tens
of billions. Such a huge quantity and data source will bring
tremendous pressure to the third parties. Hence, IoT needs
a more advanced architecture to reduce its reliance on third
parties and to establish a new trust mechanism in order to
improve the overall performance of the system [30]–[32].
III. C HARACTERISTICS OF B LOCKCHAIN -E MBEDDED I OT
The terms “IoT” and “blockchain” both have the meaning
of “connection,” i.e., “net” and “chain.” IoT is a technology
that connects people, devices, and platforms through various sensing terminals to achieve information transmission and
service. Blockchain is a technology that integrates cryptography, consensus protocols, a P2P network, and smart contracts
for data exchange, processing, and storage. It can be seen
that IoT and blockchain are two different dimensions of the
information processing system: 1) IoT includes all of the entities with physical space and 2) aims to break through the
information flow according to the communication protocol;
blockchain focuses on safely managing the flow of information
in a timely manner. Therefore, the link between IoT and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10456

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

TABLE II
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN C ENTRALIZED AND D ECENTRALIZED S YSTEMS

blockchain lies in information storage, encryption security, and
value transfer [37], [38].
IoT connects hundreds of millions of devices. Ensuring the
privacy and the security of each device and interconnection
between different devices is not easy to achieve. The P2P
propagation has high network latency in the system. When
the number of nodes is too large, the order of transactions observed by each node over a period of time may
not be identical. Hence, IoT needs a mechanism to allow
it to reach an agreement on the sequence of the transactions that occur within similar time periods. The consensus
mechanism improves the privacy and the security of data transmitted between IoT devices. Blockchain is a powerful tool
that can be used to construct a more secure IoT network by
employing blockchain’s major features: decentralization, consensus algorithm and trust, chronological and distributed data,
data encryption, and smart contracts [39], [40].
Traditionally, all data, such as user account information and
transaction history, are stored and regulated in the centralized
database. Security and privacy are poor; once the database
is attacked, the damaged data are difficult to recover. Users
have only their own records and cannot know the transaction records of other users; thus, the establishment of the
mutual trust network is affected. In a blockchain system, each
node becomes an independent provider and receiver, and each
entity is evenly dispersed. The form of the direct P2P platform has the potential to reduce unnecessary costs, such as
power loss and transaction costs. It is also possible to conduct
an information exchange between nodes in different regions
and to allocate transactions across regions. All information
and nodes can be anonymous, in order to ensure the security
of the users. The decentralized system eliminates the need
for a central supervision, improves data sharing and security, optimizes revenues and efficiency, and increases mutual
trust between entities. The following table (Table II) briefly
addresses the differences between the centralized and the
decentralized platforms [12]–[16].
A. Decentralization
The main feature of blockchain is decentralization. Unlike
the traditional network system, in the blockchain network,

the processes of data interaction, downloading, and verification do not have a supervised central node but, rather,
a decentralized structure composed of multiple nodes within
the system. Also, unlike the traditional structure, each node
in the network does not rely on unified management, and
the nodes’ functions and roles are identical. When data are
transmitted between different nodes, the receiving node will
perform identity verification on the sending node. After the
verification is executed, the received data record will be
broadcast on the entire network. Blockchain, using mathematical algorithms to implement a trust mechanism, can
effectively prevent the centralized structure of the IoT system
from paralyzing the entire network due to malicious security
attacks [14]–[16], [40]–[43].
This decentralization means that the flow of data between
nodes is not limited to a central point and is not dependent
on third parties. The blockchain-distributed nodes form a P2P
network, which consists of verification, propagation, and consensus mechanisms. Under the premise of security between
nodes, the collection, verification, storage, and dissemination
of data can effectively avoid high-cost, high-risk, and inefficient problems in the centralized system. In a blockchain
system, there is no centralized node and no managerial structure. Rather, many nodes constitute a distributed network.
The various methods of security maintenance in the network
depend on all the nodes that have authorities and capabilities within the network. Each node is equal, and there
is no hierarchical mechanism among the nodes [14]–[16],
[40]–[43].
Each node has a complete data record. When a node
receives data from another node, the node verifies the identity and data of the other node. If the verification passes, the
data received by the node will be propagated to other nodes
and to the entire network. The verification, storage, maintenance, and transmission of data in a blockchain network
are based on a distributed structure. The algorithm and protocol of the trust consensus mechanism replace the mutual
trust construct between the centralized authorities. Hence, the
blockchain optimizes the centralized structure of IoT and
reduces the dependence of IoT on the centralized model.
Blockchain has changed the way in which the IoT processes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

data, preventing damage to the entire system caused by
a centralized IoT structure [14]–[16], [40]–[43].
B. Consensus Algorithm and Trust
The consensus mechanism solves the problem of how
blockchain can achieve consistency in distributed scenarios.
It is one of the key factors of the blockchain system. The consensus mechanism ensures the fairness of each node in the P2P
network. It is a part of the entire system and a unified agreement that all nodes need to follow. The consensus mechanism
is a mechanism that motivates the system’s ability to screen
honest nodes and merge them to form an unchanging record. It
depends on the distributed maintenance of each node to a common ledger database with unified content and it is difficult to
tamper with, in the blockchain system. The maintenance process is not only a process in which each node in the blockchain
competes to accept new transaction record, but it is also a process in which each node verifies the validity of the information
recorded in the blockchain system. The blockchain consensus mechanisms include the Proof of Work (PoW), Proof of
Share (PoS), Delegated Proof of Sake (DPoS), and practical
Byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) [24]–[27].
In the blockchain system, the address associated with the
public key in the asymmetric encryption algorithm is used
to redistribute user identities, so the traditional PKI-based
certificate authority is no longer needed, thus avoiding the
problem of certificate authority. The blockchain uses a consensus algorithm to decompose and establish a trust mechanism
in the entire network. In this mechanism, there is no need
to share identity information, just to replace the address to
interact; nodes can also change their addresses. The consensus mechanism can resolve security issues in the information
transmission of IoT and can protect the privacy of specific
devices or users [13]–[17].
Due to the decentralization of blockchain, data transmission between nodes is secure, open, and transparent. The
mechanisms of the blockchain technically avoid the crucial
issue of trust between mutual parties; they implement algorithms to autonomously identify and verify the authentic
entities and transactions. Blockchain retains all the transaction
data in each block. Blockchain users can get all the data in
blockchain without additional centralized processing. The feature of blockchain trust can be applied to the trust mechanism
of IoT so that transactions between users can be implemented
autonomously, without a trusting mechanism. Additionally, the
data recorded in the ledger of the block are more transparent
and reliable [12], [14]–[16], [41].

10457

timestamp, as an important parameter of the Proof of Existence
(PoE), can confirm that some data must exist at a certain point.
This ensures that the blockchain database is not tampered with.
Time order is used to ensure the security of IoT data, preventing
attackers from injecting a large amount of irrelevant data into
the data platform, in order to prevent data services from being
blocked [14]–[16], [44]–[47].
In the blockchain system, the function of a block is like
a ledger. It can record all information exchanges on the entire
blockchain, and the information records can be checked by
other nodes at any time. Unlike the general recording method,
the information records of a blockchain are scattered on all
nodes without a center, forming a typical distributed database
system. When some nodes are attacked or when data are damaged, other nodes still have complete information, so this will
not affect the system. This feature will significantly improve
the data and information storage security of IoT [45], [46].
D. Data Encryption
In the blockchain system, when transmitting information, an
asymmetric encryption algorithm is used to ensure data security. The principle of the asymmetric encryption algorithm
is that both sending and receiving nodes need to generate
a pair of public and private keys in advance for encryption and decryption. Before the sending nodes transmit to the
receiving nodes, both nodes will share a public key with each
other, then the sender uses the receiver’s public key to encrypt
the information, and the encrypted information can only be
decrypted with the private key. Only the receiving node knows
the private key, thus ensuring the reliability and security of the
transmitted information [14]–[16].
Blockchain uses asymmetric encryption, including
data encryption and digital signatures, to encrypt data.
Data encryption in a blockchain ensures the security of data
and reduces the risk of lost or corrupted data. In transaction
processing, the blockchain uses a timestamp mechanism to
generate an ID for each transaction. The user can query the
relevant transaction data according to the ID. When the new
block is verified, the current block is added to the main
block. Each block uses a hash of an algorithm to identify
its uniqueness. If an attacker intends to tamper with the
data, more than half of the nodes must confirm. For the
system and the structure of blockchain, this possibility is
very small. Transaction data are transmitted over the network
and is digitally signed, aiming to indicate the identity and
approval of the data content. The digital signature algorithm commonly used is the elliptic-curve digital signature
algorithm (ECDSA) [14]–[16], [48]–[50].

C. Chronological and Distributed Data
Blockchain uses timestamps to identify and to record
each transaction. A time dimension is added to the data,
and the data have a time order. Sequential confirmation makes
the data traceable. The timestamp method not only guarantees
the originality of the data but it also reduces the traceability
cost of the transaction. Time order data enhance the irreversible
modification of information. The data of the common ledger
are open and they are transparent to the involved parties. The

E. Smart Contract
The IoT responds and executes the actions needed to meet
the established conditions and rules, and the process should
be performed step by step. Some operations rely on the
status parameter to determine whether to perform the next
step, making the operation complex and time consuming.
Hence, multiple operations cannot be efficiently performed
automatically and continuously. A smart contract is a set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10458

Fig. 2.

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

Taxonomy of blockchain-based IoT security.

of commitments defined in a digital form. From the user’s
point of view, a smart contract is an automatic guarantee
program. When certain conditions are met, the smart contract automatically releases and transmits the corresponding
information. From a technical perspective, a smart contract
is a Web server. This server is not built on the Internet, but
runs specific contract programs on the blockchain. Smart contracts are programmable contracts. They convert transactions
between users into a code that is stored in a blockchain and
is tagged with a unique blockchain address. The blockchain
platform enables smart contracts to self-manage and even
to have legal force. Smart contracts strengthen the mutual
trust mechanism between Internet users and achieve mutual
trust [14]–[16], [48]–[50].
As long as the contract conditions are met, the chain code
of the smart contract can automatically perform multiple operations in succession. Smart contracts automate the business
logic, as well as legal rights and obligations, provide the
foundation for security and privacy protection, and increase
the efficiency of IoT. According to each user’s requirement,
smart contracts can automatically employ different protection mechanisms, according to their different levels of privacy
information [51]–[54].

IV. C LASSIFICATION OF S ECURITY IN I OT
A. Taxonomy of Blockchain-Based IoT Security
Blockchain relies on the powerful computing power generated by consensus algorithms, such as PoW for distributed
systems, to prevent external attacks and to ensure data security.
It solves the general problem of the Byzantine mechanisms
and it establishes a decentralized and trustworthy system. It

completes the value transfer in the process of information sharing and exchange, fulfilling the requirements of information
availability and reliability [55]–[57].
IoT is a comprehensive system that, possibly, consists of
everything. As an emerging technology, blockchain is capable of changing the transaction process of IoT and can
improve security performance throughout the whole system.
As indicated in Fig. 2, our review will illustrate IoT security
issues from both the structural and the functional perspectives.
Specifically, the structural security focuses on three IoT layers:
1) the sensor layer; 2) the network layer; and 3) the application layer, as well as on IoT device surveillance; the functional
security includes device safety upgrade, privacy protection,
access control, identity authentication, data assurance, antiDDoS mechanism, and IoT network self-regulation.
B. Structural Security
IoT applications have grown in various fields but, due to
the multiple-source heterogeneity, openness, and universality, the IoT and related objects still need to resolve security
issues. One critical challenge for IoT security comes from the
underlying architecture of the IoT ecosystem; it is based on
a centralized infrastructure interconnected with a server and
a device. All devices are identified, authenticated, and connected by a centralized server that supports huge processing
and storage capacity.
According to their differing perspectives, scholars express
various views on the IoT structure. Our study focuses on
the security issues that mainly involve three layers: 1) the
sensor layer; 2) the network layer; and 3) the application
layer [1], [2], [58]. The layers of IoT security are improved
by the blockchain. Different types of attacks to these layers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

10459

TABLE III
S ECURITY I SSUES OF THE T HREE I OT L AYERS

are addressed in Table III. Associated with the three layers of
IoT, a blockchain can participate in the success of its security
by implementing diversified mechanisms and protocols.
1) Security Issues in the Sensor Layer: The sensor layer is
the basis for the development and the application of IoT. Its
main function is to collect, identify, and control information.
The sensing layer consists of malicious devices and gateways.
The sensing nodes have multisource heterogeneity, but the
function is simple and lacks effective monitoring. Terminal
nodes are more vulnerable to attacks [4].
The attacker intercepts, forges, falsifies, and replays the
data or the command transmitted in the sensor network in order
to obtain individual bits of sensitive information or to cause
information transmission errors. The attacker takes advantage
of the vulnerability of the IoT terminal to acquire the identity and password. The attacker performs illegal or malicious
attacks through the pseudo-identity, which communicates with
other nodes, issuing false information, replacing devices, and
initiating a DDoS attack. The data collected through the sensor layer are transmitted wirelessly. The data, or even the user,
are under monitoring, which directly leads to the disclosure
or the destruction of information [3], [59].
As the weakest link in IoT security, IoT terminals can
improve security performance by integrating a security chip
into IoT devices to provide a reliable security hardware execution environment. To strengthen IoT terminal devices, the
devices can directly participate in the blockchain transaction as a blockchain node. For the weak terminal of IoT,
the terminal uses the integrated blockchain software development kit (SDK) as the client and connects the IoT gateway
in the blockchain. When the terminal node participates in
blockchain transactions, the device’s unique identifier and private key information must be stored securely. The security chip
provides a chip-level trusted identifier, sensitive information
secure storage, and an encrypted secure computing environment for the terminal node. Blockchain generates the security
and the reliability of transaction information [60], [61].

2) Security Issues in the Network Layer: The network layer
mainly accesses the information of the sensing layer through
the network (such as the wireless communication network,
Internet, and satellite network) and transmits data to the IoT
platform. It is completed in this manner since the collected
information needs to be transmitted in real time through
various networks.
Since the amount of data transmitted by devices in IoT
is small, there is no encryption algorithm to protect the
data. Data may be stolen, tampered with, attacked, and/or
destroyed during transmission. The IoT is an open network
in which multiple networks overlay. With the development
of network convergence and the increasing complexity of
network architectures, more and more communication protocols appear. When data are transferred from one network
to another, a variety of issues, such as authentication, key
negotiation, data confidentiality, and integrity protection, is
involved [15], [62], [63].
3) Security Issues in the Application Layer: The application layer is the bridge between the IoT system and the user.
It provides customized services, authentication, privacy protection, and user action instructions to the processing layer.
At the same time, the application layer also has information
processing and resource management functions. The application layer is directly related to the external entities and holds
a large amount of private information [64]–[66].
The application layer stores large amounts of user data
and involves several questions: how to store data efficiently
to avoid data loss or corruption? how to isolate data for
multitenant applications? how to prevent data services from
being blocked? and how to quickly recover data errors?
Each of these questions is related to IoT security. In addition, an attacker could inject a large amount of irrelevant
data into the original data, causing system misjudgment and
data contamination. The authentication approach of the application layer is the message verification between the sender
and the receiver code. However, during the communication

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10460

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

process, the authentication code is static and is easily used
by others, resulting in incorrect authentication and security
issues [3], [16].
4) IoT-Embedded Device Surveillance and Synchronization:
IoT devices operate in centralized systems in which the trust
mechanism is relatively easy to set up but requires a trusted
third party to monitor all devices. However, the trusted third
party cannot handle the increasing large number of devices
infinitely [18]. Decentralized operation systems reduce the
operational processes of the physical network. Meanwhile, it
becomes necessary to establish a new mutual trust mechanism
in order to maintain the consensus between devices and to
ensure the performance of the system [39]. Different devices
are connected by layers within the infrastructure. A security
layer, the security abstraction layer, is capable of detecting and
separating malicious devices [63]. Although the extra layer
makes the entire structure more complicated, the present technology and protocol can fulfill the configuration of finding
abnormal working devices and keeping system consistency.
Another effective method integrates the blockchain network
with a software paradigm, aiming at limiting possible attacks
such as software-defined networking (SDN) [67], [68].
The integration of IoT and blockchain is at the early
stage. With further development, the deficiency of the integration, such as insufficient computational and storage capacity
and limited communication resources, will become clear.
Blockchain synchronization is an effective way to balance
the traffic between the blockchain system and the IoT-related
devices. In other words, certain blockchain mechanisms can
help each IoT device stay synchronized toward the protocol
of smart contracts, thus guaranteeing the security of the IoT
network [40], [69].

C. Functional Security
The accessing of large-scale IoT terminal devices establishes a crucial challenge to network capacity expansion and
to centralized platform performance. As a heterogeneous converged network, IoT not only has the same security issues
as sensor networks, mobile communication networks, and
the Internet but also has its particularities, such as a device
safety upgrade and privacy protection, access control, identity
authentication, data assurance, anti-DDoS mechanism, and IoT
network self-regulation.
1) Device Safety Upgrade and Privacy Protection: In the
network, remotely updating the firmware of embedded devices
is one of the important means of protecting IoT. Through the
blockchain network, the firmware vendor publishes the latest
version of the firmware information to the distributed ledger
of each verification node. The device node initiates a verification request to the verification node or to another neighboring
device node associated with the smart contract, consensus
mechanisms, and other methods, in order to confirm the latest
firmware and the firmware integrity of the device. An on-time
upgrade ensures firmware upgrade security through encryption and signatures and helps minimize the impact of attacks
against firmware vulnerabilities [2], [3], [7].

One of the most well-known studies in the IoT communities is privately and securely executing queries over sensed
and prepared data on IoT devices, due to the devices’ limited
and inefficient query processing abilities. A well-designed and
privacy-preserving blockchain-based scheme can protect the
privacy of IoT devices and can improve the overall communication efficiency within the network. Popular query service
companies, such as Google, Facebook, Amazon, are eagerly
seeking practical and effective anti-attack queries to protect
security and privacy throughout IoT [70], [71]. Meanwhile,
research is paying much attention to technical issues and to the
feasibility of the queries. Blockchain has the potential to be
implemented to solve these challenges. For example, Ethereum
has been proposed for auditing and privacy preserving in
database, cloud, and fog computing, and across the entire
IoT. Associated with blockchain and with the relevant technologies, a reliable auditing system could be designed by the
extant queries, such as SQL, MapReduce, etc., [72], [73].
2) Access Control: The data generated in IoT include
a large amount of personal information that is private. If this
privacy information is disclosed, it will bring huge losses
to users. As one of the basic technologies of data protection, access control ensures that data can only be accessed
by a user with permission. Access control is based on an
authorization policy that controls access to certain resources
in order to reduce illegitimate intrusions and to ensure authorized access to resources. The access control mechanism of
the system mainly consists of authentication, authority, and
auditing [74], [75]. The blockchain-based IoT platform can
separate data and data access authority, and it can implement a decentralized personal data management system. An
application needs the authority of the owner to access the
data. The system checks the signature and all of the records
to verify that the application has access to the appropriate
data. Blockchain fully records the activities of the application,
and users in the system can change the access rights of the
data at any time [76]. Since resource constraints exist in practice, access control balances the device implementation and the
consumption of resources to secure the devices and the IoT
network [77]. In addition, access control can be programmed
to update for IoT devices; this will help them to become available, accountable, agile, and adoptable among different nodes
within the network [78], [79].
When the blockchain is combined with IoT, access control is one of the key technologies for IoT data protection.
The combination has two main types. One type is the integration of the blockchain and the existing access control model.
Blockchain is the trusted entity of the existing access control model; blockchain is combined with the role-based access
control (RBAC) model, with the attributes-based access control (ABAC) model, and with capability-based access control
(CapBAC) model. The other type is based on the different
modes of blockchain. Blockchain is not only used as a trusted
entity, based upon the characteristics of blockchain, but it even
includes a transaction or smart contract that is constructed for
access control, such as the Bitcoin-based access model and the
Ethereum-based smart contract access control [28], [80], [81].
The detailed features of each model are listed in Table IV.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

10461

TABLE IV
B LOCKCHAIN R ELATED ACCESS C ONTROL M ODEL

Since blockchain has the ability to enforce the integrity of
all of its participants at the technical level, blockchain can
play the role of a third party that provides a reliable environment for access control in IoT. As a trusted platform in
IoT access control, blockchain provides computing and storage capabilities for IoT. Computing and storage are used as the
major approaches. Some are focusing on the storage capacity
of blockchain, some are focusing on the computational power
of blockchain, and more are focusing on both computing and
storage [82], [83].
Applying blockchain to IoT access control also requires
solving a series of problems caused by the terminal nodes.
There are a large number of terminal nodes in the network.
How to effectively manage the nodes is a challenging task.
Second, it is necessary to consider that there is the storage
pressure brought by the large number of nodes to blockchain.
The third need to consider is the impact of the vast nodes on
the access control and the related transactions. Since the popular blockchains, Bitcoin and Ethereum take a long time for
transactions, they are difficult to use directly for IoT access
control [76], [81].
Blockchain can solve the dynamic problem of nodes in
IoT. Since the identity of the user in blockchain is proven
by its key, the node can be connected anytime, anywhere. The
blockchain network can operate as long as the node’s signature is correct. On the other hand, blockchain uses a P2P
network architecture. When a user node needs to access
the network, it only needs to connect to other blockchain
nodes in the network. It is not based on the geographic
location between nodes; the node only needs to select and
connect to the blockchain nodes that exist in the network.
Hence, for the dynamics of the node movement, frequent
access, or exit, blockchain is able to deal with various access
controls [75]–[79].

3) Identity Authentication: In the IoT, identity authentication technology is used to prevent illegal or unauthorized
terminal devices from connecting to the IoT network or
from launching malicious attacks, and to ensure the security of the IoT. The authentication credentials are registered
to blockchain, and the device access rights can be set
through the smart contract. When an IoT device requires
access or authentication to the IoT platform, the blockchain
system authenticates and manages the identity of the access
device, based on the node consensus mechanism, to ensure
that the device safely accesses IoT. Blockchain-based IoT
device authentication can avoid the single point of failure
risk of the centralized authentication technology and, thus,
can ensure the integrity and reliability of the IoT device’s
identity [1], [2], [14].
4) Data Assurance: Traditional database systems manage
discrete data, while IoT platforms handle streaming data.
Streaming data are real-time and continuous, and, therefore,
have the potential to be attacked or tampered with. Under
the era of big data, the storage and the processing of massive amounts of data in IoT are vulnerable to attacks. IoT
uses sensors to capture and store data through a centralized
database. Other unstructured data are stored in the cloud.
However, data need to be transmitted repeatedly during use,
causing the central server to become overloaded, and jeopardizing data security. IoT applications need to cooperate with
the security and the confidentiality of the data. Especially in
the wireless transmission of IoT, it is necessary to prevent
data leakage and illegal use. In an IoT system, data are stored
and managed by a central entity. Misconduct of data management or failure of accurate processing can result in a data loss
or a leak. Blockchain-based data operation systems adopt
a decentralized architecture that eliminates the security risks
of centralization [84], [85].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10462

Fig. 3.

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

Architecture of the anti-DDoS scheme.

The traceability of blockchain can also be applied to manipulate private data, in order to ensure data authenticity. The
data manipulation process is transparent, and data are auditable
to the user. Blockchain converts the complete information into
different blocks. Each block contains only a small portion
of the complete information and is asymmetrically encrypted
using a hash function, with a chain structure of the Byzantine,
Merkle Tree, and timestamp, in order to ensure data integrity
and consistency. Since it is difficult to attack even one block
of information, the complete information within the system is
considerably less likely to be attacked [86], [87].
5) Anti-DDoS Attack: In December 2016, the Mirai virus
ravaged the United States. The virus formed a botnet by
infecting IoT devices and launched a DDoS attack on the
domain name resolution server, causing more than half of the
U.S. network to crash. The main reason for the success of
the IoT botnet attack is that the traditional network security
model is flawed. Due to the lack of reliable authentication
and consensus mechanisms, a single point of nontrust may
spread to multiple nontrust points, infecting to the entire IoT
system [88], [89].
The distributed structure of blockchain is used to combat
DDoS attacks and to increase system throughput. The DDoS
attack sends a large number of requests to the central node
of the target system, consuming the computing resources or
the network resources of the central node and causing the
target system to crash [90]. The blockchain system can provide

a distributed noncentralized structure. Each node of blockchain
has a complete record that can verify the data of other nodes.
Hence, blockchain can be applied to build database systems, as
well as to the domain name system (DNS), to eliminate singlepoint failure, to effectively defend against DDoS attacks, and
to ensure the security of the system [91].
Some IoT devices are infected by malware viruses, forming a large-scale IoT botnet and posing a huge threat to
IoT services. In the system, most devices connect to the
network through an IoT gateway. If the device that initiated
the DDoS attack can be disconnected from the IoT gateway,
the risk of the IoT service being attacked can be reduced.
A blockchain network can be established between the IoT
gateways and the deployed smart contracts to verify, log in
to, and disconnect DDoS attacks. For example, if the home
smart device is controlled and performs a DDoS attack on an
IoT service, when the IoT service verifies the DDoS attack,
it will notify the IoT gateway. The IoT gateway will broadcast that it has been controlled and it will initiate a DDoS
attack. If the attack is verified, the attack information can be
written to the blockchain ledger. Then, all of the IoT gateways will disconnect all of the controlled smart parties to
defend against the same DDoS attacks throughout the entire
network [3], [92]. We constructed the architecture for an antiDDoS scheme, which is described in Fig. 3. A plurality of
nodes forms a blockchain network that processes a detection abnormal activity on the IoT devices that are targeted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

Fig. 4.

10463

One example of applying the blockchain in IoT.

by suspicious DDoS abnormal connections initiated by the IoT
device. Then, the node submits the preliminary detection result
to blockchain to share information of suspected DDoS abnormal connection. Based on the database’s sharing suspected
DDoS abnormal connections, a smart contract is executed to
analyze some targeted IP associated with DDoS alert. The targeted IP acknowledges the alert and sends the reward to the
corresponding node. After receiving the reward, the node filters the DDoS connection by the IoT device, based on the
newly added DDoS alert.
To achieve the above proposal, there are three key issues
that need to be addressed. Problem 1 is the DDoS anomaly
detection. One method of detecting a DDoS is to analyze the
data flow: it can directly determine the characteristics of the
protocol (such as SYN FLOOD), and it can detect whether
the IoT device has completed the TCP connection initialization with a three-time connection. If it has not completed the
connection by the third time, it is likely to be DDoS abnormal attack. The other kind of attack does not have obvious
protocol differences (such as UDP FLOOD). Thus, it is more
difficult to detect this type of DDoS attack. There is no difference between the UDP communication of the controlled IoT
device and that of a normal IoT device. In general, IoT device
activity functions are stable and fixed, and the data packet content is regular, as well. By clustering the contents of historical
UDP data packets to characterize several types of groups, realtime detection on a UDP connection to determine anomalies
shows strong potential [88], [91]. Problem 2 is how to comprehensively analyze the suspicious DDoS abnormal connections.
In a traditional solution, data integration analysis still uses the
cloud. The cloud serves as a summary of all the information.
In the analysis center, if a downtime occurs, the entire solution will fail. Under the existing centralized architecture, the
single-point attack problem cannot be solved. It is considered
that blockchain implements distributed ledger technology and

the sharing of the analysis of preliminary detection results
without using the cloud. There is the possibility of mutual
trust, as well as the existence of malicious nodes. In order to
achieve a secure and reliable sharing analysis between nodes,
the blockchain can guarantee the following points.
1) Consistency: When there are malicious nodes, each node
can still record other nodes correctly. The submitted
data are consistent with the data stored in each node.
2) Cannot Be Modified: The records approved by each node
cannot easily be tampered with.
3) Anonymous: The attacker cannot speculate the
behavior of the node based on the submitted
information [89], [90].
Problem 3 is how to ensure compliance with sourceside deployment detection and prevention. Two methods are
the establishment of incentives to attract users to accept
safety measures for their IoT devices and the establishment
of a reward mechanism from the DDoS attack victim to
the abnormal result submitter. DDoS attack victims receive
a DDoS alert to avoid losses, so they offer rewards. The submitter will receive a reward for the anomalous result that
corresponds to this alert. The reward process is open, transparent, and verifiable. Blockchain writes reward rules into the
smart contract, makes the whole process transparent to all the
nodes, and verifies the reward distribution process [90]–[92].
6) IoT Network Self-Regulation: In an untrusted Internet
environment, how to build trust between IoT devices is a challenge. Typically, a third party is required as an intermediary
between devices. Through the blockchain, an IoT device trust
relationship can be established without a third-party intervention, and interaction between devices can be performed
directly. Blockchain creates an open and transparent rule
through the algorithm and redefines how to generate credits
to create a mutual-trust network. In this system, all of the
rules are prerepresented in the form of an algorithm. Service

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10464

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

participants do not need to know the relevant information
of the other nodes, but mutual trust and transaction security are guaranteed without centralized third-party intervention.
Organizational trust can be identified, and only trust algorithms
can be used to establish mutual trust and to eliminate unified
account updates and verification processes. Activities can be
recorded, transferred, and stored for service transactions, as
well [2], [4], [10].

communicate with other devices by establishing a shared
key between nodes; 3) the authorization is required before
information exchange between different private blockchain
nodes; 4) using a double-chained structure, the information
transaction in the data block chain is invalid, and vice versa;
and 5) the method of preventing DoS attacks is also useful for
preventing DDoS. There are different measures to take against
DDoS, for different purposes and principles; an appropriate
approach should be adopted [21]–[24], [93]–[95].

V. B LOCKCHAIN -BASED I OT ATTACKS
Just as the traditional IoT system has many drawbacks that
attacks can take advantage of, the blockchain-based IoT security system does, as well. Based on the features of blockchain,
attackers change their strategies and construct new attacks on
the blockchain-based IoT system. In this section, we list popular blockchain-based IoT security attacks (Table V), such as
abandon, DoS, DDoS, equipment injection, falsifying, link,
modifying, public block modifying, and time interval destruction, among others. Blockchain-based IoT attack is a hot topic
in the disciplines of both IoT and blockchain. In this article,
popular attacks of interpretation and potential anti-measures
are briefly addressed and discussed.
A. Abandon Attack
Abandon refers to a node that holds auditing rights, discards
its members’ transactions, and isolates the members in the
blockchain system. When a node finds that its transaction has
not been processed, it can change its associated blockchain
and initiate a request to the neighboring blockchain. In the IoT
network, terminal devices or nodes are vulnerable to the attack
of abandon. A distributed block or node has the ability to deal
with abandon because of the features of decentralization and
independent of the blockchain [23]–[25], [93]–[95].
B. Denial-of-Service Attack
In a DoS attack, the attacker sends so many transactions
to the target node that it exceeds its processing capability,
leaving it with no resources to handle the transactions from
other nodes. A DoS attack is one of the popular attacks in
the blockchain and in IoT. We can construct effective logical algorithms to prevent IoT from the DoS attack. The
anti-DoS measures are: 1) the IoT node does not send transactions to other nodes unless it matches the entities in its
key list and 2) the overlapping nodes between each private
blockchain have a threshold of the maximum transaction rate.
If the threshold is exceeded, the key list is updated to prevent
the node from continuously sending transactions to the target node. In practice, the algorithms and mechanisms still
need improvement to more effectively defend against the DoS
attack [22], [23], [93]–[95].
C. Distributed Denial of Service Attack
In a DDoS attack, the attacker uses multiple nodes. The
anti-measures are: 1) infecting device nodes is very difficult
due to the use of asymmetric encryption key management
mechanism; 2) in private blockchain, node devices can only

D. Equipment Injection Attack
Equipment injection is defined as when the attacker injects
fake nodes into the network to gain access to private
information. The encryption keys are suitable to resolve this
attack in the IoT network. The injected device will be isolated,
because local communication requires a shared key between
the private blockchain nodes.
E. Falsify Attack
A falsify attack occurs when the attacker generates a block
by forging a transaction and creating a falsified consensus.
The IoT node can detect the falsified block in the verification
process by verifying the output and the owner of the ledger.
In order to achieve this goal, different consensus mechanisms
are the key [26], [93]–[95].
F. Link Attack
Link attack occurs when the attacker uses the same ID to
link transactions in multiple transactions or blockchains in the
system to find real-world identifiers corresponding to anonymous nodes. A well-designed defending mechanism occurs
when the node uses a unique private key in the transaction
and uses a partial blind signature algorithm and a one-time
public-key address [27], [93]–[95].
G. Modify Attack
A modify attack occurs when stored data are modified or
deleted in the system. The stored transaction includes a hash of
the stored data, used as evidence to store the data, or last modified to ascertain whether the data were modified or deleted. It
will not be recovered once it has been modified. A modification of the mechanism can prevent data from being modified
or deleted [28], [29], [93]–[95].
H. Public Block Modify Attack
A public block modify attack occurs when the attacker
broadcasts a fake ledger and uses it as the longest ledger, causing other nodes to use the attacker’s ledger as a real ledger in
the system. The consistency algorithm used limits the number
of blocks that can be generated in a time interval, which limits
the number of malicious blocks that can be added, preventing
an attacker from generating the longest ledger or from using
it as an actual ledger [30], [31], [93]–[95].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

10465

TABLE V
B LOCKCHAIN -BASED S ECURITY ATTACKS IN I OT

I. Time Interval Destruction Attack
A time interval destruction attack occurs when a malicious ledger generates multiple blocks in a consensus

cycle in the system. Nodes can detect that the number of blocks they receive during the consensus period
exceed the number of allowed blocks, thereby reducing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10466

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

TABLE VI
T HREE C ATEGORIZATIONS OF B LOCKCHAIN

the trust rate of
isolated [89]–[91].

the

malicious

node

before

it

is

VI. B LOCKCHAIN -BASED I NFORMATION S HARING
S ECURITY M ECHANISM FOR I OT
A. Potential Integration of Blockchain for IoT Security
The purpose of IoT information sharing security is to share
information while ensuring information security. Information
security includes confidentiality, integrity, availability, authenticity, traceability, and reliability.
For the requirements of security, ownership, and confidentiality, algorithms, such as the Rivest–Shamir–Adleman
(RSA), Elgamal, Rabin, Diffie–Hellman (DH), and ellipticcurve cryptography (ECC) are integrated into blockchain to
create mechanisms for asymmetry encryption and multisignature. The Merkle tree and its variants used in the blockchain
system support simplified payment verification (SPV), which
verifies transactions without needing a complete blockchain
to meet integrity requirements. In addition, the Merkle tree
improves the efficiency of blockchain operations by storing
partial data. This is the potential that blockchain can be applied
to IoT devices and systems [96]–[100].
Blockchain systems use encryption to protect data. All of
the nodes need to verify the data before writing it to the
block. Once it is written, users can publicly query the nodes in
the blockchain network, which helps to eliminate information
gains and to reduce trust costs. The node that has the authority, in blockchain needs, to mark the timestamp in the current
block header as the recorder of the data. Thus, the blocks
on the main chain are arranged in chronological order. As
a PoE, the timestamp adds a time dimension to the data and

is highly verifiable [101]. Combined with the chain structure
of the blockchain, it meets the requirements of traceability.
The newly generated data in the blockchain need to be verified by all or most of the nodes to be written to the shared
ledger, and the ledger, then, is maintained by all blockchain
nodes. Hence, it is difficult to tamper with or to have forgery
committed against it.
B. Infrastructure of Blockchain-Based Information
Sharing in IoT
Blockchain is categorized into three classes (Table VI):
1) the public blockchain; 2) the consortium blockchain; and
3) the private blockchain. There are no centralized official organizations or regulatory agencies in the public chain.
Participating nodes are free to enter and to leave the network.
The right to read and write data is not limited by the system.
The number of participating nodes in the public chain is large,
and the trust degree of the nodes is the lowest among the
three categories of blockchain. The consortium blockchain
comprises institutions and other agencies. It applies only to
members. The permissions of participation, read, and write
are based on specific rules. Compared with the public chain,
the consortium chain has fewer nodes, with a certain degree of
trust among the nodes. Typical consensus algorithms are the
Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT) and PBFT. The private chain
is established by the private organization itself, and different
nodes have different permissions. The private chain assumes
that the participating nodes do not attack and further relax
the assumption of the consensus mechanism. Typical consensus mechanisms are Paxos and Raft; these do not consider
Byzantine failures [102], [103].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

10467

TABLE VII
S CENARIOS OF B LOCKCHAIN -BASED I OT S ECURITY

Blockchain applications are primarily based on the public
chain. Any node can freely join the blockchain network and
can maintain ledger data. This makes the public chain more
credible, but identification and data privacy can lack safety.
First, the public network is used for different scenarios of IoT,
such as smart traffic, smart healthcare, smart agriculture, etc.
Second, the consortium chain is used for different areas of the
scenario. Consortia are formed in different authorities of the
same industry. Only a member of the alliance can maintain
the blockchain data, while other nonauthorized nodes cannot. Finally, the private chain is used between the nodes in
the area. Only these nodes can maintain the data. This fundamentally eliminates the possibility of unauthorized nodes
accessing the data. Since the data block chain is mainly used
for source data collection, the requirements of timeliness and
security are higher than that of the transaction block chain.
The private chain is more appropriate and secure; the transaction blockchain can adopt the consortium or the public chain,
according to the specific application scenario [11]–[15].
VII. I OT S ECURITY S CENARIOS U NDER B LOCKCHAIN
The challenge for IoT security is the existing ecosystem
of IoT servers and user terminals. Device connectivity and
information processing on the central server cannot accommodate the rapidly evolving transactions. The adoption of
blockchain can improve the IoT system and can raise the
security level of the entire platform [28]. This section highlights major applications of the blockchain-based IoT security
(Table VII), such as a decentralized platform, data processing
and provenance, public services, the healthcare industry, traffic
management, data provenance, and smart city and home use.
A. Framework of Blockchain-Based IoT Security Application
Both blockchain and IoT are characterized by decentralization and distribution. Security features, such as authentication
and data security storage, have the potential to address security issues. Blockchain is used to enhance the security of IoT
and is classified into the physical untrusted domain and the
blockchain domain (Fig. 4). The physical untrusted domain
contains different types of IoT terminal devices. The device
sends information possessed (e.g., device identity information,
location information, transaction information, etc.) to the
network in the blockchain domain and in the blockchain

system. The node completes the encrypted recording and the
storage of information to ensure the authenticity and integrity
of the device domain information in IoT.
B. Decentralized and Disintermediated IoT Platform
The integration of the blockchain and IoT will change
the original relationship between the involved entities. IoT
has the potential to connect all the things, and blockchain
can achieve value transfer and benefit sharing. On the basis
of the interconnections of people, things, and platform, the
blockchain establishes nodes, in a production relationship, that
automatically form a connection based on the programs and
protocols. This is a revolutionary change to the business model
based on a centralized platform. Although IoT implements the
decentralized communication of peer nodes, the relationship
between nodes still depends on centralized third-party intervention. Hence, the future business model may build a weak
centralized or decentralized paradigm. The impact of a third
party on the entire platform ecosystem will be reduced [26].
With the development of wireless communication technologies, more and more IoT application scenarios have been
achieved. The intervention of a third party not only increases
costs but it also reduces efficiency. User information may also
be compromised. Blockchain enables P2P payments without
third-party intervention. As a complementation, decentralization and centralization will be complemented into a more
powerful and secure IoT system. Vehicle of Things is one
of the rapidly developing fields [104].
C. Data Processing & Provenance System
Blockchain can be used to process private data, effectively
preventing data loss and damage caused by malicious attacks.
Blockchain protects information by data encryption. The output hash is encrypted using the private key. For verification, the
receiver decrypts the hash string using the public key, and then
recalculates the hash to validate integrity. Once the data are
stored in blockchain, users can access the data and can manage
their private information without having to access the original
data. Users can also use blockchains to protect the copyright
and ownership of their property, such as patents, videos, music,
etc. [90]–[92], [105].
Blockchain records data in blocks associated with secure
protocols, thereby improving the security of the entire

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10468

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

blockchain network. Blockchain can monitor and manage
malicious IoT-related devices. Once the data or the device
appears to be abnormal, the corresponding protection program will be immediately executed, in order to ensure the
security and reliability of the system. For example, the integration of food safety and IoT enables complete monitoring
of the food production and transportation chains. Blockchain
guarantees the authenticity and integrity of a variety of food
manufacturing processes [106]–[108].
D. Public Services
The public services of IoT have been extended to all aspects
of people’s lives, such as the healthcare industry, traffic management, and smart cities. However, there are still many
security problems when using IoT in public services. The
blockchain technology can provide protection to prevent privacy leakage and the security of service data transmission in
public services.
1) Healthcare Industry: A blockchain-based IoT healthcare
system enables the processing of smart contract information
among different parties, such as the patient, doctor, insurance
company, and pharmaceutical supplier, in a safe, transparent, scalable environment. The medical data are stored in
a common ledger and are processed smoothly. Specifically,
electronic medical records (EMRs) will be more convenient
and more scalable to adopt through the use of the decentralized blockchain platform [109]–[113]. Moreover, smart
wearable devices are increasingly being applied in the medical
industry [114], [115]. For example, a smart bracelet can detect
an individual’s heart rate and can record the user’s movements
and sleep conditions. This information can be recorded and
transmitted to the terminal nodes connected to IoT. Blockchain
encrypts personal information to ensure the integrity and the
security of the information.
2) Traffic Management: The inclusion of IoT has greatly
improved the performance of transportation, but there are still
great security risks. For instance, information obtained through
electronic sensors needs to be shared with users through a traffic command center. There may be a delay in the information
distribution process; users may not get information on time.
If the database is attacked, the entire transportation system
will be stagnant. IoT traffic effectively uses sensors, communication technologies, and AI and combines with blockchain to
build an open distributed network. Each user can receive traffic
information directly and can share current traffic status. In the
near future, driverless automatic driving can be achieved with
the use of the blockchain-based IoT platform [116]–[118].
3) Smart City: The IoT is a powerful system that provides
residents with sufficient resources and convenient services in
a smart city system, which consists of smart home, smart
health, smart energy, smart traffic, smart parking, and smart
cleaning. A smart city system is a comprehensive ecosystem in which individual information is stored and the related
requested transactions occur. The answers to questions regarding how to keep personal information private and secure, how
to ensure the safe and effective use of available resources,
and how to improve the smooth operation of the entire

system are related to the common development of people and
society. Blockchain is becoming more and more popular in
practice, adopting encryption protocols and consensus mechanisms to prevent any compromise to personal information, as
well as adopting a decentralized algorithm and a smart contract paradigm to construct a safe network and to guarantee
a higher performance smart city system. A blockchain embedded IoT platform will not only protect individual privacy and
safety for a smart city system, but it will change the original operation process from centralization to at least partial
decentralization [119]–[121].

VIII. R ESEARCH C HALLENGES AND F UTURE T RENDS
By adopting blockchain and related technologies, the IoT
network can effectively solve data management, trust, security, and privacy issues. IoT can use the security mechanism
of blockchain to establish a trusted encryption system and
to improve network security performance. However, unlike
general blockchain techniques that are typically applied to
a distributed system, the communication of IoT devices is
highly dependent on the underlying physical characteristics
(e.g., the bandwidth and performance of communication).
When the communication quality is poor, the communication
between the nodes will be unequal. This will cause problems,
such as the inability to verify the block and waste computing
resources, and it will destroy the consistency of the blockchain
system. On the other hand, due to the large number of IoT
devices and data, the generation rate of blockchains and the
capacity of blocks are very high. Blockchain can enhance
the security of IoT, but the application of blockchain in IoT
runs contrary to the low block capacity of blockchain and the
channel propagation. Therefore, the application of blockchain
enhances the security of IoT. However, there are still some
technical issues in practice, including the performance of IoT
data processing, consensus mechanisms, network bandwidth
and capacity limitations, unreliable data communication, and
the inconsistency of block recording.
A. Technical Challenges
1) Performance of IoT Data Processing: The computing
power and the storage capacity of IoT devices are, generally,
weak. This restricts the application of blockchain in IoT security. Cryptography is the basis for ensuring the security and the
reliability of blockchains. Especially, in the consortium chain,
it is necessary to use data signature technology for transaction
identification and identity authentication and to protect privacy
through data encryption technology. For some IoT devices, it is
impossible to perform signature or encryption because of their
poor computing performance. Currently, hardware encryption
engines, such as integrated security chips, can provide signature/encryption computing capabilities and can improve device
encryption computing power. In addition, the account data of
the blockchain node needs to consume a large amount of storage space and, usually, IoT devices cannot meet the storage
requirements. Not all information is necessary to be recorded
in the distributed ledger. It is better to distinguish which type

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

of data needs to be recorded and which type of data can be
recorded by other methods [38]–[40], [78].
2) Consensus Mechanisms: In the public chain, the PoW
algorithm is used to implement the consensus mechanism.
Although the PoW mining algorithm solves the transaction
consistency problem, it causes a lot of wasted resources. In
addition, mining incentives can lead to highly concentrated
mining pools. The decentralized design has a long-term consensus period, with only seven transactions per second. In the
consortium chain, the BFT algorithm is used to implement
the consensus mechanism, which solves the problem of low
efficiency and high resource consumption of the PoW algorithm. The BFT algorithm provides a large number of signature
verifications for comprehensive P2P communication monitoring anomalous behavior. But the communication complexity
is high, which brings heavy system overhead and reduces
the consensus efficiency and the node scalability. This is far
from meeting the blockchain requirements for IoT security
expectation. Hence, consensus algorithms need to be modified and improved in order to meet the development of IoT
security [11], [15], [101].
3) Network Bandwidth: The application of the blockchain
has spread, and the number of nodes in the distributed ledger
system has also increased. In the P2P architecture network,
only a small number of nodes are interconnected, and the current network can fulfill its bandwidth requirements. In future
IoT applications, the number of nodes in blockchain will be
increasing sharply. The large number of interconnections and
broadcasts between nodes can easily cause broadcast storms
and can consume too much network bandwidth. As a result,
the performance of the IoT network could be degraded or even
paralyzed. As one type of cloud computing, edge computing
has the potential to deal with distributed nodes communication.
It is likely that the problem of network bandwidth requirements for large-scale deployment blockchains can be solved
in IoT [4], [7], [43].
4) Unreliable Data Communication: Unlike computer
nodes in the Internet, IoT devices are affected by the transmission of physical underlying information. IoT devices can
communicate via wireless access, such as by distributed drones
and automotive network communications. If the quality of the
wireless link is poor, the information transmission of the node
will be unreliable, resulting in a change in the topology of
the blockchain network. The verification node would not be
able to receive the information of some devices normally,
resulting in an incomplete data process in the blockchain
system. Since the blocks are stored in a chronological order,
node communication is unreliable, and lost data cannot be
recovered [44]–[47], [84].
5) Inconsistency of Block Recording: In the IoT, the amount
of data generated varies by location and device due to computer, communication capabilities, and services. This causes
the node to synchronize the IoT data record and the block
sequence, resulting in a network node. Incomplete or inconsistent records can result in inconsistent (forked) blockchains.
The hierarchical blockchain architecture is one of the ways to
solve the inconsistency problem. The upper main blockchain
verifies and stores the entire network data by deploying nodes

10469

with large computing power and capacity. The lower subblockchain manages data for some physical areas or device
components and blocks blockchain data for different layers
to perform block management. Record rates can vary, reducing the pressure to maintain consistency across large network
sizes [93], [107], [116].
B. Research Trends
1) New Blockchain-Based Business Mode: In the future,
IoT will connect devices together to process data transactions.
It is also desirable that devices connected to IoT will have
intelligent various applications and will work independently,
under given rule logic, to achieve commercial value. It is
necessary to reliably record the transaction requests sent by
smart devices, in order to ensure the validity of transactions.
For the IoT, under the current centralized architecture, it may
be difficult to accomplish the above-mentioned autonomous
collaboration and effective transactions because the parties
involved in such collaboration and transactions often belong
to different stakeholders and have difficulty determining trust
relationships. Thus, the cooperation and the transactions of
IoT devices can only be performed under the same trust
domain. This greatly reduces the actual commercial value of
IoT applications.
Blockchain can provide direct transactions for trusted intermediaries. Autonomous distributed P2P telemetry (ADEPT) is
a joint authentication system developed by IBM and Samsung,
using blockchain. This technology builds a distributed network
of smart devices and verifies the feasibility of a decentralized IoT architecture. ADEPT enables the devices connected
to it to communicate securely and efficiently and to implement
complex business logic. For example, when its level of washing powder is insufficient, the smart contract control of the
washing machine in a home can directly purchase the powder from the supplier, and blockchain will directly confirm the
order and complete the payment operation between the smart
devices connected to the ADEPT. The blockchain of things
has the potential to develop the smart of things [1]–[4], [122].
2) Integration of Blockchain and Edge Computing for IoT
Security: Edge computing is an open platform that integrates
network, computing, storage, and application core functions
on the side close to the source, in order to provide near-end
services. Its applications are launched at the edge, accelerating
the responsiveness of Web services and meeting the industry’s
basic needs for real-time business, application intelligence, and
security and privacy protection [123].
Although edge computing reduces the security of IoT, the
coverage of edge computing is severely limited by the large
number of terminal devices in IoT. Security issues continue to
be exposed, leading to unresolved security issues in IoT and to
many new security issues in edge computing. These can result
in no security measures for data in edge computing devices,
data leakage, data tampering, data corruption, and a lack of
privacy. From the perspective of edge computing, its security
systems fall into four categories: 1) data security; 2) identity
authentication; 3) privacy protection; and 4) access control.
Blockchain can deal with trust issues, data security issues,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10470

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

identity permission issues, and privacy protection issues in
nonsecure environments, as well as other issues [56], [124].
3) Double-Chained IoT Security Scheme: In view of the
lack of credit guarantee mechanisms and the information
safety problems in IoT, information sharing, data tampering,
and decentralization research have been carried out. Moreover,
a lightweight information sharing security mechanism of IoT
is another direction for growth. Based on the blockchain, the
data blockchain and the transaction blockchain can be combined into a double-chain mode to protect data collection and
information transactions. Specifically, the data blockchain uses
the consensus mechanism to form a data ledger to prevent
tampering or destruction of the stored data; meanwhile, the
transaction blockchain provides decentralized, tamper-proof,
traceable, and efficient ledger to support payment activities and behavioral records between the different nodes of
IoT [1], [125].
4) Interoperability of IoT, Blockchain, and 6G: Integrating
blockchain into IoT will enhance the effectiveness and improve
the overall performance of the entire IoT system. Both IoT and
blockchain have the potential to be employed for the development of the next generation of mobile communication 6G. 6G
will be a more distributed network that will achieve seamless
connection throughout space, sea, sky, and land. As a comprehensive network, IoT will assist to accomplish all potential
connections of 6G; as a distributed platform, blockchain will
be used for each single terminal to guarantee the security and
performance of 6G. How to adjust the infrastructures of IoT
and the transaction procedure of the blockchain will be an
interesting question [1], [4], [8], [10].
IX. C ONCLUSION
The IoT will be increasingly combined with technologies,
such as AI, big data, cloud computing, and deep learning. Security issues and the corresponding technologies will
become more and more abundant and advanced. In addition to
traditional security methods, the security of IoT will be integrated with the blockchain to make information and systems
more reliable and more stable.
Both blockchain and IoT have the feature of decentralization, which makes integration more likely. Blockchain
offers reliable information interaction, complete data storage, trusted node authentication, and other security functions.
In IoT, the blockchain can provide access authentication,
data protection, and anti-DDoS attacks on a large number
of devices, effectively providing privacy and anonymity protection for IoT devices, and reducing single points through
flexible data interaction and node consensus. The risk of failure may be exacerbated by malicious attacks, such as botnets.
However, while on the one hand, block generation inconsistency will occur due to the huge difference in the computing
and communication capabilities of IoT devices, on the other
hand, accessing large devices will result in a huge increase
of data in the blockchain. This adds to the challenges for
the data processing and storage capabilities of the blockchain
system. In future applications, blockchain systems need to be
further improved to support IoT security more effectively.

Developing a security infrastructure for the IoT requires collaboration, coordination, and integration for each IoT-related
entity. Blockchain has the capability of stimulating seamless
communication and the interaction of related devices within
the IoT ecosystem. Based on the blockchain, the data in
IoT can be converted into blocks with a decentralized structure and can be constructed into a mutual trust mechanism
by smart contracts and by other blockchain-based protocols.
The blockchain consensus mechanism and decentralized platform provide a secure and scalable environment for IoT to
achieve a truly distributed database and a consistent architecture. Blockchain has the potential to implement advanced
performance paradigms for IoT, in order to prevent security
attacks and privacy breaches.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. D. Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of Things in industries: A survey,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2233–2243, Nov. 2014.
[2] L. D. Xu and W. Viriyasitavat, “Application of blockchain
in collaborative Internet-of-Things services,” IEEE Trans.
Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1295–1305, Dec. 2019,
doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2019.2913165.
[3] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “Blockchain
for IoT security and privacy: The case study of a smart home,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun. Workshops (PerCom
Workshops), Kona, HI, USA, 2017, pp. 618–623.
[4] Y. Lu and L. D. Xu, “Internet of Things (IoT) cybersecurity research:
A review of current research topics,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 2103–2115, Apr. 2019.
[5] S. Li and L. Xu, Securing the Internet of Things. Cambridge, MA,
USA: Syngress Publ., 2017.
[6] S. Li, L. Xu, and S. Zhao, “The Internet of Things: A survey,” Informat.
Syst. Front., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 243–259, 2015.
[7] A. Whitmore, A. Agarwal, and L. D. Xu, “The Internet of Things—
A survey of topics and trends,” Informat. Syst. Front., vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 261–274, 2015.
[8] Y. Lu, “Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open
research issues,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 6, pp. 1–10, Jun. 2017.
[9] Y. Lu, “Artificial intelligence: A survey on evolution, models, applications and future trends,” J. Manag. Anal., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–29,
2019.
[10] Y. Lu and X. Zheng, “6G: A survey on technologies, scenarios, challenges, and the related issues,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 19, Sep. 2020,
Art. no. 100158.
[11] M. Crosby, P. Pattanayak, S. Verma, and V. Kalyanaraman, Blockchain
Technology: Beyond Bitcoin, vol. 2, Appl. Innovat. Inst., San Francisco,
CA, USA, 2016, pp. 6–10.
[12] M. Pilkington, “Blockchain technology: Principles and applications,” in
Handbook of Research on Digital Transformations. Cheltenham, U.K.:
Edward Elgar Publ., 2016, ch. 11.
[13] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “An overview
of blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future
trends,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Congr. Big Data (BigData Congr.),
Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 557–564. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8029379/
[14] Y. Yuan and F.-Y. Wang, “Blockchain and cryptocurrencies: Model,
techniques, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst.,
vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1421–1428, Sep. 2018.
[15] F. R. Yu, J. Liu, Y. He, P. Si, and Y. Zhang, “Virtualization
for distributed ledger technology (vDLT),” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 25019–25028, 2018.
[16] Y. Lu, “The blockchain: State-of-the-art and research challenges,” J.
Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 15, pp. 80–90, Sep. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2019.04.002
[17] Y. Lu, “Blockchain and the related issues: A review of current research
topics,” J. Manag. Anal., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 231–255, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/23270012.2018.1516523
[18] Y. Lu, “Blockchain: A survey on functions, applications and open
issues,” J. Ind. Integr. Manag., vol. 3, no. 4, 2018, Art. no. 1850015.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1142/ S242486221850015X

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

[19] S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, “Security,
privacy and trust in Internet of Things: The road ahead,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 76, pp. 146–164, Jan. 2015.
[20] Y. Yang, L. Wu, G. Yin, L. Li, and H. Zhao, “A survey on security and
privacy issues in Internet-of-Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4,
no. 5, pp. 1250–1258, Oct. 2017.
[21] F. A. Alaba, M. Othman, I. A. T. Hashem, and F. Alotaibi, “Internet of
Things security: A survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 88, pp. 10–28,
Jun. 2017.
[22] M. Ammar, G. Russello, and B. Crispo, “Internet of Things: A survey
on the security of IoT frameworks,” J. Inf. Security Appl., vol. 38,
pp. 8–27, Feb. 2018.
[23] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, V. Saxena, D. Jain, P. Goyal, and B. Sikdar, “A
survey on IoT security: Application areas, security threats, and solution
architectures,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 82721–82743, 2019.
[24] K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, “Blockchains and smart contracts
for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2292–2303, 2016.
[25] M. A. Khan and K. Salah, “IoT security: Review, blockchain solutions, and open challenges,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 82,
pp. 395–411, May 2018.
[26] A. Reyna, C. Martín, J. Chen, E. Soler, and M. Díaz, “On blockchain
and its integration with IoT. Challenges and opportunities,” Future
Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 88, pp. 173–190, Nov. 2018.
[27] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A blockchain future for
Internet of Things security: A position paper,” Digit. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 149–160, 2018.
[28] M. Conoscenti, A. Vetrò, and J. C. De Martin, “Blockchain
for the Internet of Things: A systematic literature review,”
in Proc. IEEE/ACS Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl. (AICCSA),
Agadir, Morocco, Nov. 2017, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7945805/
[29] T. M. Fernández-Caramés and P. Fraga-Lamas, “A review on the
use of blockchain for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 32979–33001, 2018.
[30] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for Internet of Things:
A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094,
Oct. 2019.
[31] X. Wang et al., “Survey on blockchain for Internet of Things,” Comput.
Commun., vol. 136, pp. 10–29, Feb. 2019.
[32] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, S. Ramasubbareddy, M. Daneshmand, and
A. H. Gandomi, “Addressing security and privacy issues of IoT
using blockchain technology,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 881–888, Jan. 2021.
[33] B. K. Mohanta, A. Sahoo, S. Patel, S. S. Panda, D. Jena, and
D. Gountia, “DecAuth: Decentralized authentication scheme for IoT
device using ethereum blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Region 10 Conf.
(TENCON), Kochi, India, 2019, pp. 558–563.
[34] S. S. Panda, B. K. Mohanta, U. Satapathy, D. Jena, D. Gountia, and
T. K. Patra, “Study of blockchain based decentralized consensus algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE Region 10 Conf. (TENCON), Kochi, India, 2019,
pp. 908–913.
[35] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, U. Satapathy, and S. Patnaik, “Survey on
IoT security: Challenges and solution using machine learning, artificial intelligence and blockchain technology,” Internet Things, vol. 11,
Sep. 2020, Art. no. 100227.
[36] A. Bahga and V. K. Madisetti, “Blockchain platform for industrial
Internet of Things,” J. Comput. Sci. Commun., vol. 9, pp. 533–546,
Oct. 2016.
[37] O. Alphand et al., “IoTChain: A blockchain security architecture for
the Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf.
(WCNC), Barcelona, Spain, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[38] P. Danzi, A. E. Kalor, C. Stefanovic, and P. Popovski, “Analysis of the
communication traffic for blockchain synchronization of IoT devices,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Kansas City, MO, USA,
May 2018, pp. 1–7.
[39] S. Huh, S. Cho, and S. Kim, “Managing IoT devices using blockchain
platform,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. Technol.
(ICACT), PyeongChang, South Korea, 2017, pp. 464–467.
[40] K. R. Özyılmaz and A. Yurdakul, “Work-in-progress: Integrating lowpower IoT devices to a blockchain-based infrastructure,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Embedded Softw. (EMSOFT), Seoul, South Korea, Oct. 2017,
pp. 1–2.
[41] H. Yin, D. Guo, K. Wang, Z. Jiang, Y. Lyu, and J. Xing,
“Hyperconnected network: A decentralized trusted computing and
networking paradigm,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 112–117,
Jan./Feb. 2018.

10471

[42] I.-C. Lin and T.-C. Liao, “A survey of blockchain security issues and
challenges,” IJ Netw. Security, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 653–659, 2017.
[43] J. C. Song, M. A. Demir, J. J. Prevost, and P. Rad, “Blockchain design
for trusted decentralized IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Annu. Conf.
Syst. Syst. Eng. (SoSE), Paris, France, Jun. 2018, pp. 169–174.
[44] Z. Huang, X. Su, Y. Zhang, C. Shi, H. Zhang, and L. Xie, “A decentralized solution for IoT data trusted exchange based-on blockchain,” in
Proc. IEEE 3rd Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. (ICCC), Chengdu, China,
Dec. 2017, pp. 1180–1184.
[45] T. T. A. Dinh, R. Liu, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B. C. Ooi, and
J. Wang, “Untangling blockchain: A data processing view of
blockchain systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 30, no. 7,
pp. 1366–1385, Jul. 2018.
[46] N. Rifi, E. Rachkidi, N. Agoulmine, and N. C. Taher, “Towards using
blockchain technology for IoT data access protection,” in Proc. IEEE
17th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Wireless Broadband (ICUWB), Salamanca,
Spain, Sep. 2017, pp. 1–5.
[47] G. Ayoade, V. Karande, L. Khan, and K. Hamlen, “Decentralized IoT
data management using blockchain and trusted execution environment,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Inf. Reuse Integr. (IRI), Salt Lake City, UT,
USA, Jul. 2018, pp. 15–22.
[48] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: A survey,” Int. J. Web Grid Serv., vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018.
[49] Y. Rahulamathavan, R. C.-W. Phan, M. Rajarajan, S. Misra, and
A. Kondoz, “Privacy-preserving blockchain based IoT ecosystem using
attribute-based encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Netw.
Telecommun. Syst., Bhubaneswar, India, Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[50] R. Agrawal et al., “Continuous security in IoT using blockchain,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP),
Calgary, AB, Canada, Apr. 2018, pp. 6423–6427.
[51] N. Szabo, The Idea of Smart Contracts, Nick Szabo’s Papers
Concise Tuts., Washington, DC, USA, Jun. 1997. [Online].
Available:
http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/Information
InSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.
vwh.net/smart_contracts_idea.html
[52] L. Luu, D.-H. Chu, H. Olickel, P. Saxena, and A. Hobor, “Making
smart contracts smarter,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Security, 2016, pp. 254–269.
[53] A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, and C. Papamanthou, “Hawk: The
blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart contracts,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Archive, Lyon, France, Rep. 2015/675,
2015. [Online]. Available: http://eprint.iacr.org/2015/675.pdf
[54] C. S. Kouzinopoulos et al., “Implementing a forms of consent smart
contract on an IoT-based blockchain to promote user trust,” in Proc.
IEEE Innovat. Intell. Syst. Appl. (INISTA), Thessaloniki, Greece,
Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[55] W. Viriyasitavat, T. Anuphaptrirong, and D. Hoonsopon, “When
blockchain meets Internet of Things: Characteristics, challenges,
and business opportunities,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 15, pp. 21–28,
Sep. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2019.05.002
[56] D. Xu, L. Xiao, L. Sun, and M. Lei, “Game theoretic
study on blockchain based secure edge networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. China (ICCC), Oct. 2017, pp. 1–5,
doi: 10.1109/ICCChina.2017.8330529.
[57] S. Biswas, K. Shaif, F. Li, B. Nour, and Y. Wang, “A scalable blockchain framework for secure transactions in IoT,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4650–4659, Jun. 2019,
doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2874095.
[58] C. Li and L.-J. Zhang, “A blockchain based new secure multi-layer
network model for Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Congr.
Internet Things (ICIOT), Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 33–41.
[59] U. Banerjee, C. Juvekar, A. W. Arvind, and A. P. Chandrakasan, “An
energy-efficient reconfigurable DTLS cryptographic engine for end-toend security in IoT applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits
Conf. (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 42–44.
[60] T. Faisal, N. Courtois, and A. Serguieva, “The evolution of embedding
metadata in blockchain transactions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf.
Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[61] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, Q. Chen, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Blockchain-based
security layer for identification and isolation of malicious things in
IoT: A conceptual design,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
Netw. (ICCCN), Hangzhou, China, Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[62] A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, “The secure sockets layer (SSL)
protocol version 3.0,” IETF, RFC 6101, 2011.
[63] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol
version 1.2,” IETF, RFC 5246, 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10472

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

[64] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
Toronto, ON, Canada, 2014, pp. 781–789.
[65] P. K. Sharma, S. Singh, Y.-S. Jeong, and J. H. Park, “DistBlockNet:
A distributed blockchains-based secure SDN architecture for IoT
networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 78–85, Sep. 2017.
[66] C. Tselios, I. Politis, and S. Kotsopoulos, “Enhancing SDN security for IoT-related deployments through blockchain,” in Proc. Conf.
Netw. Funct. Virtualization Softw. Defined Netw. (NFV-SDN), Berlin,
Germany, Nov. 2017, pp. 303–308.
[67] K. Fan et al., “Blockchain-based secure time protection scheme in
IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4671–4679, Jun. 2019,
doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2874222.
[68] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, and A. S. Pentland, “Decentralizing privacy:
Using blockchain to protect personal data,” in Proc. Security Privacy
Workshops (SPW), San Jose, CA, USA, 2015, pp. 180–184.
[69] L. Wu, X. Du, W. Wang, and B. Lin, “An out-of-band authentication
scheme for Internet of Things using blockchain technology,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Maui, HI, USA, Mar. 2018,
pp. 769–773.
[70] R. Lu, “A new communication-efficient privacy-preserving range query
scheme in fog-enhanced IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 2497–2505, Apr. 2019.
[71] H. Ren, H. Li, Y. Dai, K. Yang, and X. Lin, “Querying in Internet of
Things with privacy preserving: Challenges, solutions and opportunities,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 144–151, Nov./Dec. 2018.
[72] S. Linoy, H. Mahdikhani, S. Ray, R. Lu, N. Stakhanova,
and A. Ghorbani, “Scalable privacy-preserving query processing
over ethereum blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Blockchain
(Blockchain), Atlanta, GA, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 398–404.
[73] H. Mahdikhani, R. Lu, Y. Zheng, J. Shao, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Achieving O (log3 n) communication-efficient privacy-preserving
range query in fog-based IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 6,
pp. 5220–5232, Jun. 2020.
[74] D. Li, W. Peng, W. Deng, and F. Gai, “A blockchain-based authentication and security mechanism for IoT,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput.
Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), Hangzhou, China, Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[75] S.-C. Cha and K.-H. Yeh, “An ISO/IEC 15408-2 compliant security
auditing system with blockchain technology,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), Beijing, China, May 2018, pp. 1–2.
[76] W. Yin, Q. Wen, W. Li, H. Zhang, and Z. Jin, “An anti-quantum transaction authentication approach in blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 5393–5401, 2018.
[77] O. J. A. Pinno, A. R. A. Gregio, and L. C. E. De Bona, “ControlChain:
Blockchain as a central enabler for access control authorizations in the
IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Singapore, Dec. 2017,
pp. 1–6.
[78] A. Boudguiga et al., “Towards better availability and accountability
for IoT updates by means of a blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp.
Secur. Privacy Workshops, Paris, France, Apr. 2017, pp. 50–58.
[79] D. W. Kravitz and J. Cooper, “Securing user identity and transactions
symbiotically: IoT meets blockchain,” in Proc. Global Internet Things
Summit (GIoTS), Geneva, Switzerland, Jun. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[80] Y. Zhang, S. Kasahara, Y. Shen, X. Jiang, and J. Wan,
“Smart Contract-Based Access Control for the Internet of Things,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1594–1605, Apr. 2019.
[81] D. Hussein, E. Bertin, and V. Frey, “A community-driven access control approach in distributed IoT environments,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 146–153, Mar. 2017.
[82] V. Sivaraman, H. H. Gharakheili, A. Vishwanath, R. Boreli, and
O. Mehani, “Network-level security and privacy control for smart-home
IoT devices,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput.
Netw. Commun. (WiMob), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2015, pp. 163–167.
[83] M. Chiang and T. Zhang, “Fog and IoT: An overview of research
opportunities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 854–864,
Dec. 2016.
[84] X. Liang, J. Zhao, S. Shetty, and D. Li, “Towards data assurance and
resilience in IoT using blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf.
(MILCOM), Baltimore, MD, USA, Oct. 2017, pp. 261–266.
[85] M. Singh, A. Singh, and S. Kim, “Blockchain: A game changer for
securing IoT data,” in Proc. IEEE 4th World Forum Internet Things
(WF-IoT), Singapore, Feb. 2018, pp. 51–55.
[86] E. Karafiloski and A. Mishev, “Blockchain solutions for big data challenges: A literature review,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Conf. Smart
Technol., Ohrid, Macedonia, Jul. 2017, pp. 763–768.

[87] B. Liu, X. L. Yu, S. Chen, X. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Blockchain based data
integrity service framework for IoT data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web
Serv., Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 468–475.
[88] S. T. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper, “A survey of defense mechanisms
against distributed denial of service (DDoS) flooding attacks,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2046–2069, 4th Quart.,
2013.
[89] A. Sahi, D. Lai, Y. Li, and M. Diykh, “An efficient DDoS TCP flood
attack detection and prevention system in a cloud environment,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, pp. 6036–6048, 2017.
[90] S. Kumari, M. Karuppiah, A. K. Das, X. Li, F. Wu, and N. Kumar,
“A secure authentication scheme based on elliptic curve cryptography
for IoT and cloud servers,” J. Supercomput., vol. 74, pp. 6428–6453,
Apr. 2017.
[91] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Towards an optimized
blockchain for IoT,” in Proc. ACM 2nd Int. Conf. Internet Things
Design Implement., Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2017, pp. 173–178.
[92] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and J. Voas, “DDoS in the IoT:
Mirai and other botnets,” Computer, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 80–84, 2017.
[93] R. H. Weber, “Internet of Things—New security and privacy challenges,” Comput. Law Security Rev., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 23–30, 2010.
[94] B. Lee and J.-H. Lee, “Blockchain-based secure firmware update
for embedded devices in an Internet of Things environment,” J.
Supercomput., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 1152–1167, 2017.
[95] A. Banafa, IoT and Blockchain Convergence: Benefits and
Challenges, IEEE Internet Things, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://iot.ieee.org/newsletter/january-2017/iotand-blockchain-convergence-benefits-and-challenges.html
[96] A. Al Hasib and A. A. M. M. Haque, “A comparative study of the
performance and security issues of AES and RSA cryptography,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Converg. Hybrid Inf. Technol., vol. 2. Busan,
South Korea, 2008, pp. 505–510.
[97] T. ElGamal, “A public key cryptosystem and a signature scheme
based on discrete logarithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 31, no. 4,
pp. 469–472, Jul. 1985.
[98] M. Bellare and P. Rogaway, “The exact security of digital signatureshow to sign with RSA and Rabin,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Theory Appl.
Cryptograph. Techn., 1996, pp. 399–416.
[99] L. Harn, M. Mehta, and W.-J. Hsin, “Integrating Diffie-Hellman key
exchange into the digital signature algorithm (DSA),” IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 198–200, Mar. 2004.
[100] X. Du, M. Guizani, Y. Xiao, and H.-H. Chen, “Transactions papers
a routing-driven elliptic curve cryptography based key management
scheme for heterogeneous sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1223–1229, Mar. 2009.
[101] L. S. Sankar, M. Sindhu, and M. Sethumadhavan, “Survey of consensus
protocols on blockchain applications,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Adv.
Comput. Commun. Syst. (ICACCS), Coimbatore, India, 2017, pp. 1–5.
[102] M. Vukolić, “The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work
vs. BFT replication,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Open Problems Netw.
Security, 2015, pp. 112–125.
[103] G. Liang, B. Sommer, and N. Vaidya, “Experimental performance comparison of Byzantine fault-tolerant protocols for data centers,” in Proc.
IEEE INFOCOM, Orlando, FL, USA, 2012, pp. 1422–1430.
[104] W. He, G. Yan, and L. D. Xu, “Developing vehicular data cloud services
in the IoT environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 1587–1595, May 2014.
[105] L. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Sun, and P. Lv, “BeeKeeper: A blockchain-based
IoT system with secure storage and homomorphic computation,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 43472–43488, 2018.
[106] T. Dey, S. Jaiswal, S. Sunderkrishnan, and N. Katre, “HealthSense: A
medical use case of Internet of Things and blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Intell. Sustain. Syst. (ICISS), Palladam, India, Dec. 2017,
pp. 486–491.
[107] J. Cheney, L. Chiticariu, and W.-C. Tan, “Provenance in databases:
Why, how, and where,” Found. Trends Databases, vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 379–474, 2009.
[108] F. Tian, “An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based
on RFID & blockchain technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Serv. Syst.
Serv. Manag., Kunming, China, Jun. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[109] F. Tian, “A supply chain traceability system for food safety based on
HACCP, blockchain & Internet of Things,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Serv.
Syst. Serv. Manag. (ICSSSM), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[110] R. Guo, H. Shi, Q. Zhao, and D. Zheng, “Secure attribute-based signature scheme with multiple authorities for blockchain in electronic
health records systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 11676–11686, 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY

[111] Q. Xia, E. B. Sifah, K. O. Asamoah, J. Gao, X. Du, and M. Guizani,
“MeDShare: Trust-less medical data sharing among cloud service
providers via blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 14757–14767,
2017.
[112] M. Mettler, “Blockchain technology in healthcare: The revolution starts here,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. e-Health Netw.
Appl. Serv. (Healthcom), Munich, Germany, Sep. 2016, pp. 1–3,
doi: 10.1109/HealthCom.2016.7749510.
[113] A. Ekblaw, A. Azaria, J. D. Halamka, and A. Lippman, “A case
study for blockchain in healthcare: ’MedRec’ prototype for electronic health records and medical research data,” in Proc. IEEE
Open Big Data Conf., vol. 13, 2016, p. 13. [Online]. Available:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/56e6/5b469cad2f3ebd560b3a∼
10e7346780f4ab0a.pdf
[114] L. Catarinucci et al., “An IoT-aware architecture for smart healthcare systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 515–526,
Dec. 2015.
[115] J. Wei, “How wearables intersect with the cloud and the Internet
of Things: Considerations for the developers of wearables,” IEEE
Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 53–56, Jul. 2014.
[116] Y. Yuan and F.-Y. Wang, “Towards blockchain-based intelligent transportation systems,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst.
(ITSC), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Nov. 2016, pp. 2663–2668.
[117] A. Lei, H. Cruickshank, Y. Cao, P. Asuquo, C. P. A. Ogah, and Z. Sun,
“Blockchain-based dynamic key management for heterogeneous intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 6,
pp. 1832–1843, Dec. 2017.
[118] Y. Gupta, R. Shorey, D. Kulkarni, and J. Tew, “The applicability of
blockchain in the Internet of Things,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun.
Syst. Netw., Bengaluru, India, Jan. 2018, pp. 561–564.
[119] K. Biswas and V. Muthukkumarasamy, “Securing smart cities using
blockchain technology,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. High Perform.
Comput. Commun. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Smart City IEEE 2nd Int.
Conf. Data Sci. Syst. (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Sydney, NSW, Australia,
Dec. 2016, pp. 1392–1393.
[120] R. Rivera, J. G. Robledo, V. M. Larios, and J. M. Avalos, “How digital
identity on blockchain can contribute in a smart city environment,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Smart Cities Conf. (ISC2), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–4.
[121] J. Branger and Z. Pang, “From automated home to sustainable, healthy
and manufacturing home: A new story enabled by the Internet-ofThings and industry 4.0,” J. Manag. Anal., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 314–332,
2015.
[122] M. Samaniego and R. Deters, “Internet of Smart Things—IoST: Using
blockchain and clips to make things autonomous,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Cogn. Comput. (ICCC), Honolulu, HI, USA, 2017, pp. 9–16.
[123] P. K. Sharma, M.-Y. Chen, and J. H. Park, “A software defined fog
node based distributed blockchain cloud architecture for IoT,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 115–124, 2017.
[124] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, and T. Yang, “Blockchain-enabled security in electric vehicles cloud and edge computing,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 3,
pp. 78–83, May/Jun. 2018.
[125] Y. Qian et al., “Towards decentralized IoT security enhancement:
A blockchain approach,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 72, pp. 266–273,
Nov. 2018.

10473

Li Da Xu (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in information
science and engineering from the University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China, in 1978 and 1981, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
in systems science and engineering from Portland State University, Portland,
OR, USA, in 1986.
He is an Academician of the European Academy of Sciences, the Russian
Academy of Engineering (formerly, USSR Academy of Engineering), and
the Armenian Academy of Engineering. He is a 2016–2020 Highly Cited
Researcher in the field of engineering named by Clarivate Analytics (formerly,
Thomson Reuters Intellectual Property & Science).

Yang Lu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from Jilin University,
Changchun, China, in 2004, and the M.S. degree from the University of
Manchester, Manchester, U.K., in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree in information
and communication technology from Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA,
USA, 2020.
He has published research papers in refereed journals published by major
publishers, such as Elsevier, IEEE, Taylor & Francis, and World Scientific.

Ling Li received the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA, in 1994 and 1996, respectively.
She is an Eminent Scholar and a University Professor with Old
Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA, where she is the Chair of the
Department of Information Technology and Decision Sciences. She has
published in IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND C YBERNETICS : S YSTEMS, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS ,
M AN , AND C YBERNETICS —PART C: A PPLICATIONS AND R EVIEWS, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS OF I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY IN B IOMEDICINE, IEEE
I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL, IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL, and other
journals.
Dr. Li served as an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS. She is a Certified Fellow of Association for
Supply Chain Management.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.