Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

MATEC: A lightweight neural network for online encrypted traffic
classification✩
Jin Cheng a,b , Yulei Wu c ,∗, Yuepeng E b ,∗, Junling You b , Tong Li b , Hui Li b , Jingguo Ge b
a
b
c

School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Traffic classification
Multi-head attention
Convolutional network
Lightweight model

ABSTRACT
Increased awareness of privacy protection has led to a surge in the volume of encrypted traffic, which creates a
heavy burden for efficient network management (e.g. quality-of-service guarantees). The opacity of encrypted
traffic essentially requires high computational overheads to make traffic classification, which is even worse
when encrypted traffic surges. However, existing deep learning approaches sacrifice the efficiency to obtain
high-precision classification results, which are no longer suitable for scenarios with large volumes of encrypted
traffic. In this paper, a lightweight and online approach implemented as MATEC is proposed. The way we
optimize the classification process follows the ‘‘Maximizing the reuse of thin modules’’ design principle. The
multi-head attention and the convolutional network are adopted in the thin module. Attributed to the one-step
interaction of all packets and the parallel computing of the multi-head attention mechanism, a key advantage
of our model is that the number of parameters and running time are significantly reduced. In addition, the
effectiveness and efficiency of convolutional networks have been proved in traffic classification. Comparisons
to the existing state-of-the-art models on three typical datasets demonstrate that the proposed MATEC model
has higher accuracy and running efficiency. In addition, the number of parameters is reduced to 1.8% of the
state-of-the-art models and the training time halves.

1. Introduction
Traffic classification is a crucial tool for network management, such
as congestion control and quality-of-service (QoS) guarantees [1]. Due
to growing concerns about the privacy and security of Internet users,
an increasing number of Internet applications have adopted various
encryption technologies [2]. According to the statistics of Firefox, the
global usage of encrypted web pages increased from 32% in 2015
to 83% in 2020.1 Although encrypting transmitted data protects the
users’ privacy and security, it brings significant challenges for network management in terms of security and QoS [3,4]. For example,
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) applications encrypt the payload
and leverage different methods to bypass firewalls and proxies [4],
which challenges the intrusion detection systems. Besides, a pricing
mechanism is needed to differentiate customers with different needs
and charge according to the QoS that they have received [3]. It also

acts as a cost recovery mechanism and provides revenue generation for
the Internet Service Providers (ISP) to compensate for their efforts in
providing QoS and managing resource allocation. All QoS schemes have
some traffic classification considerations in the design [3].
Real-time traffic classification is the core component of many
emerging QoS-enabled products and automated QoS architectures [5,
6]. With the explosive growth of encrypted traffic, the implementation
of QoS policies requires more efficient traffic classification models
with lower overheads [7]. Consequently, heavyweight models for encrypted traffic classification cannot be applicable in real-time scenarios
and high-speed networks. Nevertheless, existing traffic classification
approaches sacrifice efficiency to guarantee the high precision of
classification results. Most existing machine learning (ML) methods are
based on the extraction of the hand-crafted statistical features [8–10],
such as mean packet length, flow duration, and the mean inter-arrival

✩ This work is supported by Special Project of Ministry of Science and Technology of China on Innovation Method (Grant No. 2019IM020100), Strategic
Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDC02070200), and the STS (Science and Technology Service Network) Plan of
Chinese Academy of Sciences under Grant No. KFJ-STS-QYZD-2021-11-001.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: chengjin@iie.ac.cn (J. Cheng), y.l.wu@exeter.ac.uk (Y. Wu), eyuepeng@iie.ac.cn (Y. E), youjunling@iie.ac.cn (J. You), litong@iie.ac.cn
(T. Li), lihui1@iie.ac.cn (H. Li), gejingguo@iie.ac.cn (J. Ge).
1
https://letsencrypt.org/stats/#percent-pageloads.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108472
Received 21 January 2021; Received in revised form 9 June 2021; Accepted 7 September 2021
Available online 15 September 2021
1389-1286/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.

no single dataset that can contain all traffic types. Three datasets [11,
26,27] are utilized to simulate the real-world traffic, and each dataset
contains traffic types that the other datasets do not. Besides, more
baselines, and evaluation metrics are utilized to carry out a more
comprehensive validation of the proposed model in terms of efficiency
and stability.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:

time of the packet. However, observing the entire or large part of a
flow is necessary to obtain these statistical features, so the ML method
can only apply to the offline classification scenarios. Although traffic
classification methods based on deep learning (DL) can eliminate the
disadvantages of manually constructed features, some problems still
exist. First, the features used are relatively homogenized [11,12]. In
other words, most existing studies either use statistical features or
packet byte features, which miss important information (i.e., these two
kinds of features are not used in combination). Second, most existing
models lack the consideration of model efficiency, where they neither
take into account the time and space complexity nor fully evaluate the
efficiency [2,13,14]. For DL methods, the huge overhead of memory
and runtime in the complex neural network leads to high energy
consumption [14–16].
In this paper, to raise the online performance and efficiency of
encrypted traffic classification, the time and space complexity are taken
into consideration. We propose a lightweight neural network called
MATEC for online encrypted traffic classification, which takes three
consecutive packets at a random location in a flow as the input. On
the basis of the principle ‘‘maximizing the reuse of thin modules’’,
the features at global (flow) and local (packet) levels are extracted
by using a thin module, which adopts multi-head attention [17] and
1D convolutional networks (1D-CNN) [13]. Generally, global features
come from the interactions between packets in a flow, and local features are included in the bytes from a few raw packets. At the global
level, with the multi-head attention [17], each packet interacts with
all the other packets in one step to calculate the packet weights
by multiplying matrices, greatly reducing the number of parameters
and the running time. Additionally, through the multi-head attention
mechanism, a packet is projected into multiple subspaces, and therefore
different feature interactions in different subspaces can be captured in
parallel. Therefore, the parameters of the multi-head attention mainly
come from the projection matrix and is usually low. In contrast, in
many other methods [2,11], recurrent neural networks (RNN) [18]
are usually utilized to obtain global packet interactions by processing
the packets in time series due to their ability in processing sequential
data tasks. Whereas, only two neighboring packets can interact at a
clip, making it time-consuming and inefficient due to the extra time
overheads of waiting for the output from the previous interaction.
At the local level, 1D-CNN [13] focuses on the packet bytes and is
utilized to extract packet-level features, which has been proved with
high effectiveness and efficiency in traffic classification [13,19,20].
More details about the time and space complexity are presented in
Section 4.3.
Moreover, the traffic from zero-day applications usually does not
exist in the training dataset [16]. For example, in a ground truth
dataset [21,22], the zero-day applications can make up to 60% of flows
and 30% of bytes, which refers to the presence of lots of new traffic.
However, existing traditional methods [2,13,23] were trained on a
specific dataset so that the new traffic cannot be classified. With these
considerations in mind, we are inspired to use transfer learning [24]
to solve the problem. For newly coming traffic, the previously trained
model is fine-tuned based on a small amount of labeled data. The
experimental results show that for newly coming traffic data, the
previously trained model only needs to adjust the last layer of the
neural network in structure to adapt to the new traffic and achieves
rapid model convergence.
This work is based on our former conference paper [25]. However,
the previous work ignored the traffic data outside of the dataset and
did not take the similarities and differences among different datasets
consideration. The model training of previous work was trained based
on a specific dataset. Therefore, when new types of traffic data appear,
the trained model cannot work and a new model need to be trained
from scratch, which takes considerable time to converge. This journal
version addresses this issue and provides the solution with transfer
learning [24]. Besides, as more and more new traffic emerges, there is

• A lightweight model called MATEC for online encrypted traffic classification is designed. The proposed MATEC is an end-toend model without feature engineering and subproblem partition,
which guarantees the global optimality of the results. Only three
consecutive packets at a random position are needed as input. Besides, the model automatically extracts high-order flow-level and
packet-level features in an efficient way. Comparisons to the existing state-of-the-art models on three typical datasets demonstrate
that the proposed MATEC model has higher accuracy and running
efficiency. In addition, the number of parameters is reduced to
1.8% of the state-of-the-art models and the training time halves.
• A novel approach to extract high-order flow-level features is
proposed. Existing methods apply RNN (e.g., LSTM and GRU) to
extract the flow-level features, which is time-consuming and computationally complex. To overcome these shortage, we explore
multi-head attention mechanism [17] to model the high-order
packet interactions at the flow level. To the best of the authors’
knowledge, it is the first time the multi-head attention is used
in the field of encrypted traffic classification, which enables each
packet to interact with all other packets in one step. Meanwhile,
different interactions in different subspaces are learned in parallel, reducing the number of parameters and shortening the
running time considerably. As the experimental results show, the
number of parameters in our model is reduced to 2.7% of CNN
with the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model, and 19.8% of
the Bi-directional Gated Recurrent Unit (Bi-GRU) model. Besides,
the training time of our model only takes 6.8% and 35.8% of that
of the above two RNN models.
• A new embedding approach for packet representation is
used, which can facilitate the extraction of high-order features
efficiently. Most existing studies either use statistical features
or packet byte features, which miss important information for
encrypted traffic classification. In our work, both the statistical features (e.g. the packet length and packet position) and
the packet byte features are embedded into a vector uniformly
to represent a packet (see Section 4.2.1). Experimental results
demonstrate that our embedding method improves the precision
of encrypted traffic classification by 1.7%.
• Given the similarities and differences of datasets, we employ
transfer learning to MATEC. As more and more new types of
traffic emerges, the traffic data outside of the dataset need to be
considered. We utilized three datasets to simulate real traffic data
and each dataset contains traffic types that the other datasets do
not. By transfer learning [24], for a new dataset, our previously
trained model only needs to adjust the last layer of the neural
network to adapt to the new dataset and achieves rapid model
convergence. Besides, even when the size of the new training data
is relatively small (i.e., 10% of the overall dataset), the accuracy
is still 8.04% higher than that of the model trained from scratch.
Besides, the model has a better convergence speed.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces
the related work of the traffic classification. The preliminaries of work
are presented in Section 3, and the proposed model MATEC is elaborated in Section 4. Section 5 launches the analysis of experimental
results. Finally, Section 6 draws conclusion of this paper.
2

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.

Table 1
A summary of existing traffic classification methods.

2. Related work

Methods

Our model involves three lines of works: (a) Encrypted traffic classification, (b) Flow-based methods, and (c) Packet-based methods, which
will be introduced next in this section. Meanwhile, the differences
and improvements that are compared with the previous work will be
summarized.

PacketBased

Ref.ID Classifiers

Features

[30]

Packet payload

[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]

2.1. Encrypted traffic classification
Traffic classification aims to categorize the encrypted network traffic into appropriate classes [16]. The common process of traffic classification is shown in Fig. 1. First, the target of traffic classification
should be defined clearly. The general goals include QoS provisioning,
intrusion detection, malware detection, resource usage planning, and
so on [16]. To meet its target, the traffic classification is usually
carried out based on (1) protocols (e.g. HTTP, SSL, SMTP, DNS or
QUIC), (2) traffic types (e.g. video, chat, or browsing), (3) applications
(e.g. Amazon, Apple, Microsoft or Google), and (4) websites. For all
the above four cases, labeling each flow with corresponding traffic
classes is a necessity. In our work, we identify the application of the
flow. Second, a large and representative dataset is required. Although
a few public datasets are available for research, there is no agreed
common dataset in the field of traffic classification [16]. In our work,
two public datasets [26,27] and one dataset collected by ourselves
from China Science and Technology Network (CSTNET) are utilized
for model validation. Significantly, data in these datasets are raw and
we labeled them with the advanced method [28]. Then, the features
are selected or extracted by predefined feature processing methods. At
last, the classification model will be trained, validated, and evaluated.
Furthermore, traffic classification can also be categorized into two subclasses: online and offline. The method we proposed in this work is an
online method, which only takes three consecutive packets at a random
position in a flow as the input.
Besides, two types of granularity are usually considered in the
field of traffic classification [16]: packet and flow, which will be
covered in detail in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, respectively. In our case,
we choose the flow granularity, which is common in both industry
and academia [2]. A flow refers to all packets with the same values
of the quintuple (i.e., transport layer protocol, source IP, source port,
destination IP, destination port), where the source and the destination
can be swapped [29]. For any flow 𝑓𝑖 in the flow set 𝐹 , we have
𝐹 = {𝑓1 , 𝑓2 , …}

(1)

𝑓𝑖 = {𝑝𝑖1 , 𝑝𝑖2 , … , 𝑝𝑖𝑛 }

(2)

[36]
[37]
FlowBased

Stacked autoencoder (SAE)
and CNN
Reinforcement Learning (RL)
Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN)
Autoencoder and K-Means
Autoencoder
Kiss, a novel classification
engine

[11]
[13]
[38]
[39]

Support vector machine (SVM)
Hidden Markov models
(HMM)
Gaussian mixture models and
HMM
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
CNN and RNN
Naive Bayes
Expectation Maximum (EM)

[40]
[41]
[2]

Fuzzy C-Means
K-means
CNN and LSTM

[23]

Packet bytes
Deep embedding
Packet bytes
Packet payload
Payload signatures
Packet length and TCP flags
Packet length and time delay
Inner-packet time and packet
size
Sequence of packets
Sequence of packets
Session duration and TCP port
Packet sizes and inter-arrival
time
Sequence of packets
Attribute vectors
Sequence of packet

data, the information above the layer 4 header can be exploited for
traffic classification. In work [30], after an initial pre-processing phase,
packets were fed into the model with stacked autoencoder and CNN to
classify network traffic. Liang et al. [31] proposed a deep reinforcement learning approach to solve the packet classification problem. The
method in [31] used succinct representations to encode state and action
space, and efficiently explored candidate decision trees to optimize
a global objective. Finamore et al. [35] proposed a classification approach that leveraged the statistical characterizations of the payload
by extracting payload signatures. However, the packet-based methods
focus on the detailed information of a few packets and lack attention
to global characteristics. The packet-level features contain rich local
information from the header and payload of the packet. Flow-level
features show global information, such as statistical information. In our
model, both packet-level and flow-level features are considered, and
through a combination of the two kinds of features, our model can
obtain richer feature information and achieve better performance, as
demonstrated in Section 5.3.2.
2.3. Flow-based methods
As shown in Fig. 3, flow-based methods require the selection of flow
features, and these features are then fed into the classifier. In general,
there are two main classes: machine learning-based and deep learningbased. Table 1 also shows a summary of the flow-based methods.

where flow 𝑓𝑖 contains 𝑛 packets, and packet 𝑝𝑖𝑗 is the 𝑗th packet in
𝑓𝑖 . We select 𝑁 consecutive packets 𝑃 = {𝑝𝑖𝑘 , … , 𝑝𝑖𝑘+𝑁−2 , 𝑝𝑖𝑘+𝑁−1 } in the
flow 𝑖 at a random location. That is, 𝑘 is an integer number in the range
[1, 𝑛 − 𝑁 + 1]. In our work, we set 𝑁 = 3, which indicates that three
consecutive packets are chosen to represent the flow 𝑓𝑖 . Formally, a
classifier is trained to recognize the category to which a flow belongs
(i.e., classifier: 𝑓𝑖 → class).

2.3.1. Machine learning-based
Existing machine learning-based methods for traffic classification
at the flow level are mainly based on complex manual features that
rely on expert experience to design. For example, in work [43], Moore
et al. designed about 250 flow features based on prior knowledge.
Subsequent ML-based traffic classification works (e.g., [28,44,45]) are
mostly based on these 250 features for feature extraction. These flow
characteristics include, but are not limited to variance of packet bytes,
median of the total bytes in IP packets, and so on. Zhu and Zheng [36]
studied the application of support vector machine (SVM) to classify
the network traffic by using the packet length and TCP flags, which
converted the actual problem into the high-dimensional feature space
through the kernel function. Fu et al. [37] built hidden Markov models
(HMM) to classify the services of mobile messaging Apps by jointly
modeling user behavioral patterns, network characteristics, and temporal dependencies. Along this line, the authors in [37] first segmented

2.2. Packet-based methods
As shown in Fig. 2, the packet-based methods for traffic classification take the bytes of a packet as the input directly. The packet
bytes include the information of the packet header and payload data.
Table 1 shows a summary of the packet-based methods. With respect
to the packet header, the information in layer 3 and layer 4 are useful
for non-encrypted traffic [16]. Before the deep learning era, fields
including port number, protocol, and packet length were carefully
chosen by domain experts as representative features. In some recent
approaches [2,30,42], entire packets are taken as the input. For payload
3

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.

Fig. 1. A common process for traffic classification.

Fig. 2. A common framework of packet-based methods for traffic classification.

Fig. 3. A common framework of flow-based methods for traffic classification.

Internet traffic from traffic-flows into sessions with several dialogues
in a hierarchical way, and two features including packet length and
time delay are employed. According to the distribution of time and
packet size, the authors in [23] classified the obfuscated traffic with
Gaussian mixture models and HMM, which established the connection
between inner-packet time and packet size to improve the accuracy
of the flow feature description. However, these classifiers have to
observe the whole flow or most of the packets in a flow to obtain these
features, which are more appropriate for offline classification. In this
paper, with only a few consecutive packets as the input, the proposed
model can meet the real-time requirements in the field of online traffic
classification.

of the dataset and did not take the differences among datasets into
consideration. The model of previous work was trained on a specific
dataset and could not classify the newly coming traffic data. However,
as more and more new types of traffic emerges, there is no single
dataset that can contain all traffic types. In our work, we leverage
three datasets [11,26,27] to simulate the real traffic data, and each
dataset contains traffic types that the other datasets do not. If model
training in different datasets is completely independent of each other,
it will be time-consuming and unstable. This journal version addresses
this important issue and puts forward a transfer learning solution. With
the help of transfer learning, when new traffic arrives, the model can
achieve fast convergence based on a small amount of labeled data.
To carry out a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed solution,
different from the conference version, more datasets, more baseline
models, and more evaluation metrics are utilized to verify the efficiency
and effectiveness of MATEC. First, three datasets are employed to
validate the accuracy of MATEC. Two of these datasets [26,27] are
open encrypted datasets, and the third is a dataset [11] collected by
ourselves from the backbone of the China Science and Technology Network (CSTNET) - an Internet service provider. Second, three advanced
benchmark models [2,11,13] are compared with our model. Third, the
proposed model is evaluated in terms of the well-known effectiveness
metrics including accuracy, F1-score, precision, and recall rate. Besides,
the training time and testing time of the model are also measured.

2.3.2. Deep learning-based
Deep learning methods have been widely used in traffic classification. In [11], the bidirectional gated recurrent unit (Bi-GRU) was used
to extract the forward and backward features of the byte sequences in a
flow. Authors in [12] applied Bi-GRU to extract the hidden information
in the packet length sequence. The study [13] took a few consecutive
packets as the input of 1D-CNN, which was the first work to apply the
end-to-end method on the traffic classification and achieved an accuracy of 85.8%. To get spatial and temporal features, both CNN and RNN
were used in [46]. The study [46] first learned the spatial features of
network traffic by using deep CNN and then learned temporal features
by using the recurrent network. The authors in [2] proposed a model
with 2D-CNN and LSTM networks, which accepts a few consecutive
packets as the input. In [2], CNN was used to extract the packet features
for a single packet and the LSTM network was trained to pick out the
flow features based on the inputs of the packet features in a flow. As
we can see above, pure CNN lacks the ability to extract interactive
information, which leads to the fact that CNN often combines with
RNN to extract the flow features. However, the dependencies between
units in RNN make it time-consuming to wait for the output of the
previous unit. In our proposed method, interactions of all packets are
implemented directly by the application of multi-head attention [17].

3. Problem definition
3.1. Packet interaction
More efficient global information can be extracted with high-order
interaction between packets [47]. Given 𝑁 packets as the input, the
packet interaction can be defined as
𝑔(𝒙𝟏 , 𝒙𝟐 , … , 𝒙𝑵 )

(3)

where 𝑥𝑖 is the unified representation of packet 𝑝𝑖 , and 𝑔(⋅) is a
non-additive interactive function, such as outer product [48,49] and
multiplication [50]. For instance, 𝒙𝟏 × 𝒙𝟐 is an interactive feature
concerning packet 𝒙𝟏 and packet 𝒙𝟐 . Traditionally, the meaningful highorder interactive features are extracted by RNN. However, it is very
time-consuming to wait for the pairwise interactions between the joint

2.4. The difference with our previous work
As mentioned, this work is based on our former conference paper [25]. However, the previous work ignored the traffic data outside
4

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.
Table 2
Classification targets of different datasets.
Dataset

Applications, the classification targets

[26]

nexus.ensighten.com, r.nexac.com, s.amazonaws.com,
pixel.quantserve.com, mc.yandex.ru, usu.openx.net,
tpc.googlesyndication.com, bat.bing.com, t.co, www.google.fr,
adserver.adtechus.com, ads.yahoo.com, pbs.twimg.com, d.adroll.com,
connect.facebook.net, beacon.krxd.net, batr.msn.com,
www.google-analytics.com, tags.tiqcdn.com, www.googletagmanager.com,
coupang.com, statsg.doubleclick.net, bam.nr-data.net, ascii.jp,
fonts.googleapis.com, sb.scorecardresearch.com,
dnxstfruwz.cloudfront.net, fonts.gstatic.com, ib.adnxs.com,
secure.adnxs.com, cdnjs.cloudflare.com, cdn.optimizely.com,
www.facebook.com, optimizedby.rubiconproject.com, ssl.gstatic.com,
s.adroll.com, www.livepartners.com, selfrepair.mozilla.org,
googleadsg.doubleclick.net, ssl.google-analytics.com,
www.vcommission.com, scontentxx.fbcdn.net, api.mixpanel.com,
assets.adobedtm.com, www.google.com, spanalytics.yahoo.com,
analytics.twitter.com

[11]

hpd.baidu.com, wx.sinaimg.cn, i.hdslb.com, sz.btfs.mail.ftn.qq.com,
sdkxyajs-data.xycdn.com, tracker.wps.cn, ss.bdstatic.com,
mp.weixin.qq.com, ss.baidu.com, long.open.weixin.qq.com,
wenku.baidu.com, hm.baidu.com, s.qhupdate.com,
browserkernel.baidu.com, clients.google.com, dw-online.ksosoft.com

[27]

fed as the input. After preprocessing, 𝑁 consecutive packets in a flow
are captured (Section 4.1). Then, the initial features of each packet are
extracted and embedded into several vectors that will be concatenated
to represent the flow (Section 4.2.1). The attention encoder is employed
to extract the local and global features (Section 4.2.2). At last, a fully
connected layer with softmax is employed to output the probability distribution of labels (Section 4.2.3). Recall from Section 3.2 that transfer
learning [24] is applied to optimize the training on new traffic data. In
transfer learning, the fully connected layer is the only part that needs to
be changed architecturally, because different targets of datasets cause
the number of output layer units to be different. In other words, the
structure of embedding and attention encoder layer is fixed in all tasks,
and the structure of fully connected layer is variable. To enhance the
stability of the lightweight model, a series of training optimization
methods are adopted, including ResNet [51], layer normalization [52],
and learning rate warmup [51]. In Section 4.3, we analyze the space
and time complexity of our model.
4.1. Preprocessing

nexus.ensighten.com, abs.twimg.com, pixel.quantserve.com,
mc.yandex.ru, bat.bing.com, platform.twitter.com, ads.yahoo.com,
d.adroll.com, connect.facebook.net, beacon.krxd.net,
www.google-analytics.com, tags.tiqcdn.com, s.amazonaws.com,
ib.adnxs.com, secure.adnxs.com, www.facebook.com, ssl.gstatic.com,
assets.adobedtm.com, www.google.com

The hypertext transfer protocol secure (HTTPS) is a crucial encryption technology for network management, which is based on
TCP [53]. In recent years, the number of applications using HTTPS
has exploded [11]. In this work, HTTPS traffic is classified. The threeway handshake in TCP connections is skipped because it contains less
information that is useful for traffic classification [54].
For the traffic data, we split the traffic into flows according to the
quintuple of a flow. The 𝑁 consecutive raw packets in a flow are
extracted as the only inputs for our model.

packets. Besides, the limited hidden unit structure in the RNN cannot
efficiently show the interpretability of the high-order features. Hence,
we propose to explore an approach that can efficiently discover the
meaningful high-order interactive features, and meanwhile, all packet
features can be projected into many sub-spaces, where each packet can
interact with all packets in one step.

4.2. The design of MATEC
4.2.1. Embedding
The embedding layer is used to extract the features of a packet at
a shallow level. Unlike most other studies, our work utilizes both the
statistical features and packet byte features. It is worth noting that the
statistical features used are readily accessible, such as packet length and
relative position, and can be obtained online.
As a result, the feature representations of packets are unified in the
same format, which includes multiple feature fields in our model. For
packet 𝒙𝒊 , the shallow feature fields can be represented as:

3.2. Transfer learning
In the real scenario, the traffic from zero-day applications usually
does not exist in the training set [16]. The zero-day applications can
make up to 60% of flows in a network traffic dataset [21], which refers
to new traffic types. Therefore, as more and more new traffic emerges,
there is no single dataset that can contain all traffic types. Existing
traditional methods were trained on a specific dataset so that the new
traffic cannot be classified.
In our work, three datasets [11,26,27] are utilized simulate the
real-word traffic, and each dataset contains the traffic types that the
other datasets do not. As shown in Table 2, the classification targets
(i.e., types of applications) of different datasets are different and the
model trained on a single dataset may not work well for other datasets.
To clarify, we treat the classification of different datasets as different
tasks. If the models are trained independently in different tasks, it will
be time-consuming to train the model from scratch in all tasks. Given
that there are certain similarities between different datasets [11,26,27],
we are inspired to use transfer learning [24] to solve the problem. In
our work, a new model for the new traffic data can be trained based
on the previously trained model. First, only small changes in structure
are made to the previously trained model as illustrated in Section 4.2.3.
Then, based on the new traffic data, all the parameters are fine-tuned
to make the model adapt to the new task. In this way, due to the prior
information in the previous model, the number of the required labeled
data and the training time are greatly reduced.

𝒙𝒊 = {𝑥𝑖1 , 𝑥𝑖2 , … , 𝑥𝑖𝑀 }

(4)

where 𝑀 is the number of feature fields, and 𝑥𝑖𝑗 is the feature value of
the 𝑗th field. For example, 𝑥𝑖1 represents the packet position (e.g., 1,2,
. . . , 𝑁), 𝑥𝑖2 could denote the packet length, and 𝑥𝑖3 could be the first
784 bytes after removing the Ethernet header. It is worth noting that
even for encrypted traffic, the information in the packet headers can
be exploited for traffic classification [16]. Not only do we leverage
the header of the packet, but a portion of the packet payload is also
used. As shown in Fig. 5, the component of 784 bytes includes 20
bytes for the header of the IP layer (for IPv4 traffic only), 20 bytes for
TCP/UDP header (where 12 zero bytes are used to complement the UDP
header for alignment with the 20-byte TCP header), and the remaining
744 bytes for the packet payload (truncated if the payload exceeds
744 bytes, and conversely filled with zero bytes). For the number of
packet bytes, a series of hyperparameter comparison experiments are
conducted in Section 5. To speed up the data processing, the features
are normalized to [0,1] by dividing by 255. Then, we unify these
features. For a vectorial feature 𝒙𝒊𝒋 , the dimension change can be
expressed as

4. MATEC: The proposed lightweight model
The design of MATEC is presented in this section, as shown in Fig. 4.
First, either online or offline traffic traces captured on the router are

𝒆𝒊𝒋 = 𝑈𝑗 𝒙𝒊𝒋
5

(5)

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.

Fig. 4. The preprocessing and architecture of MATEC. The structure of the embedding and attention encoder layers is fixed, and the structure of fully connected layer varies with
different tasks.

Fig. 5. The feature field of the packet bytes.

where 𝑖 represents a packet and 𝑗 denotes a feature field. 𝑈𝑗 is an
embedding matrix for field 𝑗, which can be predefined or trained. Otherwise, for a scalar feature 𝑥𝑖𝑗 , the dimension change can be expressed
as
𝒆𝒊𝒋 = 𝒖𝒋 𝑥𝑖𝑗

(6)

where 𝒖𝒋 is an embedding vector for field 𝑗. The above processing
applies to all feature fields in each packet. It is worth noting that both
parameters 𝑈𝑗 and 𝒖𝒋 are trainable.
Then, the vectorial and scalar features are transformed into a unified
representation, and the packet vector 𝒆𝒊 (take packet 𝑖 as an example)
can be represented as
𝒆𝒊 = 𝑊𝑚𝑎𝑝 [𝒆𝒊𝟏 , 𝒆𝒊𝟐 , … , 𝒆𝒊𝑴 ]

Fig. 6. The construct of attention encoder.

flatten layer. In what follows, the detailed design of each component
will be explained.
(a) Multi-head Attention
The multi-head attention block is utilized to extract the flow-level
features, as it can model the interactions between packets. In the field
of traffic classification, multi-head attention has not been verified for
its effectiveness. We find that it can be one of the most effective and
efficient blocks to extract flow-level features, as shown by the experimental results in Section 5.3. With the help of multi-head attention,
each packet is allowed to interact with all the other packets in one step
as shown in (9), greatly reducing the number of parameters and shortening the running time. Moreover, a packet is projected into multiple
subspaces as illustrated by (10) and (11), and therefore the multihead attention can capture different feature interactions in different
subspaces as shown in (12). By stacking the module with multi-head
attention, we can model different orders of feature interactions.
Take packet 𝑚 for an example, and we explain the extraction method
ℎ between packet
for high-order features. First, the attention weight 𝛼𝑚,𝑘
𝑚 and 𝑘 is defined as

(7)

where [𝒆𝒊𝟏 , 𝒆𝒊𝟐 , … , 𝒆𝒊𝑴 ] ∈ R𝑚 is the result of concatenating all feature
fields and 𝑊𝑚𝑎𝑝 ∈ R𝑑×𝑚 is the mapping matrix. Therefore, the packet
can be expressed as a vector of 𝑑 dimensions. The flow can be represented as a matrix with a shape of 𝑁 ×𝑑 by stacking the packet vectors,
where 𝑁 is the number of packets in a flow.
The position embedding is also carried out based on the method proposed in [17]. With the position encoded by Sines and Cosines as shown
in (8), the method performs well in an NLP scene, where 𝑝𝑜𝑠 represents
the location of the packet and 𝑖 is the dimension. However, it does not
work well for traffic classification, where absolute position encoding is
more indicative of position information than relative position encoding.
This can be solved by (6), i.e., multiplying the embedding vector 𝒖𝒋 and
position number 𝒙𝒊𝒋 .
𝑃 𝐸(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖) = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑝𝑜𝑠∕10 0002𝑖∕𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 )
𝑃 𝐸(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖+1) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑝𝑜𝑠∕10 0002𝑖∕𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 )

(8)

𝜙ℎ (𝒆 , 𝒆 )
ℎ
𝛼𝑚,𝑘
= ∑𝑁 𝒎 𝒌
ℎ
𝑖=1 𝜙 (𝒆𝒎 , 𝒆𝒊 )

4.2.2. Attention encoder
The attention encoder is designed to extract local and global features at a deeper level. Inspired by the literature [17], we take the
advantage of thin modules with multi-head attention [17] and 1DCNN feed-forward layers. Specifically, in our model, the thin module is
reused 𝑇 times to model the 𝑇 -order interactions between the packets,
and the number of parameters of the model is significantly reduced.
For the encoder, four lines of works are contained (see Fig. 6): (a)
multi-head attention, (b) add & norm, (c) feed-forward layer and (d)

(9)

′

𝜙ℎ (𝒆𝒎 , 𝒆𝒌 ) = ⟨𝑄ℎ 𝒆𝒎 , 𝐾 ℎ 𝒆𝒌 ⟩, 𝑄ℎ , 𝐾 ℎ ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑

(10)

where ℎ is the attention head, while 𝑄ℎ and 𝐾 ℎ are the transformation
′

matrices, mapping original embedding space R𝑑 into a new space R𝑑
in head ℎ. 𝜙ℎ (⋅, ⋅) defines the relationship between the two packets, and
it can be realized by inner product ⟨⋅, ⋅⟩ or a neural network. Typically,
we use inner product on account of the operation efficiency.
6

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.
Table 3
Comparisons with other feature extraction methods, where 𝑛 is the sequence length, 𝑑
is the representation dimension, ℎ is the number of heads of multi-head attention, and
𝑘 is the kernel size of convolutions.
Method

Complexity per
layer

Sequential
operations

Maximum
path length

Multi-head attention
Recurrent network
Convolutional network

𝑂(ℎ ⋅ 𝑛2 ⋅ 𝑑)
𝑂(𝑛 ⋅ 𝑑 2 )
𝑂(𝑘 ⋅ 𝑛 ⋅ 𝑑 2 )

𝑂(1)
𝑂(𝑛)
𝑂(1)

𝑂(1)
𝑂(𝑛)
(
)
𝑂 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑘 (𝑛)

′

By mapping the initial embedding space R𝑑 into another space R𝑑 ,
the temporary representation of packet 𝑚 is defined as
𝒆̃ 𝒉𝒎 =

𝑁
∑

′

ℎ
𝛼𝑚,𝑖
(𝑉 ℎ 𝒆𝒊 ), 𝑉 ℎ ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑

Fig. 7. The construct of feed-forward part of MATEC. The red dashed lines represent
the units that are involved in generating a target unit.

(11)
convolutional networks have been shown in Table 3, which demonstrates the good performance of convolutional networks in terms of
complexity per layer and sequential operations. In other words, the
convolutional networks run
( with)a constant number of sequentially executed operations and 𝑂 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑘 (𝑛) maximum path length, which proves
the efficiency of 1D-CNN. In our work, a 1D-CNN layer with kernel
size 1 is applied. For each packet, the inner products with each kernel
constitute the deeper representation of the packet.
The combination of the three modules above (i.e., multi-head attention, add & norm, and feed-forward) makes up the loop block as shown
in Fig. 6, with consistent dimensions of input and output.
(d) Flatten Layer
The flatten layer integrates the final vector of the flows. All the
packet vectors (𝒆𝒊 ) of the flow 𝑓 are concatenated into a flatten vector
𝐸̃ 𝑓 to represent the flow 𝑓 , shown in (13).

𝑖=1

where 𝑉 ℎ is the transformation matrix in head ℎ.
After splicing all the 𝑒̃ℎ𝑚 in all heads, the packet vector can be
expressed as
𝒆̃ 𝒎 = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(̃𝒆𝟏𝒎 , … , 𝒆̃ 𝑯
𝒎)

(12)

where 𝐻 is the number of heads. It is remarkable that the computation
of all the heads is parallelized, contributing to the efficiency of the
model running speed.
Furthermore, we compare various aspects of multi-head attention
to the recurrent and convolutional layers commonly used for feature
extraction [17], which maps one sequence of symbol representations
𝑥 = [𝑥1 , … , 𝑥𝑛 ] to another sequence of equal length 𝑧 = [𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 ]
with 𝒙, 𝒛 ∈ R𝑑 . As noted in Table 3, the comparisons include total
computational complexity per layer, the amount of computation that
can be parallelized, as measured by the minimum number of sequential
operations required and the path length between long-range dependencies in the network. As shown in Table 3, a multi-head attention layer
connects all positions with a constant number of sequentially executed
operations, which can largely reduce the running time. However, a
recurrent layer requires 𝑂(𝑛) sequential operations due to the cell
unit dependence [11]. With respect to the computational complexity,
multi-head attention layers are faster than recurrent layers when ℎ ×
𝑛 < 𝑑, which has been considered in our traffic classification tasks.
Besides, convolutional networks also have good performance in terms
of complexity per layer and sequential operations, which are used to
extract packet-level features in Section 4.2.2(c).
(b) Add & Norm
𝒆𝒎 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝒆̃𝑚 + 𝑊𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝒆𝒎 )

𝐸𝑓 = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(𝒆𝟏 , … , 𝒆𝑵 )

4.2.3. Fully connected layer
Fully connected layer converts the flow feature 𝐸𝑓 into the probability distribution of labels. The representation of the fully connected
layer is shown as follows
𝐸̃ 𝑓 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑊𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 𝐸𝑓 ), 𝑊𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 ∈ R𝑁𝑑×𝑅

(17)

where 𝑅 is the number
of classification
labels, and the output can be
[
]
represented as 𝑍 = 𝑧1 , 𝑧2 , … , 𝑧𝑅 . Then, the loss function of the model
uses the cross-entropy function and can be defined as shown in (18),
∑
𝑒𝑧𝑖
𝑝𝑖 = ∑ 𝑧
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 =
𝑐𝑖 ⋅ 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖 )
(18)
𝑗
𝑗𝑒

(13)

where 𝑐𝑖 is either 1 or 0, indicating whether the data label is 𝑐𝑖 or not.
The structure of the fully connected layer is variable as shown in
Fig. 4. As mentioned in Section 3.2, transfer learning is applied to
optimize the training on new traffic data, which can speed up the convergence of the model. To clarify, we treat the classification of different
datasets as different tasks. For different tasks, all fully connected layers
have the same input dimension (i.e., 𝑁𝑑), but the output dimension
is related to the number of classification targets, which varies with
datasets. Due to the similarity between various datasets, the structure
of embedding and attention encoder is fixed in all tasks, of which the
parameters remain various common information. When trained on a
new dataset, our model only needs to adjust the fully connected layer
(i.e. the red part in Fig. 4) in structure, and fine-tune the previous
parameters with few labeled data. In this way, the training time of the
new tasks can be greatly reduced. It means that when new traffic data
is available, the model can achieve rapid convergence with few labeled
data. The effect of transfer learning is presented in Section 5.3.3.

𝑑 ′ 𝐻×𝑑

where 𝑊𝑟𝑒𝑠 ∈ R
(In our method, 𝑑 ′ 𝐻 = 𝑑), is a transformation
matrix and 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0, 𝑧) is a non-linear activation function.
However, changes in the output of one layer will cause highly
correlated changes in the summed inputs to the next layer, especially
with ReLU units which can significantly change the outputs [52], which
may cause ‘‘covariate shift’’ problem [55]. Therefore, we apply layer
normalization [52] to reduce the ‘‘covariate shift’’ problem [55] by
fixing the mean and variance of the summed inputs within each layer.
Therefore, the layer normalization over all the hidden units in the same
layer (i.e., 𝑌 𝑙 = [𝑦1 , 𝑦2 , … , 𝑦𝐻 ]) is computed as follows,
√
√
𝐻
𝐻
√1 ∑
( 𝑙
)
1 ∑ 𝑙
𝑙
𝑙
𝜇 =
𝑦𝑖
𝜎 =√
𝑦 − 𝜇𝑙
(14)
𝐻 𝑖=1
𝐻 𝑖=1 𝑖
[
]
𝑦 − 𝑢𝑙 𝑦 − 𝑢𝑙
𝑦 − 𝑢𝑙
𝑌̃ 𝑙 = 1 𝑙 , 2 𝑙 , … , 𝐻 𝑙
𝜎
𝜎
𝜎

(16)

(15)

where 𝐻 denotes the number of hidden units in a layer.
(c) Feed Forward Layer
In the Feed Forward layer, the deployment of 1D-Convolutional
Neural Networks(1D-CNN) [13] helps to extract the packet-level features (see Fig. 7), as it focuses on a single packet. The details of the

4.3. Space and space complexity analysis
4.3.1. Space complexity
First of all, in the embedding layer, parameters are contained within
the embedding transformation matrix and transformation vector. The
7

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.
Table 4
Complexity of loop block of attention encoder.

Table 6
The parameters of MATEC.

Layer

Space complexity

Time complexity

Notation

Parameter

Value

Multi-head Attention
Add & Norm
Feed Forward
All

𝑂(𝑇 𝑑𝑑 ′ )
𝑂(𝑇 𝑑𝑟)
𝑂(𝑇 𝐻𝑑𝑑 ′ )
𝑂(𝑇 𝐻𝑑𝑑 ′ + 𝑇 𝑑𝑟)

𝑂(𝑇 𝑁 2 𝑑𝑑 ′ )
𝑂(𝑇 𝐻𝑑𝑑 ′ )
𝑂(𝑇 𝑁𝑑 2 𝑟)
𝑂(𝑇 𝑑𝑑 ′ (𝑁 2 + 𝐻) + 𝑇 𝑁𝑑 2 𝑟)

Number of packets
Number of loop blocks
Number of headers
Number of packet bytes
Dimension of embedding
/Kernel size of 1D-CNN
Kernel number of 1D-CNN
Vector dimension of subspace

N
T
H
P
d

3
2
3
784
432

r
d′

432
144

Table 5
The details of the experiment configurationl.
Item

Configuration

Hardware
Operating system
Memory
Python version
Tensorflow version

Dell EMC PowerEdge R730,Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2609
Linux 5.0.0-32-generic # 18.04.2-Ubuntu
69G
Python 3.7.3
Tensorflow 1.14.0

5.1.2. Evaluation metrics
To evaluate the effectiveness of MATEC, we adopt four generally
recognized metrics, namely accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
Accuracy represents the proportion of correctly classified flows. With
respect to the other three metrics, we obtain the true positive (TP), false
positive (FP), and false negative (FN) by comparing the output classification results with labeled ground truth. Take class 𝑖 as an example,
the information above can be used to calculate the index of 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 ,
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖 , and 𝐹 1 − 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 as the following formula show. The Precision, Recall, and F1-score are obtained by averaging the corresponding
metrics of each class.
𝑇 𝑃𝑖
(19)
𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 =
𝑇 𝑃𝑖 + 𝐹 𝑃𝑖

number of the parameters is 𝑀1 𝑑1 𝑑2 + 𝑀2 𝑑3 + 𝑑𝑚, where 𝑀1 represents
the number of vectorial features fields, and 𝑀2 denotes the number of
scalar features fields. 𝑑1 × 𝑑2 is the shape of the embedding transformation matrix and 𝑑3 is the length of the embedding transformation
vector of the scalar value. As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, 𝑑 is the
final dimension of the packet vector and 𝑚 is the dimension of the
intermediate result.
Second, for the attention encoder, the parameters mostly come
from the loop module, which contains multi-head attention, add &
norm module, and the feed-forward layer. The loop block contains the
following weight matrices: 𝑇 × {𝑄ℎ , 𝐾 ℎ , 𝑉 ℎ , 𝑊𝑟𝑒𝑠 , 𝑊𝐶𝑁𝑁 }. Independent
of the packet number 𝑁, the complexity is listed in Table 4. Besides,
the parameter values are usually small as shown in Section 5.1.1.

𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖 =

𝑇 𝑃𝑖
𝑇 𝑃𝑖 + 𝐹 𝑁𝑖

𝐹 1 − 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 =

2 × 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖
𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖

(20)

(21)

Additionally, to evaluate the efficiency of MATEC, we measure the
training time and testing time per 100 batches, and the batch size is set
to 32.

4.3.2. Time complexity
For the embedding layer, it takes 𝑂(𝑀1 𝑑1 𝑑2 + 𝑀2 𝑑3 + 𝑑𝑚) to embed
the original features into the unified representation. For the vectorial
feature fields, the time complexity is 𝑂(𝑀1 𝑑1 𝑑2 ), and for scalar feature fields, the time complexity is 𝑂(𝑀2 𝑑3 ). The representation of the
parameter is described in the part of space complexity.
For the attention encoder, we take the loop block into consideration.
The details of the time complexity of the loop block are shown in
Table 4. In multi-head attention, it takes 𝑂(𝑁𝑑𝑑 ′ + 𝑁 2 𝑑 ′ ) time for each
head in the module to calculate the attention weight, and 𝑂(𝑁 2 𝑑𝑑 ′ )
time to form a combinatorial feature under one head. All the heads can
be calculated in parallel. Therefore, the network is also time-efficient,
because 𝑁, 𝑇 , 𝑑 ′ and 𝑟 are usually small as shown in Section 5.1.1.

5.2. The overview of baselines and datasets
5.2.1. Baselines
To confirm the effectiveness of our model, we compare the model
with the following baselines in terms of accuracy, precision, recall,
and F1-score. For model efficiency, our model is compared with other
models in terms of average training time and average testing time.
• 1D-CNN Model
This model was proposed in [13]. This method integrated feature
selection, feature extraction, and classifier into a unified end-toend framework with 1D-CNN, intending to automatically learn
the nonlinear relationship between raw input and expected output. To the best of our knowledge, it was the first time to apply an
end-to-end method in the encrypted traffic classification domain.
• CNN with LSTM Model
This model was introduced in [2] and employed to compare the
effectiveness of multi-head attention [17] and RNN for flow feature extraction. It should be noted that in [2], the convolutional
network was utilized to extract the packet features for a single
packet. RNN (or LSTM) units were trained to extract the flow
features, and the model also took three consecutive packets in a
flow as the input.
• Bi-GRU model with transfer learning
The work was shown in [11], which also utilized RNN (Bi-GRU)
to model the packet interactions. With respect to the input, the
model selected three packets in a flow, where each packet contained 900 bytes. Besides, the attention mechanism was adopted
to assign weights to features according to their contributions to
the classification. The Bi-GRU network in [11] has been proved
to be the state-of-art deep learning method for encrypted traffic
classification.

5. Experiments and performance analysis
5.1. Experiment setup
5.1.1. Experiment environment
The experiments are mainly performed on Dell EMC PowerEdge
R730 with a Ubuntu operating system, and Table 5 shows the details
of the experiment configuration. The hyperparameter settings of the
MATEC are displayed in Table 6, and the experiments of hyperparameter comparisons are also conducted in this section. Besides, the
training procedure is implemented by minimizing the sum objectives
of categorical cross-entropy and the L2 regularization with a penalty
of 0.05. The learning rate is 0.01, and the training batch size is 32.
Moreover, we use Adam optimizer with 𝛽1 = 0.9 and 𝛽2 = 0.999. To
prevent the model from overfitting in the initial phase and ensure the
model stability, warmup learning rate [51] is conducted. The number
of warmup steps is set to be 4.
8

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.
Table 7
The details of Dataset B.
Applications

Flows

Applications

Flows

hpd.baidu.com
i.hdslb.com
sdkxyajsdata.xycdn.com
ss.bdstatic.com
ss.baidu.com
wenku.baidu.com
s.qhupdate.com
clients.google.com

2598
1806
6754
2494
2908
2160
2874
1148

wx.sinaimg.cn
sz.btfs.mail.ftn.qq.com
tracker.wps.cn
mp.weixin.qq.com
long.open.weixin.qq.com
hm.baidu.com
browserkernel.baidu.com
dwonline.ksosoft.com

2114
2558
1992
1724
11 056
18 694
1666
2128

5.2.2. Datasets
Three datasets are employed to validate the performance of MATEC.
Two of them (Dataset A and Dataset C) are public datasets, which
contain flows in all directions (i.e., from client to server and from
servers to clients). One dataset (Dataset B) only contains the flow from
clients to servers, which is collected by ourselves from China Science
and Technology Network (CSTNET). In our work, dataset A and B are
utilized to verify the effectiveness of the MATEC, and Dataset C is used
to verify the effectiveness of transfer learning. Detailed information
about these datasets has been shown in Table 2 in Section 3.2. The
datasets are briefly described as follows:
Fig. 8. Dataset A: comparisons between MHCNET and the three baseline models on
accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score.

• Dataset A [27] was published by the University of Lorraine,
constructed by crawling HTTPS websites over two weeks. The
dataset contains PCAP files of crawling top 779 accessed HTTPS
websites by Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox Web browsers. To
simplify the training process, we removed the special characters
(e.g. dashes and numbers). At last, the applications with more
than 1000 flows were chosen to use in the experiment, which
contains 47 classes and 84 245 flows.
• Dataset B [11] was collected by ourselves from the backbone of
CSTNET, an internet service provider in China. This dataset only
contains unidirectional traffic flows, from clients to servers. In the
end, the top 16 services with the most traffic flows were selected
as the experimental data, which contained more than 49K flows.
The details of Dataset B are shown in Table 7.
• Dataset C [26] is exploited to verify the efficiency and effectiveness of transfer learning. The dataset was published by Stratosphere Labs, supported by the CTU University of Prague in the
Czech Republic. The Lab continuously publishes new network
traffic datasets of malicious, mixed, and normal traffic. In our
work, ‘‘CTU-Normal-20’’ to ‘‘CTU-normal-32’’ normal captures are
used, including HTTPS raw traffic generated by Frantisek Strasak.
Finally, the top 19 applications with the most traffic data were
selected to verify the efficiency and effectiveness of the model.

To validate the merits of MATEC, we compare MATEC with three
well-known models as we described above (a) 1D-CNN [36], (b) CNN
(2D) with LSTM model [13], and (c) Bi-GRU [11]. We retrieve the three
benchmark models with the same architectures in the works [13,36]
and [11], and the batch size is uniformly set to 32.
As mentioned above, a new embedding approach for packet representation is explored, which can enhance the efficiency of extracting
high-order features. Both the statistical features (e.g. the packet length
and packet position) and the packet byte features are embedded into
a vector uniformly to represent the packet. While in the other three
works, packet bytes are the only original features that are input into
the model. As presented in Fig. 8, a comparative experiment of the two
embedding methods is conducted on Dataset A. The experimental results are generated from 10-fold cross-validation. As shown in Fig. 8(a),
when the embedding method we illustrate in Section 4.2.1 is adopted,
it is obvious that our model outperforms the baseline models on all
metrics. The accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score rate reached
99.76%, 98.84%, 98.74%, and 98.79%, respectively. Improvements of
15.01%, 2.89%, and 1.38% on F1-score compared to the 1D-CNN,
CNN with LSTM and Bi-GRU model demonstrate the great performance
of our model. As shown in Fig. 8(b), when only the packet bytes
are embedded as the original feature like the other three baseline
works, the performance of all models degrades due to less information
available. The experimental results show that our embedding method
improves the precision of MATEC by 1.7%. To summarize, the model
performs better when the embedding method we propose is applied.
The model which employs 1D-CNN to classify flows performs worst
due to the oversimplified model structure, which focuses on extracting
packet-level features. However, this work inspires us to explore an endto-end approach for traffic classification. The second benchmark model
utilizes both the packet features and flow features as considered in
our model, where CNN extracts the packet-level features and LSTM is
used to obtain the flow-level features. Experimental results show that
LSTM is not as effective as multi-head attention in the extraction of
flow features. This is because the multi-head attention is attributed to
the one-step interaction of all packets and the parallel computing of all
subspaces. Owing to the use of multi-head attention, a key advantage
of our model is that the number of parameters and running time are
significantly reduced. Therefore, the multi-head attention mechanism

It is important to note that all the original data is raw, and it
is necessary to label the data manually. To label the data, we adopt
an advanced labeling method proposed in [28], and its effectiveness
has been verified in several works [11,12,28]. The proposed labeling
process can be summarized as (1) getting the value of server name
indication (SNI), which is the domain’s substring of applications, (2)
comparing IP address resolution with the SNI field for the credibility
enhancement, and (3) discarding the flow if the SNI field is null or
the IP cannot be parsed into a domain name. In theory, the accuracy
of the label is doubly verified, including parsing the IP address to the
corresponding domain name and confirming the domain name with the
SNI value, which can guarantee the validity of the label.
5.3. Evaluation on three datasets
5.3.1. Evaluation on dataset A
• Effectiveness analysis
9

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.
Table 8
The comparison results of efficiency.
Item

MATEC

1D-CNN

CNN with LSTM

Bi-GRU

Weights
Average training time (ms)
Average testing time (ms)

102k
24.9
10.0

5779k
50.1
13.2

3754k
434.5
114.8

514k
69.5
29.0

Table 9
Details of different devices.
Number

Operating systems

CPU

Memory

1
2
3
4

Ubuntu 14.04 LTS
Ubuntu 14.04 LTS
Mac 11.3.1
Windows 10 Pro

2
2
6
6

69G
69G
32G
16G

× Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2620 v3
× Nvidia Teska K80
× Intel Core i7-9750H @ 2.60 GHz
× Intel Core i7-8700 @ 4300 MHz

Fig. 9. Online performance measured on different devices. The meaning of the number
values is shown in Table 9.

is proved to be effective to extract features in high dimensions. Besides, our model also can benefit from the application of ResNet, layer
normalization, and learning rate warmup. The Bi-GRU model performs
better than the other two baselines, which utilizes an attention mechanism to assign greater attention to more important features. Same as
the LSTM, the Bi-GRU model can only handle the interaction of two
packets at a clip. As a result, it is time-consuming and inefficient to
wait for the output from the previous interaction in the RNN model
due to the extra time overheads required.

Table 10
Dataset B: comparisons on F1-score with the three baseline models. The values 1–16
are the same as the Fig. 12.

• Efficiency analysis
To achieve the best lightweight performance, we adopt some principles, which can be summarized as (a) reuse of thin modules, (b)
paralleled computation in multiple heads (i.e., subspaces), and (c) multiple training optimization techniques, like ResNet, layer normalization,
and learning rate warmup.
First, the efficiency of the model is evaluated in terms of the model
weights, training time and testing time. As shown in Table 8, MATEC
benefits greatly from the principles mentioned above. The number of
parameters of MATEC is 1.8% of 1D-CNN, 2.7% of CNN with LSTM, and
19.8% of the Bi-GRU model. With respect to time efficiency, training
and testing time of each 100 batches are considered as metrics. The
training time of MATEC is 49.7% of 1D-CNN, 6.8% of CNN with LSTM,
and 35.8% of the Bi-GRU model. It should be noted that LSTM and
Bi-GRU can also be conducted to extract flow-level features, but only
two adjacent packets can interact at a time in LSTM, which leads to
high time consumption.
Second, we verify the online performance of the classifier. Online
traffic classification systems mainly consist of two parts, traffic capture
part and traffic classification part [56]. However, the authors in [57]
indicated that traffic classifier is the bottleneck of the network traffic
classification system because traffic capture has already reached a very
high speed due to the development of FPGA [56]. Therefore, we can
conclude that the online performance of the classifier is determined
by the throughput of the classifier, and we measure the throughput of
the models on different devices. The details of devices are shown in
Table 9, and the testing results are depicted in Fig. 9. In this figure, the
horizontal axis represents the different devices, and the vertical axis
denotes the number of flows that can be processed per second. As we
can see, our model has the highest processing efficiency on different
devices. On device 3, the throughput of MATEC (our model), 1D-CNN,
CNN with LSTM, and BI-GRU models were 9568 flows/s, 5376 flows/s,
768 flows/s, and 2912 flows/s, respectively. The throughput of our
model is about twice than that of the 1D-CNN model and 12 times than
that of the CNN with LSTM model.

ID

MATEC

1D-CNN

CNN with LSTM

Bi-GRU

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

94.63%
90.07%
87.91%
99.98%
99.41%
99.98%
90.47%
91.74%
90.59%
99.28%
94.91%
97.45%
96.89%
99.70%
100.00%
98.53%

78.90%
79.00%
58.85%
97.89%
95.50%
93.12%
63.23%
71.10%
75.73%
95.60%
90.38%
93.24%
79.08%
91.03%
99.60%
96.79%

84.99%
83.33%
71.86%
98.87%
97.18%
98.73%
82.76%
88.89%
85.86%
97.72%
94.74%
95.60%
93.78%
96.53%
99.98%
96.69%

93.47%
88.59%
88.07%
99.98%
99.40%
99.98%
81.63%
87.36%
85.85%
98.47%
94.44%
97.14%
95.39%
98.82%
100.00%
99.01%

The main parameters include 𝑁, 𝑇 , 𝐻, and 𝑃 . 𝑁 denotes the number
of packets that are selected in a flow, 𝑇 represents the number of
the loop blocks (i.e., the attention encoder) in the model, 𝐻 is the
number of the headers in the multi-head attention, and 𝑃 represents
the number of packet bytes. More detailed meanings of the parameters
have been illustrated in Section 4. We use the parameter values in
Table 6 as default hyperparameters, where 𝑁 = 3, 𝑇 = 2, 𝐻 = 3
and 𝑃 = 784. For each experiment, we change only one parameter
and keep the default values for the other parameters. As shown in
Fig. 10(a), the performance of our model is sensitive to the value of
𝑁. When 𝑁 is three, the model achieves an accuracy of 99.76%, and
there is a dramatic increase in accuracy when the number of packets
increases from one to two. As shown in Fig. 10(b), the accuracy of our
model reaches 99%, when the parameter 𝑇 is 2. After increasing the
value of 𝑇 , the accuracy increases by 1%. This indicates that the model
with two loop blocks is good enough for extracting packet-level and
flow-level features. In Fig. 10(c), when the number of headers in multihead attention is three, the model shows the optimal performance. As
the number of heads increases, the model becomes less effective. This
is because the increase in the number of headers leads to a further
refinement of feature granularity, which can undermine the integrity
of the flow features. Fig. 10(d) indicates that the first 784 bytes of
the packet contain information that is effective enough for encrypted
traffic classification, and the increase of bytes has little effect on the
performance of the model. The first 784 bytes of a packet contain (a)
20 bytes for the header of IP layer (for IPv4 traffic only), (b) 20 bytes
for TCP/UDP header (where 12 zero bytes are used to complement the
UDP header for alignment with the 20-byte TCP header), and (c) the
remaining 744 bytes for the packet payload (truncated if the payload
exceeds 744 bytes, and conversely filled with zero bytes).

• The comparisons on hyperparameters.
Furthermore, we conduct experiments on Dataset A to explore the
effects of different hyperparameters on the performance of MATEC.
10

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.

Fig. 10. Effects of different hyperparameter values on experimental results.

are made to the trained model as illustrated in Section 4.2.3 and we
initialize the parameters of fully connected layer randomly. At last,
based on dataset C, all the parameters are fine-tuned to make the model
adapt to the new task. In this way, due to the prior information in
the previous model, the number of the required labeled data and the
training time are greatly reduced.
We conduct a set of experiments with the training data accounting
for 10%, 30%, 60%, 80%, 100% of the total data in dataset C. The
experimental results of Dataset C are presented in Figs. 13 and 14.
These figures demonstrate the effects of the number of training samples
on the accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and training speed of
MATEC. Overall, the model based on the transfer leaning performs
better in terms of the evaluation metrics mentioned above. When the
proportion of training data is relatively small (i.e., 10%), the accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score is 8.04%, 13.97%, 7.81%, and 11.00%
higher than those of the model trained from scratch. This is because
when the number of training samples is small, the information in the
training data is insufficient to represent the real data distribution. The
relevant prior knowledge from the source model can compensate for
this shortcoming. Furthermore, for a new task, the convergence speed
of the model is significantly increased with the help of transfer learning.
As shown in Fig. 13, in the context of a small number of training
samples, the weak generalization ability of the model trained from
scratch results in lower accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. In
contrast, models that have been trained on a previous dataset can use
prior knowledge to assist in improving accuracy significantly. When the
proportion is relatively large, the gap between the two methods shrinks
due to the increasing learning ability of the model trained from scratch.
Moreover, Fig. 14 shows that, as the training set grows larger, training
a completely new model takes much more time.

Fig. 11. Dataset B: comparisons between MATEC and the three baseline models on
accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score.

5.3.2. Evaluation on dataset B
To enhance the validation of MATEC, we also conduct an experiment on Dataset B as we do on Dataset A, in terms of accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score. As shown in Fig. 11, the accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score of MATEC reach 96.84%, 95.98%, 95.53%
and 95.75%, respectively. Improvements of 10.22%, 3.85%, and 1.49%
on F1-score compared to the 1D-CNN, CNN with LSTM, and the Bi-GRU
models give more evidence that our model performs well for encrypted
traffic classification.
Fig. 12 contains three subgraphs, which display the precision, recall,
and F1-score values of 16 classes in Dataset B. In Fig. 12(a), the
precision values for 10 classes are greater than 95%, and the average
precision of MATEC is greater than that of the other three models by
9.12%, 2.33%, and 1.56% respectively. As shown in Fig. 12(b), for
the class ‘‘s.qhupdate.com’’, MATEC achieves a recall of 96.89%, with
improvements of 17.81%, 3.10%, and 1.50%, respectively, compared
to the other three. In Fig. 12(c) and Table 10, the F1-scores of 5 classes
are greater than 99%. However, all models perform poorly on the
‘‘i.hdslb.com’’, because there are only 1806 flows in this class. Through
the experiment in this section, it can be concluded that for services from
different providers, MATEC can achieve excellent performance.

5.4. Remarks
In this section, we compare MATEC with the other three baseline models in terms of effectiveness and efficiency. For Dataset A,
three groups of comparison experiments are conducted, including effectiveness comparison, efficiency comparison, and hyperparameter
comparison. According to the effectiveness analysis, improvements of

5.3.3. Effectiveness of transfer learning
Dataset C is exploited to verify the effectiveness of transfer learning
along with Dataset A. First, a source model is trained on Dataset A.
Then, only small changes (i.e. the fully connected layer) in structure
11

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.

Fig. 12. Dataset B: comparisons with the three baseline models. The values of 1 to 16 on the x axis represent the classes of ‘hpd.baidu.com’, ‘wx3.sinaimg.cn’, ‘i1.hdslb.com’,
‘sz.btfs.mail.ftn.qq.com’, ‘sdk1xyajs-data.xycdn.com’, ‘tracker3.wps.cn’, ‘ss0.bdstatic.com’, ‘mp.weixin.qq.com’, ‘ss0.baidu.com’, ‘long.open.weixin.qq.com’, ‘wenku.baidu.com’,
‘hm.baidu.com’, ‘s.qhupdate.com’, ‘browserkernel.baidu.com’, ‘clients1.google.com’, ‘dw-online.ksosoft.com’.

Fig. 13. Evaluation of transfer learning. Parts (a), (b), (c), and (d) represent the changes in accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and training time, respectively, with increasing
amounts of training data.

15.37%, 2.87%, and 1.77% on the F1-score rate compared to the other
three models demonstrate that our model performs well for encrypted
traffic classification. For the efficiency analysis, the performance of
our model achieves the optimal in terms of the number of parameters,
the training speed, and testing speed. More specifically, the number of
parameters of our model is 1.8% of 1D-CNN, 2.7% of CNN with LSTM,
and 19.8% of the Bi-GRU model, and the training time of our model
is 49.7% of 1D-CNN, 6.8% of CNN with LSTM, and 35.8% of Bi-GRU
model. At last, the comparisons on hyperparameters check the optimum
configuration of MATEC. Dataset B is utilized to enhance the validation
of the model’s effectiveness. As shown in Table 10 and Fig. 12, the
precision values for 10 classes are greater than 95%, and the average
precision of MATEC is greater than that of the other three models
by 9.11%, 2.33%, and 1.56%, respectively. Besides, the advantages of
transfer learning are tested on Dataset C. For the model trained with the
transfer learning, even when the proportion of training data is relatively

small, the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score are higher than
those of the model trained from scratch. Furthermore, the convergence
speed of the model is significantly improved by the transfer learning.
In short, MATEC is excellent in terms of effectiveness and efficiency.
6. Conclusion
Burning requirements on the efficiency of traffic classification are
put forward due to the widespread adoption of encrypted traffic. In
this paper, a lightweight model called MATEC has been proposed to
reduce resource and time consumption. ‘‘Maximizing the reuse of thin
modules’’ is our design principle. A thin module has been adopted the
multi-head attention and the 1D convolutional network. Attributed to
the one-step interaction of all packets and the parallel computation
of the multi-head attention mechanism, a key advantage of MATEC
12

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.

[5] L. Stewart, G. Armitage, P. Branch, S. Zander, An architecture for automated
network control of QoS over consumer broadband links, in: TENCON 2005-2005
IEEE Region 10 Conference, IEEE, 2005, pp. 1–6.
[6] J. But, N. Williams, S. Zander, L. Stewart, G. Armitage, Angel-automated network
games enhancement layer, 2006.
[7] M.F. Audah, T.S. Chin, Y. Zulfadzli, C.K. Lee, K. Rizaluddin, Towards efficient
and scalable machine learning-based QoS traffic classification in software-defined
network, in: International Conference on Mobile Web and Intelligent Information
Systems, Springer, 2019, pp. 217–229.
[8] W. Niu, Z. Zhuo, X. Zhang, X. Du, G. Yang, M. Guizani, A heuristic statistical
testing based approach for encrypted network traffic identification, IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol. 68 (4) (2019) 3843–3853.
[9] J. Meng, L. Yang, Y. Zhou, Z. Pan, Encrypted traffic identification based on sparse
logistical regression and extreme learning machine, in: Proceedings of ELM-2014
Volume 2, Springer, 2015, pp. 61–70.
[10] R. Alshammari, A.N. Zincir-Heywood, Identification of VoIP encrypted traffic
using a machine learning approach, J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inform. Sci. 27
(1) (2015) 77–92.
[11] X. Liu, J. You, Y. Wu, T. Li, L. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Ge, Attention-based bidirectional
gru networks for efficient https traffic classification, Inform. Sci. 541 (2020)
297–315.
[12] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, Z. Li, Fs-net: A flow sequence network for
encrypted traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[13] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, End-to-end encrypted traffic
classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), IEEE,
2017, pp. 43–48.
[14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, Mobile encrypted traffic classification using deep learning, in: 2018 Network Traffic Measurement and Analysis
Conference (TMA), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[15] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, A framework to classify heterogeneous
internet traffic with machine learning and deep learning techniques for satellite
communications, Comput. Netw. (2020) 107213.
[16] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An overview,
IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (5) (2019) 76–81.
[17] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser,
I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, in: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[18] L.R. Medsker, L. Jain, Recurrent neural networks, Des. Appl. 5 (2001).
[19] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, Y. Geng, Seq2img: A sequence-to-image based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1271–1276.
[20] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, How to achieve high classification accuracy with just a few
labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets, 2018, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.09761.
[21] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, J. Wu, Robust network traffic
classification, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 23 (4) (2014) 1257–1270.
[22] H. Kim, K.C. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, K. Lee, Internet
traffic classification demystified: myths, caveats, and the best practices, in:
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT Conference, 2008, pp. 1–12.
[23] Z. Yao, J. Ge, Y. Wu, X. Lin, R. He, Y. Ma, Encrypted traffic classification based
on Gaussian mixture models and Hidden Markov models, J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
(2020) 102711.
[24] L. Torrey, J. Shavlik, Transfer learning, in: Handbook of Research on Machine
Learning Applications and Trends: Algorithms, Methods, and Techniques, IGI
global, 2010, pp. 242–264.
[25] J. Cheng, R. He, Y. E, Y. Wu, J. You, T. Li, Real-time encrypted traffic
classification via lightweight neural networks, in: IEEE Global Communications
Conference, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[26] Stratosphere, Stratosphere laboratory datasets, 2015, Retrieved March 13, 2020,
from https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-overview.
[27] J.F. Wazen Shbair, T. Cholez, Https websites dataset, 2016, 4http://betternet.
lhs.loria.fr/datasets/https/.
[28] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, L. He, Mampf: Encrypted traffic
classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints, in: 2018
IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), 2018,
pp. 1–10, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IWQoS.2018.8624124.
[29] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, K.C. Claffy, Issues and future directions in traffic
classification, IEEE Netw. 26 (1) (2012) 35–40.
[30] M. Lotfollahi, M.J. Siavoshani, R.S.H. Zade, M. Saberian, Deep packet: A novel
approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning, Soft Comput.
24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012.
[31] E. Liang, H. Zhu, X. Jin, I. Stoica, Neural packet classification, in: Proceedings
of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication, ACM, 2019, pp.
256–269.
[32] Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, Y. Sang, Towards unknown traffic identification using
deep auto-encoder and constrained clustering, in: International Conference on
Computational Science, Springer, 2019, pp. 309–322.

Fig. 14. Evaluation of transfer learning on training time.

is that the number of parameters and the training and testing time
are significantly reduced. To improve the stability of the model, the
designed network is trained with the aid of ResNet, layer normalization,
and learning rate warmup. The proposed model outperformed the stateof-the-art works based on deep learning on three datasets. The results
has shown that our model has higher accuracy and running efficiency,
while the number of parameters used is reduced to 1.8% of that in
the 1D convolutional network and the training time halves on the
single task. By transfer learning, for a new dataset, our trained model
only needs to adjust the last layer of the neural network to adapt
to the new dataset and achieves rapid model convergence. Besides,
even when the size of the training data is relatively small (i.e., 10%
of the overall dataset), the accuracy is still 8.04% higher than that
of the model trained from scratch. Besides, the model has a better
convergence speed.
In our work, a flow refers to all packets with the same values
of the quintuple [transport layer; source IP; source port; destination
IP; destination port]. However, during the mobile session, the port
number may change. In terms of packet information for classification,
new protocols such as HTTP2 and HTTP3 use a new flow identifier
(i.e., Globally Unique Identifier) [58] to identify user sessions. In the
future work, we will consider using the Global Unique Identifier to
identify flow instead of the quintuple.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jin Cheng: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software. Yulei Wu:
Writing - original draft. Yuepeng E: Visualization, Investigation. Junling You: Validation. Tong Li: Software. Hui Li: Data curation, Writing
- review & editing. Jingguo Ge: Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] H.-N. Dai, R.C.-W. Wong, H. Wang, Z. Zheng, A.V. Vasilakos, Big data analytics
for large-scale wireless networks: Challenges and opportunities, ACM Comput.
Surv. 52 (5) (2019) 1–36.
[2] Z. Zou, J. Ge, H. Zheng, Y. Wu, C. Han, Z. Yao, Encrypted traffic classification
with a convolutional long short-term memory neural network, in: 2018 IEEE 20th
International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications;
IEEE 16th International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 4th International
Conference on Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), IEEE, 2018,
pp. 329–334.
[3] T.T. Nguyen, G. Armitage, A survey of techniques for internet traffic classification
using machine learning, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 10 (4) (2008) 56–76.
[4] A.S. Khatouni, N. Zincir-Heywood, Integrating machine learning with off-theshelf traffic flow features for http/https traffic classification, in: 2019 IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7.
13

Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

J. Cheng et al.
[33] S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sang, Towards unknown traffic identification via embeddings and deep autoencoders, in: 2019 26th International Conference on
Telecommunications (ICT), IEEE, 2019, pp. 85–89.

Jin Cheng received a B.Eng degree in software engineering from Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, in 2019. She
is currently an M.Sc student at Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research
interests include future network architecture, network
management, and network security and privacy.

[34] Z. Wang, The applications of deep learning on traffic identification, BlackHat
USA 24 (11) (2015) 1–10.
[35] A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Meo, D. Rossi, Kiss: Stochastic packet inspection
classifier for udp traffic, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 18 (5) (2010) 1505–1515.
[36] Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng, Traffic identification and traffic analysis based on support
vector machine, Neural Comput. Appl. (2019) 1–9.
[37] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, C. Chen, Service usage classification with
encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging apps, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput.
15 (11) (2016) 2851–2864.

Yulei Wu is a Senior Lecturer with the Department of
Computer Science, College of Engineering, Mathematics and
Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom. He
received the B.Sc. degree (First Class Honors) in Computer
Science and the Ph.D. degree in Computing and Mathematics from the University of Bradford, United Kingdom,
in 2006 and 2010, respectively. His expertise is on intelligent networking, and his main research interests include
computer networks, networked systems, software defined
networks and systems, network management, and network
security and privacy. He serves as an Associate Editor for
IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering,
and IEEE Access, as well as an Area Editor for Computer
Networks (Elsevier). He is a Senior Member of the IEEE
and the ACM, and a Fellow of the HEA (Higher Education
Academy).

[38] A.W. Moore, D. Zuev, Internet traffic classification using bayesian analysis techniques, in: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference
on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, 2005, pp. 50–60.
[39] A. McGregor, M. Hall, P. Lorier, J. Brunskill, Flow clustering using machine
learning techniques, in: International Workshop on Passive and Active Network
Measurement, Springer, 2004, pp. 205–214.
[40] D. Liu, C.-H. Lung, P2P traffic identification and optimization using fuzzy cmeans clustering, in: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems
(FUZZ-IEEE 2011), IEEE, 2011, pp. 2245–2252.
[41] J. Erman, A. Mahanti, M. Arlitt, I. Cohen, C. Williamson, Semi-supervised
network traffic classification, in: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMETRICS
International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems,
2007, pp. 369–370.
[42] R. Li, X. Xiao, S. Ni, H. Zheng, S. Xia, Byte segment neural network for
network traffic classification, in: 2018 IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium
on Quality of Service (IWQoS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–10.

Yuepeng E is an Associate Professor at Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS).
He received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Software and
Theory at the Graduate University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences in 2012. His research interests include future
network architecture and network testbeds.

[43] A. Moore, D. Zuev, M. Crogan, Discriminators for use in flow-based classification,
2013.
[44] Y. Okada, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, I. Oka, Comparisons of machine learning algorithms for application identification of encrypted traffic, in:
2011 10th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications and
Workshops, 2, IEEE, 2011, pp. 358–361.
[45] G.-L. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, C. Li, An novel hybrid method for effectively classifying encrypted traffic, in: 2010 IEEE Global Telecommunications
Conference GLOBECOM 2010, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[46] W. Wang, Y. Sheng, J. Wang, X. Zeng, X. Ye, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Hast-IDS:
Learning hierarchical spatial-temporal features using deep neural networks to
improve intrusion detection, IEEE Access 6 (2017) 1792–1806.

Junling You is a Senior Engineer at Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her interests are
mainly in future network, network virtualization, and big
data processing.

[47] X. He, T.-S. Chua, Neural factorization machines for sparse predictive analytics,
in: Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, 2017, pp. 355–364.
[48] J. Lian, X. Zhou, F. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Xie, G. Sun, Xdeepfm: Combining explicit
and implicit feature interactions for recommender systems, in: Proceedings of
the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining, in: KDD ’18, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
2018, pp. 1754–1763, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220023.

Tong Li is a Senior Engineer at Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He got a Ph.D.
degree from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
in 2015. His interests are mainly in network virtualization,
network measurement and big data stream processing.

[49] R. Wang, B. Fu, G. Fu, M. Wang, Deep & cross network for ad click predictions,
in: Proceedings of the ADKDD’17, ACM, 2017, pp. 1–7.
[50] S. Rendle, Factorization machines, in: IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining, IEEE, 2011, pp. 0–6.
[51] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2016, pp. 770–778.
[52] J.L. Ba, J.R. Kiros, G.E. Hinton, Layer normalization, 2016, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450.
[53] D. Naylor, A. Finamore, I. Leontiadis, Y. Grunenberger, M. Mellia, M. Munafò,
K. Papagiannaki, P. Steenkiste, The cost of the ‘‘s’’ in https, in: Proceedings of
the 10th ACM International on Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments
and Technologies, 2014, pp. 133–140.

Hui Li is a Senior Engineer at Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He got an M.Eng
degree from University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in
2006. His work focuses on computer network architecture,
traffic analysis and cyber security.

[54] A. Este, F. Gringoli, L. Salgarelli, Support vector machines for TCP traffic
classification, Comput. Netw. 53 (14) (2009) 2476–2490.
[55] S. Ioffe, C. Szegedy, Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training
by reducing internal covariate shift, in: International Conference on Machine
Learning, PMLR, 2015, pp. 448–456.
[56] A. Monemi, R. Zarei, M.N. Marsono, Online netfpga decision tree statistical traffic
classifier, Comput. Commun. (2013).

Jingguo Ge received the Ph.D. degree in computer system
architecture from the Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2003. He is currently a Professor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, and a Professor with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
His research focuses on computer network architecture,
software defined network (SDN), network virtualization,
cyber security, and mobile communication networks.

[57] H. Loo, S. Joseph, M.N. Marsono, Online incremental learning for high bandwidth
network traffic classification, Appl. Comput. Intell. Soft Comput. 2016 (2016)
1–13, http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2016/1465810.
[58] R.S.P. Leach, M. Mealling, A universally unique identifier (UUID) URN
namespace, 2005, RFC 4122 https://www.hjp.at/doc/rfc/rfc4122.html.

14