Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Expert Systems With Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa

Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for network
traffic classification
Shi Dong a, b, *
a
b

School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhoukou Normal University, Zhoukou 466001, China
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology (Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications), Beijing 100876, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Traffic classification
NETFLOW flow
Imbalance problem
Machine learning
SVM
CMSVM

With the current massive amount of traffic that is going through the internet, internet service providers (ISPs)
and networking service providers (NSPs) are looking for various ways to accurately predict the application type
of flow that is going through the internet. Such prediction is critical for security and network monitoring ap­
plications as they require application type to be known in prior. Traditional ways using port-based or payloadbased analysis are not sufficient anymore as many applications start using dynamic unknown port numbers,
masquerading, and encryption techniques to avoid being detected. Recently, machine learning has gained sig­
nificant attention in many prediction applications including traffic classification from flow features or charac­
teristics. However, such algorithms suffer from an imbalanced data problem where some applications have fewer
flow data and hence difficult to predict. In this paper, we employ network flow-level characteristics to identify
the application type of traffic. Furthermore, we propose the use of an improved support vector machine (SVM)
algorithm, named cost-sensitive SVM (CMSVM), to solve the imbalance problem in network traffic identification.
CMSVM adopts a multi-class SVM algorithm with active learning which dynamically assigns a weight for ap­
plications. We examine the classification accuracy and performance of the CMSVM algorithm using two different
datasets, namely MOORE_SET and NOC_SET datasets. Our results show that the CMSVM algorithm can reduce
computation cost, improve classification accuracy and solve the imbalance problem when compared to other
machine learning techniques.

1. Introduction

the flow of the application and its network behavior can detect and
possibly prevent such applications from affecting the network. Thus,
knowing the type of applications has been a major concern in both
research and industry.
Traditionally, port-based and payload based approach has been used
to know the type of application by knowing its payload or port number.
Applications in such approaches are mapped to specific well known and
defined ports and hence can be detected by looking at the port number
only. However, applications such as point to point (P2P) and ad hoc do
not adopt specific port and replace that dynamic unknown ports. Hence,
only 50–60% of applications were correctly classified using port-based
approaches, as was reported in 2005 Moore and Papagiannaki (2005).
In addition to port-based, deep packet inspection (DPI) techniques are
also used to classify applications in previous. However, such techniques
fail to identify the encrypted network traffic, which becomes a new
challenge for traffic identification Kumar, Turner, and Williams (2006).
Hence, the use of such traditional techniques is not sufficient enough to

Network traffic classification is a fundamental issue for various
network operations including security and network management. One
fundamental issue in that field is to classify applications or know their
type from their network flow behavior. This is particularly important to
internet service providers (ISPs) and networking service providers
(NSPs) where a vast amount of traffic passes with different applications
that have different requirements. In such large networks, it is critical to
distinguish real-time traffic applications and give them a higher priority
than those non-real-time applications. In addition to prioritization,
application classification can help in designing and engineering the
network in terms of workload characterization, capacity planning, and
routing provisioning for future application needs. Moreover, such clas­
sification can help detect and analyze malicious traffic that affects the
network which follows specific behavior that is known to be malicious
but can not be detected by simply looking at the endpoints. Looking at

* Address: School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhoukou Normal University, Zhoukou 466001, China.
E-mail address: dongshi@zknu.edu.cn.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114885
Received 16 October 2019; Received in revised form 11 February 2021; Accepted 6 March 2021
Available online 11 March 2021
0957-4174/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

classify applications that are going in today’s network.
Nowadays, advances in machine learning have proven their effi­
ciency in prediction applications, especially in the networking field.
Learning-based techniques can prove efficiency in the classification of
various applications if they were trained to count for a large amount of
ongoing and complex applications using sufficient datasets. It uses
different probability theories and statistical-based behaviors to identify
the network traffic application with sufficient time, cost, and
complexity. Montieri, Ciuonzo, Aceto, and Pescapé (2017) study on
whether anonymity networks (such as Tor, JonDonym, and I2P) can be
discerned. Experimental results show that the considered anonymity
networks (Tor, I2P, JonDonym) can be easily identified. Giuseppe Aceto,
Ciuonzo, Montieri, and Pescapé (2018), Aceto, Ciuonzo, Montieri,
Pescapé (2019a), Aceto, Ciuonzo, Montieri, Pescapé (2019b) proposed a
series of multi-model fusion algorithms for mobile encrypted traffic.
Experimental results indicate proposed algorithms can effectively
improve the identification performance. Hence, lots of machine learning
algorithms have been used to classify applications in various networks.
Examples of that can be found in surveys such as Nguyen and Armitage
(2009), Dainotti, Pescape, and Claffy (2012). Despite that fact, a com­
mon burden in such approaches is the imbalance problem of some ap­
plications in the datasets. Datasets are normally collected from the
network and hence some applications have only a limited number of
samples which made it difficult for learning algorithms to learn and
classify such applications Buda, Maki, and Mazurowski (2018). Such a
problem sound to be persistent with most network datasets, except
datasets that were actually designed to have equally distributed samples
of different application traffics which makes them inapplicable and hard
to build datasets. Hence, the imbalance problem has become a challenge
for traffic identification based on machine learning in the actual network
application traffics.
In this work, we propose an algorithm to solve the imbalance
problem using imbalanced datasets and a modified version of the sup­
port vector machine (SVM) learning algorithm. In other words, we
extend the work done in Shi, Zhou, Zhou, Wei, and Jian (2013) is
proposing the use of another learning algorithm that enhanced classi­
fication accuracy with the reduction of cost and complexity. First, we
present the new cost-sensitive SVM (CMSVM) learning algorithm and
compare it with the traditional SVM. CMSVM uses multi-class SVM with
active learning algorithms to resolve the imbalance problem for
different applications by adaptively learning weights. We applied the
proposed algorithm to two existing datasets, namely MOORE_SET
Moore and Papagiannaki (2005), and NOC_SET Shi, Zhou, Wei, and Jian
(2013), datasets. Then, we verified the performance of the proposed
algorithm in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and effectiveness in
solving the imbalance problem. We compare our performance to other
highly used machine learning techniques to prove our efficiency in
outperforming others and solving the imbalance problem with the used
dataset.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides the
related work about machine learning algorithms and traffic identifica­
tion models on NETFLOW sampled flow records. Section 3 discussed the
problem model and propose CMSVM. Section 4 highlights the datasets
used later for the evaluation of the proposed model. Section 5 describes
an evaluation method and analyzes experiment results. Finally, con­
clusions are drawn in Section 6.

2.1. Related works

2. Background

2.2. Primarily definitions

In this section, we present the state of the art in the domain of ma­
chine learning techniques for network traffic classification and appli­
cation identification. We highlight our contribution in comparison to
the prior work. In addition, we discuss some of the primary definitions
that are important to understand the later machine learning
approaches.

To build datasets from the network traffic, one can collect payloads
of different packets and analyze them to build machine learning models.
However, such an approach suffers from computational power and
storage requirements which are needed to analyze such information,
especially in recent network paradigms. Generally, network hardware is
not sufficient enough to store and process packets, and hence external
storage units need to be used to save packet information. Alternatively,

Traffic identification using supervised machine learning techniques
started earlier in 2005 when Naïve and Kernel Bayesian classifiers were
used to classify internet traffic with different applications Moore and
Zuev (2005). Such work showed a good accuracy compared to prior,
however, their accuracies for rare applications were bad which is a
serious burden when applied to real-world scenarios. In addition, their
models were designed with their network-specific features, such as IP
addresses and port numbers, and hence can not be applied to the general
internet classification. Later work used the same dataset with SVM and
non-network-specific features to build models and reached an accuracy
of 99% which is a vast enhancement compared to the earlier work Zhu,
Yuan, and Guan (2007). Furthermore, a work presented in Williams,
Zander, and Armitage (2006) used five different supervised machine
learning algorithms to build multiple models and compare the perfor­
mance of those different five algorithms in terms of complexity and
accuracy. We urge the reader to refer to Dainotti et al. (2012) for a
detailed survey of such different algorithms and datasets used for
identifying the application from some flow data.
Supervised machine learning work mostly suffers from a common
problem with datasets built for traffic identification which is the
imbalance problem. In most real-time networks in which datasets are
collected, some applications dominate the dataset and hence affect the
accuracy in predicting other applications. Applications with a low
number of training samples become religiously difficult to detect and
hence end up in low clarification accuracy due to incorrect prediction
Moore and Zuev (2005). The imbalance problem was discussed further
in Provost (2008) and showed a critical problem in the use of traditional
machine learning techniques for such applications. Different solutions
were proposed in the literature to solve the imbalance problem. For
example, In Charte, Rivera, Jesus, and Herrera (2015), the authors
propose “artificial subclass sampling technology”, which makes use of
differences to generate a new class of positive samples between the
positive class samples. This non-random sampling method in the data set
artificially adds new information, much time will significantly improve
the performance of the classification system. Of course, due to the added
new sample may be wrong, at this time it will lead to a different effect of
the subsequent classifier Han, Wang, and Mao (2005). Authors in Jap­
kowicz and Stephen (2002) analyze the unbalanced nature of classifi­
cation issues from four aspects including training sample size, the
number of samples the negative and positive sample ratio, complexity of
hyperplane and classification algorithms. In He and Garcia (2009), au­
thors indicate the imbalanced distribution of the data is only a phe­
nomenon; there may be two different reasons. The first possibility is
imbalanced data owning to the underlying data causing uneven distri­
bution, which is called the intrinsic imbalance. Another imbalanced data
is not directly related to the nature of the data space, which is considered
as an extrinsic imbalance. Extrinsic imbalances are equally as interesting
as their intrinsic counterparts since the dataspace from which an
extrinsic imbalanced data set is attained may not be imbalanced at all. In
addition, Cieslak, Hoens, Chawla, and Kegelmeyer (2012), Brefeld and
Scheffer (2005), Sun, Lim, and Liu (2010), Wang and Japkowicz (2010),
Zieba, Tomczak, Lubicz, and Witek (2014), Zieba and Tomczak (2015)
proposed different methodologies for solving the imbalance problem in
different datasets.

2

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Furthermore, we discuss our proposed algorithm, CMSVM, which is
proposed to solve the imbalance problem in a cost-effective solution.

Table 1
Proposed NETFLOW features.
Features

Features Description

Lport
Hport
duration
transproto
TCPflags1

low port number
high port number
flow duration
flow transport protocol used (TCP / UDP)
TCP header flag, or(OR), transport layer protocol is UDP,
the feature is 0 (one direction)
TCP header flag, or(OR), transport layer protocol is UDP,
the feature is 0 (the other direction)
packets/duration (second)
bytes/duration (second)
duration/packets

TCPflags2
pps
bps
mean packets arrived
time
Bi-direction packets
ratio
Bi-direction bytes ratio
Bi-direction packet
length ratio
Bi-direction packets
Bi-direction bytes
tos
mean packet length

3.1. SVM and weighted SVM algorithms
SVM is a well-known machine learning algorithm that builds hy­
perplanes to separate the data from multiple classes. To formulate the
problem, let x be inputs from NETFLOW data, y is the list of targetted
applications or class, then SVM would build a hyperplane H, which is
defined as follows:
H : aT ϕ(x) + b = 0

(1)

The assumption here is that the classes are linearly separable, a is a
vector of the weights for each flow feature, b is the bias term and Ø(.) is
fixed feature-space transformation. Assuming that x and y are known
from prior data or the training dataset, the problem is to find the hy­
perplanes H that separate different classes. SVM can be formulated as
the following optimization problem:

forward packets/ backward packets
forward bytes/ backward bytes
Bi-direction packets length ratio
forward packets + backward packets
forward bytes + backward bytes
bidirection tos OR from NETFLOW
Bi-direction bytes/bi-direction packets

N
∑
1
mina,b Q(a) = aT a + c
2
(n=1)

(2)

s.t.yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn

we used NETFLOW information to get the information needed for each
flow. Each flow record is composed of a sequence of network packets
and an artificial logical equivalent to a call or connection Rajahalme,
Amante, Jiang, and Carpenter (2011). Definition 1 formally defines a
NETFLOW flow record.

where c controls the trade-off between the volume and errors, and c > 0,

εn is the slack variable of the nth traffic object. Imbalanced classification

is also an important problem in traffic classification and identification,
while only the imbalanced classification problem of two-class SVM is
discussed in biology and context classification, and the imbalanced
classification problem of multi-class SVM is not discussed. So we will
discuss the problem in this paper.
First, we introduce the two-class SVM classification method to
resolve the imbalance problem which adopts the cost-sensitivity of
classes from Zieba et al. (2014), parameter c is divided into two realvalue parameters c+ and c- which represent the sets of positive and
negative examples. Thus the optimization problem in Eq. (2) can be
expressed as follows Zieba et al. (2014):
for all n = 1,…,N

Definition 1. NETFLOW flow records:
A flow record X with t features can be represented as a vector of flow
features x1 , x2 , …, xt . Each of those features characterizes one property
of a flow record. Examples of those features can be duration, port
number, etc. A flow record can be represented as:
X = {x1 , x2 , x3 , ..., xt }
In our analysis, we used NETFLOW features that are presented in
Table 1. All the features are based on the packets exchanged between
the clients and services. For example, duration describes the duration
of a flow record. Applications like P2P use short-lived connections
which results in a short duration while others like HTTP and SSH
require higher duration. The packets per second (pps) feature de­
scribes the number of packets exchanged between the client and
server. Video streaming applications usually cause a large number of
packets exchange while other applications might have smaller packet
exchange.
An application type or class is the type of application to be predicted
by the machine learning models. Assuming that y is the application
category, X is the vector of netflow features and F is the machine
learning classifier. The prediction can be made as follows:

N
N
∑
∑
1
mina,b Q(a) = aT a + c+
εn + c−
εn
2
n∈N+
n∈N−

(3)

T

s.t.yn (a ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn
where N+ = n ∈ 1, ..., N yn = 1, and N− = n ∈ 1, ..., N yn = − 1, wn
which is introduced as the penalty parameters variables. Eq. (3) is
further defined as follows,
for all n = 1,…,N
N
∑
1
mina,b Q(a) = aT a + c
ωn εn
2
n=1

Y = F(X) = {y1 , y2 , y3 , ..., ym }

s.t.yn (a ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn

where y1,y2,…ym represent different application categories, by function
F(X), traffic identification can be completed.

for all n = 1,…,N

(4)

T

N
∑

3. SVM and its extended versions

ωn = N

(n=1)
N
∑
1
minQ(a) = aT a + c
ωn εn
2
n=1

In this section, we briefly discuss traditional SVM and introduce
weighted SVM, which extends SVM to solve the imbalance problem.

3

(5)

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

3.2. CMSVm

where weights wn meet the requirement of a probability distribution.
Just like the paper Zieba et al. (2014) assume wn = N1 , thus we will
modify the two-class problem as a multi-class problem. So we give out
N1,…, Nm, where m indicates the type number of network traffic.
Different type application has different weights because the different
application has different proportion. Thus the optimization problem is
further expressed as Eq. (6).
)
(
N
N
N
1 T
CN 2 1 ∑
1 ∑
1 ∑
mina,b Q(a) = a a +
wn ε n +
wn εn + … +
wn ε n
2
N1 n=1
N2 n=1
Nt n=1
2

In this section, we propose a cost-sensitive SVM based on multi-class
with active learning, CMSVM, which can solve the imbalanced data by
misclassification costs estimation and sampling selection. The process of
CMSVM is the iterative procedure, which iteratively updates w by
optimizing the exponential error Zieba et al. (2014). The value of error
function ei can be modified based on ek in Zieba and Tomczak (2015),
modified error function can be applied to the multi-class problem, which
is calculated by the following:

) N
(
1
CN 2 1
1
1 ∑
= aT a +
+ + ... +
wn ε n
2
N1 N2
Nm n=1
2

ei =

where all n = 1, …, N, m = 1, ..., T

ei =

(6)

s.t.

∑N
i=1

∑N

λi −
i=1

λi yi = 0

∑N

(i)
1
n=1 wn + N2

∑N

EI

∑N (i)
(i)
1
n=1 wn + ... + Nt
n=1 wn

(9)

where EI is expressed by Eq. (10).

s.t.yn (aT ∅(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn

maxλ q(λ) =

1
N1

1∑N
λi λj yi yj k(xi , xj )
2 i,j=1

N
N
1 ∑
1 ∑
w(i)
= yn ) +
w(i) I(hk (xn )
n I(hk (xn ) ∕
N1 n=1
N2 n=1 n

= yn ) + ... +
∕

N
1 ∑
w(i) I(hk (xn ) ∕
= yn )
Nt n=1 n

(10)

where I(.) indicates the indicator function.
We consider weights wn as misclassification cost, then the weight
SVM will be changed as the cost-sensitive SVM, in order to improve the
training speed, reduce the number of training samples and time. We
introduce the active learning mechanism into cost-sensitive multi-class
SVM and call it CMSVM which includes two parts, one is cost-sensitive
SVM, the other is to select the optimal new sample to train by query
strategy. In this paper, Assume labeled network flow as L and unlabeled
network flow as U, we can adopt the query strategy to select the new
samples from U to the label.
Fig. 1 shows the procedure of CMSVM. Firstly, labeled network flow
(L) and unlabeled network flow(U) are considered as the input samples.
We train the cost-sensitive SVM adopting L data, then classify all U and
judge the maximum iteration number, if it meets the requirement for the
CMSVM algorithm, the algorithm should end. Or else we select the
network flow samples close to the cost-sensitive SVM hyperplane which

(7)

0⩽λn ⩽Cwn
for all n = 1, …N
where λ is the vector of Lagrange multipliers. k is the kernel function. Eq.
(7) is detailed derived in the Appendix section. Finally, the identification
model can be expressed as follows:
∑
h(xi ) = sign( yn λn k(xn , xi ) + b)
(8)
n∈sv

where sv shows the support vectors, the sign is the signum function
which is an odd mathematical function that extracts the sign of a real
number. h(xi ) is the objective function.

Fig. 1. CMSVM flow chart.

4

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Table 2
MOORE_SET Dataset.

Table 3
NOC_SET Dataset.

AppID

Category

Application

Number of flows

Proportion

AppID

Application

Protocol

Proportion

1
2
3
4
5
6

WWW
BULK
MAIL
DB
SERV
P2P

328,091
11,539
28,567
2648
2099
2094

86.91
3.056
7.567
0.701
0.556
0.555

1
2
3
4

WWW
Bulk
Mail
P2P

64.6
0.5
1.19
18.5

ATTACK
MULT
INT
GAME

1793
1152
110
8

0.475
0.305
0.029
0.002

5
6
7
8
9

Service
Interactive
Multimedia
Voice
Others

HTTP
FTP
IMAP, POP3, SMTP
BitTorrent, eDonkey,
XunLei, etc.
DNS, NTP
SSH, CVS, pc Anywhere
RTSP, Real
SIP, Skype
games, attacks

4943
39
91
1414

7
8
9
10

HTTP, HTTPS
FTP
POP3, IMAP, SMTP
SQLnet, Oracle
DNS, NTP, LDAP
Kazaa, Bittorrent,
Gnutella
Worm and virus Attacks
Media Player, Real
SSH, klogin, Telnet
Halflife

Flow
number

433
6
20
276
431

5.7
0.08
0.3
3.6
5.6

is a query strategy and label it. Those samples are inserted training costsensitive SVM to generate the new classifier.
Algotithm: CMSVM

Table 4
Confusion matrix.

Algorithm 1: CMSVM algorithm

Actual positive class
Actual negative class

Input: Flow F include all features(L and U), I: Iteration Number
∑kfinal
Output: Class label and Classifier for imbalance data H(x) = argmaxy∈Y k=1
ck I(hk (x)
= y)
1 Begin
2 Initialize flow feature;
3 Generate new Flow F;
4 for k = 1 to I
(k)
(k)
(k)
5 Train cost-sensitive SVM by solving(6) with values of w(k)
n ,N1 , N2 ,…, Nt ;
6
while ek < 0.5 do
1 − ek
7
ck ← ln
ek
8
compute Gmean value gk and Mauc value mk;
∑
9
Hk (x) = argmaxy∈Y kl=l cl I(hl (x) = y)
10
if gk > G then
11
G ← gk, Select the network flow which is close to the cssvm hyperplane in cssvm;
12
Kfinal ← k ;
13
end if
14
Return H;
15 end while
16 End

Predicted positive class

Predicted negative class

TP
FP

FN
TN

will be used to prove the effectiveness of the machine learning models to
correctly predict the class of a flow and solve the imbalance problem.
4.1. Dataset
In this work, we used two datasets, namely MOORE_SET, Moore and
Papagiannaki (2005) dataset and NOC_SET dataset, Shi, Zhou, Wei et al.
(2013) to build and test models using different machine learning algo­
rithms. Those datasets are publicly available datasets that can be sum­
marized as follows: MOORE-SET: as originally given by Moore and
Papagiannaki (2005) MOORE-SET dataset generates flow data using
random sampling over several different periods from one node on the
internet. It has 10 applications with a different number of samples as
summarized in Table 2. This network traffic collection site is shared by
about 1000 researchers, technicians, and management staff of three
research institutions, and connected to the Internet through a fullduplex Gigabit Ethernet link. All full-duplex traffic on this connection
is captured in a full 24 h period, so the original traffic-set contained all
full-duplex traffic connected to the node in both link directions. Since
the original traffic-set is too large, Moore divides it into ten subsets by a
random sampling method. The sampling times of each subset are almost
the same (approximately 1680 s each) and the non-overlapping random
samples are uniformly distributed over the 24-hour interval. The num­
ber of flows and the proportion of the various types of network traffic are
shown in Table 2.
NOC-SET: NOC_SET Shi, Zhou, Wei et al. (2013) dataset is collected
at Southeast University and each flow is labeled by modified L7_filter
Levandoski (2008) software. It adopts packets collector to obtain 200G
packets data in 12 h. To suit for generating the flow label, we modified
the L7_filter software to label the packets and group the packets labeled
into flows. A TCP/IP flow is uniquely identified by the five values:
source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, and protocol
type. For TCP flow, we select semantically complete TCP flows in our
experiments, which means that each TCP flow contains successful threeway handshake packets and connection termination (FIN-ACK) packets.
Table 3 summarizes the flow information of NOC_SET dataset. There are
nine application classes, some of which contain multiple application
layer protocols.

Algorithm1 represents a cost-sensitive SVM method based on multi-class
with active learning, the first step initializes network flow features and
generate new flow, those network flow samples include labeled network
flow(L) and unlabeled network flow(U). Next, the cost-sensitive SVM
classifier is built, and the classifier is increasingly optimal by ek. Gmean
value and Mauc value are computed. When the error value is lower than
0.5, the value ck will be further computed. Finally, the classifier is
updated in the iteration procedure.
3.3. Algorithm complexity analysis
In this section, the computational complexity of CMSVM is analyzed.
The complexity depends on three parts. The first part is the initialization
process of flow feature with the complexity of O(1). The second part is
the training phase with the complexity of O(I). The final part is
computing process of Gmean and Mauc value with the compexity of O
(1). So the total computational complexity of CMSVM is 2O(1) + O(I)
and approximately equal to O(I).
4. Datasets and performance metrics
In this section, we describe the datasets used to evaluate the pro­
posed algorithm. In addition, we discuss the performance metrics that

5

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Fig. 3. Precision results for different applications with the different used al­
gorithms with MOORE_SET.

Fig. 2. Overall accuracy results for CMSVM algorithms with MOORE_SET.

4.2. Performance metrics
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, we use
different standard evaluation metrics that are used in literature to
evaluate any learning algorithm. Namely, we calculate the overall ac­
curacy, precision and recall to check the correctness in predicting a
traffic fow in a particular class. In addition, to evaluate the effectiveness
of algorithms in solving the imbalance problem, we used the geometric
mean (Gmean) and the multi-class area under the curve (MAUC) Sun
et al. (2010) which are commonly used metrics to evaluate the solution
to the imbalance problem. Gmean is a type of mean or average, which
indicates the central tendency or typical value of a set of numbers by
using the product of their values. While MAUC is improved AUC method
to distinguish between multi classes.
True positives (TP) represent flows in class A that are classified
correctly in that class. False negatives (FP) represent flows that are not in
class A but misclassified in that class. False negatives (FN) represent
flows in class A that are misclassified as some other category; in other
words, bot detected in their class. FN will result in identification accu­
racy loss. True negatives (TN) represent flows that are not in class A and
correctly not detected in class A. we can obtain the confusion matrix
presented in Table 4 after a classification process. Then, the calculation
of our metrics goes as follows:
Precision: The percentage of samples classified in a particular class
correctly compared to all samples classified in that class.
Precision =

TP
TP + FP

Fig. 4. Recall results for different applications with the different used algo­
rithms with MOORE_SET.

Gmean =

TP
TP + FN

(12)

The TN rate TNR or specificity Sp is defined as
TN
TNR =
TN + FP

(15)

where n is the number of samples.
MAUC: area under the curve (AUC) is a standard measure for a single
class dataset where you distinguish between only two classes. However,
such metric can not be applied to a multi-class dataset where more than
two class is involved. Hence, the authors in Sun et al. (2010) proposed to
transform AUC to MAUC in order to be applied to multi-class datasets.
MAUC can be defined as follows:

(11)

Recall: The percentage of samples in a particular class A that are
correctly classified in that class
Recall = TPR =

√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
TPR*TNR

Mauc =
(13)

∑
2
AUC(ci , cj )
q(q − 1) i<j

Where AUC(ci , cj ) =

Overall accuracy: The percentage of samples that are correctly
classified
∑n
TPi
OverallAccuracy = ∑n i=1
(14)
i=1 TPi + FPi

(16)

S − n (n +1)/2
AUC(ci /cj )+AUC(cj /ci )
;AUC(ci /cj ) = i cni c ncic
2
i j

5. Experimental results
In this section, we describe the performance evaluation of our al­
gorithm, CMSVM, compared to different other algorithms that are
designed to solve the imbalance problem. More specifically, we
compare CMSVM to SVM, ROS, and RUC using recall, precision,

where n is where n is the number of samples.
G-mean: it is called the geometric mean.

6

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Fig. 5. Results for confusion matrix with the different used algorithms with MOORE_SET.

Table 5
Experiment results for MOORE_SET.
Method

Gmean

Mauc

SVM
ROS
RUS
CMSVM

0.583
0.673
0.684
0.718

0.625
0.631
0.646
0.709

overall accuracy, Gmean, and MAUC performance metrics. We used
the WEKA Hall et al. (2009) machine learning suite to build an SVM
model. As discussed earlier, two datasets, namely MOORE_SET and
NOC_SET, are used to verify our models and calculate the performance
metrics from the results on those two datasets. Tenfold crossvalidation was used to cross-validate the data. The ten-fold crossvalidation method is a commonly used accuracy test method. Its basic
idea is to divide the data set into 10 parts, and take 9 parts as training
data and 1 part as test data, in turn, to carry out experiments. Each
experiment will get the corresponding accuracy, and the average of
the accuracy of 10 results is used as the estimation of the accuracy of
the algorithm. Experimental results are shown in Figs. 2–5, and
Table 5 for MOORE_SET while they are shown in Figs. 6–9, and Table 6
for NOC_SET.

Fig. 6. Overall accuracy results for CMSVM algorithms with NOC_SET.

overall accuracy reaches 0.942 which is the maximum. So we will
adopt the classifier to classify the network flow when the iteration
number is 10. As can be seen in Figs. 3 and 4, CMSVM, ROS, and ROS
had a high precision and recall with all applications whereas SVM had
a relatively bad recall and precision for most of the applications. Thus,
SVM did not perform well due to the imbalance problem as applica­
tions had a different ratio of the number of samples. As discussed in

5.1. Performance analysis with MOORE_SET
Fig. 2 represents the overall accuracy for CMSVM in different
iteration number. We find the CMSVM algorithm gets convergence and
7

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

5.2. Performance analysis with NOC_SET
Fig. 6 represents the overall accuracy for CMSVM in different
iteration number. We find the CMSVM algorithm gets convergence and
overall accuracy reaches 0.945 which is the maximum. So we will
adopt the classifier to classify the network flow when the iteration
number is 10. NOC_SET results are shown in Figs. 7 and 8 and Table 5
for precision, recall, and Gmean and MAUC. As can be seen, CMSVM
outperforms all other algorithms in terms of precision and recall.
Similar to MOORE_SET, SVM had the worst performance for a low
number of sample applications which can be reasoned by the inability
of SVM to solve the imbalance problem. On the other hand, CMSVM
had a slightly better performance than ROS and RUS with more stable
performance which proof their efficiency in predicting even a low
number of sample applications. Results for the confusion matrix with
the different used algorithms are depicted in Fig. 9. From Table 3, we
know the network traffic with minimum proportion is Interactive,
which only is 0.08. In Fig. 9(a), SVM algorithm’s TP value is 0.81.
From Fig. 9(b), (c), and (d), we can know ROS, RUS, and CMSVM al­
gorithm’s TP value is 0.835, 0.84, and 0.89. The experimental results
show our proposed CMSVM algorithm can better improve the identi­
fication performance. For Gmean and MAUC, as shown in Table 6,
CMSVM performed better than other algorithms and could reach about
77% Gmean and 75% MAUC. This can be due to the better learning
ability of CMSVM using cost-sensitive than applying any of the
resamplings.
To summarize this section, our proposed algorithm, CMSVM, could
achieve higher precisions and recall compared to the other three
methods. It showed a better performance in Gmean and MAUC which is
effective proof in solving the imbalance problem. By adding other fea­
tures to the features mentioned in Table 1, better classification results
can be achieved with better models and reasonably added complexity. In
addition, the proposed multi-class solution can be applied to other
machine learning algorithms to improve their efficiency in solving the
imbalance problem.

Fig. 7. Precision results for different applications with the different used al­
gorithms with NOC_SET.

6. Conclusions
Traffic identification is one of the critical issues for network traffic
planning and management. While methods based on machine learning
are getting popularity in solving such issues, imbalance problems in
existing datasets is a burden against the efficiency of those algorithms.
This paper proposed an improved SVM algorithm, CMSVM, which tries
to solve the imbalance problem by introducing the weight values and
active learning for each class of traffic. MOORE_SET and NOC_SET
datasets are used to build models of different learning algorithms and
compare their performances. SVM, ROS, and RUS algorithms are used
in performance analysis to show the efficiency of the proposed algo­
rithm when compared to the other three algorithms. Experimental
results showed that CMSVM can outperform others in terms of recall,
precision, overall accuracy, MAUC, and Gmean. However, CMSVM
still gets about 70% MAUC and Gmean which implies that it still
needs improvements. Adding more features to the dataset or applying
the proposed strategy to other machine learning algorithms can
improve the performance and results in better solutions for the
imbalance problem. In the future work, we will consider the joint
optimization of deep learning and migation stratege with imbalance
problem.

Fig. 8. Recall results for different applications with the different used algo­
rithms with NOC_SET.

Section 4.1, the Game application had a low number of samples and
hence traditional SVM can not predict it. However, other algorithms
performed well with all applications and CMSVM had the most stable
and highest performance compared to the other algorithms. Fig. 5
presents the confusion matrix of four algorithms. It is observed that
network traffic with a large proportion has a high TP value in four
algorithms. However, there is a big difference on TP for network traffic
with a small proportion. In Fig. 5(a), the SVM has 0.61 TP value on
game category, ROS, RUS and CMSVM has 0.855, 0.845 and 0.86 TP
value. The results indicate that adopting the unbalanced strategy can
improve the identification accuracy of network traffic with a small
proportion. Especially, our proposed CMSVM has 0.86 TP value.
For the network traffic www with a large proportion, it can achieve
0.94 TP value. Moreover, MAUC and Gmean results, as presented in
Table 5 showed the outperformance of CMSVM compared to other
algorithms. CMSVM can reach 72% Gmean value while others had
lower values which can reach 58% with SVM. In addition, CMSVM
reaches around 70% MAUC while others reach 65% by maximum
which shows the better performance of our proposed algorithm
compared to the others.

Ethical approval
This article does not contain any studies with human participants or
animals performed by any of the authors.

8

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Fig. 9. Results for confusion matrix with the different used algorithms with NOC_SET.

Declaration of Competing Interest

Table 6
Experiment results for NOC_SET.
Method

Gmean

Mauc

SVM
ROS
RUS
CMSVM

0.674
0.723
0.734
0.768

0.71125
0.7231
0.7256
0.774

The all authors of the paper immediately below certify that they have
no affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with
any financial interest.
Acknowledgments
This paper is supported by Project supported by Key Scientific and
Technological Research Projects in Henan Province (Grand No.
192102210125), Open Foundation of State key Laboratory of
Networking and Switching Technology (Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications) (KLNST-2020-2-01). In addition, the authors also
will thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments and
suggestions.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Shi Dong: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing original draft, Writing - review & editing.

Appendix A
The prime problem is:
∑
∑
1
mina,b .Q(a) = aT a + C+
ξn + C−
ξn
2
n∈N +
n∈N −
(17)

s.t.yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − ξn
for all n = 1, ..., N

9

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

where N + = {n ∈ {1, ..., N} : yn = 1}, and N − = {n ∈ {1, ..., N} : yn = − 1}.
Further, we generalize the problem 1 by introducing individual penalty parameters wn for each nth observation which yields:
n
∑
1
mina,b .Q(a) = aT a + C
w n ξn
2
n=1

(18)

s.t.yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − ξn
for all n = 1, ..., N
Because we have maintained the individual penalty parameter C, the penalty parameters wn have to fulfill the following condition:
N
∑

(19)

wn = N
n=1

The introduction of w allows to diversify the costs of misclassification not only between classes but also within classes. Further, we will use the
penalty parameters w in the boosting procedure during the construction of the classifier. Then we want to get the dual optimization problem of the
primal optimization problem 2.
Introduce the multipliers λ we get the Lagrange function:
∑n
1 T
L(a, b, ξ, λ) =
a a + C n=1 wn ξn + λ1 (y1 (aT ϕ(x1 ) + b) + 1 − ξ1 )
2
(20)
+λ2 (y2 (aT ϕ(x2 ) + b) + 1 − ξ2 ) + ⋯ + λn (yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b) + 1 − ξn )
Where λ = (λ1 , λ2 , ⋯, λN ) and ξ = (ξ1 , ξ2 , ⋯, ξN ). Let ∂∂La , ∂∂Lb and ∂∂ξLi equal to 0, we get

∂L
= a − λ1 y1 ϕ(x1 ) − λ2 y2 ϕ(x2 ) − ⋯ − λN yN ϕ(xN ) = 0
∂a

(21)

∂L
= λ1 y1 + λ2 y2 + ⋯ + λN yN = 0
∂b

(22)

∂L
= Cwi − λi = 0 for all i = 1, 2, …, N
∂ξi

(23)

From Eq. (21) we have
N
∑

a=

(24)

λi yi ϕ(xi )
i=1

Put Eq. (24) into (20), we have the dual function
q(λ)

= infa,b,ξ L(a, b, ξ, λ)
∑N
∑n
∑N
1∑N
λi yi ϕ(xi )T
λi yi ϕ(xi ) + C n=1 wn ξn + λ1 (y1 ( i=1 λi yi ϕ(xi )T ϕ(x1 ) + b) + 1 − ξ1 )
i=1
2 i=1
∑N
∑N
+λ2 (y2 ( i=1 λi yi ϕ(xi )T ϕ(x2 ) + b) + 1 − ξ2 ) + ⋯ + λN (y2 ( i=1 λi yi ϕ(xi )T ϕ(xN ) + b) + 1 − ξN )
=

∑N
∑i
∑N
∑N
∑N
1∑N
λi yi ϕ(xi )T
λi yi ϕ(xi ) + C i=1 wi ξn +
λi −
λi yi b +
λi ξi
i=1
i=1
i=1
i=1
2 i=1

=−

According to Eqs. (22) and (23), we have
∑N
1∑N
q(λ) =
λi −
λi λj yi yj ϕ(xi )T ϕ(xj )
i=1
2 i,j=1
=

(25)

∑N

λi −
i=1

(26)

1∑N
λi λj yi yj k(xi , xj )
2 i,j=1

where k(xi , xj ) is a kernel function. Therefore, we get the following dual optimization problem:
N
∑

maxλ q(λ) =

λi −
i=1

N
1∑
λi λj yi yj k(xi , xj )
2 i,j=1

(27)

N
∑

s.t.

(28)

λi yi = 0
i=1

0⩽λn ⩽Cwn

(29)

for all n = 1, …N

(30)

10

S. Dong

Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

References

Moore, A. W., & Zuev, D. (2005). Internet traffic classification using bayesian analysis
techniques. Acm Sigmetrics Performance Evaluation Review, 33(1), 50.
Nguyen, T. T. T., & Armitage, G. J. (2009). A survey of techniques for internet traffic
classification using machine learning. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 10(4),
56–76.
Provost, F. (2008). Machine learning from imbalanced data sets 101 (extended abstract).
Soft Computing Pattern Recognition, International Conference of.
Rajahalme, J., Amante, S., Jiang, S., Carpenter, B., 2011. Ipv6 flow label specification.
Shi, D., Zhou, D., Wei, D., & Jian, G. (2013). Flow cluster algorithm based on improved kmeans method. Iete Journal of Research, 59(4), 326–333.
Shi, D., Zhou, D. D., Zhou, W., Wei, D., & Jian, G. (2013). Research on network traffic
identification based on improved bp neural network. Applied Mathematics Information
Sciences, 7(1), 389–398.
Sun, A., Lim, E. P., & Liu, Y. (2010). On strategies for imbalanced text classification using
svm: A comparative study. Decision Support Systems, 48(1), 191–201.
Wang, B. X., & Japkowicz, N. (2010). Boosting support vector machines for imbalanced
data sets. Knowledge Information Systems, 25(1), 1–20.
Williams, N., Zander, S., & Armitage, G. J. (2006). A preliminary performance
comparison of five machine learning algorithms for practical ip traffic flow
classification. Acm Sigcomm Computer Communication Review, 36(5), 5–16.
Zhu, L., Yuan, R., & Guan, X. (2007). Accurate classification of the internet traffic based
on the svm method. IEEE International Conference on Communications.
Zieba, M., & Tomczak, J. M. (2015). Boosted svm with active learning strategy for
imbalanced data. Soft Computing, 19(12), 3357–3368.
Zieba, M., Tomczak, J. M., Lubicz, M., & Witek, J. (2014). Boosted svm for extracting
rules from imbalanced data in application to prediction of the post operative life
expectancy in the lung cancer patients. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 14(1),
99–108.

Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., & Pescapé, A. (2018). Multi-classification
approaches for classifying mobile app traffic. Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, 131–145.
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., & Pescapé, A. (2019a). MIMETIC: Mobile encrypted
traffic classification using multimodal deep learning. Computer Networks, 165
(Dec.24), 106944.1-106944.12.
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., & Pescapé, A. (2019b). Mobile encrypted traffic
classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, lessons learned, and
challenges. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 445–458.
Brefeld, U., & Scheffer, T. (2005). Auc maximizing support vector learning. Icml
Workshop on Roc Analysis in Machine Learning, 377–380.
Buda, M., Maki, A., & Mazurowski, M. A. (2018). A systematic study of the class
imbalance problem in convolutional neural networks. Neural Networks, 106,
249–259.
Charte, F., Rivera, A. J., Jesus, M. J. D., & Herrera, F. (2015). Addressing imbalance in
multilabel classification: Measures and random resampling algorithms.
Neurocomputing, 163, 3–16.
Cieslak, D. A., Hoens, T. R., Chawla, N. V., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2012). Hellinger
distancedecisiontreesarerobustandskew-insensitive.DataMining Knowledge.
Discovery, 24(1), 136–158.
Dainotti, A., Pescape, A., & Claffy, K. C. (2012). Issues and future directions in traffic
classification. Network IEEE, 26(1), 35–40.
Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann, P., & Witten, I. H. (2009). The
weka data mining software: An update. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 11(1),
10–18.
Han, H., Wang, W. Y., & Mao, B. H. (2005). Borderline-smote: A new oversampling
method in imbalanced data sets learning. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3644(5),
878–887.
He, H., & Garcia, E. A. (2009). Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Transactionson
Knowledge Data Engineering, 21(9), 1263–1284.
Japkowicz, N., & Stephen, S. (2002). The class imbalance problem: A systematic study.
Intelligent Data Analysis, 6(5), 429–449.
Kumar, S., Turner, J., & Williams, J. (2006). Advanced algorithms for fast and scalable
deep packet inspection. Architecture for Networking Communications Systems, Acm/ieee
Symposium.
Levandoski, J., 2008. Application layer packet classifier for linux. http://l7-filter.
sourceforge. net/.
Montieri, A., Ciuonzo, D., Aceto, G., & Pescapé, A. (2017). Anonymity Services Tor, I2P,
JonDonym: Classifying in the Dark. In 29th International Teletraffic Congress (ITC 29)
Genoa (pp. 81–89). https://doi.org/10.23919/ITC.2017.8064342
Moore, A. W., & Papagiannaki, K. (2005). Toward the accurate identification of network
applications. International Conference on Passive Active Network Measurement.

Shi Dong received M.S in computer science from University of
Electronic and Technology of China in 2009, Ph.D in computer
science from southeast university in 2013. He worked as post
doctor researcher in Huazhong University of Science and
Technology. He is a visiting scholar in Washington University in
St.Louis. He is currently a Distinguished Professor with Zhou­
kou Normal University. His current research interests include
network management and network security.

11