156

IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

UTMobileNetTraffic2021: A Labeled Public Network Traffic Dataset
Yuqiang Heng , Vikram Chandrasekhar, and Jeffrey G. Andrews , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A high-quality network traffic dataset is essential to
the development of accurate network traffic classification algorithms. In this work, we present a new labeled public network
traffic dataset with realistic mobile traffic from a wide range
of popular applications. An automated platform is constructed
to generate and collect data traffic from specified applications
in a controlled environment. The dataset contains over 21 million packets from more than 29 hours of mobile traffic with
application and activity-level labels. We provide an application classification example using machine learning (ML) models
trained on the proposed dataset.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, network traffic
dataset, machine learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK traffic classification provides the foundation
for a wide range of services, such as dynamic scheduling, quality of service (QoS) assurance, content-based billing
and abnormality detection. While network traffic classification has been studied for over two decades, the explosion of
mobile data traffic along with increasing packet encryption,
have shifted the paradigm: traditional approaches that rely on
deep packet inspection (DPI) or examining the port of packets
have become less viable.
Machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) models
extract meaningful patterns from the data and learn a mapping
from the input features to the class labels. State-of-the-art ML
and DL approaches can achieve high classification accuracy
even with encrypted data traffic. Although ML and DL traffic
classification models often use different input features, they
are both data-driven and heavily rely on high-quality training data. While numerous recent works have proposed ML
and DL based network traffic classifiers, there has been a lack
of public labeled datasets. In this work, we present a public
network traffic dataset named UTMobileNetTraffic2021 with
application and activity level labels. With the assistance of 6
undergraduate UT Austin students who undertook this effort
as a part of their senior design project, an automated platform
was developed to generate and collect data traffic from a wide
range of popular mobile applications in a controlled environment. The dataset consists of over 29 hours of data traffic

N

Manuscript received May 14, 2021; revised June 25, 2021; accepted
July 10, 2021. Date of publication July 19, 2021; date of current version
August 21, 2021. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was H. H. Gharakheili. (Corresponding
author: Yuqiang Heng.)
Yuqiang Heng and Jeffrey G. Andrews are with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712 USA (e-mail: yuqiang.heng@utexas.edu).
Vikram Chandrasekhar was with Standard and Mobility Innovation Lab,
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA 94043 USA. He is now
with Amazon, Mountain View, CA 94041 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LNET.2021.3098455

generated by both the automated platform and human users.
We also provide examples of application and activity classification using the proposed dataset, where we train ML models
using flow-based features extracted from packet headers. The
dataset and the classification example are published online.1
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. The related
work and existing datasets are discussed in Section II. The
experimental setup is explained in Section III. The data collection procedure and characteristics of the dataset are explained
in Section IV. Example uses cases of the dataset are provided
in Section V. Finally, the conclusion and final remarks are
provided in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Network traffic classification is essential to various traffic engineering tasks. Early approaches relying on DPI and
packet port numbers have become less favorable since modern
network traffic is often encrypted. State-of-the-art approaches
extract features from the packets and use ML models to classify the traffic. We refer to [1] and [2] for surveys on traffic
classification techniques.
High-quality datasets are essential to ML-based traffic classification. However, sharing user data can cause privacy
concerns, and labeling network traffic data is difficult and
can be expensive. As a result, public labeled network traffic
datasets are rare. In our previous work [3] where we proposed
ML-based traffic classification models, a major challenge was
the lack of modern high-quality data. Some recent works such
as [4] use proprietary datasets, making it difficult for other
researchers to reproduce their results. On the other hand, the
datasets used in [5], [6] and [7] only contain service-level
labels, which limit the granularity of the classification algorithm. As summarized in Table I, there are only a few public
labeled datasets for application classification.
• ISCXVPN2016: The ISCXVPN2016 dataset contains
labeled traffic data generated by 20 applications across
7 different service categories [8]. It contains both normal traffic and traffic over VPN. The dataset includes
categories such as browsing, email, chat, streaming, file
transfer, VoIP and P2P, and popular applications such
as YouTube and Facebook. An updated ISCXTor2016
dataset is also published for Tor-encrypted traffic [9].
• USTC-TFC2016: The USTC-TFC2016 dataset contains
both malware traffic data and benign traffic data [10]. The
malware dataset contains various types of malware traffic collected from real network environments. The benign
1 The dataset and code are available: https://github.com/YuqiangHeng/
UTMobileNetTraffic2021.

c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2576-3156 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HENG et al.: UTMobileNetTraffic2021: LABELED PUBLIC NETWORK TRAFFIC DATASET

traffic dataset contains traffic from 10 different applications collected through a network simulator but lacks
some of the modern popular applications. The size of the
benign dataset is also limited.
• IMTD17: The IMTD17 dataset contains mobile traffic
generated by 12 Android applications [11]. The dataset
was collected on a campus gateway. The applicationspecific traffic are generated by smartphones connected
to WiFi. The dataset contains transformed features but
not raw packet data from 1000 labeled traffic flows. The
dataset includes popular applications in China but lacks
applications widely used worldwide.
• Unicauca18: The Unicauc dataset contains traffic generated by 75 applications captured in a network section in
a university environment [12]. It contains statistical features extracted from IP flows. The application labels are
obtained using DPI.
• MTD18: The MTD18 dataset contains raw traffic data
generated by 12 Android applications [13]. During data
collection, a custom client software on a mobile device
routes traffic to a VPN server and reports the socket
information associated with each application. The server
than obtains the ground truth labels by checking the
socket information of collected traffic data. Similar to the
USTC-TFC2016 and the IMTD17 datasets, this dataset
mostly considers popular applications in China.
• MIRAGE-2019: The MIRAGE-2019 dataset contains
mobile traffic data from 40 Android applications generated by human users [14]. The dataset includes per-packet
features from the first 32 packets of each bidirectional
flow, per-flow statistical features and the metadata of
each flow. The labels are generated using the socket
information or according to a heuristic: assigning the
most common label.
Numerous public datasets have also been published for purposes other than application classification, including a dataset
for YouTube traffic analysis [15], a dataset for Netflix traffic
analysis and user experience inference [16] and a dataset for
Internet of Things (IoT) device classification [17].
The advantages of the proposed UTMobileNetTraffic2021
dataset over these existing ones include:
• A wide range of modern applications: Compared to the
datasets proposed in [10], [11] and [13] which only contains popular applications in China, the proposed dataset
includes more widely used modern applications, ranging from social networking apps like Instagram, media
consumption apps like YouTube and utility apps like
Dropbox.
• Accurate activity-level labels: An automated traffic generation and data collection platform was built. Instead
of relying on DPI or socket information to obtain the
labels, users can specify the activities to perform on
each application, allowing the data to be labeled with
both the application and the activity being performed.
The proposed dataset provides accurate labels at a finer
granularity compared to the existing datasets.
• Flexible feature engineering: The proposed dataset captures TCP/IP packet headers and their timestamps in

157

both the downlink and the uplink direction. Compared
to the datasets in [11], [12] and [14] which provide either
extracted features or processed data, the proposed dataset
allows more flexible data analysis and feature engineering.
III. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
In order to construct an automated data collection platform,
a Linux laptop running Ubuntu is used as the central controller for application activity generation and packet capturing.
Data traffic is generated using 3 unlocked Samsung Galaxy S5
smartphones. The smartphones are manually rooted and the
LineageOS Android distribution is installed so that the laptop
can gain full access and control. The smartphones are connected to the Internet through a WiFi access point (AP) and are
connected to the laptop through USB 2.0 wired connections.
The laptop sends data collection commands such as launching applications on the smartphone and retrieving collected
data through the USB connection. Each experiment was conducted at one of three locations. Location 1 is the Engineering
Education and Research Center on the UT Austin campus.
It is equipped with the Cisco Aironet 2800 series Wireless
Access Points (WAP) connected to the wired network with
1 Gigabit Ethernet connections. The WAPs support the IEEE
802.11ac standard and use the 5 GHz band. Location 2 is the
Prather Residence Hall (PRH), a student dormitory on the UT
Austin campus. It is equipped with the Cisco Aironet 2702i
series WAPs with 1 Gigabit Ethernet connections to the wired
network. The WAPs support the IEEE 802.11a/g/n/ac standards and use the 2.4 GHz and the 5 GHz band. Location
3 is a house in a residential area in Houston. It uses the 50
megabits per second (Mbps) wired Internet plan from AT&T
and is equipped with an AT&T WiFi gateway supporting the
IEEE 802.11b/g/n/ac standards. The overall experimental setup
is illustrated in Fig. 1.
The general workflow of the automated data collection platform is shown in Fig. 2. From the laptop controller, the user
specifies the application and the activity to perform on the
application. The laptop then gains root access of the smartphone through Android debug bridge (ADB), which is an API
for third parties to access and control Android devices. The
laptop launches TCPDUMP on the smartphone to start collecting data packets and then launches the specified application.
The smartphone executes a series of actions on the application, which generates the corresponding network traffic. After
all specified actions have been completed, TCPDUMP and
the application are closed, and the collected data packets are
transferred and stored on the laptop.
IV. DATA C OLLECTION
We select 16 of the most popular mobile applications listed
on [18], so that the collected data is representative of the
modern data consumption patterns. Typical user activities are
selected for each application, such as browsing and posting
for Reddit and sending and opening emails for Gmail. For
each activity, a series of actions are implemented through
the Android API to emulate a sequence of user interactions
with the smartphone. Examples of actions include scrolling

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

158

IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF E XISTING P UBLIC DATASETS FOR A PPLICATION C LASSIFICATION

TABLE II
S UMMARY OF R ECORDED DATA F EATURES

Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

Data Collection Setup.

Data Collection Workflow.

the smartphone screen, clicking on part of the displayed content to go to a different screen, and waiting for the displayed
media to play for a certain time.
When collecting data, a BASH script launches the application on the smartphone through ADB, waits for the application
to finish loading, then starts recording network packets through
TCPDUMP on the smartphone. Background tasks are cleared
before starting data collection for a new application, and each
application is closed after data collection is complete. This
minimizes the amount of background traffic in the collected
data so that the majority of the traffic is generated by the target
application. After packet recording is complete, the raw pcap
data files are transferred to the laptop, where they are processed using TShark and converted to the csv format. Modern
mobile traffic is often encrypted, which makes DPI infeasible
and traffic classification more challenging in general. While

packet payloads may still contain useful information such as
the Transport Layer Security (TLS) handshake fields despite
of the encryption, they are removed for ease of data storage and for privacy concerns. No user-specific information or
meta data is included in the dataset for privacy reasons. The
dataset includes features extracted from packet headers shown
in Table II for each individual packet. During the data collection stage, the packets are recorded as a raw time series instead
of being grouped into flows, which are defined by sequences
of packets sharing the same TCP/IP 5 tuple, i.e., the source
and destination IP addresses, the source and destination ports
and the protocol. One activity on one application is performed
during each data collection experiment. All packets captured
in the same experiment are labeled with the corresponding
application and activity.
Three different sets of data were collected. In the deterministic automated dataset, the action parameters for each
activity are fixed. For instance, when performing the activity of scrolling news feed on Facebook, the BASH script will
always scroll the feed 3 times, wait for 5 seconds, and repeat
for 5 times. Although the actions are fixed, the context and
content displayed are up to the application. In the randomized
automated dataset, the action parameters for each activity are
randomized, such as the number of scrolls, the wait time and
the number of repetitions for Facebook news feed scrolling.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HENG et al.: UTMobileNetTraffic2021: LABELED PUBLIC NETWORK TRAFFIC DATASET

159

TABLE III
S UMMARY OF DATA D ISTRIBUTION

This makes the collected data more diverse and realistic. The
third dataset is generated by human users and is the most
realistic in terms of representing user activity. It includes two
subsets: an application-specific dataset and an activity-specific
dataset. In the former, human users perform each activity using
applications in Table III. In the latter, human users use each
application normally without constraints on the activities to
perform. The total number of packets, number of flows and
duration of collected data for each application is shown in
Table III. The entire dataset consists of over 29 hours of
collected data for all applications.

V. E XAMPLE U SE C ASE : A PPLICATION AND ACTIVITY
C LASSIFICATION
The proposed dataset provides a meaningful tool to analyzing modern mobile network traffic. In particular, the labeled
dataset can be used to develop traffic classification algorithms.
Two example use cases on application classification and activity classification are presented. The purpose of this section is to
provide a simple example and benchmark on how the proposed
dataset can be used rather than to achieve state-of-the-art
performance in the classification tasks.
Both examples use the randomized automated dataset which
contains 14 of the 16 applications shown in Table III, excluding Google Maps and Hangout. Per-flow features are extracted
from the TCP/IP headers of downlink packets, including the
total number of packets, the total number of bytes, the minimum, maximum, mean and standard deviation of packet sizes
in a flow, the minimum, maximum, mean and standard deviation of the packet inter-arrival times (IAT) and the flow
duration. The same set of features is used for both application and activity classification. The extracted dataset is
preprocessed to remove the mean and scale to unit variance
for each feature. Three ML models are considered: Random
Forest Classifier (RFC), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classifier and XGBoost classifier. The ML models are implemented
using the scikit-learn Python package and the default hyperparameters are used. The accuracy and the F1 score are

TABLE IV
A PPLICATION C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%)

two important metrics for classification problems. Let TPi ,
TNi , FPi and FNi denote the true positives, true negatives,
false positives and false negatives of class i, the accuracy is
given by

i TPi + TNi

.
(1)
accuracy =
TP
+
TNi + FPi + FNi
i
i
The F1 score of class i is given by
F1 score =

2TPi
.
2TPi + FPi + FNi

(2)

A. Application Classification
The mean and standard deviation of the accuracy from 10fold cross-validation are shown in Table IV. The RFC and the
XGBoost classifier which are both ensemble models achieve
an average accuracy of around 79% and outperform the KNN
by a significant margin. The mean and standard deviation of
the F1 scores for each application are shown in Fig. 3. Again,
the RFC and the XGBoost classifier outperform the KNN in
terms of the F1 score for most applications. The ML models
can classify applications such as YouTube, Spotify, Dropbox
and Pandora relatively well, achieving F1 scores of over 0.8
for these applications. On the other hand, the ML models can
only achieve F1 scores of less than 0.6 for applications such
as Gmail and Messenger. This might be caused by a lack of
training data since these applications have fewer packets and
flows in the dataset.
B. Activity Classification
Assuming that the application is known, an activity classifier is trained for each application to detect the activity
performed. The applications with multiple types of captured

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

160

IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

labeled with application and activity level labels. Examples on
application and activity classification are provided, where ML
models are trained using flow-based features extracted from
the dataset.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank C. Gill, K. Chau, N. Charles, A.
Ma, J. M. Noh and J. Poudel of UT Austin for their
assistance in developing the data collection platform and
collecting the dataset. The support of Samsung, including
smartphone donations for the experiments, is also gratefully
acknowledged.

R EFERENCES
Fig. 3. F1 score mean and standard deviation of application classification
from 10-fold cross-validation.
TABLE V
ACTIVITY C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY PER A PPLICATION (%)

activities in the randomized automated dataset are considered. The mean and standard deviation of the accuracy from
10-fold cross-validation of each application are shown in
Table V. The ML models can classify activities relatively
well for applications such as Instagram and Hulu but poorly
for Facebook and Twitter. Activities of an application like
Instagram are intuitively easier to be distinguished from one
another: browsing photos and videos generates heavy traffic
while sending messages does not. On the other hand, for an
application like Facebook, scrolling the news feed and searching for Facebook pages generate more similar traffic patterns
and are more difficult to classify using per-flow statistical
features.
VI. C ONCLUSION
We present a public labeled dataset for network traffic classification. An automated platform is constructed to generate
and collect mobile traffic data from specified applications in
a controlled environment. The dataset consists of mobile data
from a wide range of 16 popular applications generated by
both the automated platform and human users. The dataset is

[1] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of methods
for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” Int. J. Netw. Manag.,
vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–374, 2015.
[2] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A survey of techniques for
mobile service encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 54024–54033, 2019.
[3] V. Chandrasekhar, Y. Heng, J. Cho, J. Lee, J. Zhang, and J. G. Andrews,
“Experience-centric mobile video scheduling through machine learning,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 113017–113030, 2019.
[4] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
“Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural
networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
2017.
[5] A. W. Moore and K. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate identification
of network applications,” in Proc. PAM, 2005, pp. 41–54.
[6] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel QUIC traffic classifier based on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[7] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?”
Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, 2011.
[8] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. ICISSP, 2016, pp. 407–414.
[9] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc.
ICISSP, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[10] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE ICOIN, 2017, pp. 712–717.
[11] D. Li, Y. Zhu, and W. Lin, “Traffic identification of mobile apps
based on variational autoencoder network,” in Proc. IEEE CIS, 2017,
pp. 287–291.
[12] J. S. Rojas, Á. Rendón, and J. C. Corrales, “Consumption behavior
analysis of over the top services: Incremental learning or traditional
methods?” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 136581–136591, 2019.
[13] R. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Cai, D. Tang, J. Yang, and Z. Yang, “Benchmark data
for mobile app traffic research,” in Proc. EAI MobiQuitous, Nov. 2018,
pp. 402–411.
[14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
“MIRAGE: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” in
Proc. IEEE ICCCS, Oct. 2019, pp. 1–8.
[15] T. Karagkioules et al., “A public dataset for YouTube’s mobile streaming
client,” in Proc. IEEE TMA, Jun. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[16] S. C. Madanapalli, H. H. Gharakhieli, and V. Sivaraman, “Inferring
Netflix user experience from broadband network measurement,” in Proc.
IEEE TMA, Jun. 2019, pp. 41–48.
[17] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments
using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019.
[18] Statista: Unique U.S. Visitors to Mobile Apps 2016. Accessed: Mar.
1, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.statista.com/statistics/250862/
unique-visitors-to-the-most-popular-mobile-apps-in-the-us/

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.