NOMS 2022-2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium | 978-1-6654-0601-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/NOMS54207.2022.9789878

E-GraphSAGE: A Graph Neural Network based
Intrusion Detection System for IoT
Wai Weng Lo∗ , Siamak Layeghy† , Mohanad Sarhan‡ , Marcus Gallagher§ , and
Marius Portmann¶
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
Email: ∗ w.w.lo@uq.net.au, † siamak.layeghy@uq.net.au, ‡ m.sarhan@uq.net.au, § marcusg@itee.uq.edu.au, ¶ marius@itee.uq.edu.au

Abstract—This paper presents a new Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
GNNs are a relatively new sub-field of deep neural networks,
which can leverage the inherent structure of graph-based data.
Training and evaluation data for NIDSs are typically represented as flow records, which can naturally be represented in
a graph format. In this paper, we propose E-GraphSAGE, a
GNN approach that allows capturing both the edge features
of a graph as well as the topological information for network
intrusion detection in IoT networks. To the best of our knowledge,
our proposal is the first successful, practical, and extensively
evaluated approach of applying GNNs on the problem of network
intrusion detection for IoT using flow-based data. Our extensive
experimental evaluation on four recent NIDS benchmark datasets
shows that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art in
terms of key classification metrics, which demonstrates the
potential of GNNs in network intrusion detection, and provides
motivation for further research.
Index Terms—Graph Neural Networks, Network Intrusion
Detection System, Internet of Things

I. I NTRODUCTION
IoT network attacks have significantly increased over the
last few years, both in terms of frequency and level of
sophistication. IoT networks consist of many interconnected
devices, including cameras, temperature sensors, smart TV,
wireless printer, and other edge devices that require network
connectivity [1]. Cybercriminals can compromise and exploit
IoT networks to perform malicious activities such as IoT
ransomware, Botnet DDoS attacks. NIDSs, which are placed
at strategic points within the IoT network to monitor traffic,
are an important tool for the detection and mitigation of
network-based cyber attacks. There are two main types of
NIDS, signature-based and intrusion detection-based systems.
A signature-based NIDS relies on a pre-installed set of attack
signatures, which are compared and pattern-matched with the
monitored network traffic in order to detect attacks. As a result,
this type of NIDS can effectively detect known attacks with
a relatively low false alarm rate, but they are significantly
less effective in detecting new attacks or variants of existing
attacks. In contrast, intrusion detection-based systems have
the potential to detect intrusions by detecting deviations from
the regular traffic patterns in the network. Over the last few
978-1-6654-0601-7/22/$31.00 © 2022 IEEE

years, there has been great progress in the application of new
Machine Learning (ML) models and techniques, in particular
deep learning-based approaches, for the development of new
NIDS solutions.
In this paper, we are exploring the use of GNNs, a relatively new sub-field of deep neural networks for IoT network
intrusion detection. GNNs are tailored to applications with
graph-structured data, such as social sciences, chemistry, and
telecommunications, and are able to leverage the inherent
structure of the graph data by building relational inductive
biases into the deep learning architecture. This provides the
ability to learn, reason, and generalise from the graph data,
inspired by the concept of message propagation [2].
Network intrusion detection is typically performed on flowbased network data such as NetFlow [3], where flows are
identified by the communication endpoints (IP address, L4
port number, L4 protocol), and annotated via a set of flow
fields which provide details on the flows, such as the number
of packets, number of bytes, flow duration, etc. This flow data
can naturally be represented in a graph format, where the flow
endpoints are mapped to graph nodes, and network traffic
flows are mapped to the graph edges. Both the topological
information as well as the information contained in edge
features are crucial for the classification of network traffic and
the detection of attack flows.
Key recent works on ML-based NIDS, such as
[4][5][6][7][8], consider flow data records independently,
without considering the interrelation between them, and hence
the traffic pattern more globally. Consequently, these methods
are limited in their ability to detect sophisticated IoT network
attacks, such as botnet attacks [9], distributed port scans [10],
or DNS Amplification attacks [11], where a more global view
of the network and traffic flow is required.
We believe that traffic patterns at a more global level,
and hence flow interrelationships should be considered for
the detection of distributed attacks in IoT, providing the
motivation for the work presented in this paper. We propose
E-GraphSAGE, a GNN model that aims to overcome the
current limitations of NIDSs for IoT. E-GraphSAGE enables
the collection of information on flow-based features and
topological patterns to account for the interconnected patterns

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1: Overall deployment architecture

of network flows.Consequently, E-GraphSAGE supports the
process of edge classification, and hence the detection of
malicious network flows, as illustrated in Figure 1.
We demonstrate how the E-GraphSAGE algorithm can be
utilized to build a reliable NIDS, and provide an extensive
experimental evaluation of the proposed system on four recent NIDS benchmark datasets. Our results show that the
E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS outperformed the state-of-the-art
in regards to key classification metrics in all four considered benchmark datasets. To the best of our knowledge, our
approach is the first successful, practical, and extensively
evaluated approach of applying GNNs on the problem of
network intrusion detection for IoT using flow-based data.
In summary, the key contributions of this paper are twofold:
• We have proposed and implemented E-GraphSAGE, a
GNN-based NIDS, which allows the incorporation of
edge features and topological patterns for IoT network
intrusion detection.
• We applied E-GraphSAGE on four benchmark IoT NIDS
datasets for network intrusion detection, where the results
demonstrated its potential via extensive experimental
evaluation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses key related works, and Section III provides the
relevant background on GNNs and GraphSAGE. Our proposed
E-GraphSAGE algorithm and the corresponding NIDS are
introduced in Section IV. Experimental evaluation results are
presented in Section VI, and Section VII concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Haitao et al.[4] designed a multimodal sequential NIDS with
a hierarchical progressive network to capture different levels of
network data features. The approach is based on a combination
of a deep autoencoder and LSTM architecture, in order to
integrate the structural information within the temporal information shared between similar network connections. The
system is evaluated on 3 datasets including the UNSW-NB15
dataset, where it achieved an accuracy of 96.8% and 86.2% in
binary and multiclass classification experiments respectively.

In [5], an attack mitigation framework for IoT networks
is proposed using a hybrid of signature- and intrusion-based
detection systems. The signature-based system uses a database
of black-listed sources. The intrusion-based module adopts
an extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) algorithm. The XGBoost classifier achieved a binary classification accuracy of
99.99% and a false alarm rate of 0.05% on the BoT-IoT
dataset, and 99.96% multiclass classification F1-Score of 97%.
Sarhan et al. [6] converted the UNSW-NB15, BoT-IoT, and
ToN-IoT datasets from their proprietary formats and feature
set into a common Netflow-based format, with eight Netflow
features as a common feature set. The corresponding new
Netflow-based variants of the datasets, i.e. NF-UNSW-NB15,
NF-BoT-IoT, and NF-ToN-IoT, have been made publicly available. The authors evaluated an Extra Tree ensemble classifier
across these three datasets and have reported an F1-Score of
0.85, 0.97, and 1.00, respectively for binary classification. For
the multi-class case, the corresponding F1-Scores are 0.98,
0.77 and 0.60.
In [7], the authors focused on securing Internet of medical
things’ networks (IoMT) using a two-level intrusion detection
model. The first level used a decision tree (DT), naive Bayes
(NB), and random forest (RF) as first-level individual learners.
In the next level, an XGBoost classifier was used to identify
normal and attack instances. The ensemble model achieved a
binary classification accuracy of 96.35% and an F1-Score of
0.95 on the ToN-IoT dataset.
Churcher et al. [8] applied several machine learning algorithms such as k-nearest neighbour (KNN), decision tree
(DT), support vector machine (SVM), naive Bayes (NB),
random forest (RF), artificial neural network (ANN), and
logistic regression (LR) for network intrusion detection. The
authors evaluated different classifier performances on BoTIoT datasets and reported that the KNN classifier achieved the
highest multiclass classification performance with an F1-Score
of 0.99 and classification accuracy of 99.00%.
Xiao et al. [12] proposed a graph embedding approach to
perform intrusion detection on network flows. The authors first
converted the network flows into a first-order and secondorder graph. The first-order graph learns the latent features
from the perspective of a single host by using its IP address
and port number. The second-order graph aims to learn the
latent features from a global perspective by using source IP
addresses, source ports, destination IP addresses, as well as
destination ports. The extracted graph embeddings and the raw
features are then used to train a Random Forest classifier to
detect network attacks.
However, a significant limitation of this approach is its use
of a traditional transductive graph embedding method [13],
which limits its ability to classify samples with graph nodes,
e.g. IP addresses and port numbers, which were not seen
during the training phase. This makes the approach unsuitable
for most practical NIDS application scenarios. In contrast,
the E-GraphSAGE approach presented in this paper uses an
inductive learning approach, which does not suffer from this
limitation.

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Zhou et al.[14] proposed using a graph convolutional neural network (GCN) to perform P2P botnet node detection.
The authors first generated botnet traffic by creating botnet
connections mixed with different real large-scale network
traffic flows. Then, they applied the GCN for botnet node
classification.The generated graph does not include any flow
or node features and the approach only considers the topological information of the network connectivity graph for P2P
botnet node classification, rather than flow classification. This
approach limits the detection of botnet attacks, and does not
focus on other network attacks, such as XSS and ransomware.
In addition, it does not leverage all the information provided
in network flow data, i.e., the network flow features.
While some existing graph representation learning methods
have already considered edge features, none of them can be
directly applied to network intrusion detection. Methods such
as [15] [16] consider edge features, but only for the purpose
of improving node representation for better performance, and
not edge classification, which is the aim in NIDSs.
In contrast to related studies, our approach leverages edge
features that can be extracted from network flow data, and
is critical for the detection of individual attack flows via
its edge embedding approach. NIDSs based on traditional
(non-graph-based) machine learning algorithms currently have
not fully leveraged the structural and topological information
inherent in network flow data for complex network attack
detection, such as a botnet attack, which is one of the key
strengths of GNNs. A key feature and novel contribution
of E-GraphSAGE proposed in this paper, is its ability to
leverage both, topological information and edge features in
network flow data. Furthermore, related studies that apply a
ML approach for NIDS typically use either, one, two, or a
maximum of three NIDS benchmark datasets to evaluate the
proposed systems. For the evaluation of the proposed GNNbased approach, we used four different benchmark datasets,
which provide a higher degree of confidence in the robustness
of the method and the ability to generalize to different types
of network scenarios.
III. BACKGROUND
A. Graph Neural Networks (GNN)
GNN is one of the most recent and fastest growing subareas
in machine learning. Its power and potential lies in its ability
to leverage the inherent graph structure of a lot of data
encountered in real world application domains, such as social
media networks, biology, telecommunications, etc. The graph
format captures the structural information by modelling a set
of objects and their relationships. The objects are represented
by graph nodes and their relationships by graph edges. In the
case of computer networks, individual hosts (IP addresses) are
modelled as graph nodes, and the communication between the
hosts, i.e., the network flows, are modelled as graph edges.
The key motivation of using a GNN for NIDSs is the ability
to easily and directly exploit the rich structural information in
the network flow data, which can be directly encoded in a
graph format. While some traditional ML-based approaches

attempt to work with graph data, this is typically quite cumbersome and relies on hand-engineered features.
A common task performed by GNNs is to generating
node embeddings [17], which aims to encode nodes as lowdimensional vectors, while maintaining their key relationships
and graph position in the original format. Node embedding is
typically a key precursor to apply for downstream tasks such
as node classification and node clustering [17]. GNNs have
recently received a lot of attention due to their convincing
performance and high interpretability of the results through
the visualisation of the node embeddings [18].
B. GraphSAGE
The Graph SAmple and aggreGatE (GraphSAGE) algorithm
is one of the most well-known GNNs and was developed by
Hamilton et al. [13] . In GraphSAGE, a fixed size sub-set is
(uniformly randomly) sampled. This allows limiting the space
and time complexity of the algorithm, irrespective of the graph
structure (e.g. node degree distribution) and batch size.
The GraphSAGE algorithm operates on a graph G(V, E),
where V is the set of nodes and E is the set of edges. The
node features of a node v are represented as the vector xv ,
and the complete set of node feature vectors as {xv , ∀v ∈ V}.
A key hyperparameter of the GraphSAGE algorithm is the
number of graph convolutional layers K, which specifies the
number of hops via which node information is aggregated at
each iteration. Another important aspect of GraphSAGE is the
choice of a differentiable aggregator function AGGk , ∀k ∈
{1, ..., K}, to aggregate information from neighbor nodes.
The algorithm is performed in both a forward and backward
propagation stage, which we now discuss in more detail.
1) Node Embedding: Similar to the convolution operation
in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), information relating
to the local neighborhood of a node is collected and is used
to compute the node embedding. The GraphSAGE algorithm
starts by assuming the model has already been trained and the
weight matrices and aggregator function parameters are fixed.
For each node, the algorithm iteratively aggregates information
from the node’s neighbours, the node’s neighbours-neighbours,
and so on.
At each iteration, initially the neighborhood of the node
is sampled, and the information from the sampled nodes
is aggregated into a single vector. At the k-th layer, the
aggregated information hkN (v) at a node v, based of the
sampled neighborhood N (v), can be expressed as Equation
1 [13]:
hkN (v) = AGG k

 k−1

hu , ∀u ∈ N (v)

(1)

Here, hk−1
represents the embedding of node u in the
u
previous layer. These embeddings of all nodes u in the
neighbourhood of v are aggregated into the embedding of node
v at layer k.
This aggregation process is illustrated in Figure 2 (right),
the topological and node features in the graph, as collected and
aggregated from the k-hop neighborhood of each graph node.

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B

Algorithm 1: E-GraphSAGE edge embedding

D

A

A

C

B

AGG

C

AGG

D

AGG

input : Graph G(V, E);
input edge features {euv , ∀uv ∈ E};
input node features xv = {1, . . . , 1};
depth K;
weight matrices Wk , ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , K};
non-linearity σ;
differentiable aggregator functions AGGk ;
output: Edge embeddings zuv , ∀uv ∈ E

A

AGG
A

A

E
D

E
B

Fig. 2: A given graph (left), and the corresponding GraphSAGE architecture with depth-2 convolutions (right) and full
neighborhood sampling.

1
2
3
4
5

In the GraphSAGE model, we can use different aggregation
methods, including mean, pooling, or different types of neural
networks, e.g., Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [13].
The aggregated embeddings of the sampled neighborhood
hkN (v) are then concatenated with the node’s embedding from
the previous layer hk−1
. After applying the model’s trainable
v
parameters (Wk , the trainable weight matrix) and passing the
result through a non-linear activation function σ (e.g. ReLU),
the layer k node v embedding is calculated, as shown in
Equation 2 [13].



hkv = σ Wk · CONCAT hk−1
, hkN (v)
v

(2)

The final representation (embedding) of node v is expressed
as zv , which is essentially the embedding of the node at the
final layer K, as shown in Equation 3. For the purpose of node
classification, zv can be passed through a sigmoidal neuron or
softmax layer.
zv = hK
v ,

∀v ∈ V

(3)

IV. E-G RAPH SAGE
Traditional GNNs, e.g. GraphSAGE, have been successfully
applied in a wide range of applications. However, these
approaches mainly focus on node features for node classification, and are currently unable to consider edge features for
edge classification. In contrast, our proposed E-GraphSAGE
algorithm allows us to consider the edge (flow) information
in the embedding process. This provides the basis for computing the corresponding edge embeddings and enabling edge
classification; that is, the classification of network flows into
benign and attack flows.
The goal of an NIDS is to detect and identify malicious
traffic and flows. This corresponds to the problem of edge
classification in our graph representation of flow datasets,
where the key information is provided as edge features. Consequently, the current NIDS benchmark network datasets [6]
[19] [20] provide network flow information as edge features,
rather than node features, which only allows edge (flow)
classification. In contrast, most related GNN research to date
has focused on the problem of node classification, and the
proposed solutions cannot be applied to the edge classification
problem in the context of NIDS.

6
7
8

h0v ← xv , ∀v ∈ V
for k ← 1 to K do
for v ∈ V do
n
o
k−1
hkN (v) ← AGGk
euv
, ∀u ∈ N (v), uv ∈ E



, hkN (v)
hkv ← σ Wk · CONCAT hk−1
v
zv = hK
v
for uv ∈ E do
K K
zK
uv ←CON CAT (zu ,zv )

Our proposed approach (E-GraphSAGE) aims to overcome
this limitation and facilitate the capture of edge features and
topological information for intrusion detection. This section
introduces E-GraphSAGE in two parts. The first part discusses
the E-GraphSAGE model and the extensions to the original
GraphSAGE algorithm that were made to facilitate edge
embedding and edge classification. In the second part, we
discuss the application of E-GraphSAGE as an NIDS.
A. E-GraphSAGE Model
1) Edge Embedding: The message passing function in the
original GraphSAGE algorithm only considers node features,
and edge features are not taken into consideration [13]. To
include the edge features, it is required to sample and aggregate the edge information of the graph. In addition, the final
output of the algorithm needs to provide an edge embedding
rather than the node embedding provided by the original
algorithm. Our proposed E-GraphSAGE algorithm with these
modifications is shown in Algorithm 1.
Key differences to the original GraphSAGE algorithm [13]
are in regards to the algorithm input, the message passing/aggregator function, and the output.
The input includes edge features {euv , ∀uv ∈ E}, which
are, as mentioned before, missing from the list of inputs in
GraphSAGE. Since the flow-based NIDS datasets only consist
of flow (edge) features rather than node features. Therefore,
we are using only provided edge features. We use the vector
xv = {1, . . . , 1} to initialise the node features (and initial node
embeddings) and the dimension of all one constant vector is
the same as the number of edge features, as shown in Line 1
of the algorithm.
In Line 4, instead of using the standard GraphSAGE node
aggregator function (Equation 1), our newly proposed neighborhood aggregator function creates the aggregated embeddings of the sampled neighborhood edges at the k-th layer, as
shown in Equation 4 below.
hkN (v) = AGG k

n
o
k−1
euv
, ∀u ∈ N (v), uv ∈ E

(4)

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Here, ek−1
are the features of edge uv from N (v), the
uv
sampled neighborhood of node v, at layer k-1. The set
{∀u ∈ N (v), uv ∈ E} represents the sampled edges in the
neighborhood N (v)). In Line 5, the node embedding for node
v at layer k is calculated as in GraphSAGE (Equation 2), but
with the critical difference that in the new algorithm hkN (v) is
calculated via Equation 4 to include the edge features. Thus,
the topological and edge information in the network flow graph
is collected and aggregated from the k-hop neighborhood of
each network graph node.
The final node embeddings at depth K, zv = hK
v , are
assigned in Line 8. Finally, the edge embeddings zK
uv for
each edge uv are calculated as the concatenation of the node
embeddings of nodes u and v, as shown in Equation 5 below.


K
K
zK
, uv ∈ E
uv = CON CAT zu , zv

(5)

This represents the final output of the forward propagation
stage in E-GraphSAGE.
2) Time and Space Complexity: The loops over the k-hop
neighbour edges are the most time-consuming of the model
as shown in Algorithm 1, Line 4. The upper bound time
complexity estimation
of E-GraphSAGE can be represented

as O eKnd2 , where n is the total number of nodes in the
network, e is the number of neighbour edges being sampled
for each node, K is the number of layers, d is the dimension
of the node hidden features. The
 space complexity of EGraphSAGE is O beKd + Kd2 , where b is the batch size.
Since E-GraphSAGE can support a min-batch setting, i.e.,
a fixed size of neighbour edges are being sampled to improve the training efficiency and reduce memory consumption.
Instead of using full neighbourhood sets in Algorithm 1,
the per-batch space and time complexity for E-GraphSAGE,
which uniformly randomlysamples a fixed-size set of edge
QK
neighbors, is O
i=1 Ei , where the sampled edges are
Ei , i ∈ {1, . . . , K}.
B. E-GraphSAGE NIDS
Figure 3 shows a high level overview of our proposed NIDS
based on E-GraphSAGE. First, the network graph is generated
from the network flow data, and is then fed into the supervised
training process of the E-GraphSAGE model in the next step.
In the last step, the edge embeddings are created, which forms
the basis for the classification of edges (network flows) into
benign and attack classes. These three steps are explained in
the following subsections.
1) Network Graph Construction: Network flows (e.g., NetFlow) are a common format for recording network communication in production networks, and it is also the most common
format in the context of NIDS. The flow records usually
consist of fields for identifying the source and destination of
the communication, and the rest of a record field provides
further information on the flow, such as the number of packets
and bytes, flow duration, etc. A graph therefore provides a very
natural way to model such data.

Fig. 3: Proposed E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS architecture.

There are various possibilities for defining the end points
of a flow and hence the graph nodes. The method used in this
study uses the following 4 flow fields to identify a graph edge:
Source IP Address, Source (L4) Port, Destination IP Address,
and Destination (L4) Port. The first two fields form a 2-tuple
that identifies the source node and the two last fields identify
the destination node of the flow. The additional flow fields
provide features that are associated with the corresponding
graph edge. e.g. , the source node (172.26.185.48 : 52962)
exchanges data with destination node (192.168.1.152 : 80)
and the corresponding flow can be represented as a network
edge.
To construct the network graph from the flow data, we
mapped the original source IP addresses to randomly assigned
IP addresses in the range from 172.16.0.1 to 172.31.0.1. The
reason for this is the fact that in a lot of the NIDS datasets
used in this paper, only a small number of IP addresses were
used as the source of the attacks. The random mapping avoids
the potential problem of the source IP addresses providing an
unintentional label for attack traffic.
Since in our graph construction all remaining flow record
fields were assigned to the edge, the graph nodes are featureless. In this algorithm, we assign a one vector, a vector with all
values of one to all nodes. As shown in Algorithm 1, we are
using this method in our algorithm, with the dimensionality
of the all one constant vector in each node depending on the
number of edge features.
2) E-GraphSAGE Training: The neural network model we
use in our implementation consists of two E-GraphSAGE
layers (K = 2), which means that neighbour information is
aggregated from a two-hop neighbourhood. For the aggregation function AGG, as shown in Equation 4, we use the mean
function which simply finds the element-wise mean of the
edge features in the sampled neighborhood. The definition of
the mean aggregator function in E-GraphSAGE is provided in
Equation 6 below.
hkN (v) =

X
u∈N (v),
uv∈E

ek−1
uv
|N (v)|e

(6)

Here, |N (v)|e represents the number of edges in the sampled neighborhood, and ek−1
uv represent their edge features at
layer k − 1. For our implementation, we chose full neighborhood sampling, which means information from the full set of
edges in a node’s neighbourhood is aggregated.

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In both E-GraphSAGE layers, for the hidden feature sizes
of each layer represented in Equation 2, we use a size of
128 hidden units, which is also the dimension of the node
embeddings. For the nonlinear transformation (σ in Equation
2), we use the ReLU activation function, and for the purpose of
regularisation, we use a dropout mechanism with a rate of 0.2
between the two E-GraphSAGE layers. We chose the crossentropy loss function, and gradient descent in the backward
propagation phase is performed using the Adam optimizer with
learning rate of 0.001.
When node embeddings are generated in the last
E-GraphSAGE layer, they are converted to the corresponding
edge embeddings (Line 10 of Algorithm 1). Since the edge
embeddings are created via concatenation of two node embeddings, the size of the edge embeddings is 256 dimensions.
The output edge embeddings pass through a softmax layer,
which makes it possible to compare the output of the algorithm
to the labels provided by the NIDS datasets and to tune the
trainable model parameters in the backward propagation phase.
3) Edge Classification: After the model parameters have
been tuned in the training process, the model is ready for
evaluation via the classification of unseen test samples. The
test flow records are also converted to graphs, passed through
the trained E-GraphSAGE layers, from which the edge embeddings are calculated. They are then converted to class probabilities in the final softmax layer and are finally compared
with the true class labels in order to compute the classification
evaluation performance metrics.

well as IoT network traffic collected from a mediumscale network at the Cyber Range and IoT Labs at
the UNSW Canberra (Australia). In this paper, only the
network traffic component of the dataset is used. The BroIDS network monitoring tool was used to generate the
dataset’s 44 network flow features. The dataset consists of
796,380 (3.56%) benign flows and 21,542,641 (96.44%)
attack flows, with a total of 22,339,021 flows.
• NF-ToT-IoT and NF-BoT-IoT: A lack of a standard format and feature set among the various NIDS datasets has
made it very difficult to compare the performance of MLbased network traffic classifiers across different datasets,
and to evaluate their ability to generalise to different
network scenarios. Sarhan et al. [6] have addressed this
problem by providing the NetFlow version of the above
mentioned three NIDS datasets. The authors of [6] used
the raw packet capture (pcap) files of the original NIDS
datasets and converted them to the NetFlow format via
the nprobe [22] tool and selected 12 fields to be extracted,
resulting in the new variants of the original datasets, i.e.
NF-ToT-IoT and NF-BoT-IoT. In NF-ToT-IoT, the total
number of network flows is 1,379,274, out of which
1,108,995 (80.4 %) are attack flows and 270,279 (19.6
%) are benign flows. The NF-BoT-IoT dataset has a total
number of 600,100 flows, out of which 586,241 (97.69
%) are attack flows and 13,859 (2.31 %) are benign flows.

V. DATASETS

To evaluate the performance of the proposed neural network
model, the standard metrics listed in Table I are used, where
T P , T N , F P and F N represent the number of True Positives,
True Negatives, False Positives and False Negatives respectively. First, the results of the binary classification problem,
where the aim is to distinguish between attack and benign
traffic, are presented. Subsequently, we present the results of
the multiclass classification experiments, where the aim was
to identify the specific attack type of each flow.

For the evaluation of the GNN-based NIDS proposed in this
paper, we use four publicly available NIDS datasets, which
consist of different types of labelled attack flows as well as
benign network flows. The first two datasets, consisting of
ToN-IoT [20] and BoT-IoT [19], have proprietary formats and
feature sets, and have been widely used to evaluate Machine
Learning based network intrusion detection systems in IoT.
In addition, we also consider two recently created variants
of these datasets, where the respective format is translated to
NetFlow with a common feature set, i.e. NF-TON-IoT [6] and
NF-BoT-IoT [6]. A brief overview of these datasets is provided
in the following.
• BoT-IoT: This is another recent dataset with a specific
on IoT networks, created by Koroniotis et al. [19] in
2019. The authors simulated IoT services such as water
stations, by using the Node-red tool [21] and generated the corresponding IoT traffic. The Argus tool was
consequently used for feature extraction. This dataset is
comprised of 6 types of attacks and a total of 47 features
with corresponding class labels. The dataset contains only
477 (0.01%) benign flows and 3,668,045 (99.99%) attack
flows, with a total of 3,668,522 flows.
• ToN-IoT: This is a relatively new and extensive dataset
that was generated in 2019 by Abdullah et al.[20], which
includes different types of IoT data, such as operation
system logs, telemetry data of IoT/IIoT services, as

VI. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

A. Binary Classification Results
The datasets used in this paper all include two sets of labels.
The first label determines if a flow record belongs to a benign
or attack class, and the second label identifies the attack type.
We use the first label set for binary classification, and the
second set for multiclass classification.
TABLE I: Evaluation metrics utilised in this study
Metric

Definition

Detection Rate (Recall)

TP
T P +F N
TP
T P +F P
Recall×P recision
2 × Recall+P recision
T P +T N
T P +F P +T N +F N
FP
F P +T N

Precision
F1-Score
Accuracy
False Alarm Rate (FAR)

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II: E-GraphSAGE binary classification results
Dataset
BoT-IoT
NF-BoT-IoT
ToN-IoT
NF-ToN-IoT

Accuracy
99.99%
93.57%
97.87%
99.69%

Precision
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

F1-Score
1.00
0.97
0.99
1.00

Recall (DR)
99.99%
93.43%
97.86%
99.85%

FAR
0.00 %
0.38 %
1.92%
0.15%

We use the full dataset, except for the ToN-IoT dataset,
where we considered a randomly sampled subset with 10%
of the original size, due to the very large size of the original
dataset. In regards to training and evaluation data split, 70%
of the flow records of each datasets were selected for training
and 30% were reserved for testing and evaluation.
As mentioned above, the experimental evaluation was based
on three original datasets with proprietary flow formats and
feature sets, as well as their corresponding NetFlow versions.
As shown in [6], even though the original dataset and its
NetFlow counterpart represent essentially the same network
events, the performance of a classifier for the two datasets
versions can vary significantly, due to the different feature
sets. Table II presents the detailed results of our E-GraphSAGE
classifier for the binary classification case, showing Accuracy,
Precision , F1-Score, Recall and FAR, for the considered
four benchmark datasets. As can be seen in the table, the EGraphSAGE classifier performs very well across all different
performance metrics. Since the considered datasets are generally highly imbalanced, the F1-Score is a more relevant
performance metric. We use the F1-Score to compare our
classifier with the state-of-the-art, i.e., the best classification
results reported in the literature for each of the four NIDS
datasets.
Table III shows the corresponding results of our
E-GraphSAGE classifier compared to the best performing
related works for each datasets in terms of F1-Score. As
can be observed from the table, in regards to F1-Score,
E-GraphSAGE outperforms the best reported classifiers in
ToN-IoT and BoT-IoT. The NF-ToN-IoT and NF-BoT-IoT
experiments achieved an F1-score of 1.0 and 0.97, respectively,
which are the same as the state-of-art algorithms.
These results demonstrate the power of our GNN-based
approach for traffic classification and network intrusion detection. In contrast to most related works, where a new ML-based
NIDS classifier is evaluated on one, two or a maximum three
datasets, we have demonstrated the performance of our ETABLE III: Performance of binary classification by EGraphSAGE compared with the state-of-art algorithms
Method
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
XGBoost [5]
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
Extra Tree Classifier [6]
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
Ensemble [7]
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
Extra Tree Classifier [6]

Dataset
BoT-IoT
BoT-IoT
NF-BoT-IoT
NF-BoT-IoT
ToN-IoT
ToN-IoT
NF-ToN-IoT
NF-ToN-IoT

F1
1.00
0.99
0.97
0.97
0.99
0.95
1.00
1.00

TABLE IV: Results of multiclass classification by EGraphSAGE on BoT-IoT dataset families
Class Name
Benign
DDoS
DoS
Reconnaissance
Theft
Weighted Average

BoT-IoT
DR
F1-Score
100.00%
0.99
99.99%
1.00
99.99%
1.00
99.98%
1.00
93.75%
0.97
99.99%
1.00

NF-BoT-IoT
DR
F1-Score
99.45%
0.42
40.82%
0.39
57.13%
0.47
84.50%
0.92
99.83%
0.39
78.16%
0.81

GraphSAGE approach across four significantly different NIDS
benchmark datasets. The consistently solid results demonstrate
the robustness of our GNN-based approach and its ability to
generalise across different types of network traffic patterns,
feature sets, and attack types. We believe this is due to the
ability of the GNN architecture to capture the information in
the inherent graph structure of the flow-based NIDS datasets.
B. Multiclass Classification Results
We are now considering the multiclass classification problem, where the classifier aims to distinguish between different
types of attacks as well as benign traffic. This is a much
harder problem than in the binary case. For the evaluation
of the E-GraphSAGE classifier in the multiclass scenario, we
considered the same four NIDS datasets as for the binary case.
Depending on the NIDS dataset, the number of attack classes
range between 4 and 9.
Tables IV and V show the corresponding results for the
BoT-IoT and ToN-IoT datasets and their respective Netflow
counterparts. For the BoT-IoT dataset with its original format
and feature set, a very high weighted Detection Rate and F1Score is achieved for all the 5 traffic classes (4 attack classes
plus benign class), with a weighted average of 99.99% and
1.00 respectively. The corresponding numbers for the NF-BoTIoT dataset are significantly lower, with a weighted average
DR value of 78.16% and weighted F1-Score of 0.81.
The results for the ToN-IoT datasets show a high weighted
average Detection Rate (86.78%) and F1-Score (0.87), but
the values vary significantly for the individual traffic classes.
TABLE V: Results of multiclass classification by EGraphSAGE on ToN-IoT datasets families
Class Name
Benign
Backdoor
DDoS
DoS
Injection
MIMT
Ransomware
Password
Scanning
XSS
Weighted Average

ToN-IoT
DR
F1-Score
88.12%
0.91
5.06%
0.08
96.94%
0.98
96.08%
0.73
88.94%
0.83
87.43%
0.18
98.55%
0.94
89.15%
0.91
75.84%
0.85
92.08%
0.95
86.78%
0.87

NF-ToN-IoT
DR
F1-Score
98.86%
0.92
98.38%
0.99
52.35%
0.68
0.00%
0.00
93.15%
0.71
22.88%
0.28
96.49%
0.23
19.92%
0.25
15.32%
0.13
0.00%
0.00
67.16%
0.63

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) raw data

(b) edge embedded data

Fig. 4: Visualisation of dimensionality reduction a) Sample of
BoT-IoT raw validation data, b)Sample of edge embeddings
generated by E-GraphSAGE (Multiclass).

As for the BoT-IoT dataset, we observe a significantly lower
classification performance for the NetFlow variant of the BoTIoT dataset. This can be explained by the very different
nature of the feature set. While the original feature sets
include specifically engineered features to detect the attack
classes included in the dataset, the NetFlow variants consist
of relatively simple and generic features.
To get an intuitive understanding of the promising and
robust performance of the E-GraphSAGE classifier, we investigated and visualised the edge embeddings generated by
the algorithm, based on the BoT-IoT dataset. For this, we
generate two visualisations. First, we take the sample ‘raw’
BoT-IoT dataset and the edge embedding then applied the
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)
[23] dimensionality reduction algorithm to map the highdimensional data down to two dimensions, for the purpose
of visualisation. The result is shown in Figure 4. We now see
a clear separation of attack flows and normal/benign flows.
This illustrates the ability of the edge embedding mechanism
of the E-GraphSAGE algorithm to leverage the inherent graph
structure of the flow-based NIDS data, and to be able to separate attack traffic from normal traffic in the embedding space,
which in turn results in a high classification performance.
As in the binary classification case, we have provided a
comparison of our E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS with the stateof-the-art classifiers. Table VI shows the average multiclass

weighted F1-Scores of E-GraphSAGE compared with the top
one or two best reported results in the literature, depending
on availability. We observe that E-GraphSAGE outperforms
all the state-of-the-art classifiers, with the only exception of
the ToN-IoT dataset, where E-GraphSAGE matches the F1Score as the best reported results.
Overall, we see that E-GraphSAGE at least matches, and in
most cases significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art MLbased NIDS approaches, for both binary and multi-class classification. This is particularly significant, given our stringent
comparison methodology, where we picked the best performing classifiers for each of the four individual NIDS datasets,
and performed a pairwise comparison with E-GraphSAGE.
This is in contrast to a more typical approach in which a
classifier is compared with related approaches on one, two, or
three common datasets.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper presents a novel approach to network intrusion detection based on GNNs. For this, we propose EGraphSAGE which the capturing of edge features as well as
the topological pattern of a network flow graph, and is hence
able to implement attack flow detection. In this paper, we
focus on the application of E-GraphSAGE for IoT network
intrusion detection, and more specifically, for the detection of
malicious network flows. To the best of our knowledge, this
represents the first implementation and extensive evaluation
of an GNN-based NIDS for IoT using network flow data. Our
experimental evaluation based on four IoT NIDS benchmark
datasets shows that our E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS performs
exceptionally well and overall outperforms the state-of-theart ML-based classifiers. The evaluation results of our initial
system demonstrate the potential of a GNN-based approach
for network intrusion detection. In the future, we plan to
apply neighbourhood sampling techniques to improve the
run-time of the proposed E-GraphSAGE model, particularly
exploring non-uniform sampling techniques. Also, it is worth
investigating explainable graph neural network algorithms,
such as GNNExplainer [24], to get more insights about GNN
model outputs.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

TABLE VI: Performance of multiclass classification by EGraphSAGE compared with the state-of-art algorithms
Method
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
KNN [8]
XGBoost [5]
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
Extra Tree Classifier [6]
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
Extra Tree Classifier [6]
Proposed E-GraphSAGE
Extra Tree Classifier [6]

Dataset
BoT-IoT
BoT-IoT
BoT-IoT
NF-BoT-IoT
NF-BoT-IoT
ToN-IoT
ToN-IoT
NF-ToN-IoT
NF-ToN-IoT

W-F1
1.00
0.99
0.97
0.81
0.77
0.87
0.87
0.63
0.60

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

A. Ghasempour, “Internet of things in smart grid: Architecture, applications, services, key technologies, and challenges,” Inventions, vol. 4,
no. 1, p. 22, 2019.
Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24,
2021. DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386.
B. Claise, “Cisco systems netflow services export version 9,” RFC,
vol. 3954, pp. 1–33, 2004.
H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel
multimodal-sequential approach based on multi-view features for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183 207–183 221,
2019. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2959131.
M. A. Lawal, R. A. Shaikh, and S. R. Hassan, “An anomaly mitigation
framework for iot using fog computing,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 10,
2020, ISSN: 2079-9292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics9101565.
M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, Netflow
datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection systems, Nov. 2020. arXiv: 2011.09144.

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

P. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, and R. Tripathi, “An ensemble learning and fogcloud architecture-driven cyber-attack detection framework for iomt
networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 166, pp. 110–124, 2021,
ISSN : 0140-3664. DOI : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2020.12.003.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0140366420320090.
A. Churcher, R. Ullah, J. Ahmad, S. ur Rehman, F. Masood, M.
Gogate, F. Alqahtani, B. Nour, and W. J. Buchanan, “An experimental analysis of attack classification using machine learning in iot
networks,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 2, 2021, ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.
3390/s21020446. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/14248220/21/2/446.
G. Vormayr, T. Zseby, and J. Fabini, “Botnet communication patterns,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2768–
2796, 2017. DOI: 10.1109/COMST.2017.2749442.
M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Surveying
port scans and their detection methodologies,” The Computer Journal,
vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1565–1581, 2011.
G. Kambourakis, T. Moschos, D. Geneiatakis, and S. Gritzalis, “Detecting dns amplification attacks,” in International workshop on critical
information infrastructures security, Springer, 2007, pp. 185–196.
Q. Xiao, J. Liu, Q. Wang, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, and Y. Yao, “Towards
Network Anomaly Detection Using Graph Embedding,” in Computational Science – ICCS 2020, V. V. Krzhizhanovskaya, G. Závodszky,
M. H. Lees, J. J. Dongarra, P. M. A. Sloot, S. Brissos, and J. Teixeira,
Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 156–169,
ISBN : 978-3-030-50423-6.
W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, ser. NIPS’17,
Long Beach, California, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2017, pp. 1025–
1035, ISBN: 9781510860964.
J. Zhou, Z. Xu, A. Rush, and M. Yu, “Automating Botnet Detection
with Graph Neural Networks,” in 4th Workshop on Machine Learning
and Systems (MLSys), 2020.
L. Gong and Q. Cheng, “Exploiting edge features for graph neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun. 2019.
J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
“Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, D. Precup
and Y. W. Teh, Eds., ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 70, PMLR, Jun. 2017, pp. 1263–1272. [Online]. Available: https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v70/gilmer17a.html.
H. Cai, V. W. Zheng, and K. C. Chang, “A Comprehensive Survey
of Graph Embedding: Problems, Techniques, and Applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 30, no. 9,
pp. 1616–1637, 2018, ISSN: 1558-2191. DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2018.
2807452.
J. Zhou, G. Cui, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Graph
neural networks: A review of methods and applications,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/1812.08434, 2018.
N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things
for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, 2019, ISSN: 0167739X. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . future .
2019.05.041. arXiv: 1811.00701.
A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, A. M. Z. Tari, and A. Anwar, “TON IoT
telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of iot and iiot for datadriven intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165 130–
165 150, 2020. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3022862.
Low-code programming for event-driven applications, Feb. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://nodered.org/.
An extensible netflow v5/v9/ipfix probe for ipv4/v6, Feb. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.ntop.org/products/netflow/nprobe/.
L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “Umap: Uniform manifold
approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
R. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec, “Gnnexplainer: Generating explanations for graph neural networks,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, p. 9240, 2019.

NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.