Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis
Zhuoqun Fu1 , Mingxuan Liu1 , Yue Qin2 , Jia Zhang1 , Yuan Zou1,3 , Qilei Yin1 , Qi Li1 , Haixin Duan1,4
1 Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2 Indiana University Bloomington, Bloomington, USA
3 GeekSec Security Group, Beijing, China

4 Qi An Xin Group Corp., Beijing, China

1 {fzq20, liumx18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {yinqilei, qli01, duanhx}@tsinghua.edu.cn, zhangjia@cernet.edu.cn
2 qinyue@iu.edu, 3 zouyuan@geeksec.com

ABSTRACT
Malicious activities on the Internet continue to grow in volume
and damage, posing a serious risk to society. Malware with remote
control capabilities is considered one of the most threatening malicious activities, as it can enable arbitrary types of cyber-attacks. As
a countermeasure, many malware detection methods are proposed
to identify malicious behaviours based on traffic characteristics.
However, the emerging encryption and evasion techniques pose
substantial barriers to the full exploitation of network information.
This significantly impairs the effectiveness of existing malware detection methods relying on a singular type of characteristics. In this
paper, we propose ST-Graph to resolve this issue. In addition to traditional stream attributes, ST-Graph explores spatial and temporal
characteristics of network behaviours based on a graph representation learning algorithm and integrates all available information
to boost the detection decision. To illustrate the effectiveness of
ST-Graph, we evaluate it on two datasets. Experimental results
demonstrate that ST-Graph outperforms state-of-the-art malware
detection systems and also shows good performance in efficiency,
generalizability, and robustness. Specifically, it achieves over 99%
precision and recall, and its False Positive Rate is even two orders
of magnitude lower than (nearly 0.02 times) that of baseline models. Meanwhile, the deployment of ST-Graph in two real network
scenarios for around one year shows an outstanding efficiency
with only 160 seconds time cost for 5-minute traffic in 1.7 Gbps
bandwidth.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Intrusion detection systems.

KEYWORDS
Traffic-based malware detection, encryption traffic, graph representation
ACM Reference Format:
Zhuoqun Fu1 , Mingxuan Liu1 , Yue Qin2 , Jia Zhang1 , Yuan Zou1, 3 , Qilei
Yin1 , Qi Li1 , Haixin Duan1, 4 . 2022. Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis. In 25th International Symposium on
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9704-9/22/10. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3545948.3545983

495

Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses (RAID 2022), October 26–28, 2022,
Limassol, Cyprus. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3545948.3545983

1

INTRODUCTION

Malware refers to intrusive software programs developed by cybercriminals with malicious intentions such as stealing data, corrupting
computers, bringing down servers, and penetrating networks. The
most damaging malware are those with remote control capabilities, which give attackers administrative control of the victim’s
computer to enable arbitrary types of cyber-attacks. For example,
NOPEN used in a massive breach of top-secret data in 2017 has
such remote control capabilities [7]. The infection pattern of this
type of malware is shown in Figure 1, where the infected host communicates with the control server to perform further malicious acts.
Due to the highly concealed and high-risk nature, the detection
of malware has received considerable critical attention from both
academia [28, 69, 71] and industry [8, 9, 13].
Real-world malware traffic detection requires efficient detection
over complex network traffic data with high accuracy. However,
the emergence of encryption strategies and various evasion technologies of adversaries poses huge barriers to effective malware
traffic detection. More specifically, adversaries employ encryption
protocols (i.e. TLS protocol [52]) in the process of malware communications to hide suspicious information. According to [18], in
2021, more than 46% of malware have encrypted their communications. The encryption on most traffic greatly curtails the accessible
information (e.g., URL and HTTP headers in payload, ) that indicate malicious network behaviour. This impairs the accuracy and
consistency of traditional network-based malware detection, such
as Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) [47, 54].
Many previous works have made efforts to resolve the challenges
of encryption. For example, to enlarge the set of indicative information, [3, 19] summarise the fine-grained features of TLS traffic and
use machine learning methods to identify encrypted traffic generated by known malicious samples. Further, [37, 42] introduce deep
learning methods to reduce the dependence on features and human
experience. However, such detection methods based on features of
singular streams cannot be generalized to unknown samples and
may induce a large number of false positives that cannot be interpreted. To overcome such issues, another trend of methods [34, 35]
attempt to reveal the essential characteristics of malware behaviour
through the accessing relations between hosts and domains. However, adopting such methods in the real-world network scenario is
not trivial due to efficiency concerns. More seriously, adversaries
have developed various evasion techniques by perturbing stream

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Attacker

Victim

Attack
Phase

Fu and Liu, et al.

Malicious intrusion
Intrusion acknowledge & Delivery malware
Install malware

Control
Phase

Request instructions
Issue instructions

……

Figure 1: Infection pattern of remote control malware.
features, which further reduces the amount of usable information
for malware identification. So far, the issue of lacking representative
information for encrypted malware detection has not been well resolved. Previous works only use a single type of characteristics such
as stream features or context information while the information
loss and compression still exist.
In this paper, we propose ST-Graph, a multi-stream analysis
framework that explores multiple features from spatial and temporal perspectives and integrates all available information for comprehensive malware traffic detection under encryption scenarios. More
specifically, we design an attribute heterogeneous graph oriented
to spatio-temporal traffic behaviour, which effectively captures the
characteristics of associations between nodes in a large-scale network. Equipped with a graph representation learning method, our
method extends the scope of information that can be utilized for
recognizing encrypted malicious traffic, which boosts the detection
to achieve higher accuracy and robustness. In the meantime, we
carefully design our graph representation learning algorithm on
the basis of random walk [49], which learns spatial and temporal features for network traffic with high efficiency. The learned
host representations aggregate information from behavioural sequences in the network, which effectively highlights the differences
in traffic between compromised hosts and benign samples with
little information loss.
Our main contributions are summarised as follows:
• We propose ST-Graph, a real-time malicious traffic detection
framework under an encryption scenario. By exploring and integrating multiple features, ST-Graph effectively reveals malicious
behaviours within an encrypted network, which enables low false
alarm rate detection.
• We design a heterogeneous attribute graph for encrypted traffic
and propose a novel embedding method, namely interval-inclined
random walk, for exploring and incorporating spatial and temporal
characteristics of the traffic data.
• We evaluate our detection system in several real network scenarios for up to a year and observe good results. Compared to other
works, our detection model results in higher accuracy (nearly 10
times that of baselines), and significantly lower false positives with
a tolerable time cost.
• By real-world deployment, our detection system finds some malicious cases that cannot be discovered by other systems and reveals
some emerging malicious traffic types.

2

BACKGROUND

In this section, we briefly overview the available information for
malicious traffic detection under encryption and summarise the
knowledge about graph representation learning.

496

Information in TLS handshake. Transport Layer Security (TLS) [52]
is utilized to assure confidentiality and integrity between two communication entities. For example, HTTPS is the plain text HTTP
protocol over TLS. In general, a TLS connection negotiates keys
via a TLS handshake and then uses secure symmetric to encrypt
communication payloads. Encryption of TLS could prevent any
third parties from accessing plain communication payloads, which
attracts an increasing number of applications to deploy TLS. As a
coin has two sides, malicious adversaries also deploy TLS to encrypt
their connections to evade detection by DPI systems [47, 54]. However, TLS handshake remains in plain-text in order to exchange the
information necessary for encryption. During a TLS handshake,
two communicating parties authenticate with each other, negotiate encryption algorithms, exchange encryption keys and finally
agree on the encryption process based on previously exchanged
information. More specifically, the client initially sends a ClientHello message, providing a list of cipher suites and a set of TLS
extensions. The cipher suites are a set of cryptographic algorithms
required by TLS. The extensions are the features supported by the
TLS client, where the Server Name Indication (SNI) extension indicates the hostname of the target server to which the client is trying
to connect. The server then responds with a ServerHello message,
containing the selected algorithm and identity information. As the
information exchanged during the handshake process is critical
to the subsequent encrypted communication, it also provides vital
information to detect malicious encrypted traffic [2].
Graph Representation Learning. Graph is a data structure for
representing complex networks and modelling abstract concepts
such as relations between entities. However, traditional graph
construction algorithms (e.g. adjacency matrices [53], adjacency
list [10]) and graph analysis algorithms (e.g. search algorithms [59])
have difficulty in solving the increasingly complex graph topology
and can incur huge space and time overheads. At the same time,
graph representation algorithms [24] allow for more flexible and
efficient analysis on large-scale graphs, with the goal of optimizing a set of vectors that numerically represent node information
as well as graph structure. Among such methods, graph embedding [21] is a representative approach, which transforms nodes
on graphs into vectors. A graph could be approximated by several
node lists, which is similar to the word sequences in a piece of
text. Therefore, word2vec [39], a text embedding method, could be
adopted for graph embedding effectively [49]. First, a list of nodes
can be regarded as a “corpus” of a graph, which can be obtained by
random walks [16]. Based on the node list, the vectorized representations of nodes can be optimized using a skip-gram network [40],
by maximizing the likelihood probability of each node’s context.
In this paper, we extend this method to learn edge representations
from the prioritized graph topology constructed from the complex,
real-world network traffic data.

3

PROBLEM STATEMENT

Our goal is to detect infected hosts within an organization by observing host traffic behaviours. Generally, gateway refers to the
network boundary to distinguish between internal and external
networks, such as campus networks and enterprise networks. Due
to the gateway’s global perspective of the traffic through it, we position our detection system, ST-Graph, at the gateway to monitor the

Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis
External

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

ST-Graph

Internal

section, we illustrate the key observations of malware infections,
explain the design of the system, and describe the workflow of
ST-Graph.

Detect

4.1

Key Observations

…

Malicious level

Figure 2: Threat model of ST-Graph.

Attack
Control

…

Gateway

Server

whole traffic, as shown in Figure 2. Specifically, ST-Graph listens
to encrypted network traffic generated by internal hosts accessing
external servers at the gateway and detects infected hosts with
suspicious communications in a real-time manner. In this work,
we only focus on the standardized TLS protocol encrypted traffic.
Since it’s the mainstream encryption protocol with the most usage
rate for malware, due to its ease of deployment. To be noticed, our
detection system only captures the traffic without manipulating
them and thus will not affect the benign forwarding traffic.
However, such detection demand poses huge challenges mainly
from two perspectives: 1) curtailed available information limits
the effectiveness of the detection, and 2) the highly comprehensive network connections hinder the efficiency of the detection.
More specifically, the first concern results from recent encryption
and adversaries’ evasion technologies, which greatly curtail the
amount of information that can be utilized for detection. In encryption scenarios, the invisibility of payloads of communication
prevents traditional detection methods, e.g. DPI methods [47, 54],
from making accurate predictions. More seriously, adversaries have
evolved several techniques to evade existing single-stream-based
detection methods [17, 61, 65]. In obfuscation-based evasion, adversaries change frequency of accesses from a host to command and
control (C&C) servers [26], which blurs the suspicious property
of the host to evade detection based on packet length and time
interval [3, 19, 45]. In disguising-based evasion, malware takes the
form of benign software connections, disguises that its traffic is
generated by benign software [17], visits benign third-party websites initially as a front [68], or reduces the number of websites
visited [38] to avoid context-based detection [50, 73]. The suspicious behaviours hide behind millions of legitimate requests, which
poses substantial barriers to effective detection and introduces a
high level of false positives [11, 17]. Therefore, encryption and evasion behaviours prompt us to explore more available information
for effective detection.
As for the second concern, the detection over network interactions confronts a large scale of network throughput, resulting
from the increasing number of network users and the complex
network connectivity. Meanwhile, the demand of exploring additional, multi-faceted features for effective detection also intensifies
the computational complexity. Therefore, we need to design new
detection technologies that can explore and process more network
features over comprehensive network interactions with tolerable
computational complexity.

4

SYSTEM OVERVIEW

In this paper, we propose ST-Graph, a multi-stream analysis framework equipped with a novel graph embedding algorithm. In this

497

H1

H2

H3

Figure 3: Schematic representation of host connectivity in
a network environment with malware infections. Colour
of circle represents the maliciousness of the destination
server. For example, white circles represent normal destination servers, like www.google.com, grey circles represent
middle-malicious servers, like phishing websites, and black
circles represent malicious servers, like C&C servers.
Since remote control malware has the advantage of low attack
cost and the capability of widespread, it has been widely taken by
adversaries in more than half of malware attacks [30]. To detect
remote control malware, we first perform an empirical study to
condense the key features. Based on previous work that found that
some malware has similarities in attack targets and attack methods [29, 46, 57], we perform a manual analysis of remote control
malware from two aspects: code and generated traffic. First, we
randomly sample 30 malware as our ground truth and run them on
several operating systems under our control. Note that the entire
experiment environment is enclosed and will not affect any third
parties. From the code aspect, we reverse their code and analyse
the code logic and hard-coded content. We find that malware in the
same family prefers to share a similar software framework, which is
the root cause of the similar traffic behaviour. The reason for code
sharing and reuse, as we speculate, is likely to be saving costs. And
malware is generally not up to date and still accepts low version
TLS connections. Besides, developers of malware often use default
fixed parameters, especially the time interval. For example, we find
that some malware usually set the time interval to connect to the
control servers to 60 seconds.
Further, to explore the traffic behaviour, we try to decrypt the
traffic generated by ground truth malware. With the master key
extracted from controlled operating systems, we could analyse
the plain communication between malware and servers. The similarity of code within the same family leads to a concentration of
behavioural characteristics in their traffic behaviour. Due to a clear,
joint attack purpose, i.e. remote control of the infected hosts, there
exists a relatively fixed traffic pattern in remote control attack. As
shown in Figure 1, the communication process can be summarised
into two main phases: the attack phase (solid lines) and the control
phase (dashed lines). Initially, the attack phase is to deliver malware
to victim’s machine by spoofing websites (grey circles) or exploiting
vulnerabilities to install malware, which can help adversaries gain
control of the host. For example, for H2 in Figure 3, the attacker
commits a fraudulent activity by sending phishing emails in the
attack phase and lures victim to click the embedded link, which
may cause the redirection from phishing website (grey circle) to

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Fu and Liu, et al.

Encrypted Traffic
1

2

temporal (i.e., connection order and time-related information) characteristics of hosts’ network behaviour into host representations
to boost the effectiveness of detection decisions. To achieve higher
efficiency, we improve the algorithm of graph representation by
only optimising edge representation with iterative updates, while
the optimal node representations are derived from closed-form solutions. This significantly reduces the computational complexity of
graph representation learning.

Spatio-Temporal Graph Representor
Traffic Preprocessor

Flow Features

Graph
Construction

Edge
Embedding

Host
Representation

Graph Representor

3

Detector

Host Features
Malware Infection

Host

Server

4.3

Figure 4: Overview of ST-Graph.
malware download site (black circle). Afterwards, in the control
phase, infected hosts would connect to the control server of adversaries to receive and then execute instructions [46]. We find that
most malware prefers to connect to different destination servers in
different phases, which construct a connection order. We speculate
the reason may be to evade the detection. Interestingly, the forged
innocent network connectivity test of malware is common, which
is preparation before connecting to control servers, e.g., querying
the host’s public IPs or downloading servers’ certificates. For example, in Figure 3, dashed lines connected to white circles represent
the network connectivity test behaviour. Specifically, the infected
hosts may actively connect to external servers, such as third-party
servers for network inspection.
Above, we summarise the two main phases of remote control
malware from code and traffic analysis, i.e., attack phase and control
phase. Besides, we find an exclusive observation, i.e., the forged
innocent network connection test, which gives us a unique perspective on detection. Our observations not only extend existing
understanding of malware behaviour but also deliver distinctive
findings. Below, we summarise the common characteristics of malware infections from the following aspects:
• Spatial Feature refers to the concentration property between hosts
and target servers, especially within families. As mentioned before,
due to framework reuse, some malware within the same family
exhibits high similarity, reflected by the destination servers they try
to connect with. For example in Figure 3, H2 and H3 are connected
to the same destination servers in the control phase.
• Temporal Feature of the connection. The connection order of a
host over a period of time can help us rebuild the infection process
of malware, which can clearly show the change with phase. Besides,
due to the setting of fixed parameters, communications between
infected hosts and control servers are regular, especially the packet
length and packet interval time [26].

4.2

System Design

To achieve effectiveness and efficiency, the key point of our detection system, ST-Graph, is to retrieve as much information as
possible with tolerable computation complexity. According to the
observations of our empirical study (See §4.1), we summarise two
categories of general and distinguishable features. First, spatial
feature reflects the property of network connection relationships
for each host. In addition, temporal feature shows the side-channel
information of communications. These two kinds of features jointly
depict the network communication behaviour of hosts in a comprehensive way.
Based on the observed features, we design ST-Graph, which incorporates the spatial (i.e., accesses between hosts and servers) and

498

Workflow

As shown in Figure 4, our detection system consists of three components: data preprocessor, graph representor, and detector. Below
we elaborate on the functionality of each component.
Traffic Preprocessor. Raw traffic is usually captured as packets in
the Pcap format. In this original data format, many communication
details are presented in a fragmented manner, making it difficult
to be utilized for detection. Therefore, we construct a Traffic Preprocessor to recover the complete communication while removing
the extra meta-information from the traffic data. To begin with, we
apply stream reassembly to recover the entire end-to-end communication. To do this, we extract a 5-tuple (i.e., <source IP, source
port, destination IP, destination port, protocol>) from each original
packet, and integrate the packets associated with the same 5-tuple
as a stream. Afterwards, we reserve the traffic of the TLS protocol
with a complete TLS Handshake and extract the key information
for each stream. More specifically, we extract the contents of the
TLS handshake in each reserved TLS stream, including the TLS version and the supported cipher suites, and calculate some statistical
information such as the number of packets and the bytes within a
stream. Such statistical information extracted from the data stream
remains an important element of malware traffic detection and is
used later in the computation of the graph representation.
Graph Representor. We build a heterogeneous graph to represent
the end-to-end communications among hosts and servers by their
temporal and spatial features. Specifically, the temporal features are
the traffic characteristics we extract from the streams, which are
embedded in the stream representations; and the spatial features
are reflected by the graph structure. Based on this, we design a
node embedding algorithm to transfer the spatio-temporal features
into host representations, which reflect the similarity of the host’s
access behaviour. We will elaborate on this module in §5.
Detector. Given the embedding vector of each host that numerically quantifies the host’s behavioural characteristics, we apply a
machine learning approach to calculate the likelihood of the host
being infected. Considering the ability to resist overfitting [12]
and the better performance in comparative experiments (see Appendix A), we finally employ the random forest (RF) regression
algorithm [12] as our detector. It is an ensemble learning method
that makes predictions by averaging the output of multiple decision trees. With the predicted infection value of each host, the
detector outputs a list of suspicious hosts along with their access
information.

5

ST-GRAPH: SPATIO-TEMPORAL GRAPH

In this section, we present the design details of ST-Graph, elaborate
on the process of graph construction and the optimization of edge
representation, and explain how we propagate spatial and temporal
information in a lossless way to represent hosts for malware traffic

Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

detection. The key of the approach is to exploit the similarities in
the network behaviour of different applications. To do this, we first
build a heterogeneous graph to correlate all network connections
between hosts and servers. Based on the graph structure, we apply
Random Walk [16] to generate a list of corresponding connections
for each stream and use a probabilistic model to optimize the edge
representations. Each stream is represented by its edge representation and traffic characteristics. Finally, we represent each host by
its all accesses generated in a sequential order, which integrates
the traffic characteristics and network structure associated with
the host. Compared with Graph Neural Network-based methods
that train thousands of parameters [72], and Knowledge Graph
Embedding-based methods that jointly optimize the representation
of all nodes and edges [36, 66], ST-Graph learns edge embeddings
based on random-walk with a small number of iterations and optimizes host embeddings with a closed-form solution. This highly
reduces the computational complexity to meet the need for realtime detection.

5.1

Graph Construction

Graph Topology. We design a host-server bipartite graph G =
(H, D, E, S, I ) to capture the interactions between internal hosts
and external nodes. We denote the internal hosts as a vertex set
H , each represented by its IP as the unique identifier; Similarly,
the external server destinations are represented by a vertex set D,
each initialized by the server’s domain name or its IP address. The
domain can be obtained from SNI in ClientHello, and the server’s
IP address is used as a substitute when the domain is not available.
We use an edge set E = {e |e = (he , de ), he ∈ H, de ∈ D} to denote
all connections (i.e., streams) between hosts and servers. If a host
h has a TLS handshake with a server d, then an edge e = (h, d)
connecting these two nodes will be added to E. I = {i e |e ∈ E}
denotes the temporal feature of each edge, where i e represents the
order of e connected by its host he . S = {se |e ∈ E} denotes the
attributes extracted from the streams as described below.
Stream Attributes. The stream attributes S characterize the features of every single stream. To explore more detailed features, we
extend previous works [3, 55] with TLS handshake features such
as orders of cipher suits. Specifically, we exploit stream attributes
(details in Appendix E) from three aspects: 1) the TLS handshake
features extracted from internal hosts, 2) the domain name features
extracted from external nodes, and 3) the side channel statistics
features of the stream.
For the first type of attributes, we observe that malware and
C&C servers are not updated promptly, so they usually accept
lower TLS versions and maintain support capabilities for weak
encryption algorithms. The underlying reasons are that attackers
are relatively less concerned about whether communications will
be decrypted and that vulnerabilities in lower versions of operating
systems are easier to exploit. According to this observation, we
extract features from the TLS ClientHello message, including the
TLS version, the list of offered cipher suites and extensions as
TLS handshake features. Such features can provide information
about the encryption algorithm supported by the client. For the
second type of attributes, our feature extraction is mainly based
on the fact that many malicious domains are computed by Domain
Generation Algorithms (DGA). Hence, we extract features such

499

as the number, the character ratio, and the vowel or consonant
letter ratio for identification. We also extract domain name length
features to cope with lexicon-based DGA, which selects words from
proprietary dictionaries for combination to reduce randomness.
In addition, we include the side channel information as our third
type of attributes for they provide indirect signals to our detection.
Although the packet length and the arrival time do not provide
insight into the content of the connection, they can help to infer
network behaviour. For example, the large number of heartbeat
packets used to maintain a connection can result in small packets
per stream [3]. So we calculate some statistical information such
as the number, the length, or the time interval of packets sent and
received within a stream.

5.2

Edge Embedding

Edge embeddings are numerical representations of streams. In this
paper, we integrate two categories of features into edge embeddings:
1) stream attributes S for preserving original traffic information and
2) spatio-temporal embeddings for reflecting comprehensive and
dynamic network behaviours. We consider the network interactions
as the spatial features generated from graph topology, while the
temporal features refer to the sequential order of the servers being
visited by the host through the stream. To integrate spatial and
temporal features, we propose an Interval-inclined Random Walk R :
e → r e that takes into account both network interactions and access
orders to generate Spatio-temporal embeddings. Our model extends
the traditional random walk method [49] which traverses the graph
along the edges and maximizes the similarity of all edges within
several traverses. The main reason for this design choice is that
other graph-based models for edge representation learning, such as
Knowledge Graph Embedding methods [36, 66] and Graph Neural
Networks [25, 63], suffer from high computational complexity and
cannot serve our demand for efficient, real-time detection. In this
paper, we incorporate the temporal feature, i.e., the access order,
into the context generating process proposed by node2vec [22],
where the random walk strategy balances the breadth-first sampling
(BFS) and depth-first sampling (DFS). In general, from a starting
edge o, we perform random walks with at most P L steps for P N
times to collect a set of edges No . Further, we optimize the Spatiotemporal embedding of o by maximizing the similarity of edges in
No . Below we elaborate on our augmented random-walk strategy,
which decides the edge to take for the next step based on previous
wanderings.
For an edge e, we define its neighbours as a collection of edges
that share the same host or the server with e, formally Ce = {u :
(hu , du )|u ∈ E, he = hu ∨ de = du }. Let w = [w 0 , w 1 , ..., w P L ] be
a certain random walk. We define the connection order distance d
between two edges u, v as d(u, v) = |iu − iv |, where i e is the order
of edge e being connected by its host he (See §5.1). Assume the
random walker starts from edge o, we define the probability of
selecting a certain edge x ∈ Co from the neighbours of o for the
next walk as
1
Pr(w 1 = x |w 0 = o) = Í

d (o, x )

1
y ∈Co d (y,o)

.

Here, our random walker inclines to select the edge having the
minimum connection order distance with the current walk as the
next step. By doing this, streams that are generated in a small time
interval are tended to be consecutive steps in the random walk.

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Fu and Liu, et al.

For the following walks, each selection is based on the two
previous walks. Assume the last step is at edge u and the current step
takes edge v, the walker selects the next step from v’s neighbours
x ∈ Cv with
α
· 1
Pr(w i +1 = x |w i = v, w i −1 = u) = Í

u, x

d (v, x )
,
1
t ∈Cv α u, t · d (v, t )

where the value of αu,x is determined by the relation between x
and u. When x = u, αu,x takes the value of p1 ; when x is one of the
neighbours of u, αu,x is set as 1; otherwise αu,x = q1 . Here, p and q
are hyper-parameters. When edge x is overlapped with edge u, we
use a constant p to control the probability of returning from v to the
starting point u. Otherwise, if there are one or more edges between
edge x and edge u, we apply a constant q to control the probability
of v going to a new node. If q < 1, the walker tends to visit global
nodes (DFS); if q > 1, the walker tends to visit local nodes (BFS),
which enhances the coverage of the surrounding neighbours.
According to this strategy, for each edge e, we generate a network
neighbourhood Ne by P N times of random walks. The edges in Ne
are highly correlated with edge e from both spatial and temporal
perspectives. Hence, to incorporate the spatial and temporal features of the graph into edge embeddings, we set up a vector r e
for each edge, and optimize the vector by the proximity within
its network neighbourhood Ne . More specifically, we model the
plausibility that an edge n is correlated with edge u as
exp(ru · r n )
Pr(n |u) = Í
.
v ∈E exp(r u · rv )

which are not informative for characterizing the host’s behaviour
while taking a large proportion of traffic data. Hence, we rank
the streams associated with the host according to the importance
of the server visited through the stream before the information
propagation. Such importance is with respect to 1) the frequency
of the server being visited by all hosts H and 2) the order (i e : e ∈
E, he = t ∧ de = u) of the host t visiting the server u. Intuitively, if
a server u is visited by most hosts, it is likely to be visited by the
target host t, too. Also, if t visits u at a very early stage, then u is an
important access destination of t, compared with the other servers.
Hence, we define the importance of edge e to its host t as
ρ(e) =

where |{e ′ }| is the number of edges ending at u, |E| is the total
number of edges, and i e is the order of edge e being connected by t.
Further, we model the correlation score between host t and edge e
as a weighted sum over the importance of e to t and the similarity
between the host representation дt and edge embedding fe :
corr(t, e) = λρ(e) + (1 − λ)

Corr(Lt ) =

e ∈Lt

log [Corr(Lt )] =

n∈Nu

u ∈E n ∈ Nu

log Í

exp(ru · r n )

v ∈E exp(rv · r u )

(3)


Õ
Õ 

− | Nu | · log Zu +

= max
r
·
r
u
n


ru

u ∈E 
n∈Nu

Í

log λρ(e) + (1 − λ)

exp(дt · f e )
Z

t

where Zu = v ∈E exp(rv · ru ) is a normalization factor.
We use negative sampling to obtain an approximation of Zu
and optimize the objective function (3) using a stochastic gradient
ascent algorithm to update the Spatio-temporal embeddings of
edges. Finally, we represent edge e by concatenating its stream
feature se and its spatio-temporal embedding r e : fe = ϕ([se ||r e ]),
where ϕ(x) = |xx | is a normalization function.

5.3

Õ

where ξ = 1−λ
the host representation дt
λZ is a constant. We restrict


Í
ξ
as a unit vector. Let Mt = e ∈Lt fe · log (λ[ρ(e) + ξ ]) + ρ(e)+ξ .
To maximize log[Corr(Lt )], дt should be a vector of length 1 having the same direction with Mt . Therefore, we have the optimized
Mt
host representation as дt∗ = |M
|.

Pr(Nu |u)

Õ Õ

e ∈Lt

exp(дt · f e )
,
Z

Õ 




ξ
log (λ[ρ(e) + ξ ]) +
≈ 
· f e  · дt ,
ρ(e)
+
ξ
e ∈Lt




u ∈E
ru

λp(e) + (1 − λ)

e ∈Lt

We optimize the neighbourhood likelihood of all edges to pursuing
the global proximity:
Ö
= max

corr(t, e) =

and its logarithmic form can be approximated by the first-order
Taylor Expansion as



u

ru

exp (дt · f e )
,
Z

Í
where λ is a scalar hyperparameter and Z = i ∈E exp (дt · fi ) is a
normalization factor. Let Lt = {e |e ∈ E ∧ he = t } denote all edges
proceeding from host t. The joint correlation score of all edges in
Lt is defined as:Ö

Ö 

(1)

We assume the neighbourhood relation between different edge pairs
is independent, and further define the neighbourhood likelihood of
Ö
edge u as
Pr(N |u) =
Pr(n |u).
(2)

max

| {e ′ |e ′ ∈ E ∧ d e ′ = u } |
,
i e · |E |

Host Representation

To detect infected hosts through traffic behaviours, we propagate
the information of the streams associated with each host to numerically represent the hosts. Formally, for host h, we have its
representation дh as дh = Propagate({r e |e ∈ E ∧ he = h}) to
represent the host’s sequential access behaviour in a short period.
Below we explain the details of the information propagation from
streams to hosts.
For a target host t, assume u is a server being visited by t through
the stream e = (t, u). Among network traffics, each host may access
many public services (e.g., windows update service, etc.), some of

500

6

EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

In this section, we present experimental evaluations of our detection
system. We evaluate ST-Graph on two tasks: malware detection and
malware family classification. The first task distinguishes hosts with
malicious network behaviour from benign ones, while the second
task further specifies the family of malware. A malware family is a
group of associated programs with similar attack techniques, some
of which have “code overlap” [15] to a large extent. Grouping them
as a family broadens the scope of a single piece of malware as it
alters over time while reserving distinct family traits.

6.1

Experimental Setup

Implementation. We present the tools used in each component
of our detection system (See §4.3). For traffic preprocessor, we employ TShark (version 3.2.5) [32] to parse the fragmented packets
and then recover the complete communication. To implement the
graph representor, we use NetworkX (version 2.5.1) [23] to build
the heterogeneous graph and initialize nodes with text representation by Gensim (version 4.1.2) [51]. Finally, we use scikit-learn

Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

(version 0.23.2) [48] for both singular value decomposition in host
representation and the classification algorithms.
Baselines. We compare our ST-Graph with two state-of-the-art
malicious traffic detection methods (ETA and FS-Net), which both
perform detection in stream-level detection. The computational
complexity of Graph Neural Network-based methods [36, 66] is
too heavy to meet efficient detection needs at all. Therefore, we
exclude these methods as our comparative methods. The details of
the baselines are as follows.
• ETA [2] adopts the random forest model to detect malware traffic. Specifically, the ETA utilizes the stream features, including
TLS handshake metadata, DNS contextual streams linked to the encrypted stream, and the HTTP headers of HTTP contextual streams
from the same source IP address within a 5-minute window.
• FS-Net [37] is an end-to-end deep learning model, which takes the
multi-layer encoder-decoder structure to mine the potential sequential characteristics of streams. In summary, it learns representative
features from raw streams and then classifies them.
We set hyperparameters of baselines to either the values adopted
by their authors or default values. Specifically, for FS-Net, we set the
dimension of hidden state as 128, layer number as 2 and dimension
of length embedding as 16. For the other parameters involved, such
as the parameters in random forest, we apply the default settings
in scikit-learn (version 0.23.2).
Environment and Parameters. We conduct the methods on a
Supermicro server with two Intel Xeon E5-2690 CPUs (2× 14 cores),
Centos 7.9.2009, 345G memory. For hyper-parameters, we set the
dimension of the host vectors Dh as 256, the length of random walk
path P L as 100 and the number of paths per edge P N as 10. And
we set the parameter p controlling the probability of returning as 1
and the parameter q controlling the probability of exploring new
nodes as 2 for better coverage of the surrounding neighbours.
Metrics. We use the following metrics to evaluate the detection
performance: (i) precision, (ii) recall and (iii) false-positive rates
(FPR). (See Appendix B)

6.2

Dataset

We conduct experiments on one public dataset (CICInvesAndMal2019, as AndMal2019 [58]) and one dataset collected by ourselves
(EncMal2021). AndMal2019 dataset includes traffic and device logs
generated by 5065 benign and 426 malicious Android apps on real
smart devices. And the malicious apps can be divided into 39 families. Our collected dataset EncMal2021 is constructed by capturing
the traffic generated by the example and the campus network traffic.
It contains 108,847 hosts with 5,202,093 streams, 4.5% of which are
marked as malicious, and the others are marked as benign. Below
we elaborate on the data collection process of EncMal2021.
Data Collection. EncMal2021 consists of malicious and benign
traffic data.
• Malicious Traffic: We use malware analysis sandboxes to collect the data. The sandboxes, including Windows 7 and Windows
10 operating systems, allow users to submit malicious executable
examples and control the runtime based on the execution of the
executable files. Malicious samples come from malware analysis
website VirusTotal and large security companies we work with,
with millions of sample updates per day. Table1 shows the names
of malware families and the number of examples we sample from

501

Table 1: Malware Families
Family Name
Minerd
Cryxos
PhishingSite
Wacatac
hidelink
Kryptik
Redirector
Generickdz
Installcore
Iframe

# Samples
5717
4652
3080
2949
2860
2403
2190
1974
1807
1731

Family Name
Unwanted
Faceliker
Trojandownloader
Brocoiner
Sality
Zbot
RelevantKnowledge
Scrinject
Ramnit
Others

# Samples
1610
1564
1528
1482
1046
1035
771
756
719
13237

each malware family. Each example runs for 5 minutes on average,
during which all generated traffic is recorded and saved. Since most
of the behaviours of the samples in the sandbox can be observed in
the first two minutes [31], we consider five minutes to be a sufficient time interval to observe almost all valid behaviours. In total,
we end up capturing 239,007 streams from 53,111 samples.
• Benign Traffic: We construct benign traffic from two data sources,
one is real traffic captured in a campus network and the other is the
traffic generated by benign samples running in the sandbox. Most
samples in the benign dataset are collected from a large campus
network with nearly 10,000 active hosts. We passively monitor all
inbound and outbound encrypted traffic at different time points for
5 consecutive months from January 2021 to April 2021 and save
the raw pcap packets. Due to the possibility of malware-infected
hosts in the campus network, we cannot directly use all the traffic
as benign traffic. We chose Alexa ranking as a filtering criterion,
keeping domains with the top 1 million traffic rankings. The reason
for this choice is that websites with more than 1 million rankings on
Alexa can be considered as “Long Tail”, thus this filtering guarantees
the diversity of the sample and also ensures the traffic is benign to
a certain extent. Since the crawled traffic may contain some private
information, we also need to anonymize the IPs. The same host is
treated as the same fake IP to ensure the integrity of the network
relationship. On the other hand, in order to avoid large bias in the
domain distribution between benign and malicious traffic due to the
different collection methods, we also collect the traffic generated by
benign samples running in the same sandbox environment. Such
samples are partly collected from the top 100 of the Microsoft
Store’s top free list and partly collected from the programs flagged
as benign by the malware analysis site. Among all the domains
of the traffic generated by the benign samples, 24% are not in the
Alexa Top 1 million rankings. We believe this mitigates the bias
associated with filtering traffic while keeping the traffic benign.
Finally, we capture 4,940,593 streams in the existing network by
53,281 hosts and 22,493 streams in the sandbox using 2,455 samples.
Dataset statement. In EncMal2021, the malicious samples are run
in sandboxes, which makes the distribution of malicious traffic
not exactly consistent with the actual situation. However, we compensate for this by enriching the malware types and the sandbox
environment, so that the constructed dataset is comprehensive as
possible.
Train-test Split. For the first task, i.e., malware detection, we perform different train-test split strategies on the two datasets, for the
capacities of these datasets are different.

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Fu and Liu, et al.

Table 2: Detection Performance of ST-Graph and Baselines. In EncMal2021, use joint testing set as the test set.

ETA
FS-Net
ST-Graph
ETA
FS-Net
ST-Graph

EncMal2021

AndMal2019

110

99.17

97.87

95
90
85
80

FS-Net

2.0

99.3

99.92

97.8

95

92.59

90

89.92

ST-Graph

(a) Precision comparison (higher is better)

80

1.607

1.5

98.62

1.0

Joint testing set
Disjoint testing set

0.5

85

83.59
ETA

100

Malware Family
Performance
Time Taken
Precision(%) Recall(%) FPR(%) Train(s)
Test(s)
79.9473
76.5882
1.2410
306.49
76.66
73.0697
72.6062
1.5218 41048.30 1890.69
93.3669
91.2105
0.4016
1489.41
127.14
28.8382
27.5170
1.8134
139.05
39.19
19.4906
16.7309
2.0863 23055.60 774.21
53.7568
53.4014
1.0180
520.36
66.85

Joint testing set
Disjoint testing set

105
99.98 99.94

99.35

Recall/%

Precision/%

110

Joint testing set
Disjoint testing set

105
100

Malware Detection
Performance
Time Taken
Precision(%) Recall(%) FPR(%) Train(s)
Test(s)
99.1726
99.3013
0.1915
729.26
138.24
99.3515
92.5990
0.2565 45324.10 17741.15
99.9805
99.9221
0.0045
5956.45
150.31
77.8451
74.7129
19.0409
65.31
22.48
72.8997
72.5344
21.4712 23275.86 5112.93
99.2973
99.6444
0.0170
2113.13
27.19

Method

FPR/%

Dataset

0.192 0.193
ETA

FS-Net

ST-Graph

(b) Recall comparison (higher is better)

0.0

ETA

0.257
FS-Net

0.004 0.005
ST-Graph

(c) FPR comparison (lower is better)

Figure 5: Comparison between joint testing set and disjoint testing set on EncMal2021.
• For EncMal2021: We divide the collected dataset into three parts:
1) training set, 2) joint testing set and 3) disjoint testing set, with a ratio
of 6:2:2. Here, the joint testing set shares the same distribution of
malware families with the training set; while the malware families
in the disjoint testing set do not intersect with those in the training
set. And we allocate benign traffic randomly and keep the ratio of
benign traffic to malicious traffic at 10:1.
• For AndMal2019: We use 60% samples for training and 40% for
testing. Here, we do not further divide the testing set into a joint
or a disjoint one since AndMal2019 only includes a limited number
of malicious families.
As for the second task, i.e., malware family classification, we use
8:2 as the ratio of train-test split for both two datasets. The labels
for this task are the name of families in Table 1.
Ethical Concerns. We also consider ethical concerns when collecting our dataset. As aforementioned, a portion of our benign
traffic comes from border traffic on the real campus network. To
avoid burdening normal network access, we limited our collection
to passive listening. To protect privacy, we only saved TLS traffic
when capturing traffic and anonymized the address of the communication. In the detection stages, we focus on the destination of
the traffic (domains) and do not look into the payload of any TLS
traffic. Also, the traffic is stored in the physical servers to which
only privileged administrators have access.

6.3

Detection Performance

We compare ST-Graph with other baselines on EncMal2021 and
AndMal2019, respectively.
6.3.1 Evaluation on EncMal2021. We use EncMal2021 to verify the
model has good malware detection abilities in a large-scale dataset,
i.e. it can achieve good binary and multi-classification results.
Malware Detection. The purpose of this experiment is to evaluate the detection effectiveness of ST-Graph and to test whether it

502

can identify unknown malware families, i.e., generalization. Generalization is to describe a model’s ability to react to new data.
In malicious traffic detection, it is important to know how well a
trained model will generalize to unseen data. We train all models
using training set and test them with joint testing set and disjoint
testing set, respectively.
The results of the joint testing set are shown in Table 2 (1st row).
From the results, we observe ST-Graph approaches with high precision and recall over of 99.99%, and the FPR is even two orders of
magnitude lower than the other two models. In terms of computation cost, compared with ETA, a simple feature engineering-based
model, ST-Graph takes more time for training and testing, while
this is much less than the deep learning-based model FS-Net.
Figures 5a, 5b and 5c show the detection results of the three
models for the disjoint testing set, compared with the results on
the joint testing set. In terms of precision, only our model does not
degrade on unseen samples. This is due to the fact that although its
recall for malicious communication traffic drops a little, it avoids
more false positives. As for the recall score, each model decreases to
some extent, while our model is still the most effective one. FS-Net
can detect most malware traffic, but it also introduces a high level
of false positives even when the distribution of benign traffic data
changes slightly. This may be due to its overfitting, where small
changes can lead to changes in the results of the model, making it
unrealistic to be applied to security analysis in practice.
Malware Family Classification. We use only malicious data for
multi-classification to understand ST-Graph’s effectiveness for malicious family classification. This task is valuable because when
malicious communications are detected, we need to analyse their
binaries to confirm the alarm, while the family labels of the alarms
offered by the detection model itself greatly reduce analysis time.

Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

(a) ETA

(b) ST-Graph

Figure 7: Visual distinction of features where red dots are
malware.

Figure 6: Malware family classification result of ST-Graph.
Figure 6 shows the normalized confusion matrix of multi-class
classification for ST-Graph. And the results of the other two models
show in Appendix D. We observe that ETA model and FS-Net model
can only identify a small part of malware families while having poor
performance in the majority of them. For example, ETA performs a
good classification for RelevantKnowledge. After analyzing the raw
traffic data generated by all samples in RelevantKnowledge family,
we found that all samples have the same cipher suites, signature
algorithms and other characteristics in the TLS handshake phase.
These features also differ from the traffic generated by the samples
in other families, forming a unique fingerprint. Beyond that, the
distinction between malware may not be obvious, and the features
extracted by humans are designed to detect anomalies rather than
to distinguish between malware families. On the other hand, FS-Net
prefers to group malware into large malware families because large
malware families have a greater variety of packet length sequences.
Hence, it is more difficult for FS-Net to distinguish between malware
with similar packet length sequences.
Our model can achieve 93% precision in classifying malware families. Figure 11 (in Appendix D) visualizes the results of embedding
the traffic graphs into six of these families. It shows that malware
families can be distinguished based on the clustering results, and
each family can form a large cluster. In addition to some intuitive
TLS handshake features, our model can capture these same-family
network relationships and so achieve better classification results.
However, our model still cannot classify malware families completely correctly. On the one hand, this is because malware families
are classified by security analysis tools based on the software binary, and the labels themselves may not be completely accurate;
on the other hand, there is still a portion of malware that may
not present complete communication in the sandbox. These two
reasons can cause our model to misclassify malware that is not
well differentiated. In general, our model can perform fine-grained
classification.
6.3.2 Evaluation on AndMal2019. We also test our model on a publicly available dataset to verify that it is applicable to a wide range
of data with good detection results.
Malware Detection. We first evaluate the detection effectiveness
on this dataset, i.e. the binary classification performance. Table
2 (2nd row) illustrates the results and Figure 7 shows the feature

503

vector visualization of the ETA and ST-Graph. The figure clearly
shows that our approach enables a greater aggregation of malware
compared to ETA, which enables a better classification result.
Malware Family Classification. The results in Table 2 show that
it is possible to detect malware using only network traffic, but
single-stream methods are not sufficient to characterize the malware families. Our approach makes it easier to find correlations
between malware. By combining the spatial-temporal characteristics of hosts accessing the network, our detection results can be
improved considerably.

6.4

Generalization of ST-Graph

In addition to examining the model’s generalization to new infections (§6.3.1), we also conduct ablation studies to explore the role
of stream attributes and spatio-temporal embeddings.
6.4.1 Features. We reduce the variety of features of edges to confirm that ST-Graph can detect malware in less informative and
more critical situations. TLS 1.3 [52] has been standardized in 2018
and the adoption rate reaches 48% on major websites by January
2021 [27, 33]. The main change in this version is it enhances security by also encrypting the handshake process, while this results in
less information being available in ClientHello. And the proposed
Encrypted-SNI (ESNI) extension will prevent others from fetching
the server name [6, 14]. This directly affects the acquisition of TLS
handshake features and domain features for Spatio-temporal Graph.
Even so, our method still works under the stringent conditions of
TLS 1.3 and remains efficient and effective. We run ST-Graph on
EncMal2021 without stream attributes that are blocked by TLS 1.3,
and the results are shown in Table 3 (2nd row), where the stream
attributes are removed one by one from top to bottom.
According to the results, we conclude that as the feature types
are reduced, there is a slight weakening in the precision and a slight
increase in the FPR of our method. Without using any stream features, ST-Graph is still able to achieve satisfactory results and even
causes a lower FPR compared to baseline models using all stream
attributes (See Table 2). This suggests that the spatio-temporal features extracted by our method play a decisive role. Therefore, our
approach is still competitive in detecting malicious traffic after the
full deployment of TLS 1.3.
6.4.2 Embedding. We modify the graph embedding algorithm in
Graph Representor to standard techniques (such as DeepWalk [49]
and node2vec [22]), leaving the other modules unchanged for testing. This experiment is also tested on EncMal2021 and the results
are recorded in Table 3 (3rd row). The results show that our system

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Fu and Liu, et al.

Table 4: Precision(%) of Real-world evaluation results.

has good detection and generalisation capabilities and that our
graph embedding algorithm does perform better in our scenario
compared to other graph embedding algorithms.

Stage
Campus-04/15/2021
Campus-02/25/2022
Enterprise-04/15/2021
Enterprise-02/25/2022

Table 3: Ablation study’s results of ST-Graph.
Settings
Original model
No domain feat.
Features
No handshake feat.
No statistical feat.
DeepWalk
Embedding
node2vec

6.5

Precision(%)
99.9805
99.9784
99.8522
99.5848
99.7376
99.8891

Recall(%)
99.9221
99.8983
99.5578
99.0915
99.4148
99.5947

FPR(%)
0.0045
0.005
0.0161
0.0955
0.0184
0.0121

We then design experiments to analyse the robustness of ST-Graph
about noise labels and the sensitivity to parameters of ST-Graph.

Performance in Percentage

6.5.1 Noise Labels. We evaluate how noisy data affect the proposed
model in this experiment. This is worth concerning for samples
running in a sandbox may not produce truly malicious behaviour
in a short period of time, while such behaviours are still labelled as
malicious in our dataset as long as they are generated by malware.
To explore the impact of this problem, we randomly select a portion
of benign hosts and mark them as malicious ones and investigate
whether this changes the decision of the model.

ETA:Precision
ETA:FPR
FS-Net:Precision
FS-Net:FPR
ST-Graph:Precision
ST-Graph:FPR

80
60
40
20
0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Noise Label Ratio

0.4

0.5

Figure 8: Detection performance with noise labels.
In the experiment, the ratio of benign to malicious hosts is 10:1.
Figure 8 shows the relationship between the proportion of benign
hosts mislabeled as malicious ones and the detection effectiveness.
The solid line represents the precision of the detection, while the
dotted line is the FPR. From the results, we observe that ST-Graph
and EAT show better robustness than FS-Net. More specifically,
with 15% mislabelling, ST-Graph still achieves 97% precision and
lower than 1% FPR. We observe that labelling benign hosts as malicious does not change the detection rate of truly malicious traffic.
Even if the samples do not generate malicious traffic when running
in the sandbox and are consequently mislabeled, the impact on the
model prediction is not serious by only introducing a small number
of false positives.
6.5.2 Parameter Sensitivity. We evaluate ST-Graph under different
parameter settings. Specifically, we keep all parameters at their
default values and adjust the values of three parameters Dh (i.e.,
dimension of host representation), P L (i.e., length of random walk)
and P N (i.e., times of random walk starting from each edge) in turn,
respectively. The experimental results are shown in Figure 12 in
Appendix D. The results show that changing the parameters within
a certain range does not have a significant impact on the detection

504

ST-Graph
86.0
64.0
80.0
68.0

REAL-WORLD EVALUATION

To assess the performance of ST-Graph more comprehensively,
we deploy it in two real-world scenarios, i.e., a campus and an
enterprise gateway, for almost a year-long (from April 2021 to
April 2022) operation and evaluation. These two network scenarios
both have thousands of active users inside. Due to the significant
number of users, the network throughput is large enough to prove
the efficiency of ST-Graph, reaching the traffic bandwidth of 3.6
Gbps on the campus and 1.7 Gbps in the enterprise. Due to its best
performance, we deploy the model trained in §6.3.1 in this realworld evaluation and compare its performance to existing detection
systems (ETA [2] and FS-Net [37]).

7.1

100

FS-Net
4.0
2.0
0.5
0.5

performance of the model. The system is able to consistently maintain a high detection accuracy and a low false alarm rate. For the
parameters P N , the detection performance tends to get better and
then worse as the number of random walk paths per edge increases
and the number of contexts per edge increases.

7

Robustness of ST-Graph

ETA
8.0
6.0
1.0
0.8

Real-word Result

Manual Analysis of Precision. To evaluate the precision of alarms,
we operate a manual analysis. It is impossible to manually analyse
all alarms, with nearly tens of thousands of alerts per day from
these 3 models. As such, we randomly select 50 alarms for each
model and analyse them manually by an expert researcher, with the
help of information from threat intelligence [56]. First, we judge an
alert to be correct when an identifier (domain or IP address) of the
destination server is flagged malicious by threat intelligence. Then,
for alarms which threat intelligence cannot cover, we manually
visit this destination server and judge with response contents. If the
response content compared to the contextual traffic information
is abnormal, e.g., response is a phishing website, we consider this
alarm is correct. To notice, if there is no correct alarm in these
50 samples, we resample 50 alarms from unsampled data space
until we find at least one correct alarm, and the precision rate is
calculated on all sampled alarms. Due to the random nature of
sampling, we believe that our results on the sampled dataset can
be representative of the global results.
Results of Campus. To illustrate the variation in detection performance over time, we choose results for the start date and end
date to analyse and compare, which are shown in Table 4. At the
start (April 2021), ST-Graph had the lowest average daily alarm
rate of 0.237% compared to the other two detection systems (3.034%
for ETA and 3.665% for FS-Net). From the precision of alarms by
manual analysis on 50 random sampled alarms in Table 4, we find
that the precision of ST-Graph(86%) significantly surpasses the
other two detection systems. As a result, ST-Graph is accurate and
meanwhile with a low false positive, which can significantly reduce
the cost of manual auditing. In addition, ST-Graph even can detect
a large number of false negatives that cannot be detected by other

Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Attack Phase

lupic.cdn.b**bos.com

1000
750
500

ssum-sec.ca**ia.com
image6.p**ic.com

0

cms.qu**ve.com

2500

5000 7500
Time/s

10000

(a) Average length per stream

odr.mo**1.com
ag.in**id.com

100
0

50
Index

100

(b) Time interval between streams

Figure 10: Statistical information on mining traffic.

(b) Host’ access sequence

Figure 9: Activities of Ewind.
two detection models. In order to evaluate the ageing issue over
time, we compare the results of these 3 models after nearly one
year (February 2022). Although there is a slight degradation in the
performance of ST-Graph over time, it is still far superior to the
other two models.
Results of Enterprise. As the training set for the detection model
comes from the campus, the distribution is different from that of
the enterprise network. Affected by the inconsistent distribution of
training set, the average daily alarm rate for all models is higher
than the results on campus. However, ST-Graph still has the lowest
alarm rate at 0.249%, compared to 22.313% for ETA and 26.482% for
FS-Net. Similar to the results of campus, ST-Graph achieves the
highest precision and its performance is less affected by the time
ageing issue.
It’s worth noting that our detection is efficient in both scenarios.
In enterprise, ST-Graph only costs 160 seconds for 5-minute traffic
with 1.7 Gbps bandwidth. Even in the more complex network of
campus, ST-Graph still cost less time, with 200 seconds for 5-minute
traffic with 3.6 Gbps bandwidth. Overall, our model is effective and
efficient in detecting malware-infected hosts, subject only to slight
time ageing issues.

7.2

150

250

pixel.ru**ct.com

(a) Ewind examples

Time interval/s

Length/byte

Control Phase
s0.2**n.net

200

Average send length
Average receive length

1250

www.s**ta.com

Case Studies

As mentioned before, ST-Graph could detect false negatives from
other detection models, i.e., malicious behaviours that are not detected by other models. To understand the differences in performance of different detection models for these “unknown” malware,
we analyse two representative cases: EWind and Miner.
EWind. As shown in Figure 9a, Ewind is a sophisticated, longstanding class of adware [62], profiting through displaying advertisements on the victim’s device. More seriously, Ewind also includes functionality such as collecting device data and forwarding
SMS messages to attackers, which poses a serious security risk.
From the results of enterprise, we identify a host infected with
malware belonging to a variant of the Ewind [70] family, without
being detected by the other two detection models. As we cannot
access the source code of Ewind, we only analyse the traffic behaviour of these infected hosts. By extracting the connection list of
this infected host, we depict the infection procedure of Ewind in
Figure 9b. First, it visited a free software download site, which is
peculated be the attack phase. Afterwards, we observe a series of
access requests to multiple websites at very short intervals (almost
simultaneously). By manually checking these websites, we find

505

that most of these websites are advertising websites (blue circles),
while two websites are benign websites with promotional content
(white circles). Therefore, we think that the connection sequence
is the root cause for the detection of ST-Graph, which reflects
the whole procedure of this malware. Apart from the anomalous
observation of the connection relationship, this malware didn’t exhibit any other malicious features. Specifically, Ewind works on the
Android platform that uses a system interface to encrypt traffic [4].
Therefore, the encryption-related information in TLS is not different from benign applications, which leads to the failure of ETA, the
TLS-information-based detection system. Besides, in the control
phases, Ewind has no subsequent interaction after TLS handshake.
As such, FS-Net, based on packet-based side-channel information,
has no capability to detect this malware.
Miner. Malicious coin miners are an emerging attack since 2018,
whose activity is similar to ransomware [43]. By unauthorized
use of victim’s device for cryptomining, it can consume valuable
computing resources, which poses new threats to the Internet.
From the results of campus, we detect a host infected by a malicious miner. Without SNI or any other domain information, this
host only connects one target server only with IP address while
with hundreds of connections. Based on the response by manually
connecting to this IP address, we verify that this IP address hosts
an online mining pool. By analysis of the communication traffic
between this host and server, we find highly regular activities, especially side-channel temporal features. As shown in Figure 10, the
average length of streams between this host and server and the time
interval between each connection are regular and within a fixed
range. From this regular behaviour, we speculate that this infected
host sends “heartbeat” messages to indicate its alive status and
mining results to mining pool (control server) regularly. Although
the connection sequence is not very informative, ST-Graph is still
able to detect this kind of malware based on this regular activity.
From the analysis of these “unknown” malware, we have further
proven the effectiveness of ST-Graph.

8

DISCUSSION

In this section, we discuss the defence ability of ST-Graph against
existing attacks and the limitations of ST-Graph.

8.1

Defence Ability against Attacks

Several existing works have proposed methodologies to mislead
traffic detection systems, including disguising attacks and obfuscation attacks.1 We have already discussed in §6.4 that the extracted
1 In this work, we don’t compare attacks target to learning-based models [5, 64].

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Fu and Liu, et al.

spatio-temporal features in our approach play a decisive role in enhancing the model’s generalizability. On this basis, we next discuss
the impact of each attack on ST-Graph.
Disguising Attack. Goal of this attack is to disguise malicious traffic as benign applications. Frolov et al. proposed a tool to modify
TLS information to mimic other popular TLS implementations by
changing the fingerprints extracted from ClientHello and ServerHello [17]. However, this attack only modifies the TLS-stream information without changing the network connection relationships.
Therefore, ST-Graph can still detect infected hosts even with this
kind of attack.
Obfuscation Attack. This attack is more discreet, which tends to
confuse side-channel information-based detection systems. Wang
et al. [65] change the timestamp, direction and packet size of packets to confuse detection based on packet length and time interval.
Similarly, even changing the side-channel information, ST-Graph
retains the connection relationships, which allows it to still effectively detect. Since obfuscation attacks will cause a highly dispersed
distribution of packet lengths and time intervals, which is reflected
in higher entropy. As such, it’s simple to defend this attack, i.e.,
calculating the entropy of side-channel information.
To conclude, existing attacks have a limited impact on ST-Graph.

8.2

Limitations

Scale of network. We acknowledge that the scale of internal network has an impact on ST-Graph. The increase of internal hosts
will cause more nodes and edges in our graph structure. A larger
number of edges in the graph brings a heavier time cost for the detection, and therefore an infinite number of hosts cannot be handled
at the gateway. However, our real-world evaluation is conducted
on two large representative networks, with bandwidth up to 3.6
Gbps and covering over 10,000 hosts. This huge-scale experiment
could prove the efficiency of ST-Graph in reality.
In future work, we would explore more efficient traffic feature
representation methods and ease the practical deployment limitations by deploying clusters or separate inspection by network
segment for large enterprise network environments with high bandwidth. In addition, the features we used rely on the TLS protocol.
Although the model can still achieve 99.85% precision (Table 3) after
removing protocol-related features, it is still necessary to explore
the detection methods for generic encrypted traffic in the future.

9

RELATED WORK

Traditional network-based malware detection methods such as
DPI [47, 54] and HTTP-based methods [41, 45], perform keyword
matching on the plain-text payload of each packet. However, traffic
encryption makes these methods no longer effective. Besides, limited available information under encryption makes network-based
detection more challenging. We divide existing encrypted-networkbased detection methods into single-stream-based detection and
context-based detection.
Single-stream-based detection. Single-stream-based detection
strives to dig any available plain-text information for detection in
encrypted traffic. Two main features are utilized by single-streambased detection: features of TLS stream and features of side-channel.

506

• Features of TLS streams utilize the information in the TLS Handshake process, which is the only plain-text process of TLS interactions. Anderson et al. extract information as representative features
for detection, including TLS version, the cipher suites provided by
the client, the TLS extensions used, the server certificate, and the
result of negotiation between the two parties [2, 3]. Althouse et al.
first stitched information from TLS handshake to compute JA3/JA3S
fingerprints and detect malware by matching the client/server fingerprints [1]. However, methods with only these features will be
ineffective under TLS 1.3, with fewer plain-text available information for detection.
• Features of side-channel exploits information, such as packet
length, packet interval time and packet length frequency. For example, several works utilized packet length statistics information to
detect malware at the TCP/IP layer [19, 60, 67]. Furthermore, Liao
et al. utilized deep learning techniques to improve the performance
of the detection models based on packet length sequences.
Above methods usually consider a single feature, which is not
robust and can be easily escaped by using evasion strategies.
Context-based detection. Encryption results in limited available
plain-text information for TCP connections, context-based detection methods try to use information from multiple protocols [3, 20]
or multi-stream connections to extend the perspective. In fact, information from DNS could help to construct the relation graph of
multiple malware servers [35, 44, 50]. To notice, Oprea et al. detect
malware and APT infections within an organization [46], while
their method only works on available seeds of known malware.
Note that relations between multiple malware and hosts may
change over time, so capturing the dynamic changes is essential in
the detection. However, previous graph-based methods are mainly
based on static relationship graphs and usually ignore the temporal
characteristics, which limits the effectiveness of detection with less
information. In our work, we propose ST-Graphto detect malicious
traffics based on a spatial-temporal graph.

10

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose ST-Graph, an encrypted malicious traffic
detection system equipped with a well-designed, novel graph representation learning algorithm. By exploring additional, informative
network attributes and effectively integrating multiple features, STGraph achieves high detection accuracy with a significantly lower
false alarm rate and tolerable computational complexity. Experimental results on both self-collected dataset and benchmark dataset
demonstrate the effectiveness and the efficiency of ST-Graph, compared with state-of-the-art malware traffic detection systems. In
addition, ST-Graph shows good performance in both generalization
and robustness perspectives and reveals outstanding efficiency by
real-world deployment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments on this work. This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U1836213, U19B2034
and 62132011), the Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd under Grant No.
TC20200917004.
Jia Zhang is the corresponding author (zhangjia@cernet.edu.cn).

Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

REFERENCES
[1] John Althouse. 2019. TLS Fingerprinting with JA3 and JA3S. https://engineering.
salesforce.com/tls-fingerprinting-with-ja3-and-ja3s-247362855967.
[2] Blake Anderson and David McGrew. 2016. Identifying Encrypted Malware Traffic
with Contextual Flow Data. In AISec@CCS. 35–46.
[3] Blake Anderson and David McGrew. 2017. Machine Learning for Encrypted
Malware Traffic Classification: Accounting for Noisy Labels and Non-Stationarity.
In SIGKDD. 1723–1732.
[4] AndroidDev. 2021. Developer Guides-SSLSocket. https://developer.android.com/
reference/javax/net/ssl/SSLSocket Accessed January 22, 2022.
[5] Aleksandar Bojchevski and Stephan Günnemann. 2019. Adversarial Attacks on
Node Embeddings via Graph Poisoning. In ICML, Vol. 97. PMLR, 695–704.
[6] Zimo Chai, Amirhossein Ghafari, and Amir Houmansadr. 2019. On the Importance of Encrypted-SNI (ESNI) to Censorship Circumvention. In FOCI@USENIX
Security Symposium. USENIX Association.
[7] Catalin Cimpanu. 2016. NOPEN Is the Equation Group’s Backdoor for Unix
Systems. https://news.softpedia.com/news/nopen-is-the-equation-group-sbackdoor-for-unix-systems-508257.shtml Accessed March 10, 2022.
[8] Cisco. 2018.
Cisco Advanced Malware Protection Solution Overview.
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/enterprise-networks/
advanced-malware-protection/solution-overview-c22-734228.html.
[9] Cloudflare. 2021. Cloudflare Gateway. https://www.cloudflare.com/products/
zero-trust/gateway/ Accessed March 10, 2022.
[10] Thomas H Cormen, Charles E Leiserson, Ronald L Rivest, and Clifford Stein. 2022.
Introduction to Algorithms. MIT press.
[11] Neustar International Security Council. 2020. NISC Survey Results. https://www.
nisc.neustar/nisc-survey-results/ Accessed March 20, 2022.
[12] Antonio Criminisi, Jamie Shotton, Ender Konukoglu, et al. 2012. Decision forests:
A unified framework for classification, regression, density estimation, manifold
learning and semi-supervised learning. Foundations and trends® in computer
graphics and vision 7, 2–3 (2012), 81–227.
[13] Azure documentation. 2022. Microsoft Antimalware for Azure Cloud Services
and Virtual Machines. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/defender-foriot/organizations/how-to-control-what-traffic-is-monitored.
[14] David Fifield. 2018. Anticipating a world of encrypted SNI: risks, opportunities,
how to win big. https://www.bamsoftware.com/sec/esni.html.
[15] FireEye. 2020. Definition of Malware Family. https://vision.fireeye.com/editions/
06/06-m-trends-fireeye-mandiant.html.
[16] Francois Fouss, Alain Pirotte, Jean-Michel Renders, et al. 2007. Random-Walk
Computation of Similarities between Nodes of a Graph with Application to
Collaborative Recommendation. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 19, 3 (2007), 355–
369.
[17] Sergey Frolov and Eric Wustrow. 2019. The Use of TLS in Censorship Circumvention. In NDSS. The Internet Society.
[18] Sean Gallagher. 2021. Nearly half of malware now use TLS to conceal communications. https://news.sophos.com/en-us/2021/04/21/nearly-half-of-malwarenow-use-tls-to-conceal-communications/ Accessed November 20, 2021.
[19] Ali Gezer, Gary Warner, Clifford Wilson, et al. 2019. A Flow-Based Approach
For Trickbot Banking Trojan Detection. Comput. Secur. 84 (2019), 179–192.
[20] Paul Giura and Wei Wang. 2012. A Context-Based Detection Framework for
Advanced Persistent Threats. In CyberSecurity. IEEE Computer Society, 69–74.
[21] Palash Goyal and Emilio Ferrara. 2018. Graph embedding techniques, applications,
and performance: A survey. Knowl. Based Syst. 151 (2018), 78–94.
[22] Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. 2016. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks. In SIGKDD. ACM, 855–864.
[23] Aric Hagberg and Drew Conway. 2020. NetworkX: Network Analysis with
Python. URL: https://networkx.github.io (2020).
[24] William L Hamilton. 2020. Graph representation learning. Synthesis Lectures on
Artifical Intelligence and Machine Learning 14, 3 (2020), 1–159.
[25] William L Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Inductive Representation
Learning on Large Graphs. In NeurIPS. 1025–1035.
[26] Cobaltstrike Helpsystem. 2021. Beacon Covert C2 Payload. https://www.
cobaltstrike.com/help-beacon Accessed November 20, 2021.
[27] Ralph Holz, Jens Hiller, Johanna Amann, et al. 2020. Tracking the deployment of
TLS 1.3 on the Web: A story of experimentation and centralization. SIGCOMM
50, 3 (2020), 3–15.
[28] Dan Jiang and Kazumasa Omote. 2015. An Approach to Detect Remote Access
Trojan in the Early Stage of Communication. In AINA. IEEE Computer Society,
706–713.
[29] İlker Kara and Murat Aydos. 2019. The ghost in the system: technical analysis of
remote access trojan. International Journal on Information Technologies & Security
11, 1 (2019), 73–84.
[30] Catherine Knowles. 2021. End of 2021 marks drop in cyber attacks, and increase
in remote access malware. https://securitybrief.asia/story/end-of-2021-marksdrop-in-cyber-attacks-and-increase-in-remote-access-malware.
[31] Alexander Küchler, Alessandro Mantovani, Yufei Han, Leyla Bilge, and Davide
Balzarotti. 2021. Does Every Second Count? Time-based Evolution of Malware

507

Behavior in Sandboxes.. In NDSS.
[32] Ulf Lamping and Ed Warnicke. 2004. Wireshark user’s guide. Interface 4, 6 (2004),
1.
[33] Hyunwoo Lee, Doowon Kim, and Yonghwi Kwon. 2021. TLS 1.3 in Practice: How
TLS 1.3 Contributes to the Internet. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021.
70–79.
[34] Jehyun Lee and Heejo Lee. 2014. GMAD: Graph-based Malware Activity Detection by DNS traffic analysis. Computer Communications 49 (2014), 33–47.
[35] Kai Lei, Qiuai Fu, Jiake Ni, et al. 2019. Detecting malicious domains with behavioral modeling and graph embedding. In ICDCS. IEEE, 601–611.
[36] Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, et al. 2015. Learning entity and relation
embeddings for knowledge graph completion. In AAAI.
[37] Chang Liu, Longtao He, Gang Xiong, et al. 2019. Fs-net: A flow sequence network
for encrypted traffic classification. In INFOCOM. IEEE, 1171–1179.
[38] Dan Mcwhrter. 2014. APT1: Exposing One of China’s Cyber Espionage
Units. https://www.mandiant.com/resources/apt1-exposing-one-of-chinascyber-espionage-units.
[39] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781
(2013).
[40] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. 2013.
Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality.
Advances in neural information processing systems 26 (2013).
[41] Mamoru Mimura, Yuhei Otsubo, Hidehiko Tanaka, and Hidema Tanaka. 2017. A
practical experiment of the HTTP-based RAT detection method in proxy server
logs. In AsiaJCIS. IEEE, 31–37.
[42] Yisroel Mirsky, Tomer Doitshman, Yuval Elovici, and Asaf Shabtai. 2018. Kitsune:
an ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.09089 (2018).
[43] Michael Nadeau. 2021. Cryptojacking explained: How to prevent, detect,
and recover from it. https://www.csoonline.com/article/3253572/what-iscryptojacking-how-to-prevent-detect-and-recover-from-it.html.
[44] Pejman Najafi, Andrey Sapegin, Feng Cheng, and Christoph Meinel. 2017. Guiltby-association: detecting malicious entities via graph mining. In International
Conference on Security and Privacy in Communication Systems. Springer, 88–107.
[45] Terry Nelms, Roberto Perdisci, and Mustaque Ahamad. 2013. Execscent: Mining
for new c&c domains in live networks with adaptive control protocol templates.
In USENIX Security Symposium. 589–604.
[46] Alina Oprea, Zhou Li, Ting-Fang Yen, et al. 2015. Detection of early-stage
enterprise infection by mining large-scale log data. In DSN. IEEE, 45–56.
[47] Vern Paxson. 1999. Bro: a system for detecting network intruders in real-time.
Computer networks 31, 23-24 (1999), 2435–2463.
[48] Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel,
Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss,
Vincent Dubourg, et al. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. the
Journal of machine Learning research 12 (2011), 2825–2830.
[49] Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. 2014. Deepwalk: Online learning
of social representations. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 701–710.
[50] Babak Rahbarinia, Roberto Perdisci, and Manos Antonakakis. 2015. Segugio: Efficient behavior-based tracking of malware-control domains in large ISP networks.
In DSN. IEEE, 403–414.
[51] Radim Rehuurek, Petr Sojka, et al. 2011. Gensim—statistical semantics in python.
Retrieved from genism. org (2011).
[52] Eric Rescorla. 2018. The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3.
RFC 8446. https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC8446
[53] Ronald L Rivest and Jean Vuillemin. 1976. On recognizing graph properties from
adjacency matrices. Theoretical Computer Science 3, 3 (1976), 371–384.
[54] Martin Roesch et al. 1999. Snort: Lightweight intrusion detection for networks..
In Lisa, Vol. 99. 229–238.
[55] Samuel Schüppen, Dominik Teubert, Patrick Herrmann, and Ulrike Meyer. 2018.
FANCI: Feature-based Automated NXDomain Classification and Intelligence. In
USENIX Security. 1165–1181.
[56] Gaurav Sood. 2021. virustotal: R Client for the virustotal API. R package version
0.2.2.
[57] Gianluca Stringhini, Christopher Kruegel, and Giovanni Vigna. 2013. Shady paths:
Leveraging surfing crowds to detect malicious web pages. In CCS. 133–144.
[58] Laya Taheri, Andi Fitriah Abdul Kadir, and Arash Habibi Lashkari. 2019. Extensible android malware detection and family classification using network-flows
and API-calls. In ICCST. IEEE, 1–8.
[59] Robert Tarjan. 1972. Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms. SIAM journal
on computing 1, 2 (1972), 146–160.
[60] Florian Tegeler, Xiaoming Fu, Giovanni Vigna, and Christopher Kruegel. 2012.
Botfinder: Finding bots in network traffic without deep packet inspection. In
CoNEXT. 349–360.
[61] Michael Carl Tschantz, Sadia Afroz, Vern Paxson, et al. 2016. Sok: Towards
grounding censorship circumvention in empiricism. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 914–933.

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

Fu and Liu, et al.

[62] Tobias Urban, Dennis Tatang, Thorsten Holz, and Norbert Pohlmann. 2018. Towards understanding privacy implications of adware and potentially unwanted
programs. In ESORICS. Springer, 449–469.
[63] Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro
Lio, and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.10903 (2017).
[64] Binghui Wang and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. 2019. Attacking graph-based classification via manipulating the graph structure. In CCS. 2023–2040.
[65] Junnan Wang, Liu Qixu, Wu Di, Ying Dong, and Xiang Cui. 2021. Crafting
Adversarial Example to Bypass Flow-&ML-based Botnet Detector via RL. In 24th
International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses. 193–204.
[66] Zhen Wang, Jianwen Zhang, Jianlin Feng, and Zheng Chen. 2014. Knowledge
graph embedding by translating on hyperplanes. In AAAI, Vol. 28.
[67] Nigel Williams, Sebastian Zander, and Grenville Armitage. 2006. A preliminary
performance comparison of five machine learning algorithms for practical IP
traffic flow classification. SIGCOMM 36, 5 (2006), 5–16.
[68] James Wyke. 2016. The ZeroAccess rootkit. https://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/
zeroaccess4/ Accessed March 20, 2022.
[69] Zhixing Xu, Sayak Ray, Pramod Subramanyan, and Sharad Malik. 2017. Malware detection using machine learning based analysis of virtual memory access
patterns. In DATE, 2017. IEEE, 169–174.
[70] Simon Conant Yaron Samuel. 2017. Ewind – Adware in Applications’ Clothing. https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/unit42-ewind-adware-applicationsclothing/ Accessed January 22, 2022.
[71] Yanfang Ye, Tao Li, Donald A. Adjeroh, and S. Sitharama Iyengar. 2017. A Survey
on Malware Detection Using Data Mining Techniques. ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 3
(2017), 41:1–41:40.
[72] Si Zhang, Hanghang Tong, Jiejun Xu, and Ross Maciejewski. 2019. Graph convolutional networks: a comprehensive review. Computational Social Networks 6, 1
(2019), 1–23.
[73] Futai Zou, Siyu Zhang, Weixiong Rao, and Ping Yi. 2015. Detecting malware
based on DNS graph mining. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks
11, 10 (2015), 102687.

C

SAMPLES FOR MANUAL ANALYSIS

Table 6 presents information on the 30 samples analysed manually.
Table 6: Families and Md5 of Malware Samples.
Family

Adware

Wacatac

Minerd

CobaltStrike
Flystudio
gamhak
krypyik

A

MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS

hoax
Rbot
avaddoncrypt
lockscreen
graftor

We compared seven common algorithms: Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machine (SVM), Naive Bayes, Artificial Neural Network
(ANN), k-nearest neighbours (k-NN), Decision Tree and Random
Forest ensemble. We used an implementation of Scikit-learn for all
algorithms except ANN, which uses Keras. All also used the default
hyperparameters. The experimental results are shown in Table 5.

csdi
NetWorm

Related md5
ab775c62c8d03b33f9d9b60e013d54f5
3eeace60ad9f357dc8b77981465381c3
3185657ca1707f2364f34fea46afc455
75e3d279cc20419f2af57975f755614c
04436941856e5a8c3296b55292c47636
fc92be6f976b598cf65a241c8520cfd6
f18ac8264e592a4949c5fe09979234be
e8766491e8c8a9fc79e86197b1a55a76
d5bea7ed4ffc27366e218a99d5709987
fe3bea4366ecc34ddbf90291762cba88
d63d7bceed0da682db6170c24663b3b0
df5ed0925bfb4e141a134bfdf4b2e0ce
d32e7100988f924a0070418051de053f
d31ca0d08a4bc600c51ecd6e891551eb
331dfc88f7d056b2667875199eb2d504
332265a774e2ad113cbf4d05189d2ee0
363eddcc28509a08c039833a9b6e2a04
79a4c854d00928024f9ce3020a041451
67b4843d49d60e16372160cc10f80cf8
c6752ffeb1ebc6bba468a71c36e69c85
01372c76417280c2c7a524edd268d5a0
ceb684549a97dae140df9e4cef10c308
464852e25233ece2e3ed769e727f3ef3
e90fb38bd6c50f517d6d1fc00b445f91
33874816e3eb31b874e1301fcf73bb72
4cf1bf8ebf10d596f7ecbb1c24258eef
71fb3ed4bf17e328c045a062fbf0895e
19435957f4a3d1380bfcd4c087e40a93
cc07157af9a75f492748baed0d22a9fe
97acceb1b93ace58c250901ebd55aadd

Table 5: Classification Result of 7 algorithms
Logistic Regression
SVM
Naive Bayes
ANN
k-NN
Decision Tree
Random Forest

B

Precision(%)
97.8118
97.4046
92.7736
95.9901
99.8524
99.3426
99.9805

Recall(%)
98.0980
93.3431
98.6101
98.9759
98.9759
99.4879
99.9221

D

FPR(%)
0.2417
0.2740
0.8461
0.1653
0.0161
0.0725
0.0045

EVALUATION RESULTS

Figure 11 visualizes the results of embedding the traffic graphs into
six of these families, Figure 12 shows the experiment results of
parameter sensitivity, and Figure 13 shows malware family classification results of ETA and FS-Net in EncMal2021.
Generickdz
Minerd
RelevantKnowledge
Sality
Brocoiner
Installcore

PERFORMANCE METRICS

We define True Positive (TP) as malicious connections predicted as
malicious and False Positive (FP) as benign connections predicted
as malicious. True Negative (TN) represents benign connections
classified correctly and False Negative (FN) represents malicious
connections classified incorrectly. We use the following metrics to
evaluate the detection performance: (i) precision, (ii) recall and (iii)
false-positive rates (FPR).
TP
TP + FP
TP
Recall = T P R =
TP + FN
FP
FPR =
FP +TN
P r ecision =

Figure 11: Visualization of the 6 malware families.

508

Encrypted Malware Traffic Detection
via Graph-based Network Analysis

RAID 2022, October 26–28, 2022, Limassol, Cyprus

98.5

0.01

98.0

100

200
300
Dimensionality Dh

0.00

98.5
98.0

(a) Dimensionality of host vectors D h

Precision 0.03
Recall
FPR
0.02

99.0

0.01
50

100
Path Length Pl

150

0.00

(b) Random walk path length P L

0.05

100.0

0.04
99.5

Precision 0.03
Recall
FPR
0.02

FPR

99.0

0.04
99.5

FPR

Precision & Recall

Precision 0.03
Recall
FPR
0.02

FPR

Precision & Recall

0.04
99.5

0.05

100.0

Precision & Recall

0.05

100.0

99.0
98.5
98.0

0.01
5.0

7.5
10.0
Path Num Pn

12.5

(c) Random walk path nums per edge P N

Figure 12: Parameter sensitivity results.

(a) Results of ETA.

(b) Results of FS-Net.

Figure 13: Malware family classification result of ETA and FS-Net.

E

THE STREAM ATTRIBUTES

1

Table 7 shows the single-stream attributes used in our model (See
§5) and their descriptions.
Table 7: The Stream Attributes.
Attribute Type
Domain features

TLS handshake features

Statistical features

Attribute
Domain Length
Domain Level
Punctuation/Upperletter/
Lowerletter/Digit Ratio
Vowel/Consonant Ratio
Client/Server TLS version
Number of Client Ciphersuites
Client Ciphersuite x
Server Chosen Ciphersuite
Client/Server Compression Method
Number of Client Extensions
Number of Signature Algorithms
Signature Algorithm x
Number of ec Point Formats
Number of Elliptic Curve
TLS Packet Length x
TLS Time Interval x
Number of Packets
Max/Min/Average Packet Length

Description
Total number of characters in the domain.
Level of domain. Sub, second-level or top-level.
The proportion of different character types to all characters.
The proportion of vowel/consonant letters to all letters.
The TLS version selected by the client and server.
The number of the offered cipher suites by the client.
The x th in the list of cipher suites provided (x = 1, ..., 10).
The cipher suite chosen by the server during the connection.
2 method selected by the client and server.
The compression
The number of the client extensions.
The number of the signature algorithms offered by client.
The x th in the list of signature algorithms provided (x = 1, ..., 4).
The number of point formats offered by the client.
The number of elliptic curves offered by the client.
Length of the x th packet in the stream (x = 1, ..., 25).
The x th time interval in the stream (x = 1, ..., 25).
The number of the total packets in the stream.
The max/min/average length of total packets in the stream.

509

0.00