Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

A framework for threat intelligence extraction and fusionR,RR
Yongyan Guo, Zhengyu Liu, Cheng Huang∗, Nannan Wang, Hai Min, Wenbo Guo, Jiayong Liu
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 24 January 2022
Revised 19 June 2023
Accepted 26 June 2023
Available online 28 June 2023
Keywords:
Threat intelligence
Knowledge graph
Relation extraction
Joint model
Knowledge fusion

a b s t r a c t
Cyber-attacks, with various emerging attack techniques, are becoming increasingly sophisticated and difﬁcult to deal with, posing great threats to companies and every individual. Therefore, analyzing attack
incidents and tracing the attack groups behind them becomes extremely important. Threat intelligence
provides a new technical solution for attack traceability by constructing Cybersecurity Knowledge Graph
(CKG). In this paper, we propose a framework for threat intelligence extraction and fusion, which is
able to extract, correlate and unify cybersecurity entity-relation triples from structured and unstructured
data. However, the existing entity and relation extraction for cybersecurity concepts uses the traditional
pipeline model that suffers from error propagation and ignores the connection between the two subtasks.
To solve the above problem, we propose a joint entity and relation extraction model for cybersecurity
concepts. We model the joint extraction problem as a multiple sequence labeling problem, generating
separate label sequences for different relations, which contain information about the involved entities
and the subject and object of that relation. Experimental results on Open Source Intelligence (OSINT)
data show that the F1 value of the joint model is 81.37%, which is better than the previous pipeline
model. For the knowledge fusion, we propose an improved Levenshtein distance to correlate the same
entities extracted from different data sources to construct a preliminary CKG, which is demonstrated in
the Experiments section.
© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the damage and impact caused by malicious behaviors in cyberspace such as hacker attacks, frauds, and rumors have
become more serious. Therefore, how to effectively and accurately
detect cyber attacks as early as possible, analyze attack incidents,
and trace the source of attackers and groups has become a severe
problem for enterprises and countries.
The concept of Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) was developed
supplying new theoretic support for cyber-attack source tracing,
making it possible to trace the source of a wide range of attacks.
Therefore, many researchers extract and analyze different threat
intelligence to generate the Cybersecurity Knowledge Graph (CKG).
The CKG has the characteristic of strong timeliness and high accuracy, which can timely and easily detect, respond and defend
against speciﬁc targets, providing a new measure for attack source
R
This paper was presented in part at the Proceeding of the 23rd International Conference on Information and Communications Security (ICICS 2021) (Guo
et al.(2021)).
RR
This work was supported in part by National Key Research and Development
Program of China (No. 2021YFB310 050 0), Sichuan Science and Technology Program
(No. 2023YFG0162), and National Natural Science Foundation of China (61902265).
∗
Corresponding author.
E-mail address: codesec@scu.edu.cn (C. Huang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103371
0167-4048/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

tracking, and can even effectively deal with sophisticated cyberattacks (e.g., zero-day attacks, advanced persistent threat).
The key step in constructing CKG is cyber threat intelligence
extraction, which involves subtasks such as entity recognition, relation extraction, and event extraction. Currently, many research
groups have conducted research on the automated construction
and analysis of CKG (Gao et al., 2021; Husari et al., 2017; Jia et al.,
2018; Milajerdi et al., 2019; Piplai et al., 2020a; 2020b; Zhao et al.,
2020b). In terms of CTI information extraction, previous studies are
dedicated to extracting cybersecurity concepts (Liao et al., 2016;
Mittal et al., 2016; Zhu and Dumitras, 2018) and entities (Ghazi
et al., 2018; Husari et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2020a) from unstructured data. This extraction leads to a rich repository of cybersecurity entity-relation triples that precisely delineate the relations
within the cybersecurity realm. For instance, consider the triple
(“sqlite3 in versionc 3.26.0”, “hasVulnerability”, “CVE-2019-5018”).
Here, “sqlite3 in version 3.26.0” is the subject entity of type “software”, “hasVulnerability” is the relation, and “CVE-2019-5018” is
the object entity of type “vulnerability”. This triple clearly indicates
that the software “sqlite3” in version 3.26.0 has a speciﬁc vulnerability referenced as “CVE-2019-5018”.
The construction of CKG is inseparable from a large number of
cybersecurity entity-relation triples from different sources. Threat
intelligence comes from structured and unstructured data such as

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

audit logs, network traﬃc, security alerts, vulnerability databases,
security bulletins, hacker forums, and social media. These data
have the characteristics of multisource, heterogeneous, polysemy,
and highly dependent on domain knowledge. Therefore it is diﬃcult to effectively integrate data from different sources. More importantly, extracting cybersecurity entity-relation triples from unstructured data is a great challenge, and is the key step to constructing CKG. Existing research on cybersecurity entity and relation extraction (Jones et al., 2015; Pingle et al., 2019) uses the traditional pipeline model, named entity recognition ﬁrst and then relation extraction, which leads to error propagation and losses sight
of the relevance between entity recognition and relation extraction.
To solve the above problem, we propose a framework for threat
intelligence extraction and fusion which can extract and correlate
cybersecurity entity-relation triples from structured and unstructured data. For unstructured data, we propose a joint entity and relation extraction model for cybersecurity concepts, which extracts
both cybersecurity entities and relations and generates cybersecurity triples. Speciﬁcally, we use a tagging scheme to convert the
joint extraction problem into a multiple sequence labeling problem by generating separate label sequences for different relations
containing information about the related entities and the subject
and object of that relation. The joint extraction model applies the
pre-trained model, BERT, to generate word vectors. After extracting semantic features by BiGRU, the model assigns higher weights
to relation-related words in the sentences by an attention mechanism. Finally, BiGRU combined with CRF is used to decode and
construct cybersecurity triples. Then, we fuse the entities extracted
from different data sources by an improved Levenstein distance to
form a preliminary CKG.
In summary, the main contribution of this paper are as follows:

ple sources, links real-world entities or concepts, and provides
search services through semantic retrieval. In the ﬁeld of cybersecurity, correlating and fusing threat intelligence data from different
sources to generate the CKG can provide new technical means for
situational awareness and attack traceability.
In the area of automated construction and analysis of CKG, researchers have also proposed several ideas and approaches in recent years (Gao et al., 2021; Husari et al., 2017; Jia et al., 2018; Milajerdi et al., 2019; Piplai et al., 2020a; 2020b; Zhao et al., 2020b).
Jia et al. (2018) introduced a cybersecurity knowledge base and deduction rules based on a quintuple model. Gao et al. (2021) proposed ThreatRaptor, a system that facilitates threat hunting in
computer systems using OSINT. The system uses an unsupervised,
lightweight, and accurate NLP pipeline to extract structured threat
behaviors from unstructured OSINT text. Piplai et al. (2020b) described a system that extracts information from After Action Reports (AARs) and represents the extracted information in a CKG.
Zhao et al. (2020b) demonstrated a threat intelligence framework
(HINTI). HINTI ﬁrst recognizes IOCs and models the interdependent
relations between IOCs using heterogeneous information networks
(HINs), and then proposes a threat intelligence computing framework based on graph convolutional networks to explore complex
security knowledge. Although these approaches have made initial
attempts and achieved good results in CKG construction, further
research is needed in the key steps of knowledge graph construction.
2.2. Threat intelligence extraction
The construction of a knowledge graph can be divided into
three steps, including information extraction, knowledge fusion,
and knowledge reasoning. Among them, information extraction
plays a decisive role in the quality of the generated knowledge
graph. Information extraction for threat intelligence is divided into
several subtasks, including entity recognition (Ghazi et al., 2018;
Husari et al., 2018; Liao et al., 2016; Mittal et al., 2016; Zhao et al.,
2020a; Zhu and Dumitras, 2018), relation extraction (Jones et al.,
2015; Pingle et al., 2019) and event extraction (Satyapanich et al.,
2020).
In terms of cybersecurity entity and concept recognition,
Mittal et al. (2016) proposed a framework for extracting threat intelligence from Twitter, CyberTwitter, which automates the extraction of security vulnerability concepts. Liao et al. (2016) introduced
iACE for automatically extracting IOCs and their context in the
sentences of technical articles. Zhu and Dumitras (2018) designed
Chainsmith, an IOC extraction system that collects IOCs from security articles and classiﬁes them according to the stages of the Kill
Chain. Ghazi et al. (2018) used natural language processing techniques to extract threat sources from unstructured web threat information sources and provided comprehensive threat reports in
the STIX (2017) standard, which is used for the accurate and eﬃcient exchange of cyber threat intelligence.
Due to the lack of a well-labeled corpus for training, relatively few studies have been conducted on cybersecurity relation
extraction and event extraction compared to entity recognition.
Pingle et al. (2019) proposed RelExt, a deep learning-based cybersecurity relation extraction method for constructing CKGs. The
model uses a pipeline approach, ﬁrst identifying entities in the text
by an entity recognizer then classifying the relations by a deep
learning model. Jones et al. (2015) implemented a semi-supervised
cybersecurity relation extraction method based on a bootstrapping
algorithm to extract relations. Satyapanich et al. (2020) proposed
CASIE, a security event extraction system that uses deep neural
networks and can incorporate rich linguistic features and word
embeddings for extracting security events related to cyber-attacks
and vulnerabilities.

• We propose a framework for threat intelligence extraction and
fusion that can extract and fuse cybersecurity entity-relation
triples from large-scale structured and unstructured data. These
triples can be used to construct the CKG.
• We present a joint entity and relation extraction model for cybersecurity concepts. The model employs deep learning techniques to extract entities and relations in sentences simultaneously, avoiding the error propagation of traditional pipeline
models. The experimental results show that the joint model
outperforms the traditional pipeline model with an F1 value of
81.37%.
• We design a lightweight cybersecurity entity fusion method
that is optimized for the features of the cybersecurity corpus
by fusing entities from different sources based on an improved
Levenshtein distance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related work, and Section 3 presents our framework for
threat intelligence extraction and fusion. Section 4 provides the experiments and analysis related to this work. Section 5 summarizes
the conclusion and proposes future works.
2. Related work
In this section, we ﬁrst review the methods for automated construction and analysis of CKG. Secondly, since the pivotal step of
CKG construction is threat intelligence extraction, we review the
work related to CTI extraction including entity recognition, relation extraction, and event extraction subtasks. Finally, we present
the related research on relation extraction and knowledge fusion.
2.1. Cybersecurity knowledge graph
The Knowledge Graph (KG) was originally proposed by Google.
It is a knowledge base that integrates information from multi2

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

2.3. Relation extraction

gies such as CVE, CCE, CVSS, CAPEC, CYBOX, KillChain, and
STUCCO.
Existing entity alignment studies fall into two main categories, including similarity-based and embedding-based approaches. Similarity-based approaches use information such as
entity names, attributes, and relations to compute the similarity of entity pairs. Lacoste-Julien et al. (2013) proposed a simple greedy matching algorithm that uses the structural information of the knowledge graph and the similarity metric between
entity attributes to align entities on a large-scale knowledge base.
Azevedo et al. (2019) proposed a method to connect different IoCs
based on two similarity measures (the n-level correlation) in order to generate threat intelligence of quality in the form of enriched IoCs. The embedding-based approach maps the triples in
the knowledge graph to the same vector space and aligns entities that are similar to each other by computing the distance
between entity vectors. Chen et al. (2016) improved the TransE
(Bordes et al., 2013) model by proposing MTransE, which encodes
entities and relations for each language in a separate embedding
space to achieve cross-language entity alignment. Since knowledge
graphs are in graph structure, some studies also use graph neural networks to embed the information of knowledge graphs, for
example, Liu et al. (2020) improved the GNN-based entity alignment method by using an attributed value encoder and partition
the KG into subgraphs to model various types of attribute triples.
Nie et al. (2021) proposed jointly utilizing the global KG structure
and entity-speciﬁc relational triples to achieve entity alignment.
In the construction of CKG, a lot of research has been conducted on the extraction of cybersecurity entities and concepts,
while research on cybersecurity relation extraction is still in its infancy. Existing approaches use traditional pipeline methods, which
leads to error propagation and loses sight of the relevance between entity recognition and relation extraction. Different from
these above works, this paper proposes a joint entity and relation
extraction model for cybersecurity concepts, which extracts entities and relations simultaneously, effectively avoiding the shortcomings of the traditional pipeline model. In addition, our paper
further fuses threat intelligence from different sources through a
lightweight knowledge fusion algorithm.

As a subtask of information extraction, relation extraction has
a long research history. The main approaches to relation extraction can be broadly divided into three categories, including early
rule-based approaches (Iria, 2005; McDonald et al., 2005); traditional machine learning-based approaches (Culotta and Sorensen,
20 04; Jiang and Zhai, 20 07); and deep learning-based approaches
(Bekoulis et al., 2018; Miwa and Bansal, 2016; Wei et al., 2020;
Zeng et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2017). In recent years, the latest research results in the ﬁeld of relation extraction have focused on
deep learning models (Dai et al., 2019; Fu et al., 2019; Sun et al.,
2018; Yuan et al., 2020). The advantage of deep learning methods is that they do not require manual extraction of features nor a
large amount of domain knowledge.
Currently, there are two main approaches to relation extraction
based on deep learning: the pipeline approach and the joint approach. The pipeline approach performs relation classiﬁcation after extracting all the entities. Zeng et al. (2014) ﬁrst applied CNN
to relation extraction to automatically extract lexical and sentencelevel features. Wei et al. (2020) proposed a novel cascaded binary
annotation framework (CASREL) that models relations as functions
that map subjects to objects in a sentence, which naturally handles
the overlapping triple problems. Although these methods achieve
promising results, the pipeline architectures suffer from the problem of error propagation. In addition, neglecting the relationship
between the two tasks of entity recognition and relation extraction for training can also affect the effectiveness of relation extraction. Therefore, to construct the bridge between the two subtasks, building a joint model that extracts entities together with
relations simultaneously has attracted much attention. Miwa and
Bansal (2016) proposed a joint relation extraction model based on
shared parameters, which captures both word sequences and dependency tree substructure information for end-to-end relation extraction via LSTM. Bekoulis et al. (2018) propose a joint model
that uses a CRF layer to model the entity recognition task and
the relation extraction task as a multi-headed selection problem.
Zheng et al. (2017) proposed a new tagging scheme that can convert the joint extraction task to a sequence labeling problem.
Yuan et al. (2020) proposed a relation-based attention network
(RSAN) to jointly extract entities and relations using a relationaware attention mechanism.

3. Framework design
In this section, we will introduce our proposed framework for
threat intelligence extraction and fusion. The ontology of our cybersecurity knowledge graph references UCO 2.0 (Syed et al., 2016)
and STIX 2.0 STIX (2017).

2.4. Knowledge fusion
Due to the existence of duplicate and complementary information in data from different sources, knowledge fusion is proposed
to study how the same entity or concept from multiple sources
can be fused to form a high-quality knowledge base (Zhao et al.,
2020c). Its necessity has been explained in the recent relevant
studies (Alves et al., 2020; Gonzalez-Granadillo et al., 2021; Liu
et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2021). Knowledge fusion needs to be performed at two levels: at the ontology level, equivalence or similar
classes, relations, and attributes between different ontologies need
to be found, i.e., ontology matching; at the entity level, the same
objects from different sources need to be correlated and combined,
i.e., entity alignment.
Ontology matching requires abstracting a myriad of concepts
and complex relations in the cybersecurity domain into a semantic network. Iannacone et al. (2015) proposed STUCCO, an ontology
for building CKGs, integrating 13 different formats of cybersecurity
data sources. Building on this foundation, Syed et al. (2016) proposed a Uniﬁed Cybersecurity Ontology (UCO). The UCO ontology provides a general understanding of the cybersecurity domain and, in addition to mapping to STIX, UCO extends several related cybersecurity standards, vocabularies, and ontolo-

• The main entity types include: Indicator, Threat Actor, Attack
Pattern, Malware, Tool, Campaign, Course of Action, Vulnerability, and Software.
• The main relation types include: hasProduct, hasVulnerability,
uses, attributedTo, mitigates, and indicates.
Our framework is divided into four parts, as shown in Fig. 1. In
the data collection, threat intelligence data is collected from structured data and unstructured data on the internet, and the framework processes these two types of data separately. For structured
data such as STIX data, we directly obtain the entities or triples by
ontology matching, as described in Section 3.1. In the threat intelligence extraction, we propose a joint entity and relation extraction model to extract cybersecurity triples from unstructured data,
as described in Section 3.2. In the knowledge fusion, we design
an improved Levenshtein distance to fuse entities from different
sources based on the characteristics of the cybersecurity corpus, as
described in Section 3.3. Finally, our framework deposits the cybersecurity triples extracted and fused from structured and unstructured data into the neo4j database to form a preliminary CKG.
3

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

Fig. 1. The framework for threat intelligence information extraction and fusion.

3.1. Data collection and structured data process

the model constructs cybersecurity triples based on the label sequences predicted by the model, and these triples will eventually
be used to construct CKG.

The framework regularly collects raw data from various sources
such as existing attack and defense knowledge bases, intelligence
sharing platforms, vulnerability databases, security bulletins, and
APT reports. These data include structured data and unstructured
data, which are processed separately by the framework. The structured data only requires simple steps before importing into the
knowledge graph, while the unstructured data requires a more
complex model to extract the cybersecurity triples from it.
There exist many structured threat intelligence data, including
attack and defense knowledge bases (e.g., ATT&CK Strom et al.,
2018) and intelligence sharing platforms (e.g., MISP, 2021; Unit 42,
2021; WatcherLab, 2021), which are maintained by professional
teams with high quality and rich content, usually in a structured
form such as STIX. Collecting these structured data can quickly get
a large amount of reliable threat intelligence data. We store the entities and relations in these structured data directly into the neo4j
database after ontology matching. In addition, the data sources are
not limited to those platforms mentioned above. Structured data
from other sources can also be extended into our framework after
ontology matching.

3.2.1. Data preprocess
Unstructured threat intelligence data is usually stored in rich
text documents such as PDF, HTML/XML, JSON, and other formats.
First, we use various text parsing tools (e.g. HTMLParser, PDFLib)
to extract the raw text from these documents. But the extracted
raw text is not well-formatted. Therefore, we devised some data
pre-processing procedures as follows.
The ﬁrst step in preprocessing is data cleaning, where we remove non-ASCII characters from the text and whitespace characters at the beginning and end of each sentence. It is worth noting that in some threat intelligence data, special types of entities
are often rewritten to prevent readers from clicking on them by
mistake. For example, the IP address “136.244.119.85” is rewritten as “136. 244.119[.]85”; the URL http://www.test.com is rewritten to http://www.test.com ; the email address hacker@test.com is
rewritten as hacker[at]test.com. We revert this rewritten form to
its original form.
The next step in preprocessing is special entity substitution. In
the ﬁeld of cybersecurity, some entities are very different in form
from the normal natural language, such as IP, MAC, Hash, URL,
Email, domain name, ﬁle name, and ﬁle path. We build regular expressions to match these entities from text and replace them with
natural language strings in the form of “sub type”, where “type” is
the type of the special entity. For example, we would replace the
IP address “136.244.119.85” with “sub ip”.
The last step in the preprocessing process is text segmentation,
which is the process of converting text into sequences. We use the
NLTK library for sentence segmentation and WordPiece for word
tokenization.

3.2. Joint entity and relation extraction for unstructured data
To extract threat intelligence from unstructured data such as
vulnerability descriptions, security bulletins, APT reports, technology blogs, and hacker forums, we propose a joint entity and relation extraction model for cybersecurity concepts. Our model can
extract cybersecurity triples from unstructured data. We brieﬂy
outline the overall strategy here before discussing details in the
following subsections. The model takes unstructured threat intelligence data collected from multiple sources as raw input. Then
the data undergoes a pre-processing process including data cleaning, sentence segmentation, and tokenization to obtain the training
corpus, which will be fed into the joint extraction model subsequently (see Section 3.2.1 for details). We adopt the cybersecurity
entities and relations deﬁned in the UCO 2.0 (Syed et al., 2016) ontology and model the joint entity and relation extraction problem
as a multiple sequence labeling problem by generating a sequence
of labels for each relation through a speciﬁc tagging schema (see
Section 3.2.2 for details). Each relation label sequence contains information about the entities involved and the subject and object
of the relation. Our proposed multiple sequence labeling model is
structured into an embedding layer, an encoding layer, an attention
layer, and a decoding layer (see Section 3.2.3 for details). Finally,

3.2.2. Tagging scheme
In this section, we will introduce the tagging schema for the
joint entity and relation extraction. In the ﬁeld of relation extraction, there has been related work (Dai et al., 2019; Yuan et al.,
2020; Zheng et al., 2017) on the joint entity and relation extraction
through the construction of a speciﬁc tagging schema. For cybersecurity concepts, the extracted relation usually suffers from the
entity overlapping problem that different types of relations sharing the same entities, so the tagging scheme has to overcome this
issue. Our model generates a sequence of labels for each relation
in UCO 2.0 (Syed et al., 2016). In each tag sequence, we use the
typical “BIO” signs to locate the entities in the sentence, where “B”
4

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

Fig. 2. An example for tagging scheme.

represents the starting part of the entity, “I” represents the middle
part of the entity, and “O” is the non-entity part. At the same time,
we also label the entity as subject or object in the relation, with
“1” representing the subject in the triple and “2” representing the
object in the triple.
Figure 2 shows an example of the tagging scheme. The ﬁrst label sequence describes the “hasVulnerablity” relation, where “Microsoft VFP_OLE _Server ActiveX control” is an entity of type “Software”, as the subject of the “hasVulnerablity” relation; “CVE-20080235” is an entity of type “Vulnerability”, as the object of the
“hasVulnerablity” relation. Through the label sequence, we can generate the triple (“Microsoft VFP_OLE_Server ActiveX control”, “hasVulnerability”, “CVE-2008-0235”). Likewise, other label sequences can
be used to generate triples of corresponding relations. If a relation does not exist in a sentence, the label sequence for that relation will be all “O”. Besides, as we can see, the “attributedTo” and
“uses” relations have the over-lapped entity “remote attackers”, and
they can be extracted without conﬂict based on the separate label
sequences.

of polysemy, generating different word vectors for the same word
according to the context, which can better express the semantic
features of the words. This situation often occurs in the cybersecurity corpus. For a piece of software, when describing the vulnerabilities that exist in that software, this entity should then be
recognized as a “Software” type, and the triple (“Software”, “hasVulnerability”, “Vulnerability”) can be extracted. In another context, the
software may be used as a tool by an attacker, at which point the
entity should be recognized as a “Tool” type, and the triple (“Threat
Actor”, “uses”, “Tool”) can be extracted. So, we use the BERT model
to generate word embedding vectors in the embedding layer. For
the input sentence X = {x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , xn }, where xt is the tth word
in the sentence. After the computation of the BERT pre-trained
model, the word embedding vector E = {e1 , e2 , e3 , . . . , en } of the
sentence is generated, where et is the word vector of the tth word
in the sentence.
Encoder Compared with the traditional recurrent neural network (RNN), GRU consists of an update gate and a reset gate,
which can alleviate the gradient disappearance or explosion problem that occurs during training. The GRU hidden state ht is generated by the previous hidden state ht−1 and the input et of the
current state together. The GRU only calculates the correlation between time step t and the previous time step. However, in the cybersecurity corpus, entities may constitute relations with the entities before or after. So, for the word vectors generated by the
embedding layer, we further extract the semantic features of the
sentences H = {h1 , h2 , h3 , . . . , hn } using BiGRU and then concatenate the forward and backward GRU hidden states as the contextual word representation. The transformations are as follows:

3.2.3. Multiple sequence labeling model
Based on the tagging scheme above, we propose an end-to-end
multiple sequence labeling model to jointly extract cybersecurity
entities and relations. We take the sentence and a type of relation as input to the model, and the output sequence holds information about the subject and object entities involved in that relation. Thus, for a sentence, when we traverse all the relation types,
the model generates a label sequence for each type of relation, resulting in a joint extraction of entities and relations. Figure 3 gives
an overall structure of the model, which is divided into four parts.
The embedding layer generates a word vector et for each word
xt in sentence X. In the encoding layer, the embedding sentence
is fed into the bi-directional Gated Recurrent Units (BiGRU) neural network to generate a hidden state representation ht . Then we
apply the attention mechanism to assign different weights to the
context words under different relations and construct a relationspeciﬁc sentence representation lk . Finally, in the decoding layer,
we use another BiGRU neural network and joined it with CRF for
decoding to obtain the label sequence and extract corresponding
entities under the speciﬁc relation.
Embedding
Given a sentence as a sequence of tokens, the word embedding layer is responsible to map each token to a word vector.
In this paper, we propose to use a pre-trained model to generate word vectors. The pre-trained word embedding model converts
words in natural language into dense vectors, and semantically
similar words will have similar vector representations. The latest
pre-trained model BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) can solve the problem



−−→
←−−
ht = GRU (et ), GRU (et )



(1)

Attention mechanism In the cybersecurity corpus, a sentence
usually contains many entities and complex relations. As shown in
Fig. 2, the sentence contains ﬁve different entities (“Vulnerability”,
“Software”, “Threat Actor”, “Campaign”, “Attack Pattern”) and three
different relations (“hasVulnerability”, “attributedTo”, “uses”). Therefore, it is necessary to assign different weights to the words in a
sentence according to different types of relations. For example, for
the “hasVulnerability” relation, the words in the sentence indicating a software name or identifying a speciﬁc vulnerability should
be paid higher attention to. Thus, we have referred to the relationbased attention mechanism proposed by Yuan et al. (2020). The
attention mechanism can assign different weights to the words in
a sentence under each relation, and the attention score can be calculated as follows:



hg = avg h1 , h2 , h3 , . . . , hn
5



(2)

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

Fig. 3. The multiple sequence labeling model for joint entity and relation extraction. It receives the same sentence input and different relation rk to extract all triples in the
sentence. et is the BERT embedding of the word, ht is the hidden vector of time step t, rk is the trainable embedding of the kth relation, lk is the attention weights under
relation type rk . Under the given relation rk (Take hasVulnerability for example), the decoder extracts the corresponding entities of rk to generate triples (PCRE, hasVulnerability,
Buffer overﬂow).



etk = vT tanh Wr rk + Wg hg + Wh ht
exp (etk )
 
atk = n
j=1 exp e jk



(3)

p( y | Z ) = 

y∗ = arg max score(Z, y )

(4)

y∈YZ

(5)

htk = ht  lk

(6)

Knowledge fusion includes ontology-level fusion and entitylevel fusion. The ontology-level is only for structured data, and
most structured data exists in STIX format with equivalence classes
and relations in the UCO ontology. This section focuses on the
entity-level, which aims to determine whether entities from different data sources are the same object in reality.
The knowledge graph constructed from a single data source has
problems such as low information coverage and imperfect entity
attributes, which are not desirable for further application on downstream tasks. Entity-level fusion can fuse threat intelligence knowledge from different sources to form a more complete CKG. Existing
methods determine whether two entities are the same object by
the features extracted from the entities, attributes, and relations.
In addition to similarity-based approaches (Azevedo et al., 2019;
Lacoste-Julien et al., 2013), the mainstream approach in the general domain is embedding-based approaches (Bordes et al., 2013;
Chen et al., 2016). However, since our framework aims to construct
a preliminary CKG from scratch and mainly addresses threat intelligence extraction, the extracted entities often have incomplete
relations. Embedding-based methods generally perform knowledge
fusion on the mature knowledge graph, so they are not suitable in
the early stage of building CKG. Piplai et al. (2020b) used the Levenshtein distance to calculate the similarity of entity names to perform entity fusion when constructing a knowledge graph for malware after action reports. Although this method is effective for entity fusion with name distortion, misspellings, etc., there is a drawback that can lead to many incorrect results. For example, “APT28”
and “APT29” are two different “Threat Actor” entities, but their Levenshtein distance is only 1, which causes the entity fusion algorithm to consider them as the same entity mistakenly. There are

t=1

Decoder The decoding layer generates the label sequences of
the sentences under the rk relation and returns the relational
triples through the tagging scheme described in Section 3.2.2.
We ﬁrst used another BiGRU to produce sentence representations H o = {ho1 , ho2 , ho3 , . . . , hon } and generate sequence scores Z =
{z1 , z2 , z3 , . . . , zn }using features from the encoding and attention
layers. The calculation process is as follows, where W is the parameter:



−−→
←−−
hto = GRU (htk ), GRU (htk )



(7)

zt = W hto

(8)

Next, the sequence is decoded by the CRF layer, which is able
to obtain constrained rules from the training data, to ensure that
the predicted cybersecurity entity labels are valid. The decoding
process is shown as follows:
n

score(Z, y ) =

n

Ayt ,yt+1 +
t=0

Zt,yt

(11)

3.3. Knowledge fusion based on improved levenshtein distance

n

atk ht

(10)

where A is the transition matrix between labels, score(Z, y ) is the
position score, and p(y | Z ) is the normalized probability function.
Finally, the label sequence y∗ is generated.

where hg indicates the global representation of the sentence, rk is
the embedding of the k-th relation. v, Wr , Wg , and Wh are all trainable parameters. The attention score generated reﬂects the importance of the sentence’s words in the context as well as relational
expression in the current relation. The sentence representation lk
under the rk relation is generated by the weighted sum of the sentence words, which is calculated as shown in Eq. (5). The attention layer combines the generated lk and the sentence representations output by the encoding layer as input to the decoding layer,
as shown in Eq. (6).

lk =

exp(score(Z, y ))
(score(Z, y ))

y ∈YZ exp

(9)

t=1

6

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371
Table 1
Comparison results with the pipeline model.

many other similar cases, for example, two IP addresses with only
one digit difference.
In order to perform knowledge fusion as accurately as possible, we propose a knowledge fusion method based on an improved
Levenshtein distance for the characteristics of the cybersecurity
corpus. Compared to embedding-based knowledge fusion methods, this algorithm does not need to store entity embeddings and
model parameters. We ﬁnd that the above errors are mainly caused
by numbers which usually represent deterministic information in
entity naming. The Levenshtein distance is the minimum number
of edit operations required to turn string a into string b. Editing
operations include replace, insert and delete. In our improved Levenshtein distance, a larger penalty weight of wnum is set for edit
operations on numbers, and edit operations on other characters
remain a weight of wother , where wnum should be larger than the
threshold, which avoids the errors caused by the traditional Levenshtein distance. We use the dynamic programming algorithm to
calculate the improved Levenshtein distance as follows. For strings
a and b with lengths n and m respectively, i and j are the subscripts indicating the position of the corresponding strings. First,
the distance matrix is initialized as shown in Eq. (12). Then the
distance of each position of the two strings is calculated iteratively
as shown in Eq. (13). In addition, the weight function is shown in
Eq. (14).

D ( 0, 0 ) = 0
D(i, 0 ) = D(i − 1, 0 ) + W (ai )
D ( 0, j ) = D ( 0, j − 1 ) + W ( b j )

(1 ≤ i ≤ n )
(1 ≤ j ≤ m )

⎧
⎪
⎨D(i − 1, j ) + W (ai )
D(i, j − 1 ) + W (b j )
D(i, j ) = min
⎪
⎩D(i − 1, j − 1 ) + max(W (ai ), W (b j ))
D ( i − 1, j − 1 )

W (char ) =

wnum
wother

if char is a number
otherwise

Precision

Recall

F1-score

Pipeline model (Pingle et al., 2019)
Joint model

57.04%
82.28%

67.80%
80.48%

61.69%
81.37%

Models

Precision

Recall

F1-score

NovelTag (Zheng et al., 2017)
GraphRel (Fu et al., 2019)
MultiHead (Bekoulis et al., 2018)
Our Model

54.34%
65.26%
77.76%
82.28%

57.87%
58.30%
65.14%
80.48%

56.05%
61.59%
70.89%
81.37%

Table 2
Comparison results with the joint model.

4.2. Evaluation metrics
We use standard Precision, Recall, and F1-score to measure the
performance. A triple is considered to be correctly extracted if and
only if its relation type and both entities are correctly matched.
4.3. Experimental settings
To evaluate the effectiveness of the joint extraction model, we
design a set of experiments. In the comparison experiments with
the pipeline approach, we compare our model with the existing
pipeline model RelExt (Pingle et al., 2019), where parameters that
are not mentioned in the paper are set by default. Because an entity may consist of many words, we generate word vectors for each
word and average these word vectors to obtain the ﬁxed dimensional embedding described in the RelExt paper. Besides, to further analyze our proposed model, we compare the preprocessing
methods, the word embedding models and the choice of neural
networks. Also to test whether the model is effective on a smaller
training set, we experimented with different training set division
ratios. We use a 5-fold cross-validation to train the model. The size
of the BERT word vector is 768 dimensions. The size of the BiGRU
hidden layer and relational embedding vector are both set to 300.
During the training process, the optimizer is RMSprop, the learning rate is 0.0 0 01, and the batch_size is 64. we use the dropout
mechanism to avoid overﬁtting with a rate of 0.5.

(12)

( ai = b j )
( ai = b j )
(13)



Models

(14)

With the ﬁnal result D(n, m ), we set a distance threshold and
add the “sameAs” relation between these two entities if their Levenshtein distance is less than the threshold.
4. Experiments

4.4. Joint entity and relation extraction experimental result
4.1. Datasets
4.4.1. Comparison with pipeline model
This section shows the results of the comparison between the
traditional pipeline approach and the joint model. From Table 1,
we can see that our joint model outperforms the pipeline model,
signiﬁcantly improving precision (82.28%), recall (80.48%), and F1score (81.37%). This indicates that the joint model extracts both entities and relations, which avoids the error propagation between
the two subtasks of the pipeline model and effectively improves
the performance of entity-relation triples extraction.

Our data is collected from publicly available open-source
intelligence (OSINT) data. It includes both structured and unstructured data. The unstructured data comes from the CVE
vulnerability database (vulnerability descriptions) (MITRE, 2021),
security bulletins and APT reports (CyberMonitor, 2021).
Structured data comes from STIX format data provided by
ATT&CK Strom et al. (2018), Unit 42 (2021), MISP (2021) and
WatcherLab (2021), etc. To train the joint extraction model, we
used the BRAT annotation platform (Stenetorp et al., 2012) to annotate the unstructured data, and further checked the annotation
of the dataset based on our previous work (Guo et al., 2021) to
improve the annotation accuracy. We manually annotated 12,680
sentences containing a total of 67,918 cybersecurity triples. Then,
we transform the annotated labels into the format described in
Section 3.2.2 for futher training. In this paper, we take the “Threat
Actor” entity as an example to validate the knowledge fusion
algorithm. The knowledge fusion dataset we constructed is all
used to test the performance of the algorithm. We obtained a total
of 698 “Threat Actor” entities from different sources of STIX data
and manually annotated 560 “sameAs” relations between them.

4.4.2. Comparison with joint model
To corroborate the eﬃcacy of our proposed model, we benchmark it against established joint models (Bekoulis et al., 2018; Fu
et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2017). As presented in Table 2, our model
displays a remarkable improvement over the compared models.
This superior performance can be attributed to a meticulously preprocessing procedure, an effective word embedding approach, and
a ﬁtting tagging scheme tailored for the cybersecurity corpus. For
a more thorough exploration and understanding of its capabilities,
we have carried out an array of detailed experiments, the results
of which are discussed in Section 4.4.3.
7

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

Table 3
Analysis results of the proposed model.

Table 4
Experimental results for different dataset splitting.

Models

Precision

Recall

F1-score

Train-test split

Precision

Recall

F1-score

Our Model
Model-NoSub
Model-W2V
Model-LSTM
Model-NoAtt

82.28%
79.55%
79.41%
82.06%
81.71%

80.48%
78.18%
71.73%
79.70%
79.36%

81.37%
78.86%
75.37%
80.86%
80.52%

80%-20%
75%-25%
66%-34%
50%-50%

82.28%
82.23%
81.20%
81.16%

80.48%
79.87%
79.16%
78.69%

81.37%
81.03%
80.17%
79.90%

tion mechanism. From Table 3 (“Model-NoAtt”), we can tell that
the attention mechanism slightly improve the performance by providing a better reﬂection on the importance of the tokens under
the speciﬁc relation.

4.4.3. Analysis of the proposed model
In the preprocessing approach experiments, as described in
Section 3.2.1, we replaced special entities such as IP, MAC, Hash,
URL, Email, domain name, ﬁle name and ﬁle path. We experimented with the effect of not using this preprocessing method.
As shown in Table 3 (“Model-NoSub”), the preprocessing approach
of special information replacement is more effective, because special information replacement allows these entities with large differences to be replaced with a uniﬁed expression form, which is
beneﬁcial to the extraction of semantics.
In the word vector experiments, as the word vectors generated
by the word embedding model serve as the input to the following
model, the quality of the word vectors has an important impact on
the model performance. In this section, we experiment with two
representative word embedding models, BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)
and Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), where the BERT model is the
“cased L-12 H768 A-12” version, and the Word2Vec model is the
“GoogleNews- vectors-negative300” version. It can be seen from
Table 3 (“Model-W2V”) that using BERT for word embedding has
a certain improvement compared to Word2Vec. This is attributed
to the fact that BERT can generate different word vectors for the
same word depending on the context thus making better use of
the contextual information of the text, while Word2Vec can only
generate a ﬁxed word vector representation for each word.
In the neural network model experiments, since we use neural
networks in our model for the sequence labeling task, we investigate the effect of different neural networks on the model performance. Speciﬁcally, we experiment with the performance of LSTM
and GRU neural networks in the joint extraction model. As shown
in Table 3 (“Model-LSTM”), we found that the GRU performed
slightly better than the LSTM, and therefore we take GRU in our
model.
To demonstrate the role played by the attention mechanism in
our model, we further explored the effect of not using the atten-

4.4.4. Experimental results with different dataset splitting
In this section, we conduct experiments using different dataset
splitting, and the results show that the effectiveness of our model
does not drop signiﬁcantly on a smaller training set ratio, as shown
in Table 4. This is because the cybersecurity corpus has some similarities in writing style, syntax, and use of terminology. For example, CVE vulnerability descriptions use similar syntax, and different APT reports may use the same terminology. In addition, we
replace special entities with uniﬁed forms of expression in the preprocessing stage, which also mitigates the problem of high variability between data from different sources.
4.5. Knowledge fusion experimental results
In this section, we take the “Threat Actor” entity as an example. We set the distance threshold to 0, 1, 2, and 3 for each experiment. The wnum is set to 10 and the wother is set to 1. If the
distance between two entities is less than the threshold, we consider these two entities are the same entity. As shown in Fig. 4,
the Improved Levenshtein distance (Fig. 4a) outperforms the traditional Levenshtein distance (Fig. 4b). The performance of the traditional Levenshtein distance algorithm decreases signiﬁcantly as the
threshold increases. This is because there are numbers involved in
cybersecurity entity names (as described in Section 3.3), causing
the traditional Levenshtein distance to produce a large number of
erroneous results. In addition, as shown in Fig. 4a, the algorithm is
bound to introduce some false alarms as the threshold increases,
so the threshold cannot be set too large, and it can be seen that
the best results are obtained when the threshold is set to 1. Although our algorithm does not consider more complex knowledge

Fig. 4. Experimental results of knowledge fusion.
8

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

Fig. 5. The effect of knowledge fusion.

fusion cases, the algorithm can more accurately fuse entities in the
process of constructing the CKG from scratch for naming distortions, misspellings, etc.

intelligence extraction, we use the joint extraction model to extract
entities and relations in sentences. For example, the entities and
relations in the blue box of the right part of Fig. 5 are extracted
from the sentence at the bottom of the ﬁgure. In the knowledge
fusion, the framework fuses the extracted entities and the existing entities in the knowledge graph using the algorithm described
in Section 3.3. For example, the “APT28/Threat Actor” entity on the
right part of Fig. 5 is the same object as the “Threat Actor” entity shown in the red box on the left part of Fig. 5. Above all, our
framework can fuse multi-source threat intelligence data to form a
more comprehensive CKG.

4.6. Analysis and discussion
4.6.1. Relation extraction case study
In this section, we illustrate the advantages of the joint model
over the pipeline model by two examples, as shown in Appendix Table A1. In both examples, our proposed joint model predicts all the triples in the sentences correctly.
For Case 1, although the pipeline model correctly predicts all
“Software” entities in the entity recognition task, when predicting the relation between two “Software” entities, the model will
combine the two “Software” entities into two entity pairs in different orders and predict two wrong relations. This indicates that
the pipeline model does not take into account the connection between entity recognition and relation extraction tasks, while the
joint model is able to predict the “hasProduct” relation between the
two “Software” entities well.
For Case 2, the pipeline model only recognizes the “zeroday vulnerabilities/Vulnerability” and “compromise victim systems/Campaign” entity but misses the “apt28/Threat Actor” and
“spear phishing emails/Attack Pattern” entities, resulting in a null
input to the relation extraction model that fails to predict the
relation between them. This indicates that the pipeline model has
the defect of error propagation, implying that if an entity is not
predicted or is incorrectly predicted, it will affect the subsequent
relation extraction task.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a framework for threat intelligence
extraction and fusion, which extracts threat intelligence from
structured and unstructured data sources, and fuses threat intelligence from different sources to form a preliminary CKG. For the
unstructured data, we propose a joint entity and relation extraction model for cybersecurity concepts, which can extract both entities and relations in the cybersecurity corpus. Speciﬁcally, we use
a tagging scheme to convert the joint extraction problem into a
multi-sequence labeling problem by generating separate label sequences for different relations, which contain information about
the related entities and the subject and object of that relation. In
addition, the model employs the BERT model, BiGRU neural network, and attention mechanism to extract the features of sentences. For the knowledge fusion, we propose an improved Levenshtein distance to fuse entities pointing to the same object from
different data sources. In the experimental section, our results on
OSINT data demonstrate that the joint model achieves better results compared to the traditional pipeline approach. And the improved knowledge fusion also works better than the traditional
Levenshtein distance. The limitation of this study is that our framework is mainly for threat intelligence extraction and simple knowledge fusion to construct a preliminary CKG. Therefore, to further
construct a more effective CKG, our future work will focus on entity disambiguation, knowledge embedding, and knowledge inference in cybersecurity.

4.6.2. Knowledge fusion effect
This section demonstrates the effect of knowledge fusion. As
described in Section 3, the framework extracts cybersecurity triples
from structured and unstructured data and performs knowledge
fusion. In the constructed knowledge graph, we query the data related to the “APT28/Threat Actor”, as shown in Fig. 5. The left part
is constructed from structured data of various existing attack and
defense knowledge bases; the right part is a set of cybersecurity
triples extracted from unstructured data. Speciﬁcally, in the threat
9

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

Declaration of Competing Interest

References

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

Alves, F., Andongabo, A., Gashi, I., Ferreira, P.M., Bessani, A., 2020. Follow the blue
bird: a study on threat data published on twitter. In: European Symposium on
Research in Computer Security. Springer, pp. 217–236.
Azevedo, R., Medeiros, I., Bessani, A., 2019. Pure: generating quality threat intelligence by clustering and correlating OSINT. In: 2019 18th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In Computing And Communications/13th
IEEE International Conference On Big Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE, pp. 483–490.
Bekoulis, G., Deleu, J., Demeester, T., Develder, C., 2018. Joint entity recognition and
relation extraction as a multi-head selection problem. Expert Syst. Appl. 114,
34–45.
Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Garcia-Duran, A., Weston, J., Yakhnenko, O., 2013. Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data. In: Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, vol.
2, pp. 2787–2795.
Chen, M., Tian, Y., Yang, M., Zaniolo, C., 2016. Multilingual knowledge graph embeddings for cross-lingual knowledge alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03954
Culotta, A., Sorensen, J., 2004. Dependency tree kernels for relation extraction. In:
Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL-04), pp. 423–429.
CyberMonitor, 2021. APT & cybercriminals campaign collection. https://github.com/
CyberMonitor/APT_CyberCriminal_Campagin_Collections.
Dai, D., Xiao, X., Lyu, Y., Dou, S., She, Q., Wang, H., 2019. Joint extraction of
entities and overlapping relations using position-attentive sequence labeling.
In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 33,
pp. 6300–6308.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K., 2018. Bert: pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1810.04805
Fu, T.-J., Li, P.-H., Ma, W.-Y., 2019. Graphrel: modeling text as relational graphs for
joint entity and relation extraction. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1409–1418.
Gao, P., Shao, F., Liu, X., Xiao, X., Qin, Z., Xu, F., Mittal, P., Kulkarni, S.R., Song, D.,
2021. Enabling eﬃcient cyber threat hunting with cyber threat intelligence.
In: 2021 IEEE 37th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE,
pp. 193–204.
Ghazi, Y., Anwar, Z., Mumtaz, R., Saleem, S., Tahir, A., 2018. A supervised machine
learning based approach for automatically extracting high-level threat intelligence from unstructured sources. In: 2018 International Conference on Frontiers
of Information Technology (FIT). IEEE, pp. 129–134.
Gonzalez-Granadillo, G., Faiella, M., Medeiros, I., Azevedo, R., Gonzalez-Zarzosa, S.,
2021. ETIP: an enriched threat intelligence platform for improving OSINT correlation, analysis, visualization and sharing capabilities. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 58,
102715.
Guo, Y., Liu, Z., Huang, C., Liu, J., Jing, W., Wang, Z., Wang, Y., 2021. Cyberrel: joint
entity and relation extraction for cybersecurity concepts. In: International Conference on Information and Communications Security. Springer, pp. 447–463.
Husari, G., Al-Shaer, E., Ahmed, M., Chu, B., Niu, X., 2017. Ttpdrill: automatic and
accurate extraction of threat actions from unstructured text of CTI sources. In:
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
pp. 103–115.
Husari, G., Niu, X., Chu, B., Al-Shaer, E., 2018. Using entropy and mutual information
to extract threat actions from cyber threat intelligence. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Iannacone, M., Bohn, S., Nakamura, G., Gerth, J., Huffer, K., Bridges, R., Ferragut, E.,
Goodall, J., 2015. Developing an ontology for cyber security knowledge graphs.
In: Proceedings of the 10th Annual Cyber and Information Security Research
Conference, pp. 1–4.
Iria, J., 2005. T-rex: a ﬂexible relation extraction framework. In: Proceedings of the
8th Annual Colloquium for the UK Special Interest Group for Computational Linguistics (CLUK’05), vol. 6. Citeseer, p. 9.
Jia, Y., Qi, Y., Shang, H., Jiang, R., Li, A., 2018. A practical approach to constructing a
knowledge graph for cybersecurity. Engineering 4 (1), 53–60.
Jiang, J., Zhai, C., 2007. A systematic exploration of the feature space for relation extraction. In: Human Language Technologies 2007: The Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics; Proceedings
of the Main Conference, pp. 113–120.
Jones, C.L., Bridges, R.A., Huffer, K.M., Goodall, J.R., 2015. Towards a relation extraction framework for cyber-security concepts. In: Proceedings of the 10th Annual
Cyber and Information Security Research Conference, pp. 1–4.
Lacoste-Julien, S., Palla, K., Davies, A., Kasneci, G., Graepel, T., Ghahramani, Z., 2013.
Sigma: simple greedy matching for aligning large knowledge bases. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, pp. 572–580.
Liao, X., Yuan, K., Wang, X., Li, Z., Xing, L., Beyah, R., 2016. Acing the IOC game: toward automatic discovery and analysis of open-source cyber threat intelligence.
In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 755–766.
Liu, Z., Cao, Y., Pan, L., Li, J., Chua, T.-S., 2020. Exploring and evaluating attributes, values, and structures for entity alignment. In: Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pp. 6355–6364.
Liu, Z., Su, H., Wang, N., Huang, C., 2022. Coreference resolution for cybersecurity
entity: towards explicit, comprehensive cybersecurity knowledge graph with

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yongyan Guo: Conceptualization, Data curation, Methodology,
Software, Writing – original draft. Zhengyu Liu: Conceptualization,
Data curation, Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft.
Cheng Huang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing
– review & editing. Nannan Wang: Data curation, Investigation,
Software. Hai Min: Data curation, Investigation, Software. Wenbo
Guo: Data curation, Investigation, Software. Jiayong Liu: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Appendix A

Table A1
The examples of the triples to the given sentences extracted by joint model and
pipeline model.
#Case 1
Raw text

Joint model

Pipeline model

#Case 2
Raw text

Joint model

Pipeline model

CVE-2021-28967: The unoﬃcial MATLAB extension before
2.0.1 for Visual Studio Code allows attackers to execute
arbitrary code via a crafted workspace because of lint
conﬁguration settings.
(’attackers’, ’crafted workspace’, ’Threat Actor/Attack
Pattern/uses’)
(’attackers’, ’cve-2021-28967’, ’Threat
Actor/Vulnerability/uses’)
(’execute arbitrary code’, ’attackers’, ’Campaign/Threat
Actor/attributedTo’)
(’visual studio code’, ’unoﬃcial matlab extension’,
’Software/Software/hasProduct’)
(’unoﬃcial matlab extension’, ’cve-2021-28967’,
’Software/Vulnerability/hasVulnerablity’)
(’visual studio code’, ’cve-2021-28967’,
’Software/Vulnerability/hasVulnerablity’)
(’attackers’, ’crafted workspace’, ’Threat Actor/Attack
Pattern/uses’)
(’attackers’, ’cve-2021-28967’, ’Threat
Actor/Vulnerability/uses’)
(’unoﬃcial matlab extension’, ’cve-2021-28967’,
’Software/Vulnerability/hasVulnerablity’)
(’visual studio code’, ’cve-2021-28967’,
’Software/Vulnerability/hasVulnerablity’)
(’execute arbitrary code’, ’attackers’, ’Campaign/Threat
Actor/attributedTo’)
(’visual studio code’, ’unoﬃcial matlab extension’,
’Software/Software/uses’)
(’unoﬃcial matlab extension’, ’visual studio code’,
’Software/Software/hasVulnerablity’)
APT28 relies upon spear phishing emails or zero-day
vulnerabilities to initially compromise victim systems.
(’apt28’, ’spear phishing emails’, ’Threat Actor/Attack
Pattern/uses’)
(’apt28’, ’zero-day vulnerabilities’, ’Threat
Actor/Vulnerability/uses’)
(’initially compromise victim systems’, ’apt28’,
’Campaign/Threat Actor/attributedTo’)
Only entities found zero-day vulnerabilities/Vulnerability
compromise victim systems/Campaign

10

Y. Guo, Z. Liu, C. Huang et al.

Computers & Security 132 (2023) 103371

low redundancy. In: International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communication Systems. Springer, pp. 89–108.
McDonald, R., Pereira, F., Kulick, S., Winters, S., Jin, Y., White, P., 2005. Simple algorithms for complex relation extraction with applications to biomedical IE. In:
Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’05), pp. 491–498.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J., 2013. Eﬃcient estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781
Milajerdi, S.M., Gjomemo, R., Eshete, B., Sekar, R., Venkatakrishnan, V., 2019.
Holmes: real-time apt detection through correlation of suspicious information ﬂows. In: 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE,
pp. 1137–1152.
MITRE, 2021. Cvelist project. https://github.com/CVEProject/cvelist.
Mittal, S., Das, P.K., Mulwad, V., Joshi, A., Finin, T., 2016. Cybertwitter: using twitter to generate alerts for cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities. In: 2016
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis
and Mining (ASONAM). IEEE, pp. 860–867.
Miwa, M., Bansal, M., 2016. End-to-end relation extraction using LSTMs on sequences and tree structures. In: Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pp. 1105–1116.
MISP project, 2021. MISP threat sharing platform. https://www.misp-project.org/
galaxy.html.
Nie, H., Han, X., Sun, L., Wong, C.M., Chen, Q., Wu, S., Zhang, W., 2021. Global structure and local semantics-preserved embeddings for entity alignment. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Conference on International Joint
Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 3658–3664.
Pingle, A., Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Joshi, A., Holt, J., Zak, R., 2019. Relext: relation extraction using deep learning approaches for cybersecurity knowledge graph improvement. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, pp. 879–886.
Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Abdelsalam, M., Gupta, M., Joshi, A., Finin, T., 2020. Knowledge
enrichment by fusing representations for malware threat intelligence and behavior. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Piplai, A., Mittal, S., Joshi, A., Finin, T., Holt, J., Zak, R., 2020. Creating cybersecurity knowledge graphs from malware after action reports. IEEE Access 8,
211691–211703.
Satyapanich, T., Ferraro, F., Finin, T., 2020. CASIE: extracting cybersecurity event information from text. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 34, pp. 8749–8757.
Stenetorp, P., Pyysalo, S., Topić, G., Ohta, T., Ananiadou, S., Tsujii, J., 2012. Brat: a
web-based tool for NLP-assisted text annotation. In: Proceedings of the Demonstrations at the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 102–107.
STIX. Structured threat information expression. https://oasis-open.github.io/
cti-documentation/stix/intro.
Strom, B.E., Applebaum, A., Miller, D.P., Nickels, K.C., Pennington, A.G., Thomas, C.B.,
2018. MITRE ATT&CK: Design and Philosophy. Mitre Product MP. 18–0944
Sun, C., Wu, Y., Lan, M., Sun, S., Wang, W., Lee, K.-C., Wu, K., 2018. Extracting
entities and relations with joint minimum risk training. In: Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pp. 2256–2265.
Syed, Z., Padia, A., Mathews, M.L., Finin, T., Joshi, A., et al., 2016. UCO: a uniﬁed
cybersecurity ontology. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Cyber Security.
Unit 42. 2021. Unit 42 playbook viewer. https://pan-unit42.github.io/playbook_
viewer/.
WatcherLab, 2021. Threat intelligence feed system. https://feed.watcherlab.com.
Wei, Z., Su, J., Wang, Y., Tian, Y., Chang, Y., 2020. A novel cascade binary tagging
framework for relational triple extraction. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1476–1488.
Yuan, L., Bai, Y., Xing, Z., Chen, S., Li, X., Deng, Z., 2021. Predicting entity relations
across different security databases by using graph attention network. In: 2021
IEEE 45th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC). IEEE, pp. 834–843.

Yuan, Y., Zhou, X., Pan, S., Zhu, Q., Song, Z., Guo, L., 2020. A relation-speciﬁc attention network for joint entity and relation extraction. In: International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence 2020. Association for the Advancement of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 4054–4060.
Zeng, D., Liu, K., Lai, S., Zhou, G., Zhao, J., 2014. Relation classiﬁcation via
convolutional deep neural network. In: Proceedings of COLING 2014, the
25th international conference on computational linguistics: technical papers,
pp. 2335–2344.
Zhao, J., Yan, Q., Li, J., Shao, M., He, Z., Li, B., 2020. Timiner: automatically extracting
and analyzing categorized cyber threat intelligence from social data. Comput.
Secur. 95, 101867.
Zhao, J., Yan, Q., Liu, X., Li, B., Zuo, G., 2020. Cyber threat intelligence modeling
based on heterogeneous graph convolutional network. In: 23rd International
Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses ({RAID} 2020),
pp. 241–256.
Zhao, X., Zeng, W., Tang, J., Wang, W., Suchanek, F., 2020. An experimental study of
state-of-the-art entity alignment approaches. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 34
(1), 1.
Zheng, S., Wang, F., Bao, H., Hao, Y., Zhou, P., Xu, B., 2017. Joint extraction of entities
and relations based on a novel tagging scheme. In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. 1227–1236.
Zhu, Z., Dumitras, T., 2018. Chainsmith: automatically learning the semantics of malicious campaigns by mining threat intelligence reports. In: 2018 IEEE European
Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE, pp. 458–472.
Yongyan Guo received the B.Eng. degree in cyberspace security from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the masters degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. His current research interests include Web security and artiﬁcial intelligence.
Zhengyu Liu is currently an undergraduate student studying at the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His current research interests focus on data-driven security, especially in applying machine learning with empirical
data measurements to solve cybersecurity problems, including cyber threat modeling, cyberattacks detection, etc.
Cheng Huang received the Ph.D degree from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China,
in 2017. From 2014 to 2015, he was a visiting student at the School of Computer
Science, University of California, CA, USA. He is currently an Associate Professor at
the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
His current research interests include Web security, attack detection, artiﬁcial intelligence.
Nannan Wang is a prospective graduate student in the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Sichuan University, China. His current main research areas include
artiﬁcial intelligence, data mining and attack detection.
Hai Min is currently pursuing his bachelor’s degree in the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Sichuan University, China. His current research interests include
fuzzing test, ﬁrmware security and artiﬁcial intelligence.
Wenbo Guo received the B.Eng. degree in cyberspace security from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the masters degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. His current research interests
include Web security and artiﬁcial intelligence.
Jiayong Liu received his B.Eng. degree in 1982, M. Eng. degree in 1989, and Ph.D.
degree in 2008 from Sichuan University, China. He is currently a professor in School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, China. His research interests
include network information processing and information security, communications
and network information system.

11