Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Information Fusion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus

Full length article

DFMKE: A dual fusion multi-modal knowledge graph embedding framework
for entity alignment
Jia Zhu a , Changqin Huang a ,∗, Pasquale De Meo b
a Zhejiang Normal University, China
b

University of Messina, Italy

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Knowledge graph
Entity alignment
Neural networks
Multi-modal knowledge

ABSTRACT
Entity alignment is critical for multiple knowledge graphs (KGs) integration. Although researchers have made
significant efforts to explore the relational embeddings between different KGs, existing approaches may not
describe multi-modal knowledge well in some tasks, e.g., entity alignment. In this paper, we propose DFMKE, a
dual fusion multi-modal knowledge graph embedding framework, to address entity alignment. We first devise
an early fusion method for fusing features of multi-modal entity representations of a KG. Simultaneously,
multiple representations of various types of knowledge are generated independently by various techniques
and fused by a low-rank multi-modal late fusion method. Finally, the outputs of early and late fusion methods
are combined using a dual fusion scheme. DFMKE provides an ultimate fusion solution by leveraging the
advantages of early and late fusion methods. Extensive experiments on two public datasets show that the
DFMKE outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin achieving at least 10% more regard to
Hits@n and MRR metrics.

1. Introduction
Entity alignment is critical for integrating distinct knowledge graphs
(KGs) by connecting entities that refer to the same real-world object.
Because most KGs are created with a specific purpose, different KGs
showcase different representations for the same concepts [1].
Early studies on entity alignment primarily focus on attribute similarity [2,3], which frequently suffers from attribute heterogeneity, making entity alignment error-prone [4]. Subsequently, other approaches
to aligning entities in KGs required human intervention [5], or extraresources [6], that is, a description of involved entities and their
relations. The methods above require many examples to work in downstream tasks correctly, but obtaining a sufficiently large number of
examples in real-life applications is challenging and expensive. More
recently, some authors suggested semi-supervised models perform entity alignment in KGs; that is, they sought new algorithmic approaches
which benefit from both labeled and unlabeled entities [7,8].
For instance, [7] proposed the SEA (Semi-supervised Entity Alignment) framework. The SEA framework extends the popular TransE
embedding method [9] to deal with the degree difference of entities.
SEA, in particular, applies adversarial training to prevent entities with
a similar degree of popularity are aggregated in the same region of
the embedding space during the training step. After generating the

embedding of two input KGs, SEA constructs and optimizes a suitable
objective function that contains both labeled and unlabeled entities.
A further exciting approach is KECG (Knowledge Embedding model
and Cross-Graph model), proposed in [8]. The KECG approach formulates the problem of aligning entities as an optimization problem
in which the objective function is the sum of two components. The
first component of the objective function to optimize is related to the
so-called cross-graph model, which captures inner KG structures and
alignments between entities in different KGs. The cross-graph model
applies an attention mechanism, and, in particular, it is built utilizing
an extended GAT as an encoder: in this way, the KECG system can
ignore unimportant nodes. We observe that KECG uses both labeled
and unlabeled examples in the cross-graph model construction process;
thus, it has to be regarded as a semi-supervised approach. The second
component of the objective function to optimize uses the TransE algorithm to learn the embedding of entities and relations in different KGs,
and then it aligns these representations into a unified vector space.
SEA and KECG have achieved excellent performance on a range of
popular datasets, but they cannot handle multi-modal KGs: in other
words, KGs are often populated by heterogeneous data such as texts,
numbers, or images to describe the same piece of reality. Distinct
knowledge forms play a crucial role as auxiliary data to complete KGs
and perform entity alignment; thus, we are strongly motivated to design

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: jiazhu@zjnu.edu.cn (J. Zhu), cqhuang@zju.edu.cn (C. Huang).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2022.09.012
Received 23 July 2021; Received in revised form 11 September 2022; Accepted 14 September 2022
Available online 20 September 2022
1566-2535/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.

Fig. 1. Illustration of entity alignment between multi-modal knowledge graphs.

• We prove the performance of the DFMKE by conducting experiments on two public multi-modal datasets, and we compared
DFMKE with several state-of-the-art entity alignment methods.
DFMKE works well even when no seed entities are available to
initialize the training process. We also offer interpretable analysis
in our work by conducting ablation studies on early and late
fusion modules’ contributions.

new entity matching algorithms that can exploit their full potential
multi-modal data.
Fig. 1 provides an example of entity alignment for multi-modal KGs,
and it clarifies the peculiarities arising from the presence of multimodal data in a KG. Here, the images associated with the entity ‘‘THU’’
indicate that the type of this entity is ‘‘university’’ in this case. However,
leveraging multi-modal knowledge to perform entity alignment is not
trivial. The inevitable heterogeneity among different modalities makes
the entity alignment task challenging. For example, in Fig. 1, it is
difficult to conclude that the ‘‘Tsinghua University’’ entity in KG1 and
the ‘‘THU’’ entity in KG2 refer to the same object using only images or
text information.
Recent studies [10–12] have put forth several models that combine
multi-modal data from KGs into a joint embedding and enable the
alignment model to modify modality weights automatically. However,
the approaches above did not consider modal correlation at the feature
level, and thus, these approaches may achieve poor results if multiple
modalities are highly correlated. In addition, most existing works do
not work well when seed entities, a list of labeled entities across KGs
to initialize the training process, are not broadly available.
To address the issues above, we propose a dual fusion multi-modal
knowledge graph embedding framework (DFMKE) for modeling the
entity associations of multi-modal KGs and locating entities referring to
the same real-world identity. Specifically, we propose an early fusion
strategy to perform feature fusion among different modalities, which
can exploit correlations between low-level features of each modality.
Then, we discriminatively generate knowledge representations for each
modality and design a late fusion method based on low-rank weight
decomposition to leverage knowledge from multiple modalities for the
entity alignment task. This work offers three contributions:

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly
discusses the main existing works; Section 3 introduces the technical
details of the work; Section 4 reports and comments on the experimental results according to various benchmarks; Section 5 concludes this
paper.
2. Related literature
KGs are a powerful tool to efficiently organize, manage and retrieve
a large body of information which is usually represented as a collection
of RDF triplets of the form (head, predicate, tail) [13].
Two core problems in the KG research area are: (a) Link Prediction,
i.e., we aim at completing triplets of the form (head?, predicate, tail)
(in which the head is not specified) or (head, predicate, tail?) (in which
the tail is not specified); (b) Entity Matching, i.e., given two KGs, we
wish to find pair of entities (one from each KG) which correspond to
the same entity (and, thus, entities are related by a sameAs predicate).
Our work mainly falls in two areas, entity alignment and multimodal knowledge graphs; in what follows, we describe the main approaches related to ours.
2.1. Entity alignment in knowledge graphs

• To alleviate the inconsistency of original data in each modality,
we propose a dual multi-modal knowledge graph embedding
framework called DFMKE that can incorporate the advantages of
both early fusion and late fusion techniques for entity alignment
with joint training. The main idea of DFMKE is to integrate
knowledge representations of multiple modalities from separate
spaces to a shared spaces.
• We present a novel late fusion method for multi-modal fusion
using modality-specific low-rank factors. This method can easily
combine the output features from the early fusion method and
reduce the computational complexity caused by input transformation into a tensor.

Entity alignment (also known as entity matching or entity resolution) refers to the task of identifying pairs of entities from different
KGs that refer to the same object in the real world.
Early approaches to dealing with the entity alignment problem in
KGs use discriminative features such as names, descriptive annotations,
and relational structures in each KGs [3,6,14–16]. For instance, Raimond et al. [15] proposed a method called LD-Mapper to utilize entity
nearest neighbor similarity and string similarity. Later, it was suggested
to use SILK to calculate string equality and similarity, numeric similarity, and other metrics to determine how similar entities are. The
linguistic and schematic heterogeneity between independently created
KGs was the main challenge the systems above needed to deal with.
112

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.

the entity space and extract useful characteristics from images. (2) It
applies an attention module to learn the representation of an entity,
given the image instances associated with that entity, and (3) It applies
a translational-based method to learn a representation of triplets and
images jointly.
A further exciting approach to dealing with multi-modal KG is the
MKBE (Multimodal Knowledge Base Embeddings) system discussed by
Pezeshkpour et al. [39]. The MKBE system applies a specific encoder
for each type of data (for instance, bidirectional GRU to encode short
texts [41] and the last hidden layer of VGG pre-trained network on
Imagenet [42] coupled with by compact bilinear pooling [43] to embed images). Obtained embeddings are thus combined with learning
embeddings of the entities and multi-modal data. Learned embeddings
(along with suitable different neural decoders) are at the basis of the
multi-modal imputation model, which can create missing multi-modal
values from information in the KG.
Later, an MMKG (Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs) dataset was proposed in [44]: such a dataset is a collection of three knowledge graphs
to experimentally assess the effectiveness of link prediction and entity
alignment algorithms in multi-modal knowledge graphs. In the three
proposed knowledge graphs, all entities are associated with numerical and visual data; the three knowledge graphs contain matchings
between entities from different KGs’ sameAS relations, linking entities
belonging to different knowledge graphs. Liu et al. [44] also extended
the learning framework described in [45] and, thus, it can manage
queries such as (head?, sameAs, tail) and (head, sameAs, tail?); such
a task can be considered something in between the link prediction and
the entity matching problem.
Zhang et al. [12] introduced a multi-view KG embedding framework
for entity alignment. This framework learns entity embeddings from
three typical KG views by combining view-specific embeddings using
three different algorithms. By creating entity representations for relational, visual, and numerical knowledge and fusing these representations via a multi-modal knowledge fusion module, Chen et al. [10] suggested the MMEA approach to deal with the issue of entity alignment
in a multi-modal view.
Liu et al. [11] described EVA (Entity Visual Alignment), a system
that uses images as pivots to align entities from different KGs. EVA
operates both in semi-supervised (i.e., it makes use of a small set of
labels provided by humans) and unsupervised fashion (i.e., it creates
an initial seed dictionary by using the visual resemblance of entities).
Therefore, both in semi-supervised and unsupervised environments,
iterative learning (IL) is used to increase the number of training pivots.
In real-world datasets, the correlation between multiple modalities
can be significant; thereby, such a correlation is a precious tool for
embedding a multi-modal KG. Unfortunately, the approaches cited
above do not consider the correlation between different modalities at
the feature level, and thus, they may be less effective in calculating
embeddings.
Unlike previous literature, our approach describes a method to
perform multi-modal KG embedding consisting of two main phases. We
call our approach DFMKE, dual fusion multi-modal knowledge graph
embedding: as we will detail below, we perform feature fusion across
different modalities in the first phase (called early fusion). In this way,
each modality has its representation. Thus, in the second phase (called
late fusion), we consider a low-rank weight decomposition algorithm
that enables us to benefit from knowledge associated with different
modalities to perform entity alignment.

More recently, embedding-based methods have been considered an
effective approach to handling the entity alignment problem [17–22].
Embedding-based methods map KGs onto vectors of a low-dimensional
space so that the embedding space’s geometrical structure can reveal
semantic relatedness between pairs of entities [9]. For example, Zhu
et al. [23] proposed IPTransE, an iterative method through joint knowledge embedding. Li et al. [24] used the unaligned entities to improve
performance by being aware of the degree of difference in adversarial training. Concerning the lack of aligned entities for training, Pei
et al. [25] proposed a semi-supervised entity alignment method with
a cycle-consistency-based translation loss to leverage the unaligned
entity instead of only using labeled aligned entities. Later, Li et al. [26]
proposed a semi-supervised entity alignment method called KECG that
utilized an extended graph attention network for encoding heterogeneous KGs and performing entity alignment by propagating alignment
information over the entire graphs. Their experiments proved that the
method does not require a sufficient number of aligned entities. However, These methods have not been proven suitable for multi-modal
KGs.
We can identify three main categories of approaches to performing
KG embedding, namely:
1. Translational Models [9,27,28]
2. Semantic Matching Models [29–31]
3. Deep Models [32,33]
We refer to [34] for a detailed survey of existing approaches. Often,
KGs contain multi-modal data (text, images, and so on). Thus, it is
convenient to consider these data as a tool to improve the accuracy
of an approach to finding matching entities. In the next section, we
introduce related literature on multi-modal KGs.
2.2. Multi-modal knowledge graphs
Holzinger et al. [35] recently observed that the direct involvement
of a human-in-the-loop can be enormously helpful when constructing
a KG as an initial connector, especially because it bridges the gap
to the increasingly important topic of explainability and causability.
We can successfully map explainability with causability through KGs
if we can develop a human–AI interfaces that allow domain experts
to ask questions interactively to gain deep insight into the underlying
independent factors of a result. However, to develop such a system,
there are many issues we need to resolve, such as link prediction and
entity matching problems. Most of the previous research work mainly
uses the relational structure of a KG to address the link prediction
and entity matching problems. Thus, they neglect crucial auxiliary
information such as text, numerical values, and images associated with
entities [36–38].
To this end, an increasing number of approaches combine the
relational structure of a KG with other types of information to better
manage the link prediction and entity matching problems. KGs containing various data types such as numerical attributes, texts, and images
are often called multi-modal knowledge graphs [39]. One of the early
examples of multi-modal KG is the VisualGenome project [36]. The
main output of the VisualGenome project is a KG based on WordNet, which provides annotations of categories, attributes, and relation
types for each available image. In line with the work of [36], Onoro
et al. [37] described IMAGEGRAPH as a publicly available KG in which
entities are associated with images. They considered a novel class of
queries to pose against a KG in which images are treated as arguments
of the query itself.
Xie et al. [38] suggest using rich information embodied in images in
constructing a KG. Xie et al. [38] describes a method called IKRL, which
consists of the following steps: (1) It applies a neural image encoder
(based on the AlexNet neural network [40]) on every entity image as
input. The image encoder aims to generate picture representations in

3. Proposed framework
In this section, we first formulate the problem and then describe the
technical details of the proposed framework. A multi-modal KG can be
viewed as a tuple 𝐺 = (, , , ), where , , ,  denote the sets of
entities, images, relations and attributes, respectively. Given a pair of
entities 𝑒𝑠 ∈ 𝑠 from source KG 𝐺𝑠 and 𝑒𝑡 ∈ 𝑡 from target KG 𝐺𝑡 , the
113

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.

task of entity alignment is to match entities describing the same object
in different KGs.
To tackle the entity alignment task, we propose a framework called
DFMKE to learn a function 𝑓 that can estimate the similarity of 𝑒𝑠 and
𝑒𝑡 , and such a similarity should be high if 𝑒𝑠 and 𝑒𝑡 refer to the same
object.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the DFMKE consists of two critical parts:
multi-modal KG embeddings and dual multi-modal knowledge fusion.
In the following, we will introduce the technical details of these two
steps.

algorithm, which considers a relation to be a translation vector from
the head to the tail of an entity. We use the following scoring function
with the 𝐿2 -norm to calculate the structural similarity for a fact (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡):
‖
‖
𝑓rel (𝐡, 𝐫, 𝐭) = − ‖𝐡(2) + 𝐫 − 𝐭 (2) ‖ .
‖
‖

(5)

Then we apply the logistic loss function to learn the relation embeddings 𝑒𝑚𝑏 as below:
∑
))
(
(
(6)
log 1 + exp 𝛼𝑓rel (𝐡, 𝐫, 𝐭) ,
𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑅 =
(ℎ,𝑟,𝑡)∈ + ∪ −

3.1. Multi-modal KG embeddings

where 𝛼 is the label of (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡) whose value is 1 or -1; the symbol
 + = 𝑎 ∪ 𝑏 denotes the set of positive relation facts in the source and
target KGs while  − denotes the set of negative samples obtained by
replacing the head or tail entities of positive relation facts with random
ones. The goal is to maximize the probability of the prediction being
positive and the probability of the negative prediction. That is to say,
each sample prediction must obtain the maximum probability, and the
probability of all the samples after the prediction is multiplied to get the
maximum likelihood function. This loss function can guarantee better
generalization ability with higher efficiency than the original TransE
design.
Attribute Embedding. According to [51], modeling attributes with
deep neural networks might pollute entity representations due to noise
from neighbors. Thus, because in this work we focus on attribute
embedding (including numerical attributes), we employ a feed-forward
network for mapping attribute features into a low-dimensional space:

In the multi-modal KG embeddings part, we generate the knowledge
representations of entities from three data modalities, including a relational triple with entity associations, visual data, and entity attributes,
for instance, numerical attributes and descriptions of entities. Besides,
we model the structure of KG to capture both entity and relation proximity to compute the structural similarity of 𝐺𝑠 and 𝐺𝑡 . The following
sections will go into further detail about each knowledge embedding.
KG Structure Embedding. For KG structure embedding, we design an embedding model based on graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) [46] and our previous work [47]. Compared to traditional GCNbased methods for graph embedding, we treat the KG as an undirected
bipartite graph and use additional nodes to represent the relationships
between two entity nodes. For example, assume a triplet (𝑒1 , 𝑟, 𝑒2 ), we
assign relation vertices 𝑟1 and 𝑟2 for this triplet as (𝑒1 , 𝑟1 ) and (𝑒2 , 𝑟2 ).
Each relation vertex will be assigned a unique one-hot representation.
We then use the feature vector generated by Deepwalk [48] to
represent each entity vertex and the unique one-hot representation for
each relation vertex as input channels of GCN on this newly constructed
graph. The relation vertices indicate how many neighbors with the
same relation information exist between two entity vertices.
After 𝑙 convolutional layers encoding, we can obtain a representation learned from the graph, including the information of entity vertices
and relation vertices. Thus, each layer of GCN can be written as a
non-linear function:
(
)
𝐻 (𝑙+1) = 𝑓 𝐻 (𝑙) , 𝑀 ,
(1)

𝑒𝑚𝑏 = 𝐖 ⋅ 𝐀 + 𝐛 ,

where 𝑒𝑚𝑏 is the attribute embedding; 𝐖 is the weight matrix and
𝐛 is the bias vector. In this way, we can improve computing efficiency
with sound results.
3.2. Dual multi-modal knowledge fusion
We introduce an efficient dual fusion scheme to incorporate the
advantages of features combination and outputs of embedding models
from different modalities. To describe our dual fusion scheme approach,
we begin by observing that multi-modal data sources have been extensively used in Machine Learning applications: in fact, each data
source (or modality) provides a different type of information about
the same piece of reality and, if we were able to integrate single
modalities effectively, then we could reduce the impact of noisy data.
The ultimate purpose of multi-modal data fusion approaches is to
design more accurate and robust-to-noise Machine Learning algorithms.
A critical problem in multi-modal data fusion is the correlation
among different modalities: broadly speaking, the term correlation
specifies how one input modality varies if another modality varies
too. In many situations, the correlation between modalities provides
essential clues to deciding how to fuse two modalities [52].
Feature correlation is, in our opinion, extremely important to address the entity alignment problem for multi-modal KGs: two entities
in two independent multi-modal KGs could be provided with a small
amount of data, each encoded in a particular form (e.g., texts in the
first KG and images in the second KG). If we could capture correlations
among features, we could cleverly perform the fusion task, and thus,
we could be more confident in deciding if the two entities represent
the same thing.
The above observations motivate us to design a fusion scheme
that can capture correlations between modalities. We recall that the
fusion method can be roughly classified into early and late fusion,
and we recall that early fusion methods are particularly appealing in
capturing correlations between modalities; due to these reasons, our
fusion scheme combines an early with a late fusion method to achieve
the best of the two methods.

where 𝐻 (0) is the input matrix, 𝐻 (𝐿) is the output matrix, 𝐿 is the
number of layers, and 𝑀 is the adjacency matrix of KG. We then set
the following propagation rule:
(
)
(
)
𝑓 𝐻 (𝑙) , 𝑀 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 𝑀𝐻 (𝑙) 𝑊 (𝑙) ,
(2)
where 𝑊 (𝑙) is a weight matrix for the 𝑙th network layer, and ReLU is
the activation function. Note that the multiplication by 𝑀 only sums
up all attributes of all neighbor vertices, not the vertex itself. Therefore,
we need to add the identity matrix 𝐼 to 𝑀, and Eq. (2) is updated as
follows [46]:
( 1
)
1
(
)
̂ 𝐷̂ − 2 𝐻 (𝑙) 𝑊 (𝑙) ,
𝑓 𝐻 (𝑙) , 𝑀 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 𝐷̂ − 2 𝑀
(3)
̂ = 𝑀 + 𝐼 and 𝐷̂ is the diagonal vertex degree matrix of 𝑀.
̂
where 𝑀
As the KG structure embedding 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑘𝑔 , we use the output of the final
layer.
Visual Knowledge Embedding. For image embedding, we use a
pre-trained RESNET model [49] as the feature extractor for all images
and use the output of the last layer to represent the image. Compared
to the other classical model VGG16 [50], RESNET proposed a residual
network to solve the degradation problem in a deep network. The
extracted feature is processed using the equation below to obtain the
image embedding 𝑒𝑚𝑏 :
𝑒𝑚𝑏 = 𝐖 ⋅ RESNET() + 𝐛 .

(7)

(4)

Relation Embedding. A KG’s fundamental component is its relations, which connect the entities. We use the well-known TransE [9]
114

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.

Fig. 2. Overview of DFMKE Framework.

Specifically, we first adopt early fusion to combine various features
of multi-modal data. In light of the observations above, an early fusion
step aims to exploit correlations between low-level features of each
modality. Though this step cannot make full use of the complementary
between modalities, it can alleviate the inconsistency between the
original data in each modality which is beneficial for later steps.
After that, late fusion is carried out to fuse the early fusion module’s
output and the multi-modal representation computed via the classical
low-rank multi-modal fusion model (LMF), which has been proved
efficient to leverage knowledge from multiple modalities [53].
In this section, we will give the technical details about the early and
late fusion methods and their combination strategy.
Early Fusion. Before feeding into a model, early fusion is combining feature representations at the input level, which can better capture
the relationship among features [54]. We fuse multiple features for
various data modalities in this work by using standard early fusion
techniques. To combine learned feature representation for images from
the final fully-connected layer of the RESNET with features from the
other modalities, we create a straightforward fully connected neural
network model (NN) as shown in Fig. 3. The early fusion module maps
heterogeneous features in a shared space. After that, the output vector
ℎ𝑒 of the NN will be combined with the output representation of LMF
for late fusion.
Late Fusion. As we mentioned earlier, early fusion can only ensure
data consistency between different modalities but cannot guarantee the
complementary between data features. Based on these premises, we
introduce the late fusion module in the proposed framework, which addresses the complementary problem by fully exploiting the correlations
among data features.
Late fusion combines outputs of models for different modalities to
mine the complementary [55]. The multi-modal fusion can be formulated as a multi-linear function𝑓 ∶ 𝑉1 × 𝑉2 × ⋯ × 𝑉𝑀 → 𝐻, where
𝑉1 , 𝑉2 , … , 𝑉𝑀 are the vector spaces of input modalities and 𝐻 is the
output vector space.
{ }𝑀
Given a set of vector representations, 𝑧𝑚 𝑚=1 , which are encoding
uni-modal information of the 𝑀 different modalities, the goal of multimodal fusion is to combine the uni-modal representations into one
compact multi-modal representation.

Fig. 3. Early fusion model architecture.

Tensor representation is one of the successful methods for multimodal fusion. Prior to calculating the outer product, by adding 1s to the
uni-modal representations, the input tensor  formed by the uni-modal
⨂𝑀
𝑑𝑚 [56], where
representation is computed as  =
𝑚=1 𝑧𝑚 , 𝑧𝑚 ∈ R
⨂𝑀
denotes
the
tensor
outer
product
over
a
set
of
vectors
indexed
𝑚=1
by 𝑚. Then,  ∈ R𝑑1 ×𝑑2 ×⋯𝑑𝑀 can be integrated as an order-𝑀 tensor
with the weight  using a linear layer as ℎ =  ⋅  + 𝑏. However,
the weight tensor’s number of parameters will grow exponentially as
well, requiring a lot of computation and putting the model in danger
of over-fitting.
By breaking down the weight into a collection of low-rank factors,
the LMF solves the computational issues outlined above. Using the fact
⨂
that  = 𝑀
𝑚=1 𝑧𝑚 , the computation for the vector representation ℎ𝑙 can
be simplified as:
[ 𝑟
]
𝑀
⋀
∑
ℎ𝑙 =
𝐰(𝑖)
⋅
𝑧
(8)
𝑚 ,
𝑚
𝑚=1

115

𝑖=1

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.

⋀
where 𝑀
𝑚=1 denotes the element-wise product over a sequence of
tensors, 𝑟 is the rank of the tensor and 𝐰(𝑖)
𝑚 is the corresponding lowrank factors for each modality 𝑚. (Compared to the)original computation
∑𝑟 ⨂𝑀
(𝑖)
method in the LMF, where ℎ𝑙 =
𝑖=1
𝑚=1 𝐰𝑚 ⋅ , in the proposed
framework, we may compute ℎ𝑙 without actually generating the tensor
 from the input representations 𝑧𝑚 by making use of the parallel
decomposition of both  and  in this simplification (Eq. (8)). In
doing so, we eliminate the weight-lifting associated with computing the
massive input tensors  and .
To achieve the complementary of heterogeneous data, LMF implicit access to high-dimensional tensors to obtain the data commonalities of different modalities in a high-dimensional space while the
unimodal representations are integrated into a compact multi-modal
representation.
Moreover, in this work, as we tend to perform joint training with
the early fusion module further, the computation is still heavy if 𝑟 is too
big. Therefore, we update Eq. (8) by swapping the order of summation
and the element-wise product as below:
]
[𝑀
𝑟
∑
⋀[
]
(2)
(𝑟)
⋅
𝑧
̂
ℎ𝑙 =
𝐰(1)
,
𝐰
,
…
,
𝐰
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑚
𝑖=1

𝑚=1

𝑖

3.3. Training details
We design a training stage that learns all multi modalities embeddings and iteratively optimizes the shared space learning during an
epoch. To regularize embedding vectors, we limit all entity embeddings
with 𝐿2 normalization. The parameters are initialized with Xavier initializer, and the loss functions are optimized with Adadelta to simplify
the calculation. Every embedding has dimensions set to 100. We use the
mini-batch technique with a 1000 batch size. All learning rates were
set to 0.01, except shared space learning, which was set to 0.001. In
addition, 200 epochs are the maximum allowed.
On top of the 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 for all entities, we estimate the similarity of all
bi-graph entity pairs and align them using a loss function 𝐿𝑒𝑎 because
the similarity should be high if two entities refer to the same object
(the far right of Fig. 2).
Let 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑠𝐹 and 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑡𝐹 denote embeddings of the source and target
entities 𝑠 ⟨
and 𝑡 ⟩respectively. We compute their cosine similarity
matrix 𝐒 = 𝐅𝑠𝐽 , 𝐅𝑡𝐽 ∈ R|𝑎 |×|t | , where the cosine similarity between
the 𝑖th item in 𝑠 and the 𝑗th entity in 𝑡 is represented by each entry
𝑆𝑖𝑗 . The loss function of the whole entity alignment framework 𝐿𝑒𝑎 can
be formulated as below [57]:
(
)
∑ (1
∑
𝛼S𝑚𝑖 +
𝑒𝑎 = 𝑁1 𝑁
𝑚≠𝑖 𝑒
𝑖=1 𝛼 log 1 +
(11)
(
)
(
)) ,
∑
1
log 1 + 𝑛≠𝑖 𝑒𝛼𝑆𝑖𝑛 − log 1 + 𝛽𝐒𝑖𝑖
𝛼

(9)

∏𝑀

𝑟≤

s.t.

𝑚=1
∑𝑀
𝑚=1

,

where [⋅]𝑖 indicates the 𝑖th slice of a matrix, the Restriction can ensure
the decomposition exists in an acceptable range to reduce the computation. In other words, it allows us to early stop the calculation, thus
achieving relevant computational savings. This change also allows us to
parameterize the model with order-𝑀 tensors rather than a collection
of vectors, which means we can do the calculation in a parallel fashion
in practice is also beneficial from a computational standpoint.
Combination. We then design a strategy to combine ℎ𝑙 with ℎ𝑒
from the early fusion model. This combination strategy participates in
the joint training of early fusion and late fusion modules. In this way,
multiple modalities benefit from each other by inducing an orthogonal
mapping matrix from each embedding space to shared space. Let 𝐇𝑒
and 𝐇𝑙 be the combined embedding matrices obtained by storing
vectors ℎ𝑒 and ℎ𝑙 for each entity, respectively. The goal is to maximize
the agreement between 𝐇𝑒 and 𝐇𝑙 in a unified embedding space to
obtain the final multi-modal embeddings 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 . The loss function 𝐿𝑒𝑙
to learn 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 is designed as follows:
)
𝑁 (
∑
‖2 ‖
‖ 𝑖
‖2
(𝑖)
,
(10)
𝑒𝑙 =
‖𝐇𝑒 − 𝐇𝑙 𝐙(𝑖) ‖ + ‖𝐈 − 𝐙(𝑖)⊤ 𝐙(𝑖) ‖
‖𝐹 ‖
‖
‖𝐹

where 𝛼 and 𝛽 are temperature scales; 𝑁 is the number of seeds.
Before obtaining the 4096-dimensional embeddings for each entity, we
train RESNET image embeddings. We then train relation embedding
from TransE for all triplets. At each training step, the parameters are
updated by 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑅 , the loss function of dual fusion scheme 𝑒𝑙 and
𝑒𝑎 . Once the training process converges, we perform alignment by
the nearest-neighbor search based on 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 . Due to the convexity and
additive nature of the functions to be optimized, we employ stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) to optimize all of the aforementioned loss
functions. In other words, the SGD can converge to the optimal solution
using a single iteration to renew the model parameters, significantly
accelerating the convergence rate.

where 𝑁 is the number of entities, 𝐙(𝑖) serves as the mapping from the
𝑖th entity embedding space to the shared space for entity alignment in
the next step.
We observe that the loss function 𝑒𝑙 is additive, and, in addition,
each term appearing in the sum is, itself, the sum of the squares of two
norms. Consequently, the function 𝑒𝑙 is convex because it is the sum
of convex functions. As described earlier, the early fusion module produces a vector (ℎ𝑒 ) that ensures data consistency in different modalities,
while the late fusion model produces a vector (ℎ𝑙 ) that ensures data
is complementary across different modalities. With this strategy, the
fusion of low-level features and high-dimensional tensors mapped back
to a low-dimensional output vector space is implemented, which means
the information of modal correlations at the feature level is employed.
It is worth observing that Eq. (10) depends only on matrices 𝐇𝑖𝑒 and 𝐇𝑙(𝑖)
for 𝑖 ∈ [1, 𝑁] and, thus, it does not require to specify in advance seed
entities, that is pairs of entities from two KGs which represent the same
entity. Consequently, Eq. (10) defines a measure of similarity between
entities that can be computed in a fully unsupervised fashion.
From a practical standpoint, we have many efficient options to
optimize 𝑒𝑙 , and to this extent, the stochastic gradient descent method
is the most convenient strategy. In the following subsection, we give
details on how the training phase was performed.

Datasets. We use two public multi-modal datasets in the experiments, FB15K-DB15K and FB15K-YAGO15K [44]. The FB15K subset
was extracted from the Freebase knowledge base as a representative
subset. We chose DB15K from DBpedia and YAGO15K from YAGO to
keep an approximate entity number aligned with FB15K. The statistics
for multi-modal data are shown in Table 1.
Evaluation Metrics. To calculate the similarity between two entities, we use cosine similarity. We use three popular indicators, Hits@n,
MR, and MRR, as metrics to evaluate model performance. Hits@n
denotes the rate at which correct entities rank in the top 𝑛 entities based
on the similarity computation. The terms MR and MRR in the parameter
stand for the mean rank and mean reciprocal rank of correct entities,
respectively.
Comparative Methods. We have chosen various types of state-ofthe-art models to demonstrate the performance of the DFMKE framework, including two typical translation-based methods, TransE [9], and
IPTransE [23]; two straightforward late fusion methods, MMKG [44],
and MMEA [10]; and two recently proposed methods, that is MultiKE [12], and EVA [11].
We employ their reported results for those methods using the same
datasets. To replicate their experiments, we followed the same hyperparameters setting for other methods mentioned in the original
papers.

4. Experiments
In this part, we assess DFMKE using two real-world datasets and
show how it may be used to attain cutting-edge performance by utilizing multi-modal knowledge in the entity alignment task.
4.1. Experimental settings

𝑖=1

116

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.
Table 1
Statistics of multi-modal datasets.
Datasets

Entities

Relations

Attributes

Relational triples

FB15K
DB15K
YAGO15K

14951
12842
15404

1345
279
32

116
225
7

592213
89197
122886

Fig. 7. Ablation study on FB15K-YAGO15K dataset (MRR).

baseline methods on both datasets. For example, DFMKE exceeds 10%
more than EVA, which is the second-best method regarding the Hits@n
indicator on both datasets. Regarding the MRR indicator, DFMKE
is the only model that can exceed 0.5 on both FB15K-DB15K and
FB15K-YAGO15K datasets.
Additionally, we found that multi-modal knowledge outperforms
those that just use one modality, e.g., TransE and IPTransE, the worstperforming models that use only relation knowledge. The experimental
findings demonstrated that DFMKE is more successful for multi-modal
knowledge than other fusion approaches.
Analysis of Unsupervised Entity Alignment. This task intends
to evaluate the performance of the DFMKE to align entities without
seed entities. As found in [58], seed entities are vital to learning KG
embeddings from relation facts. However, annotated seeds may not
be widely available across KG for entity alignment. Therefore, we
considered a variant of our approach – called ‘‘DFMKE w/o seed’’ – in
which we assumed no seed entities were available. We compared the
DFMKE w/o seed method with the well-known semi-supervised entity
alignment method KECG [26] we already introduced in Section 2 on
multi-modal KGs. For fairness, we adjusted the architecture of KECG to
handle the situation that there are no seed entities.
As shown in Table 3, DFMKE w/o seed still achieves acceptable
results, which means the framework does not heavily rely on seed
alignment as supervision. At the same time, the relation and attribute
views can benefit from early and late fusion during training, even if no
seed entity alignment is given. This experiment reveals that DFMKE has
good robustness and can alleviate seed alignment reliance. As expected,
the HITS@10 and MRR scores achieved by the DFMKE w/o seed
approach degrade compared with the DFMKE model in both FB15KDB15K and FB15K-YAGO15K datasets, but such a worsening appears
to be limited. Consequently, we can conclude that lack of seed entities
has a negligible impact on the accuracy of the DFMKE approach.
We also point out that DFMKE w/o seed achieves better performance than that observed for KECG in both Hits@10 and MRR metrics;
this behavior depends on the fact that the relation and attribute views
can benefit from early and late fusion during training, even if no
seed entity alignment is given. Therefore, we can conclude that the
experiment presented in this section shows that the DFMKE approach
displays good robustness and slightly relies on seed entities.
Ablation Study. To further validate the effectiveness of DFMKE,
we design two variants for the ablation study, namely DFMKE-E and
DFMKE-L. DFMKE-E is a variant of DFMKE using the early fusion
method only, and DFMKE-L is a variant of DFMKE using the late fusion
method only.
In this experiment, we further evaluate DFMKE, DFMKE-E, and
DFMKE-L with different test splits on FB15K-DB15K and FB15KYAGO15K datasets using Hit@10 and MRR indicators. For instance,
80% means we use the 80% dataset as the training dataset, and the
rest of 20% is the test dataset.

Fig. 4. Ablation study on FB15K-DB15K dataset (Hits@10).

Fig. 5. Ablation study on FB15K-DB15K dataset (MRR).

Fig. 6. Ablation study on FB15K-YAGO15K dataset (Hits@10).

4.2. Experimental results
To compare the outcomes of each model, we divide up the datasets.
We use 20% of each dataset’s data as training sets because this setting
can better demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of all methods,
as many existing works prove. The remaining data are treated as testing
sets.
Performance Comparison. On the FB15K-DB15K and FB15KYAGO15K datasets, Table 2 provides all model results with 20% alignment information. In general, the proposed DFMKE outperforms all
117

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.
Table 2
Results of unsupervised entity alignment.
Models

FB15K-DB15K

TransE [9]
IPTransE [23]
MMKG [44]
MMEA [10]
MultiKE [12]
EVA [11]
DFMKE

FB15K-YAGO15K

Hits@1

Hits@10

MR

MRR

Hits@1

Hits@10

MR

MRR

7.81
3.99
12.01
26.48
28.82
30.25
33.82

24.11
17.27
25.62
54.11
56.35
59.85
65.45

442.47
387.51
148.82
124.81
110.85
99.65
89.66

0.13
0.08
0.17
0.36
0.42
0.48
0.55

6.36
3.08
10.91
23.39
28.55
32.68
36.78

20.25
14.43
24.14
48.11
50.25
58.65
64.55

522.54
522.23
168.88
147.44
129.65
110.56
102.53

0.11
0.07
0.15
0.32
0.39
0.45
0.51

Table 3
Results of entity alignment.
FB15K-DB15K

KECG [26]
DFMKE w/o seed
DFMKE

public datasets showed the robustness and efficiency of the suggested
approach for multi-modal entity alignment, which significantly beat
state-of-the-art baseline techniques. In the future, we plan to investigate
the adaptation of the DFMKE for cross-lingual entity alignment in
multi-modal KGs.

FB15K-YAGO15K

Hits@10

MRR

Hits@10

MRR

60.11
63.21
65.45

0.48
0.53
0.55

58.55
62.75
64.55

0.46
0.49
0.51

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Zhu JIA reports financial support was provided by National Natural
Science Foundation of China.

Table 4
Ablation study of DFMKE based on 20% alignment data.
FB15K-DB15K

w/o structure
w/o image
w/o relation
w/o attribute

FB15K-YAGO15K

Hits@10

MRR

Hits@10

MRR

40.85
62.33
61.45
61.66

0.41
0.52
0.51
0.52

40.68
60.32
59.78
59.93

0.38
0.47
0.46
0.47

Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgments

As illustrated in Figs. 4 to 7, DFMKE outperforms DFMKE-E and
DFMKE-L, revealing that DFMKE provides insights to take advantage
of multi-modal knowledge compared to early or late fusion modules.
Moreover, early fusion complements the information absence of feature
correlation to improve its overall performance through its performance
is much worse than late fusion. Finally, we discover that the performance of all three models on both indicators improved if the amount
of training data increased.
In summary, all the above experiments demonstrate that the DFMKE
framework can locate entities referencing the same real-world identity
from various KGs by fully utilizing multi-modal knowledge to reach
cutting-edge performance for entity alignment.
Last but not least, we also perform experiments to verify the impact
of each modality on the DFMKE. As shown in Table 4, we have ‘‘w/o
x’’ methods in this experiment, where ‘‘x’’ represents the modality we
remove. For instance, according to the results, dropping KG structure
embedding decreases Hit@10 from 65.45 to 40.85 on FB15K-DB15K,
which means the modality remains the most important for our framework. The other three modalities are of equal importance, around
a 4%–7% drop for each modality on both datasets. Note that we
initialize the same weight for each modality at the beginning of the
training. This experiment proves the effectiveness and innovation of our
work, especially in the fusion part, as the proposed dual multi-modal
knowledge graph embedding framework can leverage knowledge from
multiple modalities to achieve better results for entity alignment.

This work was supported by the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Normal University, Zhejiang, China, the Key Research and Development
Program of Zhejiang Province (No. 2021C03141), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (62077015, 61877020
and 62037001).
References
[1] D. Wijaya, P.P. Talukdar, T. Mitchell, PIDGIN: ontology alignment using web text
as interlingua, in: ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, 2013, pp. 589–598.
[2] J. Bleiholder, F. Naumann, Data fusion, ACM Comput. Surv. 41 (1) (2009) 1–41.
[3] J. Volz, C. Bizer, M. Gaedke, G. Kobilarov, Discovering and maintaining links
on the web of data, in: Proceedings of International Semantic Web Conference,
2009, pp. 650–665.
[4] B.D. Trisedya, J. Qi, R. Zhang, Entity alignment between knowledge graphs
using attribute embeddings, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2019, pp. 297–304.
[5] F. Mahdisoltani, J. Biega, F. Suchanek, Yago3: A knowledge base from multilingual wikipedias, in: 7th Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems
Research, CIDR Conference, 2014.
[6] W. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Qu, A self-training approach for resolving object coreference
on the semantic web, in: Proc. of the 20th International Conference on World
Wide Web, Hyderabad, India, 2011, pp. 87–96.
[7] S.C. Pei, L. Yu, R. Hoehndorf, X.L. Zhang, Semi-supervised entity alignment via
knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in: Proceedings
of the World Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3130–3136.
[8] C. Li, Y. Cao, L. Hou, J. Shi, J. Li, T.-S. Chua, Semi-supervised entity alignment
via joint knowledge embedding model and cross-graph model, in: Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2019, pp. 2723–2732.
[9] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. García-Duran, J. Weston, O. Yakhnenko, Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data, in: Proceedings of Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2013, pp. 2787–2795.
[10] L. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Wang, T. Xu, Z. Wang, E. Chen, MMEA: Entity alignment for
multi-modal knowledge graph, in: Proceedings of International Conference on
Knowledge Science, Engineering and Management, 2020, pp. 134–146.
[11] F. Liu, M. Chen, D. Roth, N. Collier, Visual pivoting for (unsupervised) entity
alignment, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2021, pp. 1–9.

5. Conclusions
In this paper, we propose a dual fusion multi-modal KG embedding
framework that integrates several representations of various types of
information based on knowledge embedding for the entity alignment
task. We first introduce an early fusion method for fusing features of
multi-modal entities. Moreover, an efficient late fusion method using
modality-specific low-rank factors was designed through shared space
learning with the output vectors from early fusion to migrate features under different knowledge spaces. Extensive experiments on two
118

Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

J. Zhu et al.

[35] A. Holzinger, B. Malle, A. Saranti, B. Pfeifer, Towards multi-modal causability
with graph neural networks enabling information fusion for explainable AI, Inf.
Fusion 71 (2021) 28–37.
[36] R. Krishna, Y. Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata, J. Kravitz, S. Chen, Y.
Kalantidis, L.-J. Li, D.A. Shamma, et al., Visual genome: Connecting language
and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations, Int. J. Comput. Vis.
123 (1) (2017) 32–73.
[37] D. Oñoro-Rubio, M. Niepert, A. García-Durán, R. González-Sánchez, R.J. LópezSastre, Representation learning for visual-relational knowledge graphs, 2017,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.02314.
[38] R. Xie, Z. Liu, H. Luan, M. Sun, Image-embodied knowledge representation learning, in: Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2017, pp. 3140–3146.
[39] P. Pezeshkpour, L. Chen, S. Singh, Embedding multimodal relational data for
knowledge base completion, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018, pp. 3208–3218.
[40] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G.E. Hinton, ImageNet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks, in: Proc. of the International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United
States, 2012, pp. 1106–1114.
[41] P. Verga, D. Belanger, E. Strubell, B. Roth, A. McCallum, Multilingual relation
extraction using compositional universal schema, in: Proc. of TheConference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, The Association for Computational Linguistics,
San Diego, California, USA, 2016, pp. 886–896.
[42] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for largescale image recognition, in: Proc. of the International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, California, USA, 2015.
[43] Y. Gao, O. Beijbom, N. Zhang, T. Darrell, Compact bilinear pooling, in: Proc.
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp.
317–326.
[44] Y. Liu, H. Li, A. Garcia-Duran, M. Niepert, D. Onoro-Rubio, D.S. Rosenblum, MMKG: multi-modal knowledge graphs, in: Proceedings of the European
Semantic Web Conference, 2019, pp. 459–474.
[45] A. García-Durán, M. Niepert, KBlrn: End-to-end learning of knowledge base
representations with latent, relational, and numerical features, in: Proc. of the
Thirty-Fourth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2018,
Monterey, California, USA, 2018, pp. 372–381.
[46] T.N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-seupervised classification with graph convolutional
networks, 2017, pp. 1–14.
[47] J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, M. Yang, G.P.C. Fung, Y. Tang, A semi-supervised model for
knowledge graph embedding, Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 34 (2019) 1–20.
[48] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, S. Skiena, Deepwalk: Online learning of social representations, in: Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, 2014, pp. 701–710.
[49] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition,
in: Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2016, pp. 770–778.
[50] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
image recognition, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2015, pp. 1–14.
[51] H.-W. Yang, Y. Zou, P. Shi, W. Lu, J. Lin, X. Sun, Aligning cross-lingual entities
with multi-aspect information, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing, 2019, pp. 4422–4432.
[52] P. Atrey, M. Hossain, A.E. Saddik, M.S. Kankanhalli, Multimodal fusion for
multimedia analysis: a survey, Multimedia Syst. 16 (6) (2010) 345–379.
[53] Z. Liu, Y. Shen, V.B. Lakshminarasimhan, P.P. Liang, A.B. Zadeh, L.P. Morency,
Efficient low-rank multimodal fusion with modality-specific factors, in: Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018,
pp. 2247–2256.
[54] Z. zhong Lan, L. Bao, S.-I. Yu, W. Liu, A.G. Hauptmann, Multimedia classification
and event detection using double fusion, Multimedia Tools Appl. 71 (1) (2014)
333–347.
[55] C.G.M. Snoek, M. Worring, A.W.M. Smeulders, Early versus late fusion in
semantic video analysis, in: ACM International Conference Multimedia, 2005,
pp. 399–402.
[56] A. Zadeh, M. Chen, S. Poria, E. Cambria, L.-P. Morency, Tensor fusion network
for multimodal sentiment analysis, in: Proceedings of Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2017, pp. 1103–1114.
[57] F. Liu, R. Ye, X. Wang, S. Li, HAL: Improved TextImage matching by mitigating
visual semantic hubs, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2020, pp. 11563–11571.
[58] Z. Wang, Q. Lv, X. Lan, Y. Zhang, Cross-lingual knowledge graph alignment via
graph convolutional networks, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018, pp. 349–357.

[12] Q. Zhang, Z. Sun, W. Hu, M. Chen, L. Guo, Y. Qu, Multi-view knowledge
graph embedding for entity alignment, in: Proceedings of the International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019, pp. 5429–5435.
[13] G. Klyne, Resource description framework (RDF): Concepts and abstract syntax,
2004, http://www.w3.org/tr/2004/rec-rdf-concepts-20040210/.
[14] A. El-Roby, A. Aboulnaga, ALEX: Automatic link exploration in linked data, in:
Proc. of the 2015 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, Melbourne, Australia, 2015, pp. 1839–1853.
[15] Y. Raimond, C. Sutton, M. Sandler, Automatic interlinking of music datasets on
the semantic web, in: Proceedings of LBOW, 2008, pp. 1–8.
[16] F.M. Suchanek, S. Abiteboul, P. Senellart, PARIS: probabilistic alignment of
relations, instances, and schema, Proc. VLDB Endow. 5 (3) (2011) 157–168.
[17] M. Chen, Y. Tian, M. Yang, C. Zaniolo, Multilingual knowledge graph embeddings
for cross-lingual knowledge alignment, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Sixth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Melbourne, Australia, 2017, pp.
1511–1517.
[18] Y. Cao, Z. Liu, C. Li, Z. Liu, J. Li, T. Chua, Multi-channel graph neural
network for entity alignment, in: Proc. of the 57th Conference of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Florence, Italy, 2019, pp. 1452–1461.
[19] M. Chen, Y. Tian, K. Chang, S. Skiena, C. Zaniolo, Co-training embeddings of
knowledge graphs and entity descriptions for cross-lingual entity alignment,
in: Proc. of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 3998–4004.
[20] S. Pei, L. Yu, R. Hoehndorf, X. Zhang, Semi-supervised entity alignment via
knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in: The World
Wide Web Conference, WWW 2019, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 13-17, 2019,
ACM, 2019, pp. 3130–3136.
[21] Z. Sun, W. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Qu, Bootstrapping entity alignment with knowledge
graph embedding, in: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2018, pp. 4396–4402.
[22] Y. Wu, X. Liu, Y. Feng, Z. Wang, R. Yan, D. Zhao, Relation-aware entity
alignment for heterogeneous knowledge graphs, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Eighth
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2019, Macao,
China, pp. 5278–5284.
[23] H. Zhu, R. Xie, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Iterative entity alignment via joint knowledge
embeddings, in: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2017, pp. 4258–4264.
[24] C. Li, Y. Cao, L. Hou, J. Shi, J. Li, T.-S. Chua, Semi-supervised entity alignment
via knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in:
Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3130–3136.
[25] S. Pei, L. Yu, R. Hoehndorf, X. Zhang, Semi-supervised entity alignment via
knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in: The World
Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3130–3136.
[26] C. Li, Y. Cao, L. Hou, J. Shi, J. Li, T.-S. Chua, Semi-supervised entity
alignment via joint knowledge embedding model and cross-graph model, in:
EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2019, pp. 2723–2732.
[27] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Feng, Z. Chen, Knowledge graph embedding by translating
on hyperplanes, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, AAAI Press, Québec City, Québec, Canada, 2014, pp. 1112–1119.
[28] Y. Lin, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, Learning entity and relation embeddings
for knowledge graph completion, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, January, AAAI Press, Austin, Texas, USA, 2015, pp.
2181–2187.
[29] B. Yang, W. Yih, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, Embedding entities and relations
for learning and inference in knowledge bases, in: Proc. of the International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, 2015.
[30] M. Nickel, L. Rosasco, T.A. Poggio, Holographic embeddings of knowledge
graphs, in: Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, AAAI Press, 2016, pp.
1955–1961.
[31] Z. Sun, Z. Deng, J. Nie, J. Tang, Rotate: Knowledge graph embedding by
relational rotation in complex space, in: 7th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2019.
[32] B. Shi, T. Weninger, Proje: Embedding projection for knowledge graph completion, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
2017.
[33] T. Dettmers, P. Minervini, P. Stenetorp, S. Riedel, Convolutional 2D knowledge
graph embeddings, in: Proc. of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, AAAI-18, AAAI Press, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 2018, pp.
1811–1818.
[34] Q. Wang, Z. Mao, B. Wang, L. Guo, Knowledge graph embedding: A survey
of approaches and applications, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 29 (12) (2017)
2724–2743.

119