Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

EETC: An extended encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithm based on
variant resnet network
Xiuli Ma a,∗, Wenbin Zhu a, Jieling Wei a, Yanliang Jin a, Dongsheng Gu b, Rui Wang a
a

Key Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Joint International Research Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Advanced
Communication, Shanghai Institute of Advanced Communication and Data Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China
b
Shanghai YueWei Technology Co., Shanghai 200072, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 31 August 2022
Revised 20 January 2023
Accepted 4 March 2023
Available online 8 March 2023
Keywords:
Encrypted traﬃc
Network security
Incremental learning
Residual network
Extended classiﬁcation

a b s t r a c t
With the advent of big data, encrypted traﬃc is widely used, and it is gradually becoming a new challenge for network security and management. Many researchers have obtained good results by converting
encrypted traﬃc into images and feeding them to deep learning-based classiﬁcation models. However,
these methods have some limitations in that they cannot do sustainable learning. They have to retrain a
new classiﬁer when new traﬃc is encountered. To tackle this issue, we propose an extended encrypted
traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithm based on incremental learning. This approach extracts content and statistical information from encrypted traﬃc and supports multi-label prediction for VPN channels and applications. We can add new classes to the model without completely retraining and accelerate the update
cycle of the model. The results show that the proposed model performs well in classiﬁcation experiments,
which can achieve 98.1% and 96.0% classiﬁcation accuracy on ISCXVPN2016 and self-collected dataset respectively. In addition, our method can retain high accuracy under the situation of limited memory space
while the number of new classes of data increases gradually. It demonstrates the superiority of constructing a generic unforgetting basis for classifying encrypted communication.
© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Due to the prevalence of Internet applications, a large amount
of network traﬃc is generated when people surf the Internet.
Therefore, the high-accuracy classiﬁcation of traﬃc has become an
essential aspect of network security and cyberspace management.
For example, the enterprise network administrator can prioritize
the quality of service (QoS) for certain speciﬁc applications and assign a lower network communication priority to the applications
that do not comply with the network policy. Nowadays, the need
for information privacy is increasingly recognized. Many companies use encryption protocols that are designed to guarantee the
security of information in their products, such as Transport Layer
Security (TLS), Virtual Private Network (VPN), Secure Sockets Layer
(SSL), Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP), and so on. However, cyber-attacks are commonplace. Typically, attackers utilize
encryption technology to conceal themselves, elude the scrutiny of
network security technologies, and cause enormous losses to in-

∗

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: xlma@shu.edu.cn (X. Ma), zhuwenbin@shu.edu.cn (W. Zhu),
969377443@qq.com (J. Wei), jinyanliang@staff.shu.edu.cn (Y. Jin), gds@yview.cn (D.
Gu), rwang@shu.edu.cn (R. Wang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103175
0167-4048/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

dividuals and businesses. Therefore, academia and industry have
begun to pay attention to the classiﬁcation of encrypted traﬃc in
recent years.
Traditionally, there are two main methods of traﬃc classiﬁcation: the port-based approach and the payload-based approach. In
the port-based approach, protocols can be identiﬁed directly according to the corresponding port in RFC. For instance, port 21
corresponds to File Transfer Protocol (FTP), whereas port 80 corresponds to Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). The port-based approach is straightforward. However, with the appearance of dynamically assigned port numbers (Cotton et al., 2011), more and
more applications begin to use random ports to circumvent the
inspection of the ﬁrewall. As a consequence, the port-based approach is invalid. Then, researchers are devoted to the traﬃc identiﬁcation method by studying payload in traﬃc, which is also
known as deep packet inspection (DPI) (Bujlow et al., 2015). Due
to the speciﬁc packet formats in different encryption protocols or
applications, such as ﬁxed strings, DPI can explore and summarize the characteristics of payloads from different kinds of trafﬁc. However, it has restrictions with regard to encrypted payload.
At present, machine learning has emerged as a strategy to solve
the problem of encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation, such as Bayesian
technology (Kudryavtsev and Shorgin, 2010), C4.5 decision tree

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175
Table 1
List of acronyms.

(Ho, 1998), support vector machine (Poulet, 2004), and k-nearest
neighbor (Sun and Huang, 2010). However, these classical algorithms deeply rely on the artiﬁcial feature selection of encrypted
traﬃc. Consequently, deep learning classiﬁers have been implemented in modern-traﬃc classiﬁcation which gives computers the
ability to learn the features of traﬃc. Some works classify encrypted data based on statistical characteristics of traﬃc. Generally, statistical information needs to be adjusted according to different classiﬁcation tasks. Apart from that, the majority of these
works use raw traﬃc data to classify. Due to the uniﬁed input size
of neural network, it is necessary to truncate raw traﬃc data or
add 0 bytes after packet. Hence, the traﬃc information is lost or
redundant, and classiﬁcation accuracy decreases. In recent years,
an increasing number of researchers have utilized parallel network
topology to combine the content characteristics and statistical features of encrypted data, which increases the complexity of the network and the training time.
In addition, another diﬃculty exists in the classiﬁcation of
encrypted traﬃc. Traditional encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithms often focus on oﬄine training. When new data come, the
model needs to be retrained. With the rapid growth of encrypted
traﬃc types, it has become a trend for the dataset to be larger, the
model to be more intricate, and the training period to be longer.
Therefore, it is of great signiﬁcance to explore an algorithm that
can make the model accumulate learning experience despite limited memory and computational resources.
In this paper, we propose an encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation
model based on variant ResNet18 (He et al., 2016) and apply incremental learning to realize expanded classiﬁcation and improve
the model’s practicability. Our method is different from the existing approaches of traﬃc classiﬁcation in both preprocessing and
network structure.
The contributions of our work are as follows:

Acronym

Expansion

APP
BV
CIL
CNN
DER
DPI
EETC
EWC
FN
FP
FTP
GEM
GIL
HTTP
iCaRL

Application
Bias Vector
Class-Incremental Learning
Convolutional Neural Network
Dark Experience Replay
Deep Packet Inspection
Extended Encrypted Traﬃc Classiﬁcation
Elastic Weight Consolidation
False Negative
False Positive
File Transfer Protocol
Gradient Episodic Memory
General Incremental Learning
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
Incremental Classiﬁer and
Representation Learning
Internet Protocol
Long Short-Term Memory
Learning without Forgetting
Media Access Control
Nearest Mean of Exemplars
Quality of Service
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
Stacked Autoencoders
Secure Real-time Transport Protocol
Secure Sockets Layer
Shadowsocks-R
Transmission Control Protocol
Transport Layer Security
True Negative
True Positive
Virtual Private Network

IP
LSTM
LWF
MAC
NME
QoS
RKHS
SAE
SRTP
SSL
SSR
TCP
TLS
TN
TP
VPN

2.1. Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation

• We propose a new composition method based on packet splicing to generate three-channel RGB images. It enhances statistical information such as packet direction and data transmission
frequency with completely keeping the content information of
encrypted traﬃc.
• To extend the framework, a novel attempt is adopted to apply
incremental learning to encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. We employ a variety of techniques to store a subset of exemplars in
limited memory and replay them for the next classiﬁcation.
• To overcome the bias problem caused by Softmax, we purpose
a bias vector and a balance factor to modify the prediction of
the model by normalization in an extended framework.
• Our proposed model supports the multi-label prediction of VPN
channels and applications. The experimental results show it can
achieve 98.1% and 96.0% classiﬁcation accuracy on ISCXVPN2016
(Draper-Gil et al., 2016) and self-collected dataset respectively.

In the literature, deep learning-based traﬃc classiﬁcation methods are classiﬁed into two categories. Some methods directly use
the traﬃc payload as the input to the network. Other methods extract statistical characteristics from the raw traﬃc as input to the
classiﬁcation model.
Many studies focus on traﬃc payload. Wang et al. (2017) transformed traﬃc payloads into images and used an end-to-end onedimensional convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture to
classify these images. This is the ﬁrst work to turn traﬃc classiﬁcation into image classiﬁcation. They integrated feature extraction and classiﬁcation network into one system directly using the ﬁrst 784 bytes of original ﬂow, which can successfully
distinguish VPN and non-VPN traﬃc. He and Li (2020) also proposed an image-based traﬃc classiﬁcation method. They converted
the ﬁrst few non-zero payloads of the session into gray images
and employed CNN to achieve classiﬁcation. Hu et al. (2021) proposed the CLD-Net model which can automatically extract features from the packet payload of the original stream and add
the information of the packet interval and fuse it into new features. Cui et al. (2019) fed the 28×28 traﬃc matrices into the
capsule neural network (Rajasegaran et al., 2019). Compared with
CNN, the capsule network adopts vector instead of scalar as neuron, which can learn the features of packets more effectively.
Lotfollahi et al. (2020) proposed a framework called Deep Packet,
which preprocessed raw traﬃc at the packet-level and employed
1DCNN and stacked autoencoders (SAE) (Gehring et al., 2013) in
two tasks: application identiﬁcation and traﬃc characterization.
To cope with packet features, Zou et al. (2018) retrieved ﬂow
time-sequence features using Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) paired with CNN. The experimental results showed that their model performed better
than using CNN or LSTM alone on encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 presents related work. Section 3 describes EETC, an
extended encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation model based on variant
ResNet18 and incremental learning. Section 4 shows the results
of experiments, including classiﬁcation performance and extension performance. In Section 5, we conclude this paper. Table 1
summarizes the acronyms that are used in this paper.

2. Related works
In this section, we review previous related works under two
categories: encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation and incremental learning. Table 2 summarizes the input data and network structure using deep learning in encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation.
2

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175
Table 2
Related works based on deep learning: B(Bytes).
Input Data

Network Structure

Paper

Payload[784B]
Payload[784B]
Payload[256B]
Payload[28×28B]
Payload[1500B]
Payload[28×28B][3 packets]
Payload[784B]
Payload[1480B]
Arrival time, Frame length, Packet size
6 ﬁelds [20 packets]
Flow-based statistics
Packet direction
Arrival time, Packet length
IP packet length
Payload[784B]+4 ﬁelds [32packets]
Payload[64B]+Flow-based statistics
Packet length, Packet direction
Payload[32×32×3B]

1DCNN/2DCNN
1DCNN
1DCNN+LSTM
Capsule Network
1DCNN/SAE
CNN+LSTM
1DCNN+LSTM
1DCNN
2DCNN
LSTM+2DCNN
CNN
1DCNN
2DCNN
BiGRU
1DCNN+BiGRU
Neural Network
Graph Neural Network
Variant ResNet18

Wang et al. (2017)
He and Li (2020)
Hu et al. (2021)
Cui et al. (2019)
Lotfollahi et al. (2020)
Zou et al. (2018)
Lu et al. (2021)
Soleymanpour et al. (2021)
Pathmaperuma et al. (2022)
Aceto et al. (2018, 2019)
Chen et al. (2017)
Sirinam et al. (2018)
Shapira and Shavitt (2019)
Liu et al. (2019)
Aceto et al. (2021)
Zhou et al. (2020)
Shen et al. (2021)
This Paper

Lu et al. (2021) used the inception module to extract local features
of the traﬃc and the LSTM model to extract the temporal features
of the packets within a session. Their approach enhanced the characterization of packet features to improve classiﬁcation accuracy.
Soleymanpour et al. (2021) proposed a Cost-Sensitive CNN (CSCNN)
to deal with the class imbalance issue in encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. It greatly improved the impact of data imbalance on trafﬁc classiﬁcation. Pathmaperuma et al. (2022) proposed a method
to both identify known and unknown traﬃc and categorize in-app
activity types. After ﬁltering the unknown traﬃc, the classiﬁcation
accuracy of their model would be 92%.
Different classes of encrypted traﬃc can be identiﬁed by evaluating the temporal and spatial information of the ﬂow’s packets in light of statistical features. Aceto et al. (2018, 2019) attempted to classify mobile traﬃc by constructing a classiﬁer based
on six statistical characteristics: the number of bytes in the transport layer payload, the TCP window size, the source port, the
destination port, the inter-arrival time, and the packet direction.
Chen et al. (2017) put forward an online traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithm which was called Seq2Img focusing on packet size, interarrival time, and direction. They used Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) embeddings (Rosipal and Trejo, 2001) to transform
the packet sequences into six-channel images and classify these
images into different applications. Sirinam et al. (2018) applied
CNN to website traﬃc identiﬁcation. They achieved high accuracy using only the packet direction as an input to the network. Shapira and Shavitt (2019) constructed a two-dimensional
histogram as the input to the CNN. They deﬁned the X-axis as
the normalized arrival time and the Y-axis as the packet size.
Liu et al. (2019) tapped potential ﬂow-based characteristics via an
encoder-decoder structure. Aceto et al. (2021) combined statistic
characteristics with content characteristics to achieve multimodal
traﬃc classiﬁcation, ultimately addressing three classiﬁcation objectives. There exists plain text during a three-way handshake, including unencrypted communication parameters and the public
key. Thus, some researchers consider the entropy distribution to be
a property of traﬃc. Zhou et al. (2020) combined entropy estimation with neural networks in their method, where 64 bytes in the
content of TCP protocol are randomly selected to calculate entropy.
Shen et al. (2021) constructed traﬃc interaction graphs based on
the length and direction of packets, and then used graph neural
networks to implement the identiﬁcation of decentralized apps.
In contrast to the above methods, we leverage both the content characteristics and statistical characteristics of encrypted trafﬁc through the composition method rather than parallel network

architecture. After preprocessing, the variant residual network is
used to extract features automatically and realize classiﬁcation.
2.2. Incremental learning
In incremental learning, the deep model often leads to catastrophic forgetting (Robins, 1993). The model performs well in the
current task, but poorly in previous tasks. There are three main
categories of methods for solving this problem.
The regularization-based method (Rannen et al., 2017) involves
punishing the parameters and encouraging them to be similar
to the parameters of the old task. Kirkpatrick et al. (2017) purposed elastic weight consolidation (EWC) based on synaptic plasticity, which mitigated catastrophic forgetting by limiting the space
of weight update. Speciﬁcally, it includes a penalty term measured by Fisher information within the loss function. Therefore,
the weights closely related to the classiﬁer performance are protected. Zenke et al. (2017) suggested limiting changes to the most
relevant synapses in order to reduce catastrophic forgetting, thus
controlling the changes in important parameters. LWF (Li and
Hoiem, 2017) computed the distillation loss between the teacher
model and the student model, using the preceding model’s output
as the soft label to alleviate forgetting.
The structure-based method modiﬁes the architecture of the
network (Mallya et al., 2018; Mallya and Lazebnik, 2018), so as
to reduce the disturbance between tasks without changing the
objective function. You can freeze some weights in the network
and keep the same, or specify a model copy for each task. Some
studies decrease to reduce the learning rate of the layer shared
with the original task and ﬁne-tune it to avoid drastic changes
in parameters. Moreover, models using different nonlinear activation functions, such as ReLU, MaxOut, and Tanh, have been
proven to improve the effect of incremental learning, especially in
MNIST and emotion analysis tasks (Rosenfeld and Tsotsos, 2018).
Yan et al. (2021) proposed a novel architecture, which replicated
the entire network and added new branches in order to perform
the new task. Nonetheless, it will enhance the complexity of architecture.
The replay-based method (De Lange et al., 2021) stores samples
in raw format. While learning new tasks, the samples of previous
tasks will be replayed. Rebuﬃ et al. (2017) proposed iCaRL, which
adopted herding algorithm to select exemplars and Nearest Mean
of Exemplars (NME) classiﬁer for training. DER (Buzzega et al.,
2020) employed reservoir sampling (Dash and Ng, 2006) during
the whole training phase and investigated the generalization po3

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175
Table 3
Number of samples in ISCXVPN2016.

Fig. 1. Overview of EETC with a scenario: EETC is identifying different apps’ traﬃc
under different VPN tunnels. When new traﬃc comes, the model does not need to
be trained from scratch through memory updating.

tential of incremental learning. It is an alternative solution to constrain optimization. The key idea of GEM (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017) is to restrict new tasks without interfering with previous ones.
It is a novel attempt to apply incremental learning to encrypted
traﬃc classiﬁcation. We refer to the herding algorithm in iCaRL
(Rebuﬃ et al., 2017) and use the variant residual network instead
of NME as a classiﬁer. A bias vector and a balance factor are intended to adjust the prediction in order to address the bias problem in softmax. In this paper, we not only evaluate the classiﬁcation ability of the model but also show the extension performance
of the model when new samples are added.

Class Name

Training Samples

Testing Samples

Chat
Email
File
P2P
Streaming
VoIP
VPN-Chat
VPN-Email
VPN-File
VPN-P2P
VPN-Streaming
VPN-VoIP

6573
2586
25656
20842
26787
26700
7182
2047
25747
24324
26678
26603

731
288
2851
2316
2976
2967
798
227
2861
2703
2964
2956

crucial in self-collected dataset because the original ﬂow contains
traﬃc belonging to some non-target users.
Deleting MAC&IP. In general, the IP address of two hosts will
not often change in the process of communication. The MAC address and IP address in each packet are removed to avoid the ﬁxed
address feature acquired by the neural network, which leads to
model overﬁtting.
Splicing packets. Different lengths of bytes are padded at the
end of each packet. As shown in Fig. 4, we set different padding
values (0 or 240) to tackle packets in different directions. We deﬁne the packet from the source entity to the target entity as an uplink packet, and its padding value is 0. On the contrary, the packet
from the target entity to the source entity is deﬁned as a downlink packet, and its padding value is 240. It is helpful for neural
network to learn multimodal features (e.g., content characteristics
and statistical characteristics) via different padding bytes between
packets.
Byte conversion with normalization. We convert every 3072
bytes (including padding bytes) into a same-size array and normalize each element, which is helpful to accelerate the convergence
speed of neural network in the training process.
RGB images generation. Fig. 4 shows how we reshape the
normalized array to a 32×32 image with 3 channels. The packet
a to the packet n represents a continuous sequence of packets.
Each packet consists of bytes of different lengths. All bytes are
converted to a decimal range of 0 to 255. Ba1 denotes the ﬁrst
byte of packet a. Similarly, Bnk denotes the kth byte of packet
n. A one-dimensional sequence of 3072 bytes is sequentially reshaped into three 32×32 two-dimensional matrices. The three
two-dimensional matrices represent the three channels of the
RGB image (R channel, G channel, and B channel). We can construct the RGB image (32×32×3) by merging these three twodimensional matrices. The three-channel RGB images have more
information on traﬃc features than one-dimensional sequences or
two-dimensional images.
Dividing dataset. Based on TensorFlow framework (Abadi et al.,
2015), the generated three-channel RGB images and labels are converted to TFRecords ﬁles which store image data and labels as a
sequence of binary strings. The training set and testing set are divided into 9:1. Table 3 shows a detailed description of the number
of training and test samples.

3. Methodology
In this section, we explain the general framework of EETC in
detail. The primary goal of EETC is to classify different applications’
traﬃc under different VPN tunnels, as shown in Fig. 1. When new
types of traﬃc occur, EETC’s secondary objective is to allow the
model to accumulate experience without training from scratch.
Fig. 2 shows the overview of our proposed extended encrypted
traﬃc classiﬁcation framework, which mainly consists of preprocessing, classiﬁcation, and memory updating. The raw traﬃc is
used to generate TFRecords ﬁles after preprocessing, which are input into neural network for training. Through the Softmax layer,
the probability distributions of traﬃc are created after the automatic extraction of characteristics. In the training phase, we develop an improved cross-distilled loss to mitigate the forgetting of
old knowledge. And some rules are formulated to select the old
samples after training, where important samples will be stored in
memory to prepare for the next classiﬁcation. Furthermore, our
proposed model provides the simultaneous prediction of VPN labels and application labels.
3.1. Preprocessing
The preprocessing of encrypted traﬃc often varies with the
classiﬁcation task, which can be mainly divided into three levels
(e.g., session, ﬂow, and packet). We choose to preprocess at the
packet-level in the preprocessing phase due to the need for ﬁnegrained characteristics in application classiﬁcation. The details of
our preprocessing procedure are shown in Fig. 3, consisting of ﬁvetuple clustering, deleting Mac and IP addresses, splicing packets,
byte conversion with normalization, RGB images generation, and
dividing dataset.
Five-tuple clustering. The ﬁve-tuple consists of the source IP
address, source port, destination IP address, destination port, and
transport layer protocol. Five-tuple clustering can ﬁlter irrelevant
traﬃc noise and eliminate the inﬂuence of non-target user traﬃc.
For a public dataset, the step of data cleaning is not essential. It is

3.2. Neural network structure
Residual network is one of the most pioneering works in the
ﬁeld of computer vision and deep learning in the past few years.
It effectively solves the problem of vanishing gradient. The neural network structure refers to ResNet18 (He et al., 2016), including four residual blocks with depths of 64, 128, 256, and 512.
Each residual block is composed of several residual units, and each
4

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Fig. 2. Overview of EETC: The framework consists of preprocessing, classiﬁcation, and memory updating. It supports the simultaneous prediction of VPN labels and application labels.

Fig. 3. Preprocessing procedure: padding bytes are in red, original bytes are in blue. The preprocessing completely keeps the content characteristics of the raw traﬃc without
truncating bytes and enhances useful statistical information, such as frequency and direction.

Fig. 5. Variant ResNet18 network structure: The dotted line indicates that there is
a skip-connection in the residual block. We replace 3×3 convolution kernels with
7×7 convolution kernels and remove max pooling layer.

losophy of ResNet18, the variant ResNet18 is adopted. In order to
keep more ﬁne-grained traﬃc features, we replace 3×3 convolution kernels with 7×7 convolution kernels and remove the max
pooling layer.
The variant ResNet18 network structure is shown in Fig. 5. The
entire network starts with an input layer to obtain three-channel
RGB images. The convolutional layers have 3×3 ﬁlters, extracting
the content and statistical information of encrypted traﬃc. As the
core of the residual layer, skip-connection connects the feature
maps of different layers to construct the identity mapping. In addition, we perform downsampling to reduce the dimension of the
feature map. Finally, the variant ResNet18 ends with a global average pooling layer and a 12-way fully-connected layer with Softmax.

Fig. 4. RGB images generation. The image size of each channel is 32×32. The
padding value of uplink packet is 0 while the padding value of downlink packet
is 240.

residual unit uses (n=6,7,8,9) convolution kernels with the size of
3×3.
The classical ResNet18 is commonly used with the default input size of 224×224. According to the packet length of encrypted
traﬃc, the size of image is designed as 32×32. Inspired by the phi-

3.3. Loss function and training procedure
In the encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation, we input all class samples in one process. The whole training procedure consists of two
5

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

stages: pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. Pre-training aims to preliminarily extract the encrypted traﬃc characteristics. In addition, we
employ the cross-entropy loss for each task:



m
c
1  i
L=−
yk log (S(xi ))k + (1 − yik ) log (1 − S(xi ))k
m

where G is training dataset, Centropy is cross-entropy loss function,
and yi is ground truth of new classes. F (xi ) is exactly the same as
F T (xi ), giving a distribution over the old classes and new classes.
H T (xi ) is the model that outputs the probability distribution over
old classes. And temperature parameter T to soften the ﬁnal Softmax layer.
Hinton et al. (2015) found the bias problem that models tend
to be more prone to new traﬃc classes. Mai et al. (2021) showed
that Softmax classiﬁer and related fully connected layer are easily affected by the imbalance between old and new classes. Bias
problem (Javed and Shafait, 2018) is one of the main sources of
catastrophic forgetting. We speciﬁcally analyze the causes of bias
problem:



(1)

i=1 k=1

where m is the number of training samples, yik represents the class
of ith sample. If the ith sample belongs to class k, yik = 1. Otherwise, yik = 0. (S(xi ))k is the output of xi .
In the variant Resnet18 network, we try to minimize the loss
function by AdaGrad (Lydia and Francis, 2019) local optimizer and
adopt usual back-propagation for gradient descent.

• Modiﬁcation of network structure. The model is required to add
weights in fully connected layer when receiving new classes.
• Decoupling of feature extraction and classiﬁcation. The weight
of classiﬁer will be updated with the weight of encoder.

3.4. Memory updating
Due to the rapid growth and extreme dynamicity of encrypted
traﬃc, it is necessary to provide a way to support continuous
model updates (Bovenzi et al., 2021). In this work, we propose an
extended traﬃc classiﬁcation framework to integrate incremental
learning.
The baseline network is the variant ResNet18. Our goal is to
meet the following three requirements (Tahir and Loo, 2020):

The paper (Javed and Shafait, 2018) proposed that representative memory and knowledge distillation are incapable of solving
the bias of neural network in the training process. Motivated by
this, we propose an extended algorithm based on bias vector, in
which a bias vector V is proposed to represent the statistics of
predict labels and real labels. This demonstrates that the bias vector V intuitively reﬂects the degree to which class is biased by the
model. Then, a balance factor α is deﬁned to modify the prediction
of the model by normalization.

• It can accommodate the new traﬃc classes without training
from scratch.
• With the growth of classes, the consumption of computer
memory and the computing time are increasing slowly.
• The accuracy of classiﬁcation will not decrease seriously.

V =

It has been demonstrated that replay-based strategies in ClassIncremental Learning (CIL) are simple and effective (Bang et al.,
2021). Nonetheless, resolving the disparity between old and new
classes is a crucial obstacle for replay-based techniques (Hou et al.,
2019). With the increase of training epochs, we adopt representative memory updating to prioritize and select training exemplars.
When a new class of traﬃc or a group of new traﬃc data is added
to the current model, a subset of representative samples will be
selected and stored in the representative memory. S denotes the
computer’s ﬁxed memory capacity for the model. The number of
samples per class k is given by k = S/m, where m is the number of
classes stored in memory.
The updating of representative memory consists of two parts.
First, after the training of each incremental stage, we will store the
old class samples in a sorted list, keep the ﬁrst k and remove the
others that are no longer needed. Second, we calculate the average
Euclidean distance of the new class samples in the current class.
The new samples are sorted according to the distance from the
current class mean, and the ﬁrst k samples are preferred for storage.

x i ,yi ∈G

(1 − γ ) × Centropy (F (xi ), yi )+

T γ × Centropy (F T (xi ), H T (xi ))
2

(3)

(4)

Finally, the proposed loss function is as follows:

Loss =


x i ,yi ∈G

(1 − γ ) × Centropy (α · F (xi ), yi )+

T 2 γ × Centropy (α · F T (xi ), H T (xi ))

(5)

Algorithm 1 describes the training process of extended algorithm based on bias vector in detail.
3.6. General incremental learning
General Incremental Learning aims at learning from stream data
and does not rely on boundaries between tasks during training
and testing. Because the encrypted traﬃc appears in the form of
data stream, the traﬃc sampling shall be processed in sequence.
Sequential sampling has two main challenges:1) the input stream
must be processed in one process and 2) the size of the stream is
usually unknown in advance. To solve the above problem, reservoir
sampling (Dash and Ng, 2006) is adopted, which selects uniform
random samples of a given size from the input stream without replacement.
Herding algorithm (Rebuﬃ et al., 2017) needs to calculate the
sample distance from the mean of current class, which increases
the model’s computing cost. To explore the generalization capabilities of the algorithm, we substitute the more selective sampling
method with reservoir sampling. Without knowing the length of
input stream in advance, each traﬃc sample has an equal chance
of being stored in memory S. The reservoir sampling accelerates
the algorithm and makes general incremental learning more competitive. Considering the possibility of a sudden distribution shift
(Yu et al., 2020) in the input stream, we replay the samples from
previous tasks and use two additional coeﬃcients λ and μ to balance. To this end, the loss function is combined with regulariza-

As illustrated in Fig. 2, the feature extractor sends features
to the classiﬁcation layer with logit output. During the training
phase, the model employs these logits to calculate the gradient of
the weight in neural network through cross-distilled loss, which
is composed of classiﬁcation loss and distillation loss. We try to
measure the classiﬁcation performance difference of all classes in
terms of classiﬁcation loss. We will then suppress the difference
between the previous model and the current model in distillation loss. Notably, the structure of the feature extractor has not
changed. Only the new classiﬁcation layer is connected to the feature extractor. Paper (Li and Hoiem, 2017) proposed the following
loss function in the training model:



( 1 − γ ) × yi + T 2 γ × H T ( xi )

α = VV 

3.5. Improved cross-distilled loss

Loss =


x i ,yi ∈G

(2)
6

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175
Table 4
Classes in three datasets.

Algorithm 1 Extended Algorithm Based on Bias Vector.
Input O = (O1 , · · · , Om−1 ) //old exemplar set
Input C = (Cm , · · · , Ct )
//current exemplar sets
Input S
//memory size
Require current feature function ϕ (x )
G = O∪C
//combined training set
network training with loss function

Loss =
(1 − γ ) × Centropy (α · F (xi ), yi )

α=

Loss =

Chat, Email, File, P2P, Streaming, VoIP,VPN-Chat,
VPN-Email, VPN-File, VPN-P2P, VPN-Streaming,
VPN-VoIP
SSR-YouTube, SSR-Zalo, SSR-Weibo, SSR-Wechat,
Psiphon-YouTube, Psiphon-Zalo, Psiphon-Weibo,
Psiphon-Wechat
HTTPS, SMTPS, POP3S, FTPS

TLS

+ T 2 γ × Centropy (α · F T (xi ), H T (xi ))

(1 − γ ) × yi + T 2 γ × H T (xi ) //bias vector

xi ,yi ∈G

V 

formance on two datasets in the oﬄine model. We then set up
incremental tasks in a phase-by-phase manner to evaluate the extension performance of the two algorithms by performing a single
update that adds different traﬃc classes. Finally, we show that our
algorithm correctly adjusts the bias to the prediction of new traﬃc
classes.

//balance factor

V
that consists of distillation and classiﬁcation
k ← S/m
//number of exemplars per class
for y = 1, · · · , m − 1 do
O ← ( o1 , · · · , ok )
//keep only ﬁrst k
end for
for y = m, · · · , t do
1 
μ←
ϕ (x )
//current class mean
n x∈X


s
−1
1

Cs ← arg min μ − ϕ (x ) +
ϕ (C j )
s
x∈X
j=1
select samples with the minimum distance from the
mean of current class
end for
O ← (O1 , · · · , Ot )
//new exemplar sets
carry out multi-stage incremental learning training.

tion:

Classes

ISCXVPN2016

Self-collected

xi ,yi ∈G

V =

Dataset



Centropy (F (x ), y ) + λ

x,y∈S

To conﬁrm the validity and practicability of the algorithm, we
experiment on three datasets: a public ISCXVPN2016 traﬃc dataset
(Draper-Gil et al., 2016), a self-collected traﬃc dataset, and a TLS
traﬃc dataset. Table 4 shows the classes in each dataset.
ISCXVPN2016 which is based on OpenVPN channel and captured by Wireshark and TCPDUMP is provided by the Canadian Institute of cyber security. The dataset includes both non-VPN and
VPN traﬃc and involves many popular applications. We refer to
DeepPacket (Lotfollahi et al., 2020) to label the raw traﬃc in the
dataset. The labeled ISCX dataset has 12 classes, including 6 classes
of VPN traﬃc and 6 classes of non-VPN traﬃc.
Most public datasets mainly focus on traﬃc types or application
types. To solve the problem, we expand the experimental data by
capturing different applications’ traﬃc under different VPN channels. In detail, we choose Wireshark to capture the raw traﬃc generated by Android phones after running scripts to verify the practical value of the algorithm. The self-collected dataset consists of
eight kinds of encrypted traﬃc samples based on four kinds of
APP (e.g., YouTube, Zalo, Weibo, WeChat) under two kinds of VPN
channels (e.g., SSR and Psiphon). In the process of running scripts,
aiming at ensuring the diversity and authenticity of samples, text,
video, voice, static picture, dynamic picture, and other message formats are applied automatically with each message sent at random
intervals. In addition, we also collect a TLS-related dataset. This
dataset has 4 classes of TLS traﬃc (HTTPS, SMTPS, POP3S, FTPS).



z − h(x )2

x  ,y ,z ∈S



+μ



4.1. Dataset

2

Centropy (F (x ), y )

(6)

x ,y ,z ∈S

where h(x ) is output logits. F (x )  so f tmax(h(x )), giving a distribution over the old classes and new classes. And z  ht (x ) when t
indicates an incremental task.
Algorithm 2 elaborates on the training process of extended algorithm based on general incremental learning.
4. Experiments
This section details the classiﬁcation performance and extension performance for EETC. We ﬁrst verify the classiﬁcation per-

4.2. Preprocessed results
Algorithm 2 Extended Algorithm Based on General.

We preprocess the three datasets and then visualize RGB images, as shown in Fig. 6. It is apparent that different traﬃc classes
have different kinds of textures. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that our method can effectively discriminate traﬃc features.

Incremental Learning
Input: dataset G, coeﬃcients λ and μ, memory buffer S
for (x, y ) in G do
(x , y , z ) ← sample(S )
(x , y , z ) ← sample(S )
z ← ht (x )
network training with loss function


  
z − h(x )2
Loss =
Centropy (F (x ), y ) + λ
x,y∈S

+μ


x ,y ,z ∈S

x  ,y ,z ∈S

4.3. Hyper-parameters selection
TensorFlow is used as a deep learning framework that runs on
Ubuntu 16.04 64bit OS. The speciﬁc experimental environment is
shown in Table 5. All the experiments on ISCXVPN2016 are run for
50 epochs per increment with a batch size of 64, a momentum of
0.9, a weight decay of 0.0 0 0 05, a temperature of 2, and a memory
budget of 20 0 0. At the beginning of training, the learning rate is
set to 2.0 and then reduced 5 times in 45, 60, and 68 epochs. In
the improved cross-distilled loss function, γ is set to 0.5.

2

Centropy (F (x ), y )

S ← reservoir sampling
end for

7

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Fig. 6. Visualization of encrypted traﬃc. We show the generated three-channel RGB images from (a) ISCXVPN2016 dataset, (b) self-collected dataset, and (c) TLS dataset. It
is apparent that three-channel RGB images with different traﬃc classes have unique texture information, which will be conducive to classiﬁcation.

• SAE (Gehring et al., 2013): It preprocessed raw traﬃc at packetlevel and employed 1DCNN and stacked autoencoders in two
tasks (e.g., application identiﬁcation and traﬃc characterization).
• CNN+LSTM (Zou et al., 2018): It extracted the ﬂow timesequence features by Long Short-Term Memory combined with
CNN to deal with packet features. To be speciﬁc, CNN extracts
the content features of a single packet while LSTM extracts the
statistical characteristics of any three sequential packets in the
ﬂow.

Table 5
Experimental environment.
Category

Parameter

System
CPU
Memory
Graphics card
Deep learning backend
Cuda version
CuDNN version

Ubuntu 16.04 64bit OS
Intel(R) Core i5-8600K
8GB
NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti
TensorFlow1.15
9.0
7.4

4.5. Classiﬁcation performance

4.4. Competing methods

Four measures are utilized for evaluation: accuracy, precision,
recall, and F1. For the multi-classiﬁcation problem, we regard each
class and the remaining classes as binary classiﬁcation. Eqs. (7)–
(10) is shown below, where T P , T N, F P , and F N respectively stand
for true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative.

To demonstrate the effectiveness of EETC in encrypted traﬃc
classiﬁcation task, we compare the below algorithms under the
same condition, which are different in both preprocessing and network structure.
• 1DCNN (Cui et al., 2019): It integrated feature extraction and
classiﬁcation network into one system directly using the ﬁrst
784 bytes of original ﬂow, which can successfully distinguish
VPN and non-VPN traﬃc.
8

P+T N
Accuracy = T P+TT N+
F P+F N

(7)

TP
P recision = T P+
FP

(8)

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Table 6
Comparison of different lengths of padding bytes (%).

Table 10
Comparison of different algorithms (%).

Lengths of padding bytes

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1

Algorithm

Accuracy

Recall

F1

0
24
48

97.7
98.1
97.3

96.6
96.7
95.1

95.3
95.8
95.1

95.7
96.1
95.0

1DCNN
SAE
CNN+LSTM
This Paper

85
92
91
98

86
92
91
96

86
92
91
96

Table 7
Comparison of different size of RGB images (%).
Size of RGB images

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1

32×32×3
64×64×3
128×128×3

98.1
97.2
96.5

96.7
95.6
93.9

95.8
95.1
94.9

96.1
95.3
94.4

ant ResNet18 network has better accuracy under small image input, which gets an improvement of 8.1%.
Compared with the three encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithms below, as shown in Table 10, our approach outperforms existing approaches on ISCXVPN2016, achieving the highest accuracy
of 98%, recall of 96%, and F1 of 96%.
The confusion matrix is utilized to evaluate the performance of
our proposed model. As shown in Fig. 7, we visualize the confusion
matrix of the classiﬁer on ISCXVPN2016, self-collected dataset, and
TLS dataset. It can achieve 98.1%, 96.0%, and 97.3% classiﬁcation accuracy respectively.
The experimental results show that the accuracy of all traﬃc
classes is higher than 90% except for e-mail (see Fig. 7(a)). The
reason is that the size of e-mail pcap ﬁles is smaller than other
classes in ISCXVPN2016, which results in fewer training samples.
Therefore, we pay attention to the balance of raw traﬃc in the selfcollected dataset. As a result, each class of self-collected datasets is
very accurate. For example, we achieve an accuracy of 99%, 96%,
and 100% classifying p-weibo, p-wx p-youtube (see Fig. 7(b)). It
demonstrates that the proposed method can successfully identify
different apps’ traﬃc in different VPN channels. In addition, we
also provide the results for TLS-related traﬃc. The classiﬁcation accuracies of four TLS traﬃc (HTTPS, FTPS, SMTPS, POP3S) are 99%,
98%, 95%, and 97% (see Fig. 7(c)). It indicates that the proposed
method can successfully identify TLS-related traﬃc.

Table 8
Comparison of composition of RGB images (%).
Composition

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1

Payload
Header + Payload
Improvement

83.7
98.1
14.4

84.2
96.7
12.5

83.5
95.8
12.3

83.7
96.1
12.4

Table 9
Comparison of different network structures (%).
Network

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

F1

ResNet18
Variant ResNet18
Improvement

90.0
98.1
8.1

85.5
96.7
11.2

83.6
95.8
12.2

84.2
96.1
11.9

TP
Recall = T P+
FN

(9)

4.6. Extension performance

F 1 = 2T P+2FT PP+F N

(10)

For the public dataset, we divide 12 traﬃc classes into 2,3,4,
and 6 incremental training steps, that is to say, performing a single
update adding 6,4,3, and 2 traﬃc classes.
To validate the extension performance of EETC, we compare two
incremental learning strategies: BV (i.e., Bias Vector) and GIL (i.e.,
General Incremental Learning) in four scenarios. Taking memory
size as a key index, we study the classiﬁcation performance under different memory sizes. In general, it has better performance
in larger incremental steps, because the student model obtains less
distillation loss by reducing the noise caused by training. As shown
in Fig. 8, the accuracy of the classiﬁer has not decreased rapidly in
BV. In the last incremental task, most of them reach more than
85%.
Compared with BV, GIL has the advantage of less performance dropping rate in medium and large memory. We establish a performance dropping rate that measures the absolute drops
in the last task with respect to the accuracy in the ﬁrst task
Zhang et al. (2021). We believe that random sampling strategy and
improved loss function with regularization are the main reasons
for better performance. Meanwhile, it leads to a minor disadvantage that the accuracy of the initial task is lower than BV. However, extension performance focuses more on the degree of forgetting. To sum up, when the memory buffer is small, BV shows the
best performance in ISCXVPN2016. With a larger memory size, GIL
suffers from less forgetting than BV.
Furthermore, we attempt to determine whether the bias vector
and balance factor play a role in the CIL. Fig. 9 shows the confusion
matrix of BV in the last incremental task, from which we can ﬁnd
that in the process of constantly adding new classes to training

Three design choices are investigated in EETC: 1) the length of
padding bytes, 2) the composition of three-channel RGB image, and
3) the type of classiﬁer.
In preprocessing, we study the importance of padding bytes.
Table 6 shows the effect of the length of padding bytes on model
evaluation. Depending on the image size, we set the padding
length to 0, 24, and 48. As shown in Table 6, the proposed model
achieves the highest accuracy of 98.1% when the padding length
reaches 24. Our experimental results indicate that the padding
bytes with appropriate length are conducive to generating a more
discriminative traﬃc image and enhancing the classiﬁcation ability
of the network.
We study the effect of different sizes of RGB images on the classiﬁcation results. It can be seen from Table 7, the classiﬁcation results show a slight decrease as the size of the image increases. It
shows that the 32×32 size of the traﬃc images is more beneﬁcial
to the classiﬁcation results of the network.
To verify whether the packet header affects the effectiveness of
the encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithm, under the same condition, we conduct a comparative experiment on the composition
of input RGB images. As shown in Table 8, it is indicated that the
packet header contains information beneﬁcial to the identiﬁcation
of encrypted traﬃc, and accuracy is increased by 14.4%. As is common knowledge, a packet header usually contains a series of ﬁxed
features, such as packet length, protocol type, live time, version
number, etc.
Table 9 reveals the difference between the original ResNet18
network and the Variant ResNet18 network for training. The Vari9

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Fig. 7. Confusion matrix on different datasets. The value on the diagonal represents the classiﬁcation performance. The higher the value, the better the classiﬁcation performance.

Table 11
Time cost of different algorithms.
Algorithm

Training time

Testing time

1DCNN
SAE
CNN+LSTM
BV
GIL

50.5 min
47.2 min
75.6 min
26 min
34 min

0.09 s
0.08 s
0.13 s
0.10 s
0.10 s

Additionally, we present the performance of GIL under different
hyper-parameters when incremental step=2, as shown in Fig. 10.
To the end, λ is set to 0.2 and μ is set to 0.5 in GIL.
Table 11 shows the time cost of several algorithms. The training
time of our proposed BV and GIL for a single incremental task is
signiﬁcantly less than that of other algorithms. It is due to other algorithms do not have the ability to extend, and the entire network
needs to be retrained for each incremental task. Among them, BV
has the shortest average training time of 26 min. This is because
the teacher model in BV only calculates all probability labels at the
beginning of each incremental stage. Regarding the teacher model
as the student model of the previous incremental task, its parameters have been fully updated. As a result, the parameters in this incremental stage are frozen and only used to generate the probability labels of data. The teacher model without updating parameters
does not need to predict the same data many times. Due to the
trick, BV occupies a relatively large speed advantage in the training phase. All algorithms are based on deep learning, so the test

Fig. 8. Classiﬁcation accuracy when performing increments of different sizes with
BV and GIL.

samples, the classiﬁer does not forget the old traﬃc classes and
our model successfully overcome catastrophic forgetting in incremental learning.
10

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Fig. 9. Confusion matrix of BV on different incremental steps.

in the public dataset but also has stable performance in the selfcollected dataset, which is composed of the traﬃc of popular apps
in the real world. When new classes of traﬃc are added continuously, our methods can maintain high accuracy under the condition of limited memory space without catastrophic forgetting. We
propose a method to establish a generic unforgetting basis for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. In the future, we will focus on the following: 1) designing a special classiﬁer for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation instead of a general deep learning classiﬁer, 2) publishing
our self-collected traﬃc dataset, and 3) integrating other mechanisms to boost extension performance.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare the following ﬁnancial interests/personal
relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
Rui Wang reports ﬁnancial support was provided by National
Natural Science Foundation of China.

Fig. 10. Performance of GIL under different hyper-parameters with step=2.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

times are roughly the same. 1DCNN and SAE have fewer network
layers, so the test times are slightly lower than the other methods.
In a word, the two methods have their own advantages. It can
be concluded that our methods show the superiority of building a
general unforgetting base for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation.

Xiuli Ma: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Wenbin Zhu: Methodology, Data curation, Writing – original draft. Jieling Wei: Methodology, Data curation, Writing – review & editing. Yanliang Jin: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Visualization. Dongsheng Gu: Supervision, Writing –
review & editing. Rui Wang: Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an effective extended encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation model based on the variant ResNet18. Notably, the
multi-channel images are composed of raw traﬃc with padding
bytes. It perfectly combines content characteristics and statistical
characteristics. As a result, different apps’ traﬃc can be identiﬁed
in different VPN channels. To support continuous model updates,
incremental learning is applied to achieve extended classiﬁcation,
which is a novel attempt at encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. Our
method not only shows signiﬁcant superiority over other methods

Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Abadi, M., Agarwal, A., Barham, P., 2015. TensorFlow: large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems. Software available from tensorﬂow.org, http:
//tensorﬂow.org/.
11

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., Nascita, A., Pescapé, A., 2021. Encrypted multitask traﬃc classiﬁcation via multimodal deep learning. In: ICC 2021-IEEE International Conference on Communications. IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., Pescapé, A., 2018. Mobile encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using deep learning. In: 2018 Network Traﬃc Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA). IEEE, pp. 1–8.
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., Pescapé, A., 2019. Mobile encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using deep learning: experimental evaluation, lessons learned, and challenges. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv.Manage. 16 (2), 445–458.
Bang, J., Kim, H., Yoo, Y., Ha, J.-W., Choi, J., 2021. Rainbow memory: continual learning with a memory of diverse samples. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8218–8227.
Bovenzi, G., Yang, L., Finamore, A., Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Pescapè, A., Rossi, D., 2021.
A ﬁrst look at class incremental learning in deep learning mobile traﬃc classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04464.
Bujlow, T., Carela-Español, V., Barlet-Ros, P., 2015. Independent comparison of popular DPI tools for traﬃc classiﬁcation. Comput. Netw. 76, 75–89.
Buzzega, P., Boschini, M., Porrello, A., Abati, D., Calderara, S., 2020. Dark experience
for general continual learning: a strong, simple baseline. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, 15920–15930.
Chen, Z., He, K., Li, J., Geng, Y., 2017. Seq2Img: a sequence-to-image based approach
towards ip traﬃc classiﬁcation using convolutional neural networks. In: 2017
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, pp. 1271–1276.
Cotton, M., Eggert, L., Touch, J.D., Westerlund, M., Cheshire, S., 2011. Internet assigned numbers authority (IANA) procedures for the management of the service
name and transport protocol port number registry. RFC 6335, 1–33.
Cui, S., Jiang, B., Cai, Z., Lu, Z., Liu, S., Liu, J., 2019. A session-packets-based encrypted
traﬃc classiﬁcation using capsule neural networks. In: 2019 IEEE 21st International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications; IEEE
17th International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 5th International Conference
on Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS). IEEE, pp. 429–436.
Dash, M., Ng, W., 2006. Eﬃcient reservoir sampling for transactional data streams.
In: Sixth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining-Workshops (ICDMW’06).
IEEE, pp. 662–666.
De Lange, M., Aljundi, R., Masana, M., Parisot, S., Jia, X., Leonardis, A., Slabaugh, G.,
Tuytelaars, T., 2021. A continual learning survey: defying forgetting in classiﬁcation tasks. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.Intell. 44 (7), 3366–3385.
Draper-Gil, G., Lashkari, A.H., Mamun, M.S.I., Ghorbani, A.A., 2016. Characterization
of encrypted and VPN traﬃc using time-related. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP),
pp. 407–414.
Gehring, J., Miao, Y., Metze, F., Waibel, A., 2013. Extracting deep bottleneck features
using stacked auto-encoders. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE, pp. 3377–3381.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2016. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pp. 770–778.
He, Y., Li, W., 2020. Image-based encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation with convolution
neural networks. In: 2020 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Data Science
in Cyberspace (DSC). IEEE, pp. 271–278.
Hinton, G., Vinyals, O., Dean, J., et al., 2015. Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network 2 (7). arXiv preprint arXiv: 1503.02531.
Ho, T.K., 1998. C4. 5 decision forests. In: Proceedings. Fourteenth International Conference on Pattern Recognition (Cat. No. 98EX170), Vol. 1. IEEE, pp. 545–549.
Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput. 9
(8), 1735–1780.
Hou, S., Pan, X., Loy, C.C., Wang, Z., Lin, D., 2019. Learning a uniﬁed classiﬁer incrementally via rebalancing. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 831–839.
Hu, X., Gu, C., Wei, F., 2021. CLD-Net: a network combining CNN and LSTM for internet encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021.
Javed, K., Shafait, F., 2018. Revisiting distillation and incremental classiﬁer learning.
In: Asian Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, pp. 3–17.
Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Desjardins, G., Rusu, A.A.,
Milan, K., Quan, J., Ramalho, T., Grabska-Barwinska, A., et al., 2017. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114 (13),
3521–3526.
Kudryavtsev, A., Shorgin, S., 2010. On the Bayesian approach to the analysis of
queueing systems and reliability characteristics. In: International Congress on
Ultra Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems. IEEE, pp. 1042–1045.
Li, Z., Hoiem, D., 2017. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach.Intell. 40 (12), 2935–2947.
Liu, C., He, L., Xiong, G., Cao, Z., Li, Z., 2019. FS-Net: a ﬂow sequence network for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference On Computer Communications. IEEE, pp. 1171–1179.
Lopez-Paz, D., Ranzato, M., 2017. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30.
Lotfollahi, M., Jafari Siavoshani, M., Shirali Hossein Zade, R., Saberian, M., 2020. Deep
packet: a novel approach for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using deep learning.
Soft Comput. 24 (3), 1999–2012.
Lu, B., Luktarhan, N., Ding, C., Zhang, W., 2021. ICLSTM: encrypted traﬃc service
identiﬁcation based on inception-LSTM neural network. Symmetry 13 (6), 1080.

Lydia, A., Francis, S., 2019. Adagrad–an optimizer for stochastic gradient descent. Int.
J. Inf. Comput. Sci 6 (5), 566–568.
Mai, Z., Li, R., Kim, H., Sanner, S., 2021. Supervised contrastive replay: revisiting the
nearest class mean classiﬁer in online class-incremental continual learning. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3589–3599.
Mallya, A., Davis, D., Lazebnik, S., 2018. Piggyback: adapting a single network to
multiple tasks by learning to mask weights. In: Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 67–82.
Mallya, A., Lazebnik, S., 2018. PackNet: adding multiple tasks to a single network by
iterative pruning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7765–7773.
Pathmaperuma, M.H., Rahulamathavan, Y., Dogan, S., Kondoz, A., 2022. CNN for user
activity detection using encrypted in-app mobile data. Future Internet 14 (2),
67.
Poulet, F., 2004. SVM and graphical algorithms: a cooperative approach. In: Fourth
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’04). IEEE, pp. 499–502.
Rajasegaran, J., Jayasundara, V., Jayasekara, S., Jayasekara, H., Seneviratne, S., Rodrigo, R., 2019. DeepCaps: going deeper with capsule networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 10725–10733.
Rannen, A., Aljundi, R., Blaschko, M.B., Tuytelaars, T., 2017. Encoder based lifelong
learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1320–1328.
Rebuﬃ, S.-A., Kolesnikov, A., Sperl, G., Lampert, C.H., 2017. iCaRL: incremental classiﬁer and representation learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2001–2010.
Robins, A., 1993. Catastrophic forgetting in neural networks: the role of rehearsal mechanisms. In: Proceedings 1993 The First New Zealand International
Two-Stream Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks and Expert Systems. IEEE,
pp. 65–68.
Rosenfeld, A., Tsotsos, J.K., 2018. Incremental learning through deep adaptation. IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.Intell. 42 (3), 651–663.
Rosipal, R., Trejo, L.J., 2001. Kernel partial least squares regression in reproducing
kernel hilbert space. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2 (Dec), 97–123.
Shapira, T., Shavitt, Y., 2019. FlowPic: encrypted internet traﬃc classiﬁcation is as
easy as image recognition. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS). IEEE, pp. 680–687.
Shen, M., Zhang, J., Zhu, L., Xu, K., Du, X., 2021. Accurate decentralized application
identiﬁcation via encrypted traﬃc analysis using graph neural networks. IEEE
Trans. Inf. ForensicsSecur. 16, 2367–2380. doi:10.1109/TIFS.2021.3050608.
Sirinam, P., Imani, M., Juarez, M., Wright, M., 2018. Deep ﬁngerprinting: undermining website ﬁngerprinting defenses with deep learning. In: Proceedings of
the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1928–1943.
doi:10.1145/3243734.3243768.
Soleymanpour, S., Sadr, H., Nazari Soleimandarabi, M., 2021. CSCNN: cost-sensitive
convolutional neural network for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. Neural Process.
Lett. 53 (5), 3497–3523.
Sun, S., Huang, R., 2010. An adaptive k-nearest neighbor algorithm. In: 2010 Seventh
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery, Vol. 1.
IEEE, pp. 91–94.
Tahir, G.A., Loo, C.K., 2020. An open-ended continual learning for food recognition using class incremental extreme learning machines. IEEE Access 8,
82328–82346.
Wang, W., Zhu, M., Wang, J., Zeng, X., Yang, Z., 2017. End-to-end encrypted traﬃc
classiﬁcation with one-dimensional convolution neural networks. In: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE,
pp. 43–48.
Yan, S., Xie, J., He, X., 2021. DER: Dynamically expandable representation for class
incremental learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3014–3023.
Yu, L., Twardowski, B., Liu, X., Herranz, L., Wang, K., Cheng, Y., Jui, S., Weijer, J.v.d.,
2020. Semantic drift compensation for class-incremental learning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 6982–6991.
Zenke, F., Poole, B., Ganguli, S., 2017. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 3987–3995.
Zhang, C., Song, N., Lin, G., Zheng, Y., Pan, P., Xu, Y., 2021. Few-shot incremental
learning with continually evolved classiﬁers. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12455–12464.
Zhou, K., Wang, W., Wu, C., Hu, T., 2020. Practical evaluation of encrypted traﬃc
classiﬁcation based on a combined method of entropy estimation and neural
networks. ETRI J. 42 (3), 311–323.
Zou, Z., Ge, J., Zheng, H., Wu, Y., Han, C., Yao, Z., 2018. Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation with a convolutional long short-term memory neural network. In: 2018
IEEE 20th International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications; IEEE 16th International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 4th International Conference on Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS). IEEE,
pp. 329–334.

12

X. Ma, W. Zhu, J. Wei et al.

Computers & Security 128 (2023) 103175

Xiuli Ma received the PhD degree from Xidian University, in 2007. She is currently an Associate Professorship
with the School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University. Her research interests include big data and intelligent information processing.

Yanliang Jin received the BS and MS degrees in electrical
engineering from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1997
and 20 0 0, respectively, and the PhD degree in communication and information system from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, in 2005. He is currently an Associate Professorship with the School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University. He has published
more than 30 journals/conference papers. His research
interests include mobile ad hoc networks, wireless sensor networks, wireless multimedia sensor networks, and
wireless broad-band access.

Wenbin Zhu received the BE degree in communication engineering from Zhejiang University of Technology,
Hangzhou, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing the
master’s degree in signal and information processing with
the Shanghai University. His research interests include big
data and intelligent information processing.

Dongsheng Gu received the BS and MS in degrees from
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China, in
1999 and 2002. He worked nearly 10 years in the immigration and optimization of MPEG4/H264 codec algorithms for embedded system. His current research interests include in deep learning models for AI auxiliary diagnosis algorithms for medical images, object detection,
tracking and Re-ID algorithms in public safety ﬁeld, encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation, detection and identiﬁcation
algorithms in cybersecurity ﬁeld.

Jieling Wei received the BE degree in communication engineering from Hubei University, Wuhan, China, in 2019.
She is currently pursuing the master’s degree in communication and information systems with the Shanghai University. Her research interests include big data and intelligent information processing.

Rui Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
in signal and information processing from Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China in 2009. He is currently a professor with the School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University. His research interests include Sensor networks, Geometric algebra, Multimedia signal processing.

13