164

IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

Encrypted TLS Traffic Classification
on Cloud Platforms
Xiaochun Yun , Yipeng Wang , Member, IEEE, Yongzheng Zhang, Chen Zhao ,
and Zijian Zhao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE

Abstract— Nowadays, encryption technology has been widely
used to protect user privacy. With the explosive growth of mobile
Internet, encrypted TLS traffic rises sharply and occupies a great
share of current Internet traffic. In reality, the classification of
encrypted TLS traffic on cloud platforms brings a new challenge
to traditional encrypted traffic classification methods, because
some information such as certificates in the TLS flows is no
longer effective. In this paper, we apply deep learning technology
to the problem of encrypted TLS traffic classification on cloud
platforms, and propose NeuTic, which takes the packet sequence
of each TLS flow as the input, and effectively classifies raw TLS
flows generated by many “cloud” applications. Our approach
is able to automatically capture the long-range dependencies
between elements in the packet sequences for robust and accurate encrypted TLS traffic classification. In NeuTic, we first
convert each TLS flow into three attribute sequences. Then,
we train a multi-application traffic classification model using
our newly designed deep learning model. Finally, we use the
well-trained classification model to classify new incoming TLS
flows. We conduct comprehensive experiments on real-world
application traces covering multiple “cloud” applications from
three different companies. In addition, we compare our experimental results of NeuTic with two deep learning-based methods
for encrypted traffic classification. NeuTic outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches in classification accuracy.
Index Terms— Encrypted traffic classification, cloud platform,
self-attention mechanism, network security.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Background and Motivation

A

PPLICATION traffic classification refers to the task of
associating application traffic with their generating applications, and it has many practical uses in the area of networking and network security, such as quality-of-service (QoS),
network measurement, tunnel detection and intrusion detection
and prevention etc [1]–[4]. For network management, network
operators need to understand and classify the traffic mixed
by different applications for a better QoS of networks and
network provisioning, such as different priority strategies. The
research in this field has attracted the widespread attention in

Manuscript received 24 May 2020; revised 12 April 2022 and 25 May
2022; accepted 22 June 2022; approved by IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORKING Editor K. Ren. Date of publication 19 July 2022; date of
current version 16 February 2023. (Corresponding author: Yipeng Wang.)
Xiaochun Yun, Yongzheng Zhang, and Chen Zhao are with the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093,
China.
Yipeng Wang and Zijian Zhao are with the Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail:
yipeng.wang1@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNET.2022.3191312

both academia and industry over the past decade, and the continuous evolution of advanced traffic analysis approaches, such
as [4]–[14] justifies this lasting interests. Nowadays, encryption technology has been widely used to protect user privacy.
With the explosive growth of mobile Internet, encrypted TLS
traffic rises sharply and occupies a great share of current
Internet traffic. In reality, the classification of encrypted TLS
traffic on cloud platforms brings a new challenge to traditional
encrypted traffic classification methods.
B. Limitation of Prior Art
This paper concerns the accurate classification of TLS1
flows for different mobile applications on the cloud platform.
For a mobile application that uses TLS as its encryption basic,
the real traffic generated by the application is hidden in the
message of TLS protocol by the encryption algorithm, and
the content of the application traffic is not plaintext information any more. Recently, Chen et al. propose MAAF [15],
which uses X.509 certificates embedded in the handshake
of encrypted TLS flows to classify the encrypted flows of
different applications. Specifically, Chen et al. use the “organizationName” filed and the “commonName” field in the X.509
certificate of each TLS flow for application classification.
We find that MAAF is very effective for classifying mobile
applications from different companies. In practice, we notice
that different applications developed by the same company
provide their corresponding services for users on the same
cloud platform. At the same time, the certificate information
embedded in the TLS flows of these “cloud” apps is usually
the same. Take “Alipay”, “Amap”, “Taobao”, “Tappiaopiao”,
and “Youku” five apps from the Alibaba corporation as an
example. By parsing the X.509 certificates of the TLS flows
for the above apps, we notice that many certificates in the TLS
flows of these applications have the same “commonName”
field and the “organizationName” field, such as “*.alicdn.com”
for the “commonName” field and “Alibaba (China) Technology Co., Ltd.” for the “organizationName” field. Therefore,
MAAF cannot make a right distinction to such TLS flows on
the cloud platform.
An alternative is that we can use the packet type sequence or
the message type sequence of a TLS flow to perform encrypted
traffic classification. Different from directly inspecting the
1 TLS, Transport Layer Security, is a fundamental cryptographic protocol
suite widely used in the secure communication of today’s Internet and mobile
Internet.

1558-2566 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS

content generated by mobile applications, the methods that
based on sequence information attempt to understand the generation mechanism of different application traffic by observing the state transitions in each TLS flow. However, prior
sequence-based methods also have some limitations. (1). First,
some sequence-based methods only have short-term memory
but no long-term memory for elements in a given sequence.
For example, some sequence-based methods use first-order
or second-order homogeneous Markov chain models to construct application fingerprints for classifying SSL/TLS traffic
[16]–[18]. The Markov chain models for each application are
built from ordered SSL/TLS packet/message sequences. Recall
that the state transitions in first-order/second-order homogeneous Markov chain can only consider two/three adjacent
states. Apparently, it is difficult to capture long-term relationships between states in a given SSL/TLS flow using such
a low-order Markov chain model. Therefore, these models
do not perform very well in the task of encrypted traffic
classification. (2). Second, in recent years, methods based
on recurrent neural network (RNN) have been applied to
encrypted SSL/TLS traffic classification. However, learning
long-range dependencies in sequential data is still a challenging problem for RNNs. Theoretically, advanced RNN models,
such as LSTMs and GRUs, can have long-term memory. However, in practice, we find that this kind of long-term memory
may become blurred as the distance between elements in the
sequential data increases.
C. Proposed Approach
In this paper, we propose NeuTic, a NEUral network-based
TLS TraffIc Classification method, which takes the packet
sequence of each TLS flow as the input, and effectively
classifies raw TLS flows generated by many “cloud” applications. In practice, we notice that packet sequences can more
accurately reflect how the application flow is generated than
message sequences. In addition, NeuTic is based on a newly
designed deep neural network, and the major structure of the
neural network model includes four key components, including input embedding, multi-kernel convolution, sequence selfattention, and classification output. NeuTic aims at classifying
encrypted TLS flows. As shown in Fig. 1, NeuTic has two
phases, (i) the training phase, and (ii) the classification phase.
Specifically, the training phase aims to build a TLS traffic classification model for all target applications, and it has two major
modules, including (1) flow processing, and (2) neural training.
First, the flow processing module converts each labeled TLS
flow into a packet sequence, where each packet sequence is
composed of three attribute sequences. Then, according to
the input sequences, the neural training module builds a TLS
traffic classification model. In addition, the classification phase
aims to classifies new incoming TLS flows, and it also has two
major modules, including (1) flow processing, and (3) neural
classification. Specifically, to classify a new incoming TLS
flow, the flow processing module in the classification phase
also first extracts three attribute sequences from the packet
sequence of each TLS flow. Then, the neural classification
module works on the three attribute sequences and leverages

165

Fig. 1.

Architecture of NeuTic.

the TLS traffic classification model generated by the training
phase to assign a proper application label to the TLS flow to
be classified.
D. Novelty and Advantages of Our Approach
NeuTic is composed of a newly designed neural network,
and the design logics of NeuTic is based on the following
two considerations. First, NeuTic extracts different raw fields
from the IP packets of each flow, and uses them as the input
to the neural network model. The designed neural network
model can autonomously choose inputs that are more helpful
in classifying encrypted TLS traffic. Second, NeuTic attempts
to establish a relationship between any two elements in a given
sequence in order to obtain better classification features. The
prior state-of-the-art approaches can capture the relationship
between adjacent elements in a given sequence, but it is
difficult for them to establish the relationship between distant
elements. Those methods have a limited ability to characterize
sequential data, and thus miss the opportunity to achieve more
accurate classification results. In contrast to these methods,
NeuTic aims to better capture the relationships between elements in an input sequence.
E. Key Contributions
We highlight our key contributions as follows.
• We propose a novel deep learning-based method, NeuTic,
for encrypted TLS traffic classification. NeuTic is purely
based on the packet sequence of each TLS flow, and
thus it does not need to assemble IP packets into TLS
messages. NeuTic is very robust for application flows that
use TLS as the encryption protocol.
• We design a novel neural network model that is equipped
with a multi-kernel convolution that is able to flexibly
produce variable-length features for sequential inputs,
and also equipped with a sequence self-attention mechanism that is able to learn long-range dependencies
between elements in sequential data. Through the above
two design considerations, our proposed neural network model can automatically learn robust features
from raw sequential inputs for accurate TLS traffic
classification.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

166

IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

We try to understand and explain what features and what
packets are more helpful to identify the fingerprints of
encrypted TLS traffic.
• We implement NeuTic and carry out extensive evaluations on real-world TLS flows generated by many
mobile “cloud” applications. We compare NeuTic with
two state-of-the-art encrypted traffic classification methods, RBRN [19] and FS-Net [20], both of which are
deep learning-based methods. Our experimental results
show that NeuTic outperforms the existing methods in
terms of classification accuracy for encrypted TLS traffic
classification.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II,
we review related work. In Section III – Section V, we present
the technical details of each component of NeuTic. Next,
in Section VI, we evaluate the whole method with real-world
application traces. We compare NeuTic with two existing
methods in Section VII. Finally, we conclude our work in
Section VIII.
•

II. R ELATED W ORK
This paper focuses on the accurate classification of
encrypted TLS traffic. Prior methods for encrypted traffic classification generally fall into two categories: traditional machine
learning-based methods and deep learning-based methods.
A. Traditional Machine Learning-Based Approaches
In 2014, Korczyński et al., propose FOSM [16], which
first introduces the concept of Markov chain fingerprints to
conduct encrypted SSL/TLS traffic classification. The basic
idea of FOSM is to model possible sequences of message
types observed in single-directional SSL/TLS sessions based
on first-order homogeneous Markov chains. Notice that each
application corresponds to a Markov chain fingerprint, and
FOSM identifies the parameters of the application fingerprint
from observed training application traces. For an encrypted
flow to be classified, FOSM compares its message sequence
with all fingerprints, and takes the fingerprint with the greatest
probability as the classification result for the flow. In 2017,
Shen et al. extend the concept of Markov chain fingerprints to
build more distinctive application fingerprints [17]. They propose an attribute-aware encrypted traffic classification method
called SOB, which is designed based on the second-order
Markov Chains. Compared to FOSM, SOB introduces the
certificate packet length and the packet length of the first
application data in a session, in addition to the consideration
of possible sequences of message types. In 2018, Liu et al.,
propose a classification system called MaMPF [18], which is
designed to build multi-attribute application fingerprints based
on first-order homogeneous Markov chains for encrypted
SSL/TLS traffic classification. Specifically, MaMPF separately
uses sequences of message types observed in single-directional
SSL/TLS sessions and sequences of transformed packet length
of the corresponding encrypted flows to build application
fingerprints. Note that, in [18], MaMPF uses random forest
as its application classifier.

B. Deep Learning-Based Approaches
In recent years, deep learning techniques have achieved
great success in many fields, such as speech recognition, computer vision and machine translation. Therefore, some people
begin to consider using deep learning technology to solve the
problem of encrypted traffic classification.
In 2017, Schuster et al., bring a seminal research work
to the networking and network security community, using
deep learning technology to carry out network traffic analysis [21]. Schuster et al., develop a novel video identification
methodology based on convolutional neural networks. The
evaluation results on video titles streamed by YouTube, Netflix, Amazon and Vimeo prove that the method has excellent
identification performance for videos. In 2019, Liu et al.,
propose FS-Net [20], which is a recurrent neural network
based approach to encrypted SSL/TLS traffic classification.
Specifically, FS-Net takes the packet length sequence of each
flow as the input, and classifies it to recognize the mobile
application carried by each TLS flow. FS-Net adopts a multilayer encoder-decoder structure, and thus it is a novel deep
learning-based method in this field. In 2020, Rezaei et al.,
design a novel deep learning model [22], which uses adjacent
flows to learn the order and patterns of multiple flows to better
classify the mobile applications that generate these flows.
Also, in 2020, Zheng et al., propose RBRN [19], a network
traffic classification model based on convolutional neural networks (CNN). RBRN learns representative features from the
raw flows and then classifies them in a unified framework.
In 2021, Xiao et al., propose EBSNN [23], an extended byte
segment neural network to classify network traffic. EBSNN
is built based on the recurrent neural networks with the
attention mechanism, and it can classify flows by examining
the first few packets. Also in 2021, Nascita et al., propose
MIMETIC-ENHANCED, an evolved multimodel deep learning architecture for network traffic classification at biflow
level [24]. In 2022, Wang et al., propose Ulfar [25], a multiscale feature attention approach to network traffic classification. Ulfar takes the byte sequence of each TCP/UDP flow
as the input, and uses convolutional neural networks (CNN)
as the building block for building the deep learning models.
Also in 2022, Zhao et al., propose Festic [26] a few-shot
learning based approach to network traffic classification. Festic adopts a hierarchical convolution structure, and thus it
can extract both packet-level and flow-level classification
features.
C. Discussions
The above work has made important research contributions
to the field of encrypted traffic classification. However, these
researches do not pay enough attention to the network traffic
generated by a large number of “cloud” applications in the
Internet, and the new challenges that the “cloud” application
traffic brings to encrypted traffic classification.
III. F LOW P ROCESSING
As shown in Fig. 1, the flow processing module takes the
packet sequence of each TLS flow as the input, and it aims to

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS

Fig. 2.

167

Structure of neural training.

extract three attribute sequences (i.e., packet length sequence,
packet window size sequence and packet TCP flag sequence)
of each TLS flow for the next neural training module.
A. Our Findings
Recall that the TLS packet sequences generated by each
mobile application are controlled by its application state
automata, and each application maintains its own application
state automata. To this end, classifying TLS flows from the
packet sequences is an effective method in practice. In this
paper, instead of using the message type sequences in prior
arts [16]–[18], we propose to use the packet sequence to
effectively characterize the state transitions of each TLS flow.
The advantage of using the packet sequences is that we do not
need to assemble IP packets into TLS messages. Therefore,
our flow processing scheme allows more scalable analysis in
practice.
B. Packet Sequence of a TLS Flow
Let p1 , p2 , · · · , pi , · · · , ph denote the packet sequence of
a TLS flow (denoted F ). Notice that we cannot directly use
the packet sequence for deep learning modeling. Therefore,
for any packet pi (i ∈ [1, 2, · · · , h]), this module first extracts
three important fields from each packet, including the “Total
Length” field in the IP header, and the “Window Size” field
and the “TCP Flags” filed in the TCP header. For packet pi ,
we use leni to denote its packet length, wini to denote its
window size, and f lagi to denote its TCP flags. Then, for flow
F , it can be represented into three new sequences, Slen , Swin
and Sf lag , where Slen = {len1 , len2 , · · · , leni , · · · , lenh },
Swin
=
{win1 , win2 , · · · , wini , · · · , winh }, and
Sf lag = {f lag1, f lag2, · · · , f lagi , · · · , f lagh }. In this
paper, we extract the above three attribute sequences for
each TLS flow to represent the packet sequence of the
TLS flow. These three attribute sequences (Slen , Swin
and Sf lag ) will be fed into the subsequent module, neural
training.

IV. N EURAL T RAINING
As shown in Fig. 2, the input to the neural training module
are the labeled TLS flows, where the packet sequence of each
flow is extracted by the flow processing module, and the output
of the neural training module is the predicted application
labels of these TLS flows. The neural training module has
four key components, including input embedding, multi-kernel
convolution, sequence self-attention, and classification output.
Next, we introduce each key component of our neural network
in detail. The source code is available at: https://github.com/
auto-ctrl/NeuTic.
A. Input Embedding
For each flow, the purpose of input embedding is to fuse
the three attribute sequences from the flow processing module
into one feature sequence. First of all, as shown in Fig. 2,
for flow F , we feed Slen , Swin , and Sf lag three attribute
sequences into three embedding layers, respectively. Notice
that the embedding layer can embed each element in an input
sequence into a vector. Therefore, we will obtain three new
embedding sequences, denoted Elen , Ewin and Ef lag . Specifically, taking packet length sequence Slen as an example,
Slen = {len1 , len2 , · · · , leni , · · · , lenh } and it has h elements. The corresponding embedding layer converts each element leni (i ∈ [1, h]) into a d-dimension vector ei . For Slen ,
the embedding layer outputs an embedding sequence Elen =
{e1 , e2 , · · · , ei , · · · , eh }, where ei ∈ Rd (i ∈ [1, h]). In this
paper, the embedding dimensions of all the three embedding
layers are set to be d. Then, we concatenate these outputs (i.e.,
Elen , Ewin and Ef lag ), and apply a linear transformations to
produce the following tensor I ∈ Rh×d .
I = (Elen ⊕ Ewin ⊕ Ef lag ) · W I + bembed

(1)

where W I ∈ R3d×d is the parameter matrix of linear transformation, bembed ∈ Rh×d is the bias parameter of linear
transformation, and ⊕ is the concatenation operator. Finally,
different from recurrent neural networks and convolutional

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

168

IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

neural networks, the neural networks used in this paper are
based on the self-attention mechanism [27], which cannot naturally make use of the position information of the elements in
a given input sequence. Note that without position information,
the output of the self-attention network would be the same if
two elements in the input sequence exchange their positions.
For example, “a → b → c → d → e → f ” and “a → b →
f → d → e → c”. Therefore, we use “positional encodings”,
which explicitly encode the relative/absolute positions of the
inputs as vectors. In the paper, we use the following equation
to compute the positional encodings (P E):
P E(pos,2j) = sin(pos/100002j/d)
P E(pos,2j+1) = cos(pos/100002j/d)

(2)

where “pos” denotes the position index in the input sequence,
and “j” denotes the dimension index. In addition, “sin” and
“cos” represent the sine and cosine functions, respectively.
Finally, the “positional encodings” will be added to I, and
the new result is denoted by I  .

B. Multi-Kernel Convolution
The following component is multi-kernel convolution. For
flow F , multi-kernel convolution takes I  from input embedding as the input, and this component outputs a new sequence
tensor F . Specifically, multi-kernel convolution is composed
of 3 parallel 1D-convolutional branches, one gate convolution, and one residual connection. First of all, multi-kernel
convolution uses 3 parallel 1D-convolutional branches to produce three different feature maps for flow F , denoted Brn1 ,
Brn2 and Brn3 , where the k-th branch is composed of an
1D-convolutional layer of kernel size 2 ∗ k − 1 and stride
1 as illustrated in Fig. 2. The advantage of the parallel convolutions is that they help to consider each input sequence at
different scales. Then, multi-kernel convolution concatenates
these outputs (i.e., Brn1 , Brn2 and Brn3 ), and applies a gate
convolution layer to produce the following tensor G ∈ Rh×d .
G = Conv1d(Brn1 ⊕ Brn2 ⊕ Brn3 )

(3)

where ⊕ is the concatenation operator. The gate convolution
layer is actually another 1-D convolutional layer, and its input
is 3 ∗ d channels and its output is d channels. For the final
result of multi-kernel convolution, we introduce a residual
connection layer, which adds G and I  to get the output F .

C. Sequence Self-Attention
Notice that sequence self-attention aims to establish the
relationship between any two elements in a given sequence,
and it is composed of a stack of L identical layers, where each
layer contains two sub-layers. The first sub-layer is a multihead self-attention mechanism, and the second sub-layer is a
fully connected feed-forward network. We show the structure
of sequence self-attention in Fig. 2. Next, we introduce the
two sub-layers in detail.

1) Multi-Head Self-Attention Mechanism: Given the input
sequence F = f1 , f2 , · · · , fi , · · · fh from the multi-branch
convolution, where fi ∈ Rd be the d-dimensional vector,
the multi-head self-attention mechanism [27] outputs a new
sequence of continuous representations O = o1 , o2 , · · · , oi ,
· · · , oh , where oi ∈ Rd . The miracle here is that the multihead self-attention mechanism can achieve the construction
and extraction of the relationship between any two elements
in an input sequence through three transformations of the
input itself, named “Query”, “Key” and “Value”. Specifically,
to begin with, this mechanism transforms the input F into
three matrixes Q (Query), K (Key) and V (Value) using
three trainable parameter matrixes (i.e., W Q , W K and W V ),
respectively. Q, K and V can be formulated as follows:
⎧
Q
⎨
⎨Q = F · W
(4)
K = F · WK
⎨
⎩
V
V = F ·W
Notice that W Q , W K , and W V are the model parameters
that this sub-layer needs to train. For the above parameter matrices, we have W Q ∈ Rd×dq , W K ∈ Rd×dk and
W V ∈ Rd×dv , where dk = dq . In general, an attention
function can be described as mapping query Q and key-value
pairs (K, V ) into a new output O  . Next, according to K and
Q, we can compute attention matrix A ∈ Rh×h , and A can
be computed as follows.


Q · KT
√
A = Sof tmax
(5)
dk
where “Sof tmax” denotes the softmax activation function.
It is worthy to notice that attention matrix A reflects the
relationship between every two elements in input sequence
F . Finally, we use attention matrix A to extract information
from V to form output O  , and the new output sequence
O  ∈ Rh×dv can be formulated as follows:
O  = Attention(Q, K, V ) = A · V

(6)



In practice, we can generate a series of O (i.e., O1 , O2 ,

) using different parameter matrixes in parallel, and
· · · , Ohead
concatenate them together to form the final output O, which
increases the expressive power of our neural network. The
output sequence O of the multi-head self-attention mechanism
can be formulated as follows:

) · WO
O = (O1 ⊕ O2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Oi ⊕ · · · ⊕ Ohead

(7)

(head×dv )×d

and head × dv = d. In addition,
where W ∈ R
we have Oi = Attention(Qi , K i , V i ).
2) Fully Connected Feed-Forward Network: The sub-layer
following the multi-head self-attention mechanism is the
fully connected feed-forward network, which takes the output
O = o1 , o2 , · · · , oi , · · · , oh (oi ∈ Rd ) of the previous sub-layer
as the input. The fully connected feed-forward network is
a two-layer fully-connected neural network consisting of an
inner hidden layer of dimensionality df f = 2048 and a ddimensional output layer activated by ReLU [28]. The fully
connected feed-forward network can be formulated as follows.
O

F F N (O) = max(0, O · W1 + b1 )W2 + b2

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS

169

TABLE I

In addition, as shown in Fig. 2, notice that there is an
Add&Norm layer between each sub-layer, which involves
a residual connection [29] followed by a layer normalization [30]. Specifically, the residual connection provides a
shortcut path between sub-layers, and it is basically just taking the input and adding it to the output of the sub-layer.
The residual connection is used for an additional gradient
path when building deeper neural network models. The layer
normalization is a normalization method similar to batch normalization [31], and it is commonly used in deep learning,
especially in recurrent neural networks.

D ATASET-I

D. Classification Output
The last component of our neural network is classification
output, which consists of one flatten layer and two linear layers
(that is the fully-connected layers).
1) Flatten Layer: In NeuTic, we use a linear layer to do a
R-way classification, where R denotes the number of application labels. Notice that the linear layer only accepts 1dimension vectors as its input. However, our current output
from sequence self-attention is a 2-dimension tensor. Therefore, before going through the linear layer, we first flatten
our 2-dimension outputs into 1-dimension. Specifically, in our
neural network, the output (shape (h, d)) from sequence
self-attention is flattened into vectors of shape (1, h × d).
2) Linear Layers: Before the linear layers, we do a dropout
operation with a rate of 0.3 to avoid over-fitting. The outputs
to the two linear layers are R1 , and R, respectively, where we
have R1 = 512 and R is adjusted according to the specific
classification task. The final linear layer uses “Softmax” as the
activation function.
V. C LASSIFICATION P HASE
Recall that as shown in Fig. 1, the classification phase aims
at classifying new incoming TLS flows according to the TLS
traffic classification model produced in the training phase.
There are two key functional components in the classification
phase, including the flow processing module and the neural
classification module.
First, the flow processing module also extracts the “Total
Length” field, the “Window Size” field, and the “TCP Flags”
field information from the first h packet of each TLS flow, and
converts them into corresponding sequences. Then, the neural
classification module uses the TLS traffic classification model
generated by the neural training module to make decisions on
each new TLS flow, so that each unlabeled TLS flow can be
assigned a proper application label.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In this section, we aim at assessing the effectiveness of
NeuTic in the classification of encrypted TLS traffic on cloud
platforms. To this end, we introduce real-world application
traces for the evaluation. In the following subsections, we first
introduce the application traces used in our experiments. Then,
we define proper metrics to evaluate the performances of our
method and other prior approaches. Finally, we investigate
how NeuTic’s performance is affected by different parameter
settings.

A. Data Set
In this paper, we have selected multiple mobile applications
from three companies, i.e., Alibaba, Baidu and ByteDance,
to evaluate the effectiveness of NeuTic. Next, we report our
datasets in detail.
1) Dataset-I: In Dataset-I, we collect a variety of TLS traffic generate by 15 mobile applications from three corporations,
and the three corporations are Alibaba, Baidu, and ByteDance.
Specifically, (1). first, for mobile applications designed by
Alibaba, we select 5 popular mobile applications, which are
Amap, Eleme, Taobao, Taopiaopiao and Youku. The type of
these applications include map, food ordering, online shopping, short video and video. These applications comprise a
variety of categories, and see Table I for details. (2). Secondly, for mobile applications designed by Baidu, we choose
a total of 6 popular mobile applications, including Baidumap,
Duxiaoshi, Haokan, Baidusearch, Youjia and Baiduyuedu. The
type of these applications include map, short video, video,
search, etc. All of these are well-known applications developed
by Baidu corporation. (3). Thirdly, for mobile applications
designed by ByteDance, we choose 4 popular mobile applications, including Dongchedi, Douyin, Ixigua and Toutiao. The
type of these applications include video, short video, news,
etc. For each application trace, we report the total amount of
flows, packets, bytes and its main use in Table I.
2) Dataset-II: Dataset-II aims to evaluate the classification
performance of NeuTic on mobile applications with the same
usage category. In Dataset-II, we use TLS traffic generate by
6 mobile applications, including Taopiaopiao, Youku, Duxiaoshi, Haokan, Douyin and Ixigua. The main uses of all these
mobile applications are short video sharing or video. In addition, Taopiaopiao and Youku are from Alibaba, Duxiaoshi and
Haokan are from Baidu, and Douyin and Ixigua are from
ByteDance. It is worth noting that the two applications from
the same company are similar applications developed under
the same certificate. For each application trace, we report its
main use, the number of flows and the company it is affiliated
with in Table II.
3) Summary: For all the above applications, we collect our
application traffic traces under a controlled operating environment. Specifically, our in-laboratory test-bed setup for data
collection is as follows. Firstly, we use three smartphones as
the end devices to generate mobile application traces, including one iPhone SE2 (running on iOS 14.0), one iPhone 11

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

170

IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

TABLE II
D ATASET-II

(running on iOS 13.7), and one iPhone 11 (running on iOS
14.3). We execute each mobile application on the smartphones
separately. Secondly, our smartphones are connected to a
workstation over an access point. The workstation directly
connects to the Internet, and it acts as the gateway device.
Thirdly, we run tcpdump on this workstation to record the
traffic generated by each mobile application.
As with the previous works, in this paper, we consider
the unidirectional flows, that is, flows that from a server to
a client as well as flows that from a client to a server. For
each application in the datasets above, we randomly pick 10K
TLS flows. We notice that the TLS versions used by the TLS
flows we captured are either TLS1.2 or TLS1.3. Therefore,
we have a total of 150,000 samples for Dataset-I, and a total
of 60,000 samples for Dataset-II. For all the two datasets,
we carry out 5-fold cross validation to enhance the reliability
of our experiments. In addition, for each dataset, the ratio of
the training set, the validation set and the testing set is 3:1:1.
B. Evaluation Metrics for Effectiveness
Once an application traffic classification model has been
designed, its performance must be evaluated, and proper evaluation metrics must be defined. For a specific application r
under analysis, we define the following metrics for further
analysis:
• T Pr , True Positives for application r: the set of flows
where each flow is classified by NeuTic as belonging to
application r and is indeed generated by application r.
• F Pr , False Positives for application r: the set of flows
where each flow is classified by NeuTic as belonging to
application r but is not generated by application r.
• F Nr , False Negatives for application r: the set of flows
where each flow is classified by NeuTic as not belonging
to application r but is indeed generated by application r.
Next, we define the following three metrics for application
r to quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of NeuTic:
|T Pr |
,
recallr =
|T Pr | + |F Nr |
|T Pr |
precisionr =
(9)
|T Pr | + |F Pr |
recallr ∗ precisionr
F −measurer = 2 ∗
(10)
recallr + precisionr
In addition, for the scenario of multi-category classification,
we need to define the accuracy metric to assess the performance of the whole method.
R
recallr
(11)
Accuracy (ACC) = r=1
R

where R denotes the total number of applications for application classification. Furthermore, we also need to present our
experimental results of multi-application classification through
a Confusion Matrix, a visualization tool commonly used in the
field of artificial intelligence, where each column of the matrix
represents instances in a predicted class label, and each row
of the matrix represents instances in an actual class label. It is
quite convenient to see if the proposed method confuses two
classes (i.e., one class is erroneously marked as the other) by
means of a Confusion Matrix.

C. Parameter Selection
The training phase of NeuTic involves the following
parameters:
(h):
(d):
(L):

The number of the first few packets of a TLS flow
used for classification.
The dimension of the embedding vector for the
embedding layer.
The number of times sequence self-attention is
repeated.

Next, we present our experimental results for varying values
of the above parameters h, d and L.
1) Number of the First Few Packets of a TLS Flow Used for
Classification, (h): In NeuTic, remember that we use the first
h packets of a TLS flow for application traffic classification.
Notice that the parameter h affects the performance of NeuTic
in two ways. First, the accuracy values of NeuTic generally
decrease for lower values of h. Second, we also notice that
the time overhead of the application classification model also
increases with the number packets considered per TLS application flow. Taking into account the time overhead and the classification accuracy, in our following evaluation experiments
for NeuTic, we vary the range of parameter h ∈ {4, 8, 12, 16}
as a convenient trade-off.
2) Dimension of the Embedding Vector for the Embedding
Layer, (d): Recall that in Section IV, we have three embedding
layers in input embedding. For each embedding layer, we use
d to denote the dimensions of the embedding vector for the
embedding layer. In practice, we experimentally find that the
parameter d has an impact on the classification performance of
NeuTic. Therefore, in the following evaluations, we vary the
ranges of d ∈ {128, 256, 512, 1024} to investigate how NeuTic’s performance is affected by different parameters settings.
3) The Number of Times the Sequence Self-Attention Is
Repeated, (L): The depth of the neural network is very
important for classification, and the classification accuracy can
gain from considerably increased depth. In practice, we can
stack one sequence self-attention on top of another sequence
self-attention to build a deeper classification model. For NeuTic, we use parameter L to denote the number of times
sequence self-attention is repeated. Notice that, with a small
value of L, it looks like that we may not have enough model
parameters and therefore will suffer from an under-fitting
problem. With a larger value of L, we may have too many
model parameters and we encounter an over-fitting problem.
Therefore, in the following evaluations, we carry out our

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS

Fig. 3.

Accuracy (%) on the validation set of Dataset-I (in the form of mean±standard deviation).

Fig. 4.

Accuracy (%) on the testing set of Dataset-I (in the form of mean±standard deviation).

experiments for L ∈ {1, 2, 3} to investigate how NeuTic’s
performance is affected by different parameters settings.
4) Other Settings: We have trained our neural networks with
Adam (adaptive moment estimation) optimizer with a minibatch of 1024 to optimize the loss function. In addition, the
initial value of our learning rate is 1e(−4), and the patience
value of the model on the validation set is 30 epoches, then
the learning rate is adjusted to 1/10 of the original, and the
minimum learning rate is 1e(−5). In this paper, the optimal
epoch we choose for the training of each deep learning model
is the number of epochs for which each model has a maximum
accuracy value on the validation set.
D. Effectiveness Results for Dataset-I
Fig. 3 plots the accuracy values for varying values of
parameter h, d, and L on the validation set of Dataset-I.
Specifically, Fig. 3(a), Fig. 3(b), and Fig. 3(c) three figures
plot the accuracy values for varying values of h and d for
L = 1, L = 2 and L = 3, respectively. For different parameter
settings, we report that the accuracy values vary in the range
of 83.41(±0.20)% – 95.09(±0.12)%. As shown in Fig. 3,
we clearly notice that the accuracy values generally degrade
for lower values of h for all possible values of d and L. In addition, we also observe that the accuracy of NeuTic generally
degrades for lower values of d. Next, let’s take a closer look
at the detailed experimental results in Fig. 3. For any fixed
values of d and h, we observe the trend that the classification
performance of NeuTic with L = 2 in most cases outperforms

171

those of L = 1 and L = 3. In addition, we also notice
that when h = 12, the classification accuracy is relatively
stable, and increasing the value of h does not significantly
improve the classification accuracy. In Fig. 4, we present
the experimental evaluation results of all the neural network
models on the testing set under different parameter settings.
The accuracy values vary in the range of 83.35(±0.16)% –
95.00(±0.05)%. Based on the above analysis and considering
the classification effectiveness and classification efficiency, we
choose d = 1024, h = 12, and L = 2 to carry out subsequent
evaluation experiments.
Next, for all the 15 applications from Alibaba, Baidu and
ByteDance, we report NeuTic’s confusion matrix of the classification results on Dataset-I in Fig. 5 in the case of d = 1024,
h = 12, and L = 2. As shown in the figure, we notice
that NeuTic’s recall values vary in the range of 84.15% –
99.28% for all the applications. Furthermore, NeuTic achieves
an average ACC of 94.92% on Dataset-I. From the confusion
matrix, we have two important findings. (1). First, as shown
in Fig. 5, for applications from different companies, we notice
that NeuTic has a very good classification performance. That
is to say, NeuTic will not mistake TLS flows generated by
one company’s (such as Alibaba) application for TLS flows
generated by another company’s (such as Baidu) application.
(2). Second, for apps from the same company, NeuTic performed very well in classifying TLS flows generated by applications from Alibaba and Baidu, while NeuTic’s classification
performance for TLS flows generated by applications from
ByteDance decreases slightly. For example, Ixigua and Toutiao

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

172

IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

Fig. 7.

Fig. 5.

Confusion matrix of NeuTic on Dataset-I.

Confusion matrix of NeuTic on Dataset-II.

evaluations, we only vary the ranges of parameter d and
parameter h on Dataset-II. More concretely, Fig. 6(a) and
Fig. 6(b) show the plots of accuracy for varying values of
h and d on the validation set and the testing set of DatasetII, respectively. From Fig. 6(a), we observe that the accuracy
values vary in the range of 70.77% – 97.47% for all possible
values of h and d. For Dataset-II, the optimal parameter values
on the validation dataset are h = 12 and d = 1024, and the
corresponding accuracy value is 97.47%. Notice that, like the
trend on Dataset-I, we observe that NeuTic’s accuracy values
on Dataset-II also generally degrade for lower values of h
and d. We also find that compared with h = 8, 12, 16, the
classification accuracy for h = 4 drops a lot for all possible
values of d. In addition, the parameters (h = 12, d = 1024)
that perform best on the validation set achieves an average
ACC of 97.26% on the testing set.
In Fig. 7, we report the confusion matrix of the classification results on the testing dataset of Dataset-II. Specifically,
we notice that the Recall values are 99.0% for Taopiaopiao,
99.1% for Youku, 99.1% for Duxiaoshi, 98.0% for Haokan,
93.2% for Douyin, and 95.1% for Ixigua. From the figure,
we have two findings. (1). We find that the confusion matrix
on Dataset-II has good diagonalization performance, which is
consistent with our excellent accuracy results. Although the
six categories of applications in Dataset-II are all video or
short video applications, NeuTic’s classification performance
is still very good. (2). Furthermore, compared to the other four
applications, we find that NeuTic performs slightly worse on
Douyin and Ixigua, and the TLS flows of these two types
confuse each other.

Fig. 6. Accuracy (%) on Dataset-II (in the form of mean±standard deviation).

from ByteDance, we observe that Ixigua traffic is sometimes
confused as Toutiao traffic and vice versa, where Ixigua has a
recall of 91.08% and Toutiao has a recall of 84.15%.
E. Case Study for Video Applications
Recall that Dataset-II is a data set of TLS flows generated
by six video/short video mobile applications. Based on the
experience gained on Dataset-I, in this part we choose a
fixed value for L, where L = 2. Therefore, in the following

F. Interpretability of Our Proposed Method
In this subsection, we use “Lime” [32] to help us to understand what features are more helpful to identify the fingerprint of encrypted TLS traffic. Lime is an open source tool,
which can explain the predictions of any classier. Specifically,
the input to our neural network model is the three attribute
sequences of each flow, including the packet length sequence,
the packet window size sequence, and the packet TCP flag
sequence. Lime analyzes our neural network model and gives
the importance value of each element in the three attribute

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS

173

TABLE III
A N E XAMPLE OF L IME ’ S I NTERPRETATION FOR THE PACKET S EQUENCE OF “E LEME ”

Fig. 8.

The importance of different features.

sequences to encrypted traffic classification. The higher the
importance value, the greater the contribution of this element
to encrypted traffic classification. In this part of the study,
we use the first 12 packets of each flow, so the packet sequence
of each flow has a total of 36 elements ( = 12 packets * 3
attributes). In Table III, we give an example of the results
interpreted using Lime. For the packet sequence of each flow,
we select the elements with the top 12 importance values to
carry out follow-up experimental analysis. Next, we try to
interpret the classification results of our neural network model
on Dataset-I.
1) Which Features Are More Important?: In Fig. 8, we show
the importance of three different features (i.e., packet length,
packet window size, and packet TCP flag) for each application.
From the above figure, we have the following three findings: (1). First of all, for most applications, the packet length
feature has a more important classification contribution than
the other two features. Therefore, the packet length feature
should be considered first when designing an encrypted traffic
classification model. (2). Secondly, the packet window size
feature and the packet TCP flag feature are also very helpful
for encrypted TLS traffic classification. For different applications, the classification contributions of these two features
are different, that is, the packet window size feature is more
important for some applications (such as Amap and Youku),
and the packet TCP flag feature is more important for other
applications (such as Eleme and Taobao). (3). Thirdly, we find
that the packet TCP flag feature is not important for maps (e.g.
Amap and Baidumap) and videos (e.g. Taopiaopiao, Youku,
Duxiaoshi and Hankan) from Alibaba and Baidu. However,
for mobile applications from ByteDance, the packet TCP flag
feature is still important.

2) Which Packets Are More Important?: In Fig 9, for all
the 15 applications, we separately show the importance of
the first 12 packets of the flow for classifying encrypted TLS
traffic.
From Fig. 9, we have the following three findings: (1).
First of all, the importance of packets in the flows varies
from application to application. (2). Secondly, the first four
packets are very important for encrypted TLS traffic classification. This finding is consistent with our previous experimental
results, where using only the first four packets of each flow can
achieve a classification accuracy of about 83% on Dataset-I.
(3). Thirdly, the packets after the first four packets are also
helpful for encrypted TLS traffic classification. Increasing the
value of parameter h within a certain range can improve the
classification accuracy.
G. Dealing With Traffic Obfuscation
In practice, one way to obfuscate a TLS flow is to pad all
the packet lengths of the flow to the same length, such as the
MTU (Maximum Transmission Unit) value. In this subsection,
we test NeuTic for its ability to identify such obfuscated TLS
flows. We adjust NeuTic to adapt the detection of obfuscated
TLS flows. Specifically, we feed the output of the last layer
of our neural network into a softmax layer. The output of
the softmax layer is an R-dimensional tensor, and we select
a maximum value in the tensor, denoted as valuemax. Then,
we set a threshold τ . For each flow to be tested, if valuemax
is greater than τ , NeuTic considers the flow to be a flow of a
known class, and if valuemax is less than τ , NeuTic considers
the flow to be a obfuscated flow.
In the experiment, we convert all the TLS flows in DataSet-I
into obfuscated flows, denoted as DataSet-I-confusion. We use

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

174

Fig. 9.

IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

The importance of different packets in a flow.

TABLE IV
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF D EALING
T RAFFIC O BFUSCATION

DataSet-I and DataSet-I-confusion to test NeuTic’s ability
to identify obfuscated TLS flows. For threshold τ , in our
experiment, we set a tentative value of 0.99. The evaluation
results are shown in Table IV. We notice the recall, precision,
and F-measure of NeuTic for the obfuscated flows are 90.81%,
86.66%, and 88.62%, respectively. It can be seen from the
experiment that NeuTic can accurately reject most of the
obfuscated TLS flows. This is only a preliminary attempt, and
the future work direction is to design a better obfuscated flow
filtering algorithm.
H. Discussion
If the developer changes the flow style of a mobile application, which usually means a major upgrade to the version of
this application, then our proposed approach may also lose the
ability to directly classify the traffic generated by this newly
upgraded application. Researchers can consider using DNS
resolution records to associate the flow of the upgraded application with the flow of the original application. The research
on the classification of new applications is a cutting-edge issue
in this field.

VII. C OMPARISONS W ITH E XISTING
S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS
In this section, we compare the performance of NeuTic with
two existing state-of-the-art methods, including RBRN [19]
and FS-Net [20]. Furthermore, we still use the evaluation
metrics introduced in Section VI-B to quantitatively evaluate
the experimental performances of difference methods.
A. Comparison With RBRN
First of all, we compare NeuTic with the classification
algorithm proposed in RBRN. Notice that RBRN uses the
byte information in each flow to perform encrypted traffic
classification. Specifically, RBRN converts the byte sequence
information of each flow into a 2D tensor image and feeds it
into the designed deep neural network model. In our comparison experiments, consistent with NeuTic, we also consider the
first 12 packets of each flow for RBRN and evaluate RBRN’s
classification performance on Dataset-I. In addition, we mask
the IP addresses (both source and destination IP addresses) and
TCP port numbers (both source and destination port numbers)
in the packets. For Dataset-I, columns 2 to 4 of Table V
report the cross-validation results of Recall, P recision and
F −measure three metrics of RBRN for each mobile application. Specifically, the cross-validation results of the Recall
values vary in the range of 51.79% – 92.84% for different
applications, the cross-validation results of the P recision values vary in the range of 53.25% – 95.69% for different applications, and the cross-validation results of the F −measure
values vary in the range of 51.72% – 94.22% for different
applications. We notice that RBRN has an average Recall

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS

175

TABLE V
C OMPARISONS OF N EU T IC , RBRN, AND FS-N ET ON D ATASET-I

of 75.28(±5.48)%, an average P recision of 75.90(±5.11)%,
and an average F −measure of 75.36(±5.44)%.
In addition, we report the classification confusion matrix of
RBRN on Dataset-I in Fig. 10. Let’s take a closer look at the
detailed experimental results for each application. We notice
that RBRN’s classification approach to improving Recall for
some applications may reduce Recall for other applications.
In addition, the classification results of RBRN are not good
enough for the following reason. In the design of the deep
learning model for encrypted traffic classification, RBRN
adopts a neural network structure based on CNN. It is worth
noting that the CNN model is good at dealing with the local
features of the data. However, it is worth noting that for a flow,
the relationship between packets is difficult to be described
by local features. As a result, RBRN does not perform well in
modeling the relationship between packets in a flow, especially
the relationship between distant elements in a packet sequence.
Compared to RBRN, NeuTic significantly improves the effectiveness of encrypted TLS traffic classification, where the
average F −measure increases by about 19.56% on Dataset-I.
In addition, RBRN is a very complex neural network, which
contains dozens of neural network layers, so the algorithm
complexity of RBRN is very high, and the whole training
process is also very slow.
B. Comparison With FS-Net
Remember that FS-Net classifies TLS flows by using the
packet length sequence of each flow as classification features.

Fig. 10.

Confusion matrix of RBRN on Dataset-I.

In this part, we evaluate the classification performance of
FS-Net on Dataset-I. For Dataset-I, columns 5 to 7 of Table V
report the cross-validation results of Recall, P recision and
F −measure three metrics of FS-Net for each mobile application. Specifically, the cross-validation results of the Recall
values vary in the range of 81.72% – 98.72% for different
applications, the cross-validation results of the P recision
values vary in the range of 81.92% – 99.27% for

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

176

Fig. 11.

IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

Confusion matrix of FS-Net on Dataset-I.

different applications, and the cross-validation results of
the F −measure values vary in the range of 81.81% –
99.00% for different applications. We notice that FS-Net
has an average Recall of 93.31(±0.12)%, an average
P recision of 93.34(±0.10)%, and an average F −measure
of 93.31(±0.11)%. In addition, we report the classification
confusion matrix of FS-Net on Dataset-I in Fig. 11. Compared
with FS-Net, NeuTic works much better, where the average
F −measure increases by about 1.61%. In addition, we also
notice NeuTic outperforms FS-Net on the F −measure for
all the 15 mobile applications. The main reasons why NeuTic
performs better than FS-Net in classification accuracy are:
(1) NeuTic considers some other fields of each packet to help
classify encrypted TLS traffic, and 2) the deep learning model
in NeuTic has stronger memory ability for sequence data.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
This paper represents a novel attempt to construct a TLS
traffic classification method for network traffic generated on
cloud platforms using advanced deep learning techniques. Our
approach is purely based on the packet sequence of each TLS
flow, and thus it does not need to assemble IP packets into
TLS messages. Our experimental results on real-world datasets
show that NeuTic has the ability to achieve an excellent classification performance. In addition, NeuTic outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on encrypted TLS traffic classification
with better classification effectiveness.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. Kreibich, “Design and implementation of netdude, a framework for
packet trace manipulation,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf, 2004,
pp. 1–10.
[2] V. Paxson, “Bro: A system for detecting network intruders in real-time,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 31, nos. 23–24, pp. 2435–2463, 1999. [Online].
Available: https://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/paxson98bro.html
[3] M. Roesch, “SNORT: Lightweight intrusion detection for networks,” in
Proc. 13th Syst. Admin. Conf. (LISA), Nov. 1999, pp. 229–238.
[4] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “A semantics-aware approach
to the automated network protocol identification,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 583–595, Feb. 2016.

[5] A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Meo, and D. Rossi, “KISS: Stochastic
packet inspection classifier for UDP traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1505–1515, Oct. 2010.
[6] J. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Xiang, “Internet traffic
classification by aggregating correlated naive Bayes predictions,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 5–15, Jan. 2013.
[7] A. Tongaonkar, R. Torres, M. Iliofotou, R. Keralapura, and A. Nucci,
“Towards self adaptive network traffic classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 56, pp. 35–46, Feb. 2015.
[8] J. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and A. V. Vasilakos, “An
effective network traffic classification method with unknown flow detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 133–147,
Jun. 2013.
[9] Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. P. C. Lee, Y. Liu, and G. Xie, “Toward unsupervised protocol feature word extraction,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1894–1906, Oct. 2014.
[10] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Robust network traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1257–1270, Aug. 2015.
[11] D. M. Divakaran, L. Su, Y. S. Liau, and V. L. L. Thing, “SLIC: Selflearning intelligent classifier for network traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 91,
pp. 283–297, Nov. 2015.
[12] Y. Wang, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, and T. Zang, “Rethinking
robust and accurate application protocol identification,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 129, pp. 64–78, Dec. 2017.
[13] N. Hubballi and M. Swarnkar, “BitCoding: Network traffic classification through encoded bit level signatures,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2334–2346, Oct. 2018.
[14] N. Hubballi, M. Swarnkar, and M. Conti, “BitProb: Probabilistic bit
signatures for accurate application identification,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1730–1741, Sep. 2020.
[15] Y. Chen, T. Zang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, and Y. Wang, “Rethinking
encrypted traffic classification: A multi-attribute associated fingerprint
approach,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP),
Oct. 2019, pp. 1–11.
[16] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM),
Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
[17] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute
bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
[18] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
(IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[19] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, Learning to Classify: A FlowBased Relation Network for Encrypted Traffic Classification. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 13–22.
[20] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[21] R. Schuster, V. Shmatikov, and E. Tromer, “Beauty and the burst:
Remote identification of encrypted video streams,” in Proc. 26th
USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2017, pp. 1357–1374.
[22] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identification using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2020.
[23] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H.-T. Zheng, and S.-T. Xia, “EBSNN:
Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Aug. 2, 2021,
doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2021.3101311.
[24] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
A. Pescape, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
[25] Y. Wang, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and X. Liu, “A multi-scale feature
attention approach to network traffic classification and its model explanation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 875–889,
Jun. 2022.
[26] Z. Zhao, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, W. Jia, and H. He, “A few-shot learning based
approach to IoT traffic classification,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26,
no. 3, pp. 537–541, Mar. 2022.
[27] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2017,
pp. 1–11.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS

[28] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio, “Deep sparse rectifier neural
networks,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statistics, 2011,
pp. 315–323.
[29] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[30] J. Lei Ba, J. Ryan Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” 2016,
arXiv:1607.06450.
[31] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating
deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” 2015,
arXiv:1502.03167.
[32] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should i trust
you?’: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.

Xiaochun Yun received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in
1993 and 1998, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China. His
research interests include network and information
security. He is a member of Advisory Committee for
Chinese State Informatization and a member of Subject Matter Expert Group of Information Security
Technology for National High Technology Research
and Development Program of China. He was honored with the First Prize of the Chinese National Award for Science and
Technology Progress in 2002 and 2011.

Yipeng Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the Institute
of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS), in 2014. He is currently an
Associate Professor with the Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology.
He has published more than 40 research papers
in international journals and conferences, such as
IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F OREN SICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, and IEEE I NTERNATIONAL C ON FERENCE ON N ETWORK P ROTOCOLS . His research interests are in networking, network security and machine learning, in particular network protocol
inference. He has won the Best Paper Award at ICNP for his work on
protocol format inference. He serves as a Regular Reviewer for IEEE/ACM
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING, IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS
IN C OMMUNICATIONS, Computer Networks (Elsevier), and Neurocomputing
(Elsevier).

177

Yongzheng Zhang received the B.S. and Ph.D.
degrees from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
China, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is currently a Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor at the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CAS), China. His research interests
include network security, particularly cyberspace
security situational awareness. He was honored with
the First Prize of the Chinese National Award for
Science and Technology Progress in 2011.

Chen Zhao received the B.E. degree in information
management and information system from Tianjin
University and the Ph.D. degree in cyber security from the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Her
research interests include network traffic analysis
and DNS security issues.

Zijian Zhao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree in computer science from
the Beijing University of Technology, Beijing,
China, where he is currently pursuing the M.S.
degree in computer technology with the Faculty
of Information Technology. His research interests
include network traffic classification and artificial
intelligence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.