Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

Including insider threats into risk management through Bayesian threat
graph networks
Nicola d’Ambrosio, Gaetano Perrone ∗ , Simon Pietro Romano
University of Napoli Federico II, Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Via Claudio 21, 80125 Napoli, Italy

A R T I C L E

I N F O

Keywords:
Insider threats
Risk assessment
Risk management
Bayesian attack graphs
Attack graphs
Data security

A B S T R A C T
Cybersecurity incidents do represent a serious danger for companies. In fact, the number of cyber crimes is
exponentially growing in a scenario where the global COVID-19 pandemic determined several conditions that
have negatively aﬀected companies’ cyber-security posture. The adoption of risk management processes can help
reduce security threats and mitigate both ﬁnancial and reputation losses. In computer systems, it is crucial to
relate security risks to the system infrastructure. Bayesian attack graph models can help reach such a goal. The
approach is very eﬀective as it allows to deﬁne the attack paths an attacker would perform against a speciﬁc
network infrastructure. In this way, it is possible to construct a truthful representation of a company’s security
risks that cannot be obtained with other approaches. Still, Bayesian risk management approaches are usually
based on advanced threats. Namely, those threats relate to vulnerabilities that can only be exploited by a skilled
attacker. Although several works enrich the expressiveness of the proposed Bayesian model, current proposals do
not provide insights into how it is possible to estimate security control costs, asset values, and threat probabilities
for other types of threats. Furthermore, they do not take insider threats into consideration. This work shows that
a risk management framework based on Bayesian Attack Graphs can be adapted to include a variety of threats,
including those related to the insiders. We ﬁrst extend an interesting work based on Bayesian Decision Networks
to cover a broader range of threats. Then, we formalize several concepts, such as security control coverage and
risk strategy, and show that our model can easily integrate insider threats when speciﬁc properties are deﬁned.
Finally, in order to address insider threats, we enrich the model with security controls that diﬀer from the
standard ones, such as technical IT training sessions and employee satisfaction surveys.

1. Introduction
IT Risk management is a fundamental activity in enterprise companies. Several approaches are commonly used to prioritize risks and
deﬁne proper defensive risk strategies. One of the challenges in implementing risk assessment processes is the realization of a risk management strategy that addresses the real security risks of an IT system. A well-founded approach to model network attacks is the attack
graph analysis (Phillips and Swiler, 1998). Through attack graphs, it
is possible to eﬀectively point out the exploits an attacker can perform against a system with vulnerabilities. Exploits occur based on
satisﬁed preconditions. A relevant evolution of the approach is the
Bayesian attack graph model (Frigault and Wang, 2008), which aims
to integrate probabilistic models in order to estimate the likelihood
of such preconditions. Bayesian attack graph models were adapted to

perform dynamic network risk assessments (Poolsappasit et al., 2012).
These advancements have contributed to a more eﬃcient and applicable risk assessment. Indeed, attack graphs make it possible to determine
the risks associated with a particular asset. However, Bayesian attack
graphs typically model cybersecurity threats based on exploiting either
known or (in the case of more advanced models) unknown vulnerabilities through attacks performed by skilled technical intruders. One
reason is related to the fact that such models usually adopt known
vulnerability databases to deﬁne vulnerabilities, e.g., the National Vulnerability Database (NVD), as well as well-deﬁned metrics, such as the
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS), to estimate probabilities.
However, these approaches are not able to use quantitative metrics to
estimate probabilities of other kinds of threats, such as business email
compromise or unintentional threats. The very few models which employ methods to evaluate other types of threats and deﬁne advanced

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: nicola.dambrosio2@unina.it (N. d’Ambrosio), gaetano.perrone@unina.it (G. Perrone), spromano@unina.it (S.P. Romano).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103410
Received 8 February 2023; Received in revised form 22 June 2023; Accepted 24 July 2023
Available online 28 July 2023
0167-4048/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

security metrics, are typically based on heuristic approaches which underestimate important parameters. As an example, they do not take
worldwide cybersecurity incident trends into account when estimating
threats’ probabilities.
In the above scenario, insider threats do represent a challenging
class of menace, due to the increasing risk they pose to enterprise organizations.
The main contribution of this work is to show that it is possible to
include insider threats in Bayesian risk management frameworks. Risk
assessment is based on quantitative metrics for the deﬁnition of both
security control costs and asset values. The underlying attack graph
models allow for modeling the relationship between threat actors (internal and/or external) and assets. Threat probabilities are estimated
by analyzing the number of occurrences of global security incident
trends. We formulate an alternative model based on attack graphs that
we name “threat graph” and show that it is possible to integrate insider threats into threat graphs by analyzing their relationships with
assets and representing their enabling factors in terms of “initial threat
nodes”.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background information that is useful to better position our contribution. Section 3 analyzes several works that either investigate the
insider threat topic or leverage the techniques we used to develop our
framework, i.e., attack graphs and risk management processes. We will
observe that many works address the problem of detecting insider threat
activities, but few explore the application of risk management processes
to defend companies against internal attackers. Furthermore, we sum up
the model at the basis of our work, i.e., the Bayesian Risk Management
Framework (BRMF), and show both its strengths and limitations. We
then propose an enriched model that generalizes the vulnerability deﬁnition to include diﬀerent types of threats. Section 4 delves deeper into
the insider threat concept and shows that the proposed enriched framework can easily include insider threats. Section 5 shows a practical
usage example of the proposed framework, while Section 6 summarizes
the results and paves the ground to new research directions in the insider threats risk management landscape.

Fig. 1. Example of an attack graph.

2. Background and motivation
Fig. 2. A simple example of a vulnerable network.

In order to appreciate the details of our model, it is important to
have a few preliminary notions. In this section, we summarize the attack
graph concept and provide preliminary deﬁnitions that will help readers
dig deeper into our model.

exploit or a postcondition caused by an exploit. Hence, exploit nodes deﬁne causal relationships between condition nodes. It is possible to put
these relationships into a graphical representation, as shown in Fig. 1.
Exploit nodes are represented through rectangle nodes, while condition
nodes are depicted with circle nodes. The relationships between conditions and exploits are modeled with edges, and the ﬁnal representation
is a directed bipartite graph.
Through attack graphs, it is possible to model network vulnerability
scenarios easily. Fig. 2 shows a simple vulnerable network environment.
In the example, the attacker has access to a public web server that is
vulnerable to two critical remote command execution (RCE) vulnerabilities, i.e., “CVE-2021-41773” (NVD, 2021a) and “CVE-2021-44228”
(NVD, 2021b). If the ﬁnal attacker’s goal is to obtain sensitive data located in the database, either of the two mentioned RCE vulnerabilities
must be exploited.
In order to formalize the concept of attack graphs, several deﬁnitions
can be found in the literature. A widely accepted one is that provided
by Wang et al. (2006).

2.1. Attack graphs
This section illustrates the fundamental concepts associated with
attack graphs. An excellent explanatory guide about attack graphs is
provided by Zenitani (2023), attack graphs are fundamental models for
performing network security analysis. An attack graph allows for the realization of causal relations between malicious events that occur in an
enterprise network. The ﬁrst graph-based system for network vulnerability analysis was proposed by Phillips and Swiler (1998), where they
extended the fault-tree analysis (Kritzinger, 2017) in order to include
cyclic structures. First attack graph representations were based on state
enumeration graphs. In such representations, all vulnerabilities can be exploited, and this information is modeled with a state that can be either
true or false. Therefore, if a network contains N computers and M vulnerabilities, the number of possible states is 2𝑀𝑁 , which might cause
scalability issues. To overcome the problem, several works (Ammann et
al., 2002; Jajodia et al., 2005) proposed an alternative approach called
the “exploit-dependency graph”. The representation is a bipartite directed graph composed of exploit nodes and condition nodes where each
exploit node can only be connected to one or more condition nodes,
and each condition node can only be connected to exploit nodes. Each
condition node denotes a fact that can be a precondition that enables an

Deﬁnition 1 (Attack graph - Wang et al., 2006). Given a set of exploits E,
a set of security conditions C where 𝐸 ∩ 𝐶 = ∅, a require relation 𝑅𝑟 ⊆ 𝐶 ×
𝐸, and an imply relation 𝑅𝑖 ⊆ 𝐸 × 𝐶, an attack graph G is the connected,
directed graph G = (𝐸 ∪ 𝐶, 𝑅𝑟 ∪ 𝑅𝑖 ), where (𝐸 ∪ 𝐶) is the set of nodes
and (𝑅𝑟 ∪ 𝑅𝑖 ) is the set of edges.
2

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Fig. 3. Attack graph of the proposed example.

Zenitani (2023) includes another relevant concept in the deﬁnition,
i.e., the initial conditions.

2.1.1. Logical attack graph
Despite their eﬀectiveness in modeling network attacks, attack
graphs do not provide details about how to practically describe the
conditions and exploits. From the previous example, it is essential to
observe that the exploits can be performed when all the pre-conditions
are satisﬁed. At the same time, a post-condition (such as “web server
compromised”) can occur if at least one of the exploits succeeds. Hence,
exploits can be considered as AND combinations of their pre-conditions,
while post-conditions can be modeled as OR combinations of exploits.
Fig. 4 illustrates the concept applied to the example through logical AND and OR ports. These considerations addressed researchers
toward the propositional logic. Conditions and models can be represented through a logic programming language, such as Datalog, i.e., the
language proposed by Ceri et al. (1989). A Datalog program comprises
a set of rules and facts. It accepts rules and facts and infers relationships
in order to decide whether the assertion is True or False. In our example,
we aim to model the ﬁnal goal of the attacker, i.e., the exﬁltration of
sensitive data from the database. To the purpose, Datalog rules can be
used for exploits, while Datalog facts can be used to model conditions.
An example of rules that can model the proposed exploits is illustrated in Listing 1.
Such rules only represent the attack model, but the attack graph of
the example is realized when we deﬁne a set of facts.
Facts model the initial preconditions of the attack graph and generate post-conditions through the Datalog rules. In order to automate
the realization of attack graphs, Ou et al. (2005) introduced MulVAL.

Deﬁnition 2 (Initial conditions - Zenitani, 2023). For each attack graph
G, initial conditions refer to the subset 𝐶𝑖 ⊆ 𝐶 composed of every condition 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 satisfying ∄ 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 such that (𝑒, 𝑐) ∈ 𝑅𝑖 .
In order to better ﬁt our model with attack graphs, we introduce two
further deﬁnitions:
Deﬁnition 3 (Goal conditions). For each attack graph G, goal conditions
refer to the subset 𝐶𝑔 ⊆ 𝐶 composed of every condition 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 satisfying
∄ 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 such that (𝑐, 𝑒) ∈ 𝑅𝑟 .
Goal conditions represent the ﬁnal goals of the attacker.
Deﬁnition 4 (Intermediate conditions). For each attack graph G, intermediate conditions refer to the subset 𝐶𝑚 ⊆ 𝐶 composed of every condition
𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 such that 𝑐 ∉ (𝐶𝑔 ∪ 𝐶𝑖 )
The related attack graph containing the three deﬁned nodes is illustrated in Fig. 3. As it is possible to observe, the “web server compromised” condition is implied by two diﬀerent exploits, and each exploit
depends on other conditions.
3

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Fig. 4. Logical graph.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

This logic-based network security analyzer allows writing and analyzing attack graphs through Datalog. In logic attack graphs, there are two
types of nodes, i.e., fact nodes and derivation nodes. Fact nodes represent
conditions that enable an attacker to perform an exploit and reach a
goal. They can be primitive (i.e., facts that do not depend on derivation
nodes) or derived (i.e., facts that are not primitive). Derivation nodes
represent the exploits that allow an attacker to obtain post-conditions.
Each derivation node has an “interaction rule” describing its dependencies. In particular, a derivation node depends on one or more fact nodes
that satisfy the rule’s preconditions. Although several MulVAL extensions have been developed, the fundamental concepts are still practical
and adopted.

webserverCompromised(A, W) :- webserverReachable(A, W),
webserverVulnerableToRCE(W, V).
readDatabaseCredentials(A, D) :- webserverCompromised(A, W),
databaseCredentialsUsedByWebserver(W, D).
sensitiveDataExfiltrated(D) :- readDatabaseCredentials(A, D).

Listing 1: Datalogic rules for the proposed example.

1
2
3
4

webserverReachable(Attacker, Webserver).
databaseCredentialsUsedByWebserver(Webserver, Database).
webserverVulnerableToRCE(Webserver, CVE-2021-41773).
webserverVulnerableToRCE(Webserver, CVE-2021-44228)

2.1.2. Attack template
When modeling attack graphs, a decisive choice regards the deﬁnition of an attack template, i.e., the rule set that contains the list of

Listing 2: Datalogic facts for the proposed example.
4

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

security conditions and their relationships. The default MulVAL attack
templates are mainly based on exploits against known vulnerabilities obtained from scanning and vulnerability assessment tools. Several works
aim to extend the base MulVAL attack templates. A comprehensive taxonomy for attack graph generation and usage in network security is
provided by Kaynar (2016).

actor is a malicious person or organization that does not necessarily
have any technical skills.
From the threat graph, it is possible to derive the Bayesian Threat
Graph (BTG) in the same way as the Bayesian attack graph (see Section 2.1.3).
BTG, which stands for Bayesian Threat Graph, is a Bayesian model
derived from the related threat graph. BTG is formally equivalent to
the Bayesian Attack Graph, meaning that the formulae described in Section 2.1.3 can be applied in the same way.
There is indeed a subtle yet signiﬁcant semantic diﬀerence between
an Attack Graph and a Threat Graph, which basically reﬂects the difference between a threat and an attack. A threat can be either intentional or unintentional, whereas an attack is intentional by deﬁnition.
As such, a threat is a circumstance that has potential to cause loss or
damage, while an attack is an explicit attempt at causing damage. The
introduction of Threat Graphs allows us to explicitly catch the above
semantic diﬀerence, by incorporating additional security risks, such as
those resulting from human errors or negligence. This generalization is
especially important when including insiders in the graph model.
Furthermore, we aim to develop a graph model that explicitly incorporates the previously mentioned concepts of goal threat, vector threat,
and initial threat preconditions. By extending the attack graph, we can
apply these concepts, represent insiders, and create the model as presented in Section 4.
In the proposed model, the number of goal threats is given by the
number of analyzed assets. Namely, if 𝑁𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 is the number of assets in
the system and 𝑁𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙 is the number of goal threat types, the number of
goal threats is given by the following Equation:

2.1.3. Bayesian attack graphs
In the previous section, we observed that security conditions could
be modeled as facts that can be either true or false. However, this is a
strong assumption. Researchers have hence explored novel approaches
to introduce stochastic variables in attack graphs.
Combining the Bayesian network probabilistic method with attack
graphs makes it possible to obtain a Bayesian attack graph (Frigault and
Wang, 2008). For each exploit node, it is possible to model a conditional
probability table (CPT) based on AND and OR relationships. In particular, in order to compute CPTs eﬃciently, loopy propagation algorithms
can be adopted. For attack graphs, the Noisy OR/AND (Pearl, 1988)
approach is commonly used. If 𝑝𝑎𝑖 is the set of probabilities related
to the preconditions that must be satisﬁed to make a node 𝑋𝑖 true, it
is possible to deﬁne noisy-AND and noisy-OR relationships as follows
(Munoz-Gonzalez et al., 2019):
{
0,
∃𝑋𝑗 ∈ 𝐩𝐚𝑖 |𝑋𝑗 = 𝐹
∏
𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦-𝐴𝑁𝐷 ∶ 𝑝(𝑋𝑖 |𝐩𝐚𝑖 ) =
(1)
𝑗∶𝑋𝑗 𝑝𝑣𝑗 , 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒.
{
0,
∀𝑋𝑗 ∈ 𝐩𝐚𝑖 |𝑋𝑗 = 𝐹
∏
(2)
𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦-𝑂𝑅 ∶ 𝑝(𝑋𝑖 |𝐩𝐚𝑖 ) =
1 − 𝑗∶𝑋𝑗 (1 − 𝑝𝑣𝑗 ), 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
Each AND gate in Fig. 4 can be converted into noisy-AND equations,
while the noisy-OR equation models the probability of each OR gate. Using these equations makes it possible to obtain a Bayesian Attack Graph
(BAG).

𝑁𝐺𝑇 = 𝑁𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 × 𝑁𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙

(3)

Vector threats can also be categorized according to the required technical level:

2.2. Threat graph - revisiting the attack graph deﬁnition

• Non technical threats: they do not need technical skills. They basically occur when a system publicly exposes sensitive data.
• Technical threats: they require IT skills but no hacking skills. For
example, an anonymous ftp login exposes sensitive data.
• Advanced threats: they refer to threats that require hacking skills,
such as vulnerability exploitation capabilities.

In this section, we introduce new deﬁnitions that will support the
description of the model proposed in Section 4. A threat to a system is either a malicious or unintentional action that harms the system.
Threats can be categorized by classifying worldwide security incidents.
We divide them in two sets:

This categorization needs to be highlighted as it helps deﬁne the threat
graph edges between pairs of nodes. In fact, non-technical threats may
be performed by a variety of threat actors, whereas other threats cannot be performed by employees (even disgruntled ones) having neither
technical nor hacking skills. An important consideration is related to
the probability and impact of a threat. We deﬁne the concept of “measurable threat”:

• Goal Threats, i.e., threats that cause a ﬁnal impact. In Section 5, we
consider two primary goal threats, namely, data exﬁltration and
ransomware.
• Vector Threats, i.e., threats that can be sequentially exploited to
enable preconditions for a goal threat.
We also introduce Initial Threat Preconditions, i.e., conditions that
enable the initial vector threat of the sequence that led to a goal threat.
According to the deﬁnitions in Section 2.1, it is possible to describe
vector threats, goal threats and initial threat preconditions in terms of
condition nodes and hence formulate the following threat graph deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 6 (Measurable threat). A measurable threat is a threat to
which it is possible to assign a ﬁnancial loss and a cyber incident frequency.
2.2.1. Security controls
In our model, security controls reduce the probability that a threat
occurs. We introduce the concept of “addressed threats”.

Deﬁnition 5 (Threat graph). A threat graph 𝑇 𝐺 is an attack graph G
where:

Deﬁnition 7 (Security control). A security control is a tuple SC=(Cost,
AddressedThreats), where Cost represents the implementation cost of SC
and AddressedThreats is a list of addressed vector threats. After applying
security controls, the probability of vector threats is reduced. Consequently, goal threats probabilities are also reduced.

• intermediate nodes represent vector threats, i.e., a single step in
the sequence of threats (i.e., the “threat path”) exploited by a threat
actor in order to reach a goal threat;
• goal nodes represent goal threats, i.e., the ﬁnal steps of a threat
path followed by a threat actor;
• initial nodes represent the initial threat preconditions.

In our model, security controls reduce the probability of addressed
threats. In particular, some security controls harden the system by reducing the probability of exploiting a vulnerability. In contrast, others

In the previous deﬁnition, we explicitly refer to “threat actor” to
underline the diﬀerence from a skilled attacker. In particular, a threat
5

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

aim to increase the eﬀectiveness of intrusion detection systems that
should induce attackers to be discouraged by the possibility of being
discovered. Indeed, this is a strong assumption that requires further
work, as the “deterrence level” depends on various factors, such as the
attacker’s motivation (Chan and Yao, 2005). We are nonetheless herein
assuming that such an assumption holds true.
We can deﬁne the security control “coverage” in the following way:

eral factors cause cyber losses. Palsson et al. (2020) apply a random
forest algorithm to create a relationship between cyber incident factors
and several ﬁnancial cost classes, summarizing a relationship between
threat types and ﬁnancial losses. We leverage this relationship to estimate the global costs in our use case. Anyway, the estimation should
also consider the number of breached records. Jacob (2014) observed
that there is a logarithmic relationship between the security incident
losses and breached records. A recent study by the Cyentia Institute
(Cyentia, 2020) conﬁrms this relationship. The study relates the number of compromised records to the ﬁnancial losses of cyber incidents
that occurred in 2020. These considerations can be used to include local impact factors that depend on the company information within the
model. By applying a regression model to the Cyentia studies, it is possible to obtain the following formula:

Deﬁnition 8 (Security control coverage). Let 𝕋 a set of measurable
threats used to evaluate risk, and 𝑆𝐶 a security control. 𝔸𝕋 ⊆ 𝕋 is the
set of threats addressed by the security control. The probability of a
threat 𝑎𝑡𝑖 ∈ 𝔸𝕋 is reduced by 𝑟𝑖 when the security control is applied.
The security control coverage reduction is deﬁned by the tuple:
𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 = [𝑟0 , ..., 𝑟𝑛 ]

(4)

𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 𝑒10.36+0.55⋅𝑙𝑛(𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 )

where 𝑛 is the number of addressed threats.

Equation (8) relates the number of records stored in an asset to the
ﬁnancial losses for a company caused by cyber incidents involving the
asset. In our model, each asset can be aﬀected by one or more threat
goals. Each asset contains 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 sensitive data, and we assume
that a threat completely breaches it. Through this assumption, we can
give an impact score for each asset in the model.

Finding how much a security control reduces the probability of addressed threats is challenging. The probability can be estimated through
either qualitative or quantitative approaches. Quantitative approaches
are preferred, as these estimations allow objective results to be less
susceptible to cognitive biases. In order to assess the security control impact against the addressed threats it is crucial to adopt Speciﬁc,
Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound criteria, i.e., we
have to deﬁne SMART metrics (Doran, 2008).
After security controls are applied, a new Bayesian Threat Graph is
generated, and, depending on the addressed threats, the probability of
goal threats is reduced accordingly.
We can deﬁne a risk strategy as a combination of security controls.

3. Related works
Several works inspired our framework. Khosravi and Bafghi (2020)
present a network security risk management framework based on
Bayesian Decision Networks that allows the selection of the best security
controls’ combination under budget constraints. The model is focused
on software vulnerabilities exploitable by attackers having hacking
skills. In our work, we will extend it to cover more generic threats
and, in particular, insider threats. Our model also includes additional
security controls to deal with insider threats and proposes a diﬀerent interpretation of several concepts like, for example, the way the security
controls address threats. Namely, in our model, unlike BRMF, security
controls reduce threat probabilities rather than decreasing their impact
(see Section 2.2.1). We will give more details in the next section. Erola
et al. (2022) allowed us to gain relevant insights into several aspects.
For example, considering the CIS (Center for Internet Security) critical
security controls and the security impact in terms of data loss. Although
we utilized the logarithmic relationship between security incident losses
and breached records, the approach proposed by Erola et al. might indeed be integrated to also assess impact loss.
Psychological, social, and biological information (Levy, 2010) works
led us to integrate employee satisfaction processes, technical training,
and stress monitoring as security controls in our ﬁnal framework including insider threats (Saito et al., 2021; Roll et al., 2019; Wong et al.,
2019).
The current insider threat research is mainly focused on discovering malicious behaviors in systems (Al-Mhiqani et al., 2020). Many
works evaluate the detection performance by leveraging the insider
threat dataset provided by the Computer Emergency Response Team
(CERT) division (Lindauer, 2020). The dataset has both monitoring and
behavioral features. In particular, OCEAN personality traits (Rothmann
and Coetzer, 2003) are used to characterize the employees. Tuor et
al. (2017) develop an unsupervised deep learning model to detect insider threats, while Yuan et al. (2018) design an alternative deep neural
network and show that it increases the performance detection metrics
compared to other approaches. Finally, Zhang et al. (2021) demonstrate
that ensemble learning and self-supervised techniques increase the detection of malicious activities.
Several works aim to propose insider threat models by adopting formal methods (Wing, 1990). An outstanding contribution is represented
by the “CERT Guide to Insider Threats” (Cappelli et al., 2012). Other
two relevant formal languages (Magklaras et al., 2006; Kammuller and
Probst, 2017) are mentioned in a systematic survey about insider threats

Deﬁnition 9 (Risk strategy). Let 𝑆𝐶 the set of possible security controls
and 𝑁𝑠𝑐 the number of security controls. Each security control can be
either applied or not. A risk strategy is the implementation of a subset
of security controls. The number of risk strategies is given by Equation
(5)
𝑁𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 = 2𝑁𝑠𝑐

(5)

Each security control has a cost. The implementation cost of a risk
strategy depends on the implemented security controls:
Deﬁnition 10 (Risk strategy cost). Let 𝑆𝐶 the set of security controls
that a company is going to implement in the system. The risk strategy
cost is given by:
𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 =

𝑛
∑
𝑖=0

𝑐𝑖

(6)

where 𝑛 is the number of implemented security controls, and 𝑐𝑖 is the
cost of security control 𝑠𝑐𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝐶.
2.2.2. Threat impact
The impact of a threat can be computed in the same way as done in
the work from Erola et al. (2022). In particular, it can be obtained by
considering the ﬁnancial losses caused by a threat at a speciﬁc instant
in time.
Deﬁnition 11 (Threat impact). Let 𝑡 be a goal threat of a Bayesian
Threat Graph and 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑡 the ﬁnancial loss associated with the
threat obtained by analyzing the related cyber incidents. We can deﬁne
the threat impact variable as follows:
𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡 = 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑡

(8)

(7)

Equation (7) can be computed by considering the current statistics
of cyber incident costs for a speciﬁc threat. This is not easy, as sev6

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

from Xiong and Lagerström (2019). To the best of our knowlewdge, no
unifying theory currently exists to model insider threats. As to threat
categorization, we could not ﬁnd in the literature a well-founded set
of insider threats. Though, we were able to get relevant information
from statistical sources. In particular, the Vocabulary for Event Recording and Incident Sharing (VERIS) (The veris framework, 2022) oﬀers a
set of metrics designed to provide a common language for describing
security incidents in a structured and repeatable manner. Through this
database, it was possible to deﬁne the most relevant threats, by also
including the insider ones. Another relevant data breach source from
which to infer further insider threat scenarios was provided by Verizon’s
Data Breach Investigation Report (DBIR) (Verizon, 2021). Through data
analysis, we were actually able to extract various threats (see Table 6).
Nurse et al. (2014) propose an interesting framework to characterize insider attacks and pose countermeasures. In his disruptive paper
(Greitzer, 2019), Greitzer shows that emerging government guidelines
specify only minimum standards for insider threat monitoring, analysis,
and mitigation programs, so authors oﬀer insights to ﬁll the gap.
Our work widens the research scope to include insider threats in risk
management processes. In fact, even if risk management frameworks
are extensively adopted to prevent security risks in companies, their application to address insider threats is relatively unexplored. Logan and
Clarkson (2020) show that the insider is a signiﬁcant risk for companies
and try to make available a qualitative approach to deﬁne insider-based
risk assessment. Anyway, it is an early work that does not provide many
details about how to integrate insider threats into risk management processes. Stone (2021) oﬀers systematic reviews that conﬁrm the beneﬁts
of using the risk-management process to combat insider threats. In our
model, we deﬁne a threat graph that is conceptually based on attack
graphs. Attack graph models are extensively adopted to model the behavior of attackers in order to prevent attacks from being successful.
Lallie et al. (2020) provide a comprehensive overview that oﬀers a theoretical foundation of attack graphs and shows there is no standard
method for representing them. We think that the main cause behind
such a lack of standardization is the quest for ﬂexibility of such models.
Still, it is also their strength, as it is possible to deﬁne diﬀerent attack
“view” levels and, most importantly, to have a clear vision of the attacker’s behavior. In fact, attack graphs show the sequential steps of an
attacker who breaks into a system and relate the potential threats to the
aﬀected assets. It is an essential feature in risk management, as the impact level depends on the asset’s importance. To underline the beneﬁts
of the visual attack graph representation, Lallie et al. (2018) conﬁrm
that such models can increase the cyber-attack perception. In this work,
in order to improve the understanding of the model, we represent highlevel threats through attack graphs. By using such an approach, it would
also be possible to model low-level threats. Current works based on attack graphs are focused on the application to cyber-physical systems
and Internet of Things (Ghazo et al., 2020).

Roy Sarkar (2010) does not propose a model, yet provides a comprehensive set of technical, behavioral, and organizational measures to
predict the likelihood of insider threats. Axelrad et al. (2013) propose
an interesting approach that encloses several insider features, such as
dynamic environmental stressors and static personality, into Bayesian
networks. Although the approach focuses on detection rather than security risk assessment, it provides a point of reﬂection about the usefulness
of Bayesian networks to model insider threat behavior. However, the authors do not consider relationships between insiders and assets.
Other works model the insider threat through game theoretic models
such as that proposed by Joshi et al. (2021). In their work, adversarial
risk analysis (ARA) addresses the insider threat problem. It is an interesting work as it proposes an attack-defense approach to select the
best defensive action that eﬀectively counters insider threats. Furthermore, since it models both the attacker’s and the defender’s behavior,
it oﬀers a richer expressiveness than our model. However, it does not
consider the importance of assets in the utility function that deﬁnes the
attacker’s behavior. Also, it does not provide detailed information about
estimating security control costs.
In our opinion, one of the most relevant works about including insider threats in risk management is provided by Greitzer et al. (2021).
The work proposes a knowledge elicitation model to support the development of insider threat risk models. Although the proposed model
neither focuses on deﬁning a risk strategy, nor illustrates the approaches
for estimating costs, it is a fundamental piece of work that can be leveraged to deﬁne insider threat preconditions. Table 1 summarizes the
mentioned works and their properties.
Indeed, each of these models oﬀers relevant insights that can be of
inspiration to enrich our work. We will provide some pointers in the
concluding section of the paper.
3.2. Attack graphs and risk analysis
Attack graphs eﬀectively underline the relationship between attacks
and nodes in a network system, but it is challenging to deﬁne which security measures should be applied to address such attacks. On the other
hand, well-founded risk assessment methodologies allow for deﬁning
risk strategy eﬀectively but are usually adopted without considering the
real system environment. Hence they cannot be leveraged by network
administrators to mitigate security risks. A pioneering Bayesian attack
graph framework was proposed by Poolsappasit et al. (2012) to formalize a dynamic network risk assessment model. Several works propose
Bayesian approaches to assess network security risks. However, they
mainly focus on network security technical threats and estimate threat
probabilities using vulnerability scoring systems designed to capture
technical characteristics of software, hardware, and ﬁrmware vulnerabilities, such as the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS).
Table 2 compares our work with similar approaches. As it is possible
to observe, current Bayesian risk management models mainly aim to
mitigate technical threats. Insider threats and non-technical threats are
typically not taken into account.

3.1. Insider threat analysis
Several works propose approaches to detect insider threats and select the most eﬀective defensive strategies to minimize risks. Mathew et
al. (2008) deﬁne a theoretical model called Capabilities Attack Graphs
(CAG) to detect the most probable attack paths on the basis of the cost
related to the security controls and vulnerability score. Our threat graph
is similar to their work, as it is basically asset-centric. However, the authors do not include asset values in their cost estimation. Furthermore,
their model is based on CERT vulnerabilities and seems to rely only on
what we have herein deﬁned as hacking threats.
Bishop et al. (2010) propose a descriptive research work that gives
interesting insights into the integration of insider threats in risk management, such as the importance of access resources and psychological
indicators. However, their model includes neither external attackers nor
asset values when evaluating security risks. Therefore, no quantitative
metrics are deﬁned to evaluate security risk strategies.

3.3. Base risk management framework (BRMF)
A work that explicitly implements Bayesian attack graphs to perform
risk assessment is authored by Khosravi and Bafghi (2020). The paper
in question can help identify the limitations of existing approaches.
For simplicity, we will call the authors’ work Base Risk Management Framework (BRMF). BRMF leverages the visual representation
of attack graphs, and therefore allows to share attack scenarios with
non-technical teams easily. Its strength resides in the fact that it is selfexplanatory. As the attack graph model is widely adopted, BRMF can
be applied in many contexts. The attack graph model perfectly ﬁts an
attacker who tries to exploit remote vulnerabilities in order to break inside a system, compromise internal servers through lateral movement,
and eventually exﬁltrate sensitive data from the corrupted targets.
7

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Table 1
Comparison between related insider threat analysis works. Legend: Eternal Attackers: if the model includes external attackers; Technical Threats: if the model
includes technical threats; Non-technical threats: if the model includes non-technical threats; Asset value: if the model includes asset values; SMART metrics: if the
model deﬁnes SMART metrics; Security controls: if the model deﬁnes security control costs; Insiders and assets relationships: if the model analyzes relationships
among insiders and assets.

External Attackers
Technical threats
Non-technical threats
Asset value
SMART metrics
Security controls
Insiders and assets relationships

Mathew et al. (2008)

Bishop et al. (2010)

Axelrad et al. (2013)

Joshi et al. (2021)

Greitzer et al. (2021)

Our work

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
Y

N
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y

N
N
Y
N
N
N
N

N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Table 2
Comparison between related risk analysis works based on attack graphs. Legend: Probability metric: Used Probability Metric; Asset impact: if asset impact is included
in the risk analysis; Non-technical threats: if the attack template includes non-technical threats; Insider threats: if the attack template includes insider threats.
Work

Attack graph template

Probability metric

Asset impact

Non-technical threats

Insider threats

Munoz-Gonzalez et al. (2019)

Technical attacks, based on CVE. Do not include
0-days or global security incidents

CVSS score

N

N

N

Behbehani et al. (2022)

Web attacks. Manually creates CVSS scores to
evaluate probabilities

CVSS score

N

N

N

Sawilla and Ou (2008)

Network attacks, extracts metrics and vulnerabilities
from public known databases such as NVD

CVSS score

N

N

N

Khosravi and Bafghi (2020)

Based on technical attacks, but introduces
interesting approaches to deﬁne a risk management
strategy based on Bayesian attack graphs

CVSS Score

Y

N

N

Deng et al. (2023)

Based on technical attacks, but introduces a new
metric to evaluate asset importance

SIR model
(Ross, 1916)

Y

N

N

Our work

Based on “threats”, composed of technical,
non-technical and insider threats. Use global security
incidents to estimate threat probabilities

Global security
incident trends

Y

Y

Y

The model allows to link attack scenarios to the network topology,
by enabling security teams to easily and rapidly understand what should
be protected and hardened. The model can become too complex if large
network scenarios are considered, which might negatively impact its
visual representation power. For this reason, it is crucial to choose a
proper abstraction level for the attacks adopted in the model, as we did
in our work.

using attack models based on known software vulnerabilities, it is not
possible to model other types of threats, such as:
• 0-day attacks: if CVSS scores are used to evaluate risks, it is not
possible to model attacks that exploit unknown vulnerabilities;
• Weak or default credentials issues: attackers might compromise a target server by using default credentials. This is related to negligent
system administrators who erroneously do not harden passwords;
• Social engineering attacks: the attacker might, e.g., send a phishing
e-mail to break into the system.

3.3.1. BRMF limitations
As the attack graph approach is very ﬂexible, we chose to start from
the BRMF model (which only focuses on the exploitation of vulnerabilities) and enrich it in order to cover other threats while also widening
the scope of several related concepts. In fact, despite its advantages,
BRMF has a few intrinsic limitations, like, for example, the fact that
it is only focused on vulnerabilities. Several works adopted an attacker
risk assessment procedure making use of the base metrics (i.e., Conﬁdentiality Impact, Integrity Impact and Availability Impact) by using existing
vulnerability databases (e.g., the one proposed by the National Vulnerability Database – NVD, 2022). Unfortunately, this approach is weak
for several reasons. In fact, the probability of an attack that exploits
vulnerabilities on a target does not just depend on the severity of such
vulnerabilities but also on additional factors. For example, critical vulnerabilities might aﬀect a target representing a rarely used asset inside
the company. For this reason, even if severity is critical in such a case,
potential attackers will likely not exploit such a ﬂaw, as they will focus on investigating the most relevant widely deployed vulnerabilities
they have discovered. Hence, a parameter such as the cybersecurity incidents trend is in this case a better probability indicator, as it reﬂects
the most widely deployed cyber attacks against companies. Also, when

This limitation is much more impactful when considering non-technical
insider threats. In fact, even if an insider threat might exploit vulnerabilities, this is a rare condition. Munshi et al. (2012) underline
the discrepancy between the academic literature and empirical data in
focusing on insider’s technical skills. Although several models demonstrated that technical skills might increase the probability of an insider
threat, empirical data show that non-technical threats are the primary
cause of incidents.1 Malicious insiders usually leverage privileged access to hosts, computers, and systems. A relevant consideration is that
they can also exploit the physical access to the systems, so it is essential
to model physical assets.
Since BRMF only considers vulnerabilities, the proposed security
controls fall in the category of network security solutions, such as applying patches, disabling services and/or adding a network Intrusion

1 According to Verizon’s DBIR, 74% of breaches in 2023 involved the human element (https://www.verizon.com/business/resources/reports/dbir/, accessed: 17-06-2023).

8

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Detection System (IDS). Through network-related security controls, it
is not possible to include further threats. For this reason, we consider
the CIS (Center for Internet Security) Critical Security Controls (SANS,
2008, 2021) provided by the SANS institute2 in the same way as proposed in Erola et al. (2022). As stated by the authors, SANS has a
lack of non-technical controls. They introduce organizational culture,
information-security programs, etc., but do not consider human factors.
An employee might be inﬂuenced by several factors, such as disgruntlement or overworking. Even if several studies, e.g., Kweon et al. (2019),
have been carried out to explore the importance of security awareness
courses to reduce the risk of social engineering attacks, none of them,
to the best of our knowledge, integrates employee satisfaction programs
in the risk management process. Many works conﬁrm the relationship
between job satisfaction and performance. A crucial research study by
Vincent et al. (1960) explores the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that
inﬂuence job motivation. Job dissatisfaction and overworking can increase human error and lead to malicious behaviors, thus introducing
security risks. For this reason, it is important to conduct surveys that
estimate the employees’ job satisfaction level as well as their burnout
level (Kappala, 2015). In Section 4.7 we show how it is possible to extend CIS Critical Security Controls in order to include insider threats.
One more weakness of BRMF derives from the approach used to
relate security controls to security risks. Namely, in BRMF, security controls reduce the damaging impact. Still, it is unclear how is it possible
to estimate how much a security control reduces the impact of an attack. The accurate evaluation of the risk reduction by applying security
controls is an open research question. Still, it is important to underline
that security controls reduce threat probability rather than threat impact. Based on these considerations, we can simplify the approach by
inferring the reduced threat probabilities of a Bayesian Graph when a
subset of the available security controls is applied. In our approach, we
compute the risk by multiplying the threat probability by the threat
impact. To summarize, we design a model that:

• threats are not related to skilled attackers that exploit software vulnerabilities, but are rather deﬁned through known datasets such as
Advisen (2019);
• real incidents are used to model threat probabilities and evaluate
their impact;
• assets are not just servers but also include people, software, abstract
concepts, etc.
We use a similar approach to extend the risk framework by including
other types of threats, as well as by redeﬁning the risk strategy in terms
of risk and security controls implementation cost.
4.2. Risk and security risk strategy
For each goal threat, we can deﬁne an asset risk given by the product
between threat probability and threat impact. The total risk is given by
Equation (9):
𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 =

𝑁𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 𝑁𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡

∑ ∑
𝑖=0

𝑗=0

𝑃 (𝑇𝑖 ) × 𝐼(𝐴𝑗 )

(9)

Each asset (𝐴𝑗 ) can be aﬀected by 𝑁𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 goal threats, and each goal
threat 𝑇𝑖 has a 𝑃 (𝑇𝑖 ) probability, obtained after the inference of
the Bayesian Threat Graph generated by the implementation of Algorithm 1.
4.3. An algorithm to estimate the best risk strategy
The aforementioned deﬁnitions allow us to deﬁne an algorithm to
evaluate the best security controls selection under budget constraints
(Algorithm 1).
Algorithm 1 Bayesian reduced threat algorithm.
Require: 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ : the threat graph.
Require: 𝑁𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 : the number of risk strategies
1: 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑠 ← 𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑦𝑆𝑒𝑡()
2: for 𝑖 < 𝑁𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 do
3:
𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠(𝑖)
4:
𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡)
5:
𝑏𝑡𝑔 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐵𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ(𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡, 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ)
6:
𝑀𝑎𝑘𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑓 𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝑏𝑡𝑔)
7:
𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 = 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠(𝑏𝑡𝑔)
8:
for all 𝑔 ∈ 𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 do
9:
𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑟𝑜𝑚𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙(𝑔)
10:
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 ← 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡.𝐺𝑒𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠()
11:
𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑔)
12:
𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏))
13:
end for
14:
𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 ← 𝑆𝑢𝑚(𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑠)
15:
𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑖, 𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘)
16:
𝑖←𝑖+1
17: end for

• extends the attack concept by including other threat scenarios, e.g.,
weak credentials, sensitive data exposure, social engineering attacks, etc.;
• deﬁnes an alternative approach to evaluate the best security controls combination through the risk analysis obtained by generating
Bayesian graphs having reduced Conditional Probability Tables
(CPTs);
• evaluates threat probabilities based on cyber incident trends , as well
as threat impact based asset values;
• includes insider threats in the model by adding speciﬁc security controls capable of addressing them.
4. Towards an enriched risk management framework for insider
threats

The deﬁned algorithm allows selecting the risk strategy that maximizes risk reduction. As explained in Section 2.2.1, it is possible to
select the strategy depending on either risk reduction or budget constraints. For each risk strategy, a Bayesian Threat Graph is generated
(Line 6). The implemented security controls reduce the threat probabilities vector, thus also reducing risk. For each goal threat, the risk
associated with the related assets is estimated by using Equation (8)
(Line 11).
In the previous section, we have observed that a threat has several
preconditions that inﬂuence its probability. In the same way as BRMF,
we do not formalize the relationship between the preconditions and the
probability. The analysis of these relationships would be too complex
and depends on the speciﬁc threat as well as the context in which the
model is applied. As in almost all of the cited related works, we assume
that the implementation of a security control is a boolean condition
that can either protect a system or not. Another important assumption

In this section, we propose a risk management framework that generalizes both threat and security metrics used in the BRMF attack graph
by also including insider threats.
4.1. Beyond BRMF limits
A relevant recent work (Erola et al., 2022) inspired us to devise a
generalized BRMF model. In their study, Erola et al. (2022) design a
system to evaluate Cyber Value-at-Risk in networked architectures. The
approach is interesting under several perspectives:

2 Oﬃcially the Escal Institute of Advanced Technologies. SANS stands for
SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security.

9

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

4.5. Unintentional insiders
An unintentional insider might expose sensitive data, disable a security control and/or send sensitive data to the wrong recipients. These
events introduce threats into the system. Hence, they can be modeled
as preconditions that depend on unintentional human errors that cause
security ﬂaws.
Insider Threat Consideration 3 (Unintentional insider threats). An employee could make unintentional mistakes that generate security ﬂaws
exploitable by an attacker, i.e., initial threat preconditions.
Fig. 6 shows that a human error on tasks aﬀecting security generates an initial threat precondition (i.e., a “security ﬂaw”). Unintentional
mistakes can be inﬂuenced by several factors. The impact of factors on
human errors can be computed using known approaches with some variations. Firstly, “unawareness” should be considered as a potential factor,
which could be mitigated thanks to security training courses. Secondly,
when considering the impact of human error on security, it is important
to account for the number of security tasks over the total tasks assigned
to the employee. The human error model gives an indication of the general error that an employee might commit during the execution of an IT
task. If 𝑁𝑆𝐸𝐶 is the number of tasks that aﬀect security and 𝑁𝑇 𝑂𝑇 is the
total number of tasks assigned to the employee, the probability that an
employee’s human error aﬀects security (i.e., the threat precondition)
is given by:

Fig. 5. Hacked insider.

𝑃 (𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑤) = 𝑃 (𝐻𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟) ⋅

is that security controls are immune from vulnerabilities, while they
might potentially introduce further threats into the system. For example,
the IT administrator might set default credentials, and/or a monitoring
system might itself present vulnerabilities. In our model, insiders can
be often represented as non-technical attackers with system privileges
higher than external attackers. For the sake of completeness, we remark
that an even worse situation is the one in which the insider also has
technical skills. In such a case, the insiderness (i.e., the fact that higher
privileges do exist) property translates into the most impactful consequences on the security of an organization.
Namely, we model an insider threat as an attacker that satisﬁes the
“insiderness” property.

𝑁𝑆𝐸𝐶
𝑁𝑇 𝑂𝑇

(10)

Several authors explored models for human error estimation. Reason
(2000) analyzes human error through both a person and a system approach and explores the risks of mishaps in clinical practice. Yazdanparast et al. (2018) propose an optimization-based resource allocation
algorithm that includes human error factors. Human error is also investigated through biological models. Holroyd and Coles (2002) investigated
the neural basis of human errors, and recent studies have devised prediction models by using biological information. Though, in Section 5
we do not leverage any advanced human error probability model, but
rather consider the precondition as a boolean variable. As part of our
future work, we will focus on applying such error models in order to
evaluate their eﬀectiveness in quantifying security risks introduced by
human errors.

Insider Threat Consideration 1 (Insiderness property). The insiderness
property is a threat precondition that enables an attacker to access the
system with higher privileges than external actors.

4.6. Malicious insiders

As an insider threat is a company employee, they introduce nontechnical threats into the system. They might exﬁltrate data without
exploiting vulnerabilities, while also bypassing monitoring systems and
hence reducing the eﬀectiveness of the implemented security controls.

Malicious insiders are internal attackers who introduce vector
threats that depend on their system privileges. The “malicious intention”
is the main precondition for this threat. Such a precondition depends
on several factors, like behavioral, personal, social, and psychological
ones.

4.4. Hacked insiders
Insider Threat Consideration 4 (Malicious insider). A malicious insider
is an attacker that satisﬁes the insiderness property.

Hacked insiders are easily represented in our model by introducing
the “hacked” threat precondition. An attacker that hacks an employee
changes the BTG state, enabling new threats inside the system.

Fig. 7 shows the relationship between the insiderness property,
namely, an insider threat precondition, and several triggering factors.
The insiderness property can be ascribed to several factors, such
as personal problems, disgruntlement, OCEAN personal traits (see Section 3), etc. Unfortunately, no study carefully analyzes this relationship.
Current works are ineﬀective in discovering the triggering factors that
inﬂuence the behavior of an employee. Martinez-Moyano et al. (2008)
proposed an interesting dynamic model that we are going to explore
in order to integrate such a relationship into our framework. The insiderness level might be obtained by conducting employee satisfaction
surveys (Popovic et al., 2015). It is essential to underline that external
attackers also have a personality, might have personal problems, and,

Insider Threat Consideration 2 (Hacked user). A hacked user is an
initial threat precondition for an attacker that has been able to hack an
employee of the target organization by defeating the security controls
applied to the employee’s system.
Fig. 5 shows an example of an external attacker that compromises an
internal user, thus enabling a “hacked user” initial threat precondition.
Such a precondition allows the attacker to obtain higher privileges in
the system, hence enabling privileged threat paths.
10

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Fig. 6. Human error and initial threat condition.

Fig. 7. Insiderness triggering factors.

depending on the person’s relationship with the organization, might
also be disgruntled (e.g., a disgruntled customer). However, we do not
include these factors in the model as we assume that external entities,
i.e., attackers with partial or no access to the system, already have malicious intentions. We were interested in modeling which factors turn
an employee into a malicious employee, as those users have higher
privileges in the system. For this reason, we deﬁne the “insiderness”
property and relate it to the previously illustrated triggering factors. Insiders have speciﬁc features. For sure, more attack paths are available to
them thanks to their facilitated access to the network. It would anyhow
be interesting to extend this concept to the wider category of supplychain attacks (Warren and Hutchinson, 2000). It would anyhow be
interesting to extend this concept to the wider category of supply-chain
attacks (Reason, 2000). In Section 6 we will explore this topic in more
detail.

Fig. 8 summarizes the aforementioned considerations. Insiderness,
security ﬂaws, and hacked users can be modeled as threat preconditions. In this way, it is possible to integrate insider threats into a
uniﬁed model, i.e., the threat graph. In the use case scenario proposed in Section 5, we will treat insider threat preconditions as boolean
variables. As a future improvement, we will try to reﬁne such an assumption by leveraging the recent work conducted by Greitzer et al.
(2021).

4.7. Security controls for insider threats

As anticipated in Section 3.3.1, CIS Critical Security Controls do not
include non-technical controls. Therefore, we extend them in order to
model security controls for insider threats.
11

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Table 4
Reduction percentage per security control for addressed threats.
SC

Name

CIS_03

Data Protection

CIS_04

Secure Conﬁguration of Enterprise Assets and Software

CIS_05

Account Management

CIS_06

Access Control Management

CIS_07

Continuous Vulnerability Management

CIS_09

Email and Web Browser Protections

CIS_10

Malware Defenses

CIS_13

Network Monitoring and Defense

CIS_14

Security Awareness and Skill Training

CIS_16

Application Software Security

OTH_04 Technical training for unskilled IT personnel and
software developers

% Reduction
𝑁3_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃3
(𝑁3_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁3 +𝐹 𝑃3 )
𝑁𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖𝑔𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
(𝑁5_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃5 )
(𝑁5_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁5 +𝐹 𝑃5 )
(𝑁6_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃6 )
(𝑁6_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁6 +𝐹 𝑃6 )
𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
(𝑁9_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃9 )
(𝑁9_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁9 +𝐹 𝑃9 )
(𝑁10_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃10 )
(𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁10 +𝐹 𝑃10 )
(𝑁13_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃13 )
(𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁13 +𝐹 𝑃13 )
𝑁𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑓 𝑖𝑒𝑑_𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠
𝑁𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠
𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
𝑁𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑠
𝑁𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠

Fig. 8. Insider threats and threat graph.

• 𝐹 𝑃𝑖_𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑠 : false positives, i.e., the number of alerts erroneously triggered by CIS_i;
• 𝐹 𝑁𝑖_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 : false negatives, i.e., the number of security incidents
not detected by CIS_i;
• 𝑇 𝑃𝑖_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 : true positives, i.e., the number of security incidents
detected by CIS_i;
• 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 : the total number of services in a system;
• 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 : the total number of applications in a system;
• 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 : the number of vulnerable services in a system;
• 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 : the number of vulnerable applications in a system;
• 𝑁𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖𝑔𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 : the number of misconﬁgured services in a system;
• 𝑁𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑠 : the number of employees who have fallen victim of
a test phishing campaign;
• 𝑁𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠 : the total number of employees.

Table 3
Security controls for the proposed use case.
CIS Security
Control

Name

CIS_01
CIS_02
CIS_03
CIS_04
CIS_05
CIS_06
CIS_07
CIS_08
CIS_09
CIS_10
CIS_11
CIS_12
CIS_13
CIS_14
CIS_16
CIS_17
OTH_01
OTH_02

Inventory and Control of Enterprise Assets
Inventory and Control of Software Assets
Data Protection
Secure Conﬁguration of Enterprise Assets and Software
Account Management
Access Control Management
Continuous Vulnerability Management
Audit Log Management
Email and Web Browser Protections
Malware Defenses
Data Recovery
Network Infrastructure Management
Network Monitoring and Defense
Security Awareness and Skill Training
Application Software Security
Incident Response Management
Employee rewards
Employee engagement survey for the reduction of employees’
disgruntlement level
Implementation of a process for reducing employees’ turnover
Technical training for unskilled IT personnel and software
developers

OTH_03
OTH_04

These metrics might be obtained by analyzing historical security incidents and performing security audits on the company. For example,
vulnerability assessment activities help determine both 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
and 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 , while controlled phishing sessions might be conducted
to compute 𝑁𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑠 . For each security control, we deﬁne a formula that represents the reduction percentage of the addressed threat.
Table 4 shows the security controls and reduction formulae for addressed threats. We exclude CIS_01, CIS_02, CIS_15, and CIS_18
from the list since such controls are related to asset inventory and Penetration Testing activities. As it is impossible to evaluate the threats
without knowing assets, data, and security ﬂaws, we consider them
as “precondition controls” that are mandatory in order to implement
a security risk management process. With regard to OTH_01, OTH_02
and OTH_03, they are missing in Table 4 since it is challenging to deﬁne a quantitative metric to evaluate their eﬀectiveness. We aim to
further explore such a problem in future works. The reduction percentage reported for these indicators in the third column of Table 9 when
discussing the proposed use case is a heuristic currently based on our
practical experience.

Insider Threat Consideration 5 (Security controls for insider threats).
The security controls should include organizational processes for addressing employees’ disgruntlement and overworking conditions.
In order to address insider threats, we include four additional security controls (OTH_01 through OTH_04) besides those provided by
SANS (CIS_01 through CIS_17). Table 3 lists the security controls
considered for the proposed use case.
Each CIS_i represents one of the Critical Security Controls provided by SANS, while every OTH_i is a security control that we have
included to address insider threats. As already stated in Section 2.2.1, it
is crucial to deﬁne SMART metrics to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the
implemented security controls. In order to achieve such an evaluation,
Viegas and Kuyucu (2022) suggest a list of Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs). These KPIs can be used to estimate the security control eﬀectiveness against the addressed threats. It is possible to map each security
control onto these metrics and deﬁne formulae that combine them to
assess the threat probability reduction. Namely, we deﬁne the following relevant SMART metrics:

4.8. Enriched Bayesian risk management framework
Fig. 9 shows the enriched model. To summarize, the main diﬀerences from the BRMF are the following:
• Host vulnerabilities are replaced by a threat model that embodies
both internal and external threats;
• CVSS Base and Environmental Metrics are replaced with goal threat
ﬁnancial losses (i.e., the costs associated with cyber incidents) and

• 𝑁𝑖_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 : the number of incidents detected by CIS_i;
12

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Fig. 9. Enriched Bayesian Risk Management Framework.

data company information, namely the estimated value of the company data;
• Employee information such as employee satisfaction or overworking are considered relevant factors to estimate threat probabilities
and generate the BTG;
• The security control selection criteria algorithm is changed, by replacing Bayesian Decision Networks with Bayesian Threat Graphs
having cumulative threat probabilities reduced through the implementation of diﬀerent risk strategies.

the process used to ﬁnd both threats and probabilities. Table 5 summarizes the required parameters to use the model.
5.1.1. Cyber incidents extraction by year
We downloaded the VERIS framework in CSV format (Veris csv
database, 2008). The ﬁle contains 9135 rows, where each row represents a security incident and is composed of 2550 columns, namely the
security incident metrics. We ﬁltered out the incidents notiﬁed in 2020,
i.e., the entries with the “plus.timeline.notiﬁcation.year” equal to 2020.
With this approach, we ended up with 272 incident entries.

5. Use case and performance considerations
5.1.2. Threat identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
For each security incident, we analyzed the most interesting metrics
and created the threat model illustrated in Table 6.
Threats might be caused by either an internal actor or an external
one. We identiﬁed 19 external threats and 9 internal threats. Internal
threats can either be caused by a human error (see, e.g., TID_06), or
by intentional action (see, e.g., TID_04). Some threats could be considered both internal and external, such as TID_05, TID_09 and TID_11.
Though, we consider them as external only, as all these internal cases
are included in the generic internal threat TID_04. We distinguish between TID_11 (web vulnerabilities) and TID_05 (service vulnerabilities)
because TID_11 is related to the exploitation of web application vulnerabilities, which is a well-conﬁned domain including speciﬁc threats,
attacks, and countermeasures (Auricchio et al., 2022). Web server vulnerabilities are indeed included in TID_05. In Section 2.2, we group
threats into vector and goal threats. By analyzing the VERIS dataset, we
observed two primary goal threats:

In this section, we show a practical example of how it is possible to
use the enriched Bayesian Risk Management framework to manage risk
inside a company. We describe a process to model threats and calculate
the parameters required by our model. Then, we describe an application
of the model through a simple use case scenario. Finally, we give an
insight into the performance issues of the proposed framework.
5.1. Process to identify threats and parameters
To identify the threats and model parameters, we decided to use
the VERIS framework (The veris framework, 2022). The Vocabulary for
Event Recording and Incident Sharing (VERIS) collects several metrics
that allow to describe cyber incidents in a structured and repeatable
manner. The metrics provide useful insights about the occurred cyberincidents. Some metrics describe the used vectors. For example, the
“threat variety” metric provides information about the deployed malware, while the “pattern” ﬁeld describes the techniques used to perform
the attack. Another important metric reports whether the cyber incident
was caused by an internal actor or an external one. Hereafter we explain

• Data exﬁltration (TID_17), caused by several vector threats, such as
vulnerabilities that disclose data or even administrators that erroneously expose a sensitive data storage.
13

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Table 5
Model parameters for the proposed use case.
Model parameter

Description

Used criteria

Threat model

A set of threats that includes internal actors

Analyze the VERIS framework metrics of the cyber incidents for a particular year to
deﬁne threats

Global threat probability

The probability that a threat in the model will occur

Divide the number of security incidents caused by the threat by the total number of
occurred incidents

Financial Impact

The ﬁnancial damage induced by the threat

Examine the ﬁnancial losses caused by the threats in the year

Security Controls

The defensive mechanisms that reduce threat impact

Use CIS critical security controls for external threats. Include further special controls
to address insider threats

Security Controls Costs

The costs of implementing the security controls

Estimate the average costs for buying security products and hiring cybersecurity
personnel.

Table 6
Identiﬁed Threats.

Table 8
Threat probabilities for vector threats.

Threat ID

Threat

Actor

Threat ID

Threat

# of incidents

Prob.

TID_01
TID_02
TID_03
TID_04
TID_05
TID_06
TID_07
TID_08
TID_09
TID_10
TID_11
TID_12
TID_13
TID_14
TID_15
TID_16
TID_17
TID_18
TID_19
TID_20
TID_21
TID_22
TID_23
TID_24
TID_25
TID_26
TID_27

Sensitive data storage erroneously exposed
Ransomware deployment
Skimming device installation
Employee abuses privileged access
Service Vulnerability
Sensitive information erroneously disclosed by e-mail
Employee account breach
Spear phishing
Production data in weak test applications
Stolen sensitive asset
Web vulnerability
Resource saturation through traﬃc
Attacker discovers weak passwords
Legacy environment exploitation
Credential stuﬃng
Fraud-based identity stealing
Data exﬁltration from a company asset
Hacking Mobile Application
Password easily guessable by internal users
Sensitive data on USB pen
Data loss or destruction due to IT error
Social engineering attack to spoof identity
Erroneous disclosure through social media
Business e-mail compromise attack
External partner breach and access to customer data
Scamming
E-mail attachment containing a virus

Internal (error)
External
External
Internal
External
Internal (error)
External
External
External
External
External
External
External
External
External
External
External
External
Internal
Internal
Internal
External
Internal
External
Internal
External
External

TID_01
TID_03
TID_04
TID_05
TID_06

Sensitive data storage erroneously exposed
Skimming device installation
Employee abuses privileged access
Service Vulnerability
Sensitive information erroneously disclosed
by e-mail
Employee account breach
Spear phishing
Production data in weak test applications
Stolen sensitive asset
Web vulnerability
Resource saturation through traﬃc
Attacker discovers weak passwords
Legacy environment exploitation
Credential stuﬃng
Fraud-based identity stealing
Hacking Mobile Application
Password easily guessable by internal users
Sensitive data on USB pen
Data loss or destruction due to IT error
Social engineering attack to spoof identity
Erroneous disclosure through social media
Business e-mail compromise attack
External partner breach and access to
customer data
Scamming
E-mail attachment containing a virus

67
3
20
19
7

0.2463
0.0110
0.0735
0.0698
0.0257

34
7
1
13
64
1
4
2
10
1
2
1
1
2
1
5
2
3

0.1250
0.0257
0.0036
0.0477
0.2352
0.0036
0.0147
0.0073
0.0368
0.0037
0.0073
0.0037
0.0037
0.0073
0.0037
0.0184
0.0073
0.0110

1
1

0.0037
0.0037

TID_07
TID_08
TID_09
TID_10
TID_11
TID_12
TID_13
TID_14
TID_15
TID_16
TID_18
TID_19
TID_20
TID_21
TID_22
TID_23
TID_24
TID_25
TID_26
TID_27

5.1.4. Security controls
As stated in Section 4.7, we consider the SANS Critical Security
Controls to address threats. In order to take into account human error,
overworking, and disgruntlement factors, we integrate the above mentioned controls with four non-technical additional ones. Some security
controls address speciﬁc threats, while others cover all of them, thus
reducing both the security incident and operational costs required to either restore the infrastructure or increase the intruder detection level.
To obtain the reduction percentage for each security control, we assign
values to the involved SMART metrics by following the approach deﬁned in Section 2.2.1. Table 9 lists the proposed security controls, the
addressed threats, and the threat reduction percentage obtained in this
way.
A realistic security cost estimation is challenging. Indeed, we were
not able to estimate the threat reduction for CIS_08 and CIS_17. Current studies are focused on ﬁnding the security incident costs. Though,
they do not clarify how is it possible to evaluate the real Return On Investment (ROI) deriving from the application of security controls that
address threats. In this use case, we use average costs retrieved from
several enterprise sources to evaluate hardware, software, and security
controls’ implementation costs (Data, 2021). Such costs should also include employee satisfaction survey processes (Bjarnar, 2021), security
training courses (TrustNet, 2022) and security personnel salaries (Cours-

Table 7
Threat probabilities for goal threats.
Threat ID

Threat

# of incidents

Prob.

TID_17
TID_02

Data exﬁltration from a company asset
Ransomware deployment

59
213

0.2169
0.7830

• Ransomware (TID_02), i.e., cyber-attacks that encrypt systems and
exﬁltrate sensitive data by blocking the company unless a ransom
is paid.
The remaining 25 threats are considered vector threats, i.e., threats that
allow triggering goal threats.

5.1.3. Threat probability and impact
To evaluate the threat probabilities, we divide the number of cyber
incidents caused by the threat by the total number of cyber incidents.
Tables 7 and 8 show the global probabilities for goal and vector threats,
respectively.
As stated in Section 2, threat impact is computed based on Equation (8). Each goal threat impacts a single asset. We consider the number of impacted records to estimate the damage induced by the threat.
14

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

Fig. 10. Use case scenario.
Table 9
Security controls for the proposed use case.

Table 10
Costs associated with Devices and Processes.

CIS Security Control

Addressed Threats

Reduction

Device / Process

Cost

Periodicity

CIS_03
CIS_04
CIS_05
CIS_06
CIS_07
CIS_08
CIS_09
CIS_10
CIS_11
CIS_12
CIS_13
CIS_14
CIS_16
CIS_17
OTH_01
OTH_02
OTH_03
OTH_04

TID_06, TID_09, TID_10
TID_05
TID_07
TID_04
TID_11, TID_05
All
TID_11
TID_02
All
TID_11, TID_05
All
TID_08, TID_10, TID_15, TID_23, TID_08, TID_11
TID_11
All
TID_04
TID_04
TID_01
TID_01, TID_11

0.9
0.6
0.7
0.75
0.4
N.A.
0.9
0.72
1
0.95
0.95
0.3
0.7
N.A.
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.4

Firewall
Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)
E-mail protection
Security training costs
Employee satisfaction survey
Technical training for unskilled IT
personnel and software developers
Device Management
Identity and Access Management (IAM)
Web Application Firewall (WAF)

5000
12
4
2000
6000
2000

Installation and subscription
Monthly Cost per device
Monthly Cost per user
Annual cost per 50 employees
Annual cost per 50 employees
Annual cost per 50 employees

9
4
4000

Monthly Cost per device
Monthly Cost per user
Installation and subscription

5.2. Use case scenario
Fig. 10 leverages a use case scenario to show the eﬀectiveness of the
enriched BRMF model. It is important to underline that we focus on a
simple scenario not taking into account all possible situations and thus
showing a few limitations. Though, as we will better discuss hereafter,
through the application of speciﬁc optimization strategies it is possible to signiﬁcantly reduce the level of complexity of a real-world use
case by properly grouping employees, assets and vulnerabilities into semantically homogeneous clusters. In Section 6 we will point out these
limitations and propose approaches for increasing the eﬀectiveness of
the model.

era, 2022). This is a strong simpliﬁcation as these costs are unreliable
and depend on several conditions, such as the region, the country, the
adopted software, etc. Further studies are required to formalize a formula that allows computing security costs in a proper way. Table 10
lists the estimated costs of implementing security controls.
15

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

The network is composed of a DMZ (“Demilitarized Zone”) and an
internal network. The DMZ contains a company website, a data storage (namely, an elasticsearch server), and a DNS server, while a File
Server is deployed in the internal network. In this example, we consider three users with diﬀerent privileges and personal characteristics.
Daniel is an “aware” employee, i.e., he is less subject to phishing attacks, but he is also disgruntled for several reasons. Charlie is a satisﬁed
employee, but he is “unaware”, i.e., he has no knowledge about the security risks of using a weak password or opening a suspicious email. We
state that Charlie has the “unawareness” property. Anna is the company’s system administrator, and manages the entire infrastructure. She
is skilled and aware of phishing problems, but she has to deal with an
overload of work, so she is subject to the “human error” property. There
are also two attackers. The technical attacker can exploit vulnerabilities,
but he/she has only access to the DMZ, while the non-technical attacker
has physical access to Daniel’s workstation, so he/she can install a skimming device or steal the computer. In this scenario, we consider a subset
of the threats reported in Table 6. The steps needed to implement the
process are listed below:

Table 11
Best ﬁrst ﬁve risk reduction strategies.

1. generate a threat graph by connecting technical, non-technical, and
advanced threats with involved entities on the basis of their skills;
2. apply threat probabilities that will be used to generate the initial
Bayesian Threat Graph (i.e., the one in which threats are not mitigated through the application of security controls);
3. apply all the security control combinations and generate the related Bayesian Threat Graphs (i.e., the ones in which threats are
mitigated through the application of speciﬁc combinations of security controls);
4. obtain the goal threat probabilities and compute both the risk and
the risk strategy implementation cost in order to properly select the
most suitable risk strategy.

#

Implemented security controls

Cost

Risk reduction

195
227
211
4291
243

CIS_10, CIS_12, OTH_03, OTH_04
CIS_10, CIS_12, CIS_14, OTH_03, OTH_04
CIS_10, CIS_12, CIS_16, OTH_03, OTH_04
CIS_04, CIS_10, CIS_12, OTH_03, OTH_04
CIS_10, CIS_12, CIS_14, CIS_16, OTH_03, OTH_04

114, 000
115, 000
118, 000
118, 500
119, 000

29.33
29.48
29.34
29.33
29.49

Fig. 11. Bayesian Risk Management Framework: Cost vs risk reduction analysis.

the related cost is 285, 500. Though, it is also possible to establish alternative criteria for reducing risk. For example, based on the maximum
risk reduction achieved by implementing all security controls, we could
select the risk strategy that reduces risk by at least 29% while minimizing cost. We can ﬁlter out strategies that do not meet the risk reduction
requirement and rank the remaining combinations in ascending order
of cost. In the proposed use case, there are 657 combinations of security controls that reduce risk by at least 29%. Table 11 shows the top
ﬁve combinations in ascending order of cost.
As it can be observed from the table, these combinations have an
excellent risk reduction and allow for a cost reduction of about 60%
compared to the implementation of the comprehensive risk strategy.
Results indicate that the exclusive implementation of non-technical security controls (e.g., customer satisfaction surveys) or technical controls
(e.g., Malware Defenses) is not the best risk strategy to adopt. In fact,
the combination of both kinds of security controls gives the best results
in terms of performance.
It is also possible to make graphic considerations which help strike
a balance between risk reduction percentage and related cost. Fig. 11
relates the normalized cost to the risk reduction percentage. Each point
represents a subset of the implemented security controls. It is possible
to observe that security controls can be grouped into ﬁve clusters based
on a clearly identiﬁable range of risk reduction percentage. Depending
on the selected range of risk reduction percentage, it is possible to select the risk strategy implementation with the lowest cost in the group.
For the largest percentage of risk reduction (i.e., ∼30%) the minimum
normalized cost is 0.4, or, likewise, the total cost is reduced by 60%,
as observed in the previous analysis. In contrast, the range that minimizes cost is the one that reduces the security risk by less than 5%.
Therefore, when selecting the security risk strategy, it is crucial to ﬁnd
a compromise between risk reduction and implementation cost.

We adapt MulVAL (Ou et al., 2005) to model the rules deﬁned above
and generate a threat graph. MulVAL utilizes two ﬁles: the former, i.e.,
“rules.P”, which deﬁnes the rules that model threats (namely, rule_interactions), as well as their preconditions, modeled as primitives. The
latter, i.e., “input.P”, describes the conditions applied to our scenario.
MulVAL focuses on technical vulnerabilities. Though, it contains a Prolog environment that allows deﬁning custom rules. We deﬁne rules that
include insider threat preconditions, such as “insiderness” and “human
errors”. For example, a human error is a precondition for TID_02 (i.e.,
sensitive information erroneously disclosed by email). The threat graph
and security controls illustrated in Table 9 are used as input for Algorithm 1. For clarity purposes, we model high-level threats and do not
consider the internal resources, such as ﬁle storage paths or NFS server
folders. We just focus on host permissions. We assume that ‘exec’ permission includes read and write ones. An important consideration concerns
probabilities. Namely, the Bayesian Threat Graph converts primitives
into probabilities. With BRMF, authors use the “vulExists” primitive to
assign probabilities to the Bayesian Attack Graph. Since we need to
link vulnerabilities to threats, we add primitives that model the vector threats. In this way, we can identify vector threats in the Bayesian
Threat Graph. We implemented the use case example and pushed the
source code to Github (Gx1, NdA994, Ns-unina/insiderthreats, 2022).
We used MulVAL to create the threat graph, and the PyAgrum library
(Ducamp and Gonzales, 2020) to generate the Bayesian Threat Graph.
Several classes and methods have been implemented to model the risk,
calculate the CPTs recursively, and implement Algorithm 1. After executing the algorithm, the cost for implementing security controls is
computed, together with the residual risk for each implementation of
the security strategy. When all the values are computed, the most appropriate risk strategy can be selected based on various criteria. The
strategy that maximizes security risk reduction is, of course, the one
that implements all security controls. In our case study, the risk reduction deriving from implementing all security controls is 29.65%, and

5.3. Security practitioner considerations
Cybersecurity risk management models aim to provide an accurate
representation of a company, but they are susceptible to errors. One of
16

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

the main challenges lies in the uncertainty surrounding various factors,
particularly those related to insiders. Consequently, our model may not
fully capture the actual security risks faced by the company.
In this section, we provide guidance for security experts who wish to
implement our model within their organizations. This guidance oﬀers
valuable insights into eﬀectively incorporating our model into existing
risk management processes.

human error rates. Examples of such methodologies include the Technique for Human Error-Rate Prediction (THERP), Cognitive Reliability
and Error Analysis Method (CREAM), Technique for Human Error Assessment (THEA), Cause Based Decision Tree (CBDT), and others (Liu
et al., 2021). Security experts can assess employees’ tasks and determine if they involve security risks, and then implement the appropriate
methodologies for speciﬁc personnel.
Insiderness is a particularly challenging parameter, and it will be
thoroughly explored in future works. In particular, one relevant recent
study by Greitzer et al. (2021) will be used as a basis for further research. As a practical approach, anonymous surveys can be conducted
to analyze employees’ satisfaction and estimate the psychological factors that inﬂuence insider threats. Surveys can be administered to each
department within the company, and the insiderness properties can be
grouped based on employees belonging to the same department, allowing for the estimation of the risk of malicious behaviors. However, the
relationship between an insider’s malicious behavior and attack triggers
(as a function of psychological, social and behavioral factors) remains a
subject of ongoing study.

5.3.1. Security controls costs and ﬁnancial losses
In order to implement the model, it is essential to estimate the
costs associated with security controls and the ﬁnancial losses resulting from a cyber attack. The costs of security controls can generally be
determined with relative certainty, as they involve hardware, software,
services, and the expenses related to security teams, solution deployment, and maintenance.
On the other hand, estimating ﬁnancial losses is often challenging
and prone to inaccuracies. In Section 2.2.2, we propose an approach to
estimate the ﬁnancial loss per asset, drawing upon established formulae
from existing literature. However, it is important to note that these formulae may not fully capture the actual ﬁnancial losses experienced by
the company. Certain costs can be estimated more accurately, such as
the direct costs associated with system recovery, legal expenses, and the
economic impact resulting from service disruptions. Simulations, such
as backup recovery tests, can help estimate the cost of system recovery. However, there are other costs that are diﬃcult to predict, such as
the reputational damage leading to decreased sales and customer dissatisfaction following a data breach. Companies often employ business
teams to develop forecasting models to monitor customer satisfaction
and implement marketing strategies. These strategies may involve distributing customer questionnaires to gather feedback and enhance the
quality of services. Cybersecurity experts can collaborate with these
business teams to develop forecasting models that attempt to estimate
the ﬁnancial losses that would arise if a data breach aﬀects customers’
data. Gathering customers’ feedback regarding the impacts of a data
breach can be particularly valuable in forecasting ﬁnancial losses.
In summary, it is crucial for security experts to work closely with
business teams to enhance the accuracy of threat impact assessments
and estimate ﬁnancial losses more eﬀectively.

5.3.4. Security controls
The parameter of security controls’ threat probability reduction
poses challenges in terms of precise deﬁnition. While several studies
have attempted to deﬁne formulae, it is diﬃcult to precisely quantify
the eﬀectiveness of security controls.
One approach to address this challenge is to conduct a security assessment with enabled security controls. For example, the eﬀectiveness
of a security training course can be evaluated by comparing the results
of a phishing test conducted before and after the training. The diﬀerence
in the number of compromised employees can indicate the eﬀectiveness
of the training course. Similarly, for antivirus and security monitoring
solutions, simulated ransomware attacks and penetration tests can be
conducted both with and without the controls enabled. The reduction
in the occurrence of related threats can provide a percentage estimation
of the controls’ eﬀectiveness.
It is important to note that these solutions may require signiﬁcant
costs and time investments, and careful consideration should be given
to selecting the most appropriate methods based on the speciﬁc context
and needs of the organization.

5.3.2. Threats
Estimating threat probabilities is a common challenge in cybersecurity risk management processes. To address this, cybersecurity experts
often employ multiple-choice surveys to assess the likelihood and/or
impact of threats. These surveys are distributed among various groups
within the company and provide either qualitative assessments (e.g.,
high, medium, low probability) or quantitative values (e.g., 10%, 25%)
that can be used for risk assessment.
In the previous section, we suggested using the VERIS database to
estimate threat probabilities. However, it is important to note that the
information available in public data sources may not accurately reﬂect
the speciﬁc situation of the company. Therefore, it is crucial for security experts to integrate public data with surveys conducted within the
company to obtain estimations that are contextualized and tailored to
the organization’s speciﬁc circumstances. By combining external data
sources with internal surveys, a more accurate assessment of threat
probabilities can be achieved.

5.3.5. Cyclical feedback loop process to improve accuracy
After a security breach, it is crucial for companies to undergo a
“learned experience” step where security experts thoroughly investigate
the errors that led to the incident, analyze the eﬀectiveness of security
controls, and take steps to enhance the overall cybersecurity posture
of the organization. This event provides an opportunity to review and
reﬁne all the parameters of the proposed framework.
Following a breach, the company can gather valuable information
regarding inaccurate parameters such as indirect costs, human errors,
and insiderness. This information can be used to adjust and ﬁne-tune the
parameters, resulting in more accurate risk values. The eﬀectiveness of
security controls and their reduction parameters can also be reevaluated
and optimized. Additionally, the costs associated with implementing
security controls can be assessed and made more eﬃcient.
It is important to acknowledge that despite the suggestions provided
in this section, there may still be limitations and inaccuracies, particularly when it comes to insider parameters. However, by continuously
learning from security incidents and reﬁning the framework, organizations can make progress in reducing the impact of inaccurate factors.
In Section 6, we present future research ideas that aim to further
improve the framework and address the challenges related to parameter
accuracy.

5.3.3. Insiders threats
The estimation of insider threats’ parameters, such as human error and insiderness probability, poses signiﬁcant challenges. Further
research is needed to establish the link between human errors, insiderness, and security risks. In Section 6, we outline several future research
directions in this regard.
However, security practitioners can begin adopting the framework
through practical approaches. For addressing human errors, an eﬀective approach is to implement established methodologies for predicting
17

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

5.4. Considerations about time and space complexity

for these nodes, which can hence be removed from the network. Anyway, this approach might in some cases prove to be over simplistic and
thus aﬀect the realism of the model.

The proposed framework requires the inference computation on
Bayesian Belief Network, that is known to be an NP-hard problem
(Dagum and Luby, 1993). In this section, we show that it is possible
to overcome the problem by adopting several criteria. Though, it is important to underline that the primary goal of this work is to describe the
model. Hence, we will not herein discuss performance issues in detail.
A scaling solution that implements the suggested optimization criteria
will be proposed in future works.

Optimization Criterion 2. Consider category classes instead of single
elements.
In the proposed models the network complexity depends on the number of employees, assets and vulnerabilities. Instead of considering the
total number of employees and assets, we might leverage the concept of
‘categories’. For employees, it would be possible to use company business areas, such as Human Resources (HR), Marketing, Research and
Development (R&D). As to assets, it would be possible to categorize
them by considering their importance in terms of key features like, e.g.,
the number of sensitive records associated with them.
The proposed optimization criterion should be applied by minimizing the diﬀerence between the posterior probability of the categorized
model and that of the original one. In future works we will explore
clustering techniques to deﬁne the optimal number of categories that
minimize such an error.

5.4.1. Attack graph generation performance
To generate the attack graph we adapted MulVAL for the creation of
the threat graph. Although MulVAL is extensively used in the research
ﬁeld (Tayouri et al., 2022), it is subject to several performance limitations.
Wang et al. (2019) underline that MulVAL cannot be used in large
scale network environments. In our model the presence of a large number of employees and/or assets exponentially increases the graph generation time. A few optimization strategies can be leveraged in order to
face this issue, as discussed below.
Several authors create algorithms that can be used to eﬃciently generate an attack graph (Ou et al., 2006; Chokshi et al., 2012; Albanese et
al., 2012). In these works, authors propose algorithms that have polynomial complexity both in time and space. Though, such approaches
should be thoroughly validated through solid experimental campaigns
aimed at assessing their scalability in real-world complex scenarios.
Previous works are focused on the automatic generation of attack
graphs from data sources, without considering potential performance
issues. To the best of our knowledge, there is no study that explores
such a challenging problem. In future works we intend to tackle this
issue by investigating scalable approaches to the generation of attack
graphs. To the purpose, state-of-the-art solutions will be both evaluated
and integrated in our framework.

5.4.3. Security controls and performance
Algorithm 1 iterates over an exponential number of security control combinations, therefore it is computationally expensive. However,
each risk strategy performance computation of a single iteration is independent from the others. Therefore, it is possible to apply parallel
computing techniques (Shukur et al., 2020) to increase performance.
Another approach could be to store pre-computed risk strategy tables
for speciﬁc threat models. Finally, one might think of applying machine
learning techniques to infer the relationships between threat graphs, security controls and risk strategy. This is a fundamental issue for future
research that needs to be further investigated.
5.4.4. Future evolutions of the model
According to the previous observations, future works will investigate
state-of-the-art solutions and explore new techniques to:

5.4.2. Bayesian complexity
To address the mentioned NP-hard problem, several authors propose
model variations that eﬀectively improve performance. Amongst the
most promising proposals we ﬁnd approximate inference algorithms,
such as Loopy Belief Propagation (Murphy et al., 2013) or sampling
inference (which uses sampling to compute the posterior probability).
More recent works propose innovative approaches to address memory and time issues. Byun et al. (2019) propose a new matrix-based
data structure for discrete Bayesian Networks that improves memory
usage. Jongsawat and Premchaiswadi (2013) show that it is possible
to compute an exact inference by leveraging the MapReduce programming model to run parts of the original network in parallel. Michiels
et al. (2021) oﬀer a public framework for learning Bayesian Networks
that can scale to tens of thousands of nodes while providing fast and
friendly user experience. These approaches can be integrated into our
framework to model realistic use-cases with large networks. The existing exact Bayesian network inference algorithms share the property of
run time exponentiality in the size of the largest clique of the triangulated moral graph, which is also called the induced width (i.e., the
treewidth) of the graph (Corneil and Rotics, 2005). For this reason, it is
crucial to ﬁnd out criteria that reduce the treewidth of the network. We
propose two criteria to reduce the network complexity.

• reduce time and space complexity for threat graph computation;
• reduce time and space complexity of the inference algorithms;
• explore the application of optimization criteria to reduce the
treewidth of the threat graph;
• analyze parallel computing approaches to decrease the exponential
complexity of Algorithm 1.
We plan to realize a framework able to overcome MulVAL’s limits
in terms of time and space complexity. We also intend to explore the
integration of state-of-the-art inference algorithms on Bayesian Belief
Networks to reduce the complexity associated with inference computation. Finally, we will investigate if it is possible to adopt the proposed
optimization criteria by minimizing the diﬀerence with respect to the
posterior probabilities of the original model.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a Risk Management framework
based on Bayesian Networks to evaluate the risk associated with both
internal and external threats. We have extended the work from Khosravi and Bafghi (2020) in order to include several types of threats not
caused by security ﬂaws. We have provided deﬁnitions that formalize the risk management process and demonstrated how it is possible
to model an insider threat as a special type of attacker that can perform non-technical attacks, too. To deﬁne a risk strategy, we have used
several types of security controls based on SANS CIS Critical Security
Controls. We have underlined the importance of alternative defensive
approaches, such as technical training sessions to reduce human error

Optimization Criterion 1. Use boolean assumptions to reduce model
complexity.
In the use case we proposed above, several properties can be represented as boolean conditions. This is, e.g., the case of both “human
error” and “insiderness”. These assumptions reduce the network complexity. Indeed, we do not have to compute the posterior probability
18

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano

and employee satisfaction surveys to decrease employees’ disgruntlement. Finally, we have deﬁned a performance indicator to select a
risk strategy, i.e., a subset of implemented security controls that maximizes the security beneﬁts while also minimizing the probability of
goal threats. We have provided a use case scenario that shows an application example of the framework by using the VERIS set of metrics
as a basis for the deﬁnition of the proposed threat model. Although the
use case described in Section 5 is a simplistic representation of an IT
system, it shows several aspects of our model. Future works will enrich
the threat model and automate the generation of probabilities from the
VERIS framework. Estimating threat probabilities by just relying on the
security incidents contained within the VERIS framework can indeed
bring to unreliable results. Hence, we envision to include other datasets
in our framework, like, e.g., the one proposed by Abbiati et al. (2021),
which integrates several datasets in order to provide statistically significant observations. Further works will extend the threat model and the
list of security controls, by exploring alternative classiﬁcation schemes.
As repeatedly underlined herein before, the use of attack graphs oﬀers a
number of beneﬁts. However, as MulVAL is based on ﬁrst-order logic, it
has a few intrinsic limitations for modeling complex scenarios. In fact,
for such scenarios, the number of required rules grows exponentially.
For this reason, we will investigate alternative approaches to model the
attacker’s behavior. For example, second-order and higher-order logic
(Väänänen, 2021) might reduce the model’s complexity through the
utilization of either universal or existential quantiﬁers to model both
threats and assets. In Section 4.6, we have deﬁned the malicious insider and underlined that malicious insider attack paths could involve
wider categories, such as supply-chain attacks. With the supply-chain,
we can spot situations in which increased privileges do exist. Let’s ﬁgure
out, as an example, an external consultant who has access to a system on a customer’s premises. It is in theory possible to generalise the
currently adopted concept of “insiderness” by deﬁning a generic “disgruntlement” property that enables critical threats against a system in
case the disgruntled entity (either an internal or an external one) also
holds increased privileges allowing them to carry out a successful attack.
This is for sure among the concepts we will further explore in our future work. The threat impact evaluation deﬁned in Equation (6) could
also be subject to relevant improvements. In fact, we have used the
logarithmic relationship between the number of records stored into an
asset and the security incident losses. This relationship might be oversimplistic, as it does not consider several factors, like, e.g., the fact that
diﬀerent assets might contain records having diﬀerent sensitivity and,
consequently, diﬀerent values. We are aware that this work is a preliminary step toward a complete Risk Management framework that includes
insider threats. Further studies will need to be undertaken to reﬁne
the model. In Section 5.3, we have provided suggestions for security
practitioners aiming at integrating our framework into their companies.
Although companies could beneﬁt from the framework, the prioritized
risk strategies could not be optimal, as many factors required to run
the algorithm may be inherently inaccurate. In order to address the issue, companies should monitor the frameworks’ risk strategy outputs
and ﬁne-tune them according to their business needs. The framework
could also beneﬁt from well-known methodologies developed to manage the input uncertainty, such as sensitivity analysis (Saltelli, 2002). In
future works, we will assess the framework through sensitivity analysis
and Monte Carlo simulation and evaluate the impact of variables’ uncertainty. We also intend to implement the framework in companies in
order to obtain eﬀective feedback from security risk management teams
and thus improve the overall method.
The work lets several questions open. We ask ourselves whether is
it possible to model the relationship between OCEAN’s personal, social,
behavioral traits and the insiderness property. Recent works provide
comprehensive insider threats ontologies (Costa et al., 2016; Greitzer
et al., 2018) that could be included in our model in order to enrich its
expressiveness. Similarly, we wonder whether is it possible to ﬁnd a reliable connection between human error probability and security tasks.

However, current datasets do not provide enough information to deﬁne these relationships properly. All this to say that the role of insider
threats in risk management is still an unexplored ﬁeld. We do hope that
this work will oﬀer useful insights to colleagues interested in investigating such a challenging research ﬁeld.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Nicola d’Ambrosio: Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Gaetano Perrone:
Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Validation,
Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Simon Pietro Romano: Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data are public available and I share the code and results through
the GitHub platform.
Funding
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
References
Abbiati, G., Ranise, S., Schizzerotto, A., Siena, A., 2021. Merging datasets of CyberSecurity
incidents for fun and insight. Front. Big Data 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2020.
521132.
Advisen, 2019. https://www.advisenltd.com/data/cyber-loss-data/. (Accessed 28 April
2021).
Al-Mhiqani, M.N., Ahmad, R., Abidin, Z.Z., Yassin, W., Hassan, A., Abdulkareem, K.H.,
Ali, N.S., Yunos, Z., 2020. A review of insider threat detection: classiﬁcation, machine
learning techniques, datasets, open challenges, and recommendations. Appl. Sci. 10
(15), 5208. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10155208.
Albanese, M., Jajodia, S., Noel, S., 2012. Time-eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective network hardening using attack graphs. In: IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks (DSN 2012), pp. 1–12.
Ammann, P., Wijesekera, D., Kaushik, S., 2002. Scalable, graph-based network vulnerability analysis. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’02. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
pp. 217–224.
Auricchio, N., Cappuccio, A., Caturano, F., Perrone, G., Romano, S.P., 2022. An automated
approach to web oﬀensive security. Comput. Commun. 195, 248–261. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.comcom.2022.08.018.
Axelrad, E.T., Sticha, P.J., Brdiczka, O., Shen, J., 2013. A Bayesian network model for
predicting insider threats. In: 2013 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, pp. 82–89.
Behbehani, D., Rajarajan, M., Komninos, N., Al–Begain, K., 2022. Detecting open banking api security threats using Bayesian attack graphs. In: 2022 14th International
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN),
pp. 789–796.
Bishop, M., Engle, S., Frincke, D.A., Gates, C., Greitzer, F.L., Peisert, S., Whalen, S., 2010.
A risk management approach to the “insider threat”. In: Insider Threats in Cyber
Security. Springer US, pp. 115–137.
Bjarnar, 2021. The cost of outsourcing an employee survey. https://www.driveresearch.
com/market-research-company-blog/the-cost-of-outsourcing-an-employee-survey/,
online; 10-Apr-2022.
Byun, J.-E., Zwirglmaier, K., Straub, D., Song, J., 2019. Matrix-based Bayesian network for
eﬃcient memory storage and ﬂexible inference. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 185, 533–545.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2019.01.007.
Cappelli, D.M., Moore, A.P., Trzeciak, R.F., 2012. The CERT Guide to Insider Threats: How
to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Information Technology Crimes (Theft, Sabotage,
Fraud). Addison-Wesley.
Ceri, S., Gottlob, G., Tanca, L., 1989. What you always wanted to know about datalog
(and never dared to ask). IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 1 (1), 146–166. https://
doi.org/10.1109/69.43410.
19

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano
Chan, S.H., Yao, L.J., 2005. An empirical investigation of hacking behavior. Rev. Bus. Inf.
Syst. (RBIS) 9 (4), 41–58. https://doi.org/10.19030/rbis.v9i4.4443.
Chokshi, I., Ghosh, N., Ghosh, S.K., 2012. Eﬃcient generation of exploit dependency
graph by customized attack modeling technique. In: 2012 18th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communications (ADCOM), pp. 39–45.
Corneil, D.G., Rotics, U., 2005. On the relationship between clique-width and treewidth.
SIAM J. Comput. 34 (4), 825–847. https://doi.org/10.1137/s0097539701385351.
Costa, D., Albrethsen, M., Collins, M., Perl, S., Silowash, G., Spooner, D., 2016. An insider
threat indicator ontology. Tech. Rep. CMU/SEI-2016-TR-007, Software Engineering
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/
library/asset-view.cfm?AssetID=454613.
Coursera, 2022. Cybersecurity analyst salary guide: how much can you make? https://
www.coursera.org/articles/cybersecurity-analyst-salary, online; 10-Apr-2022.
Cyentia, 2020. Information risk insights study. Tech. rep. Cyentia Institute.
Dagum, P., Luby, M., 1993. Approximating probabilistic inference in Bayesian belief
networks is NP-hard. Artif. Intell. 60 (1), 141–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/00043702(93)90036-b.
Data, P., 2021. How much does cyber security cost? Common cyber security expenses &
fees. https://www.provendatarecovery.com/blog/cyber-security-cost-expenses-fees/,
online; 10-Apr-2022.
Deng, S., Zhang, J., Wu, D., He, Y., Xie, X., Wu, X., 2023. A quantitative risk assessment
model for distribution cyber-physical system under cyberattack. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 19 (3), 2899–2908. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2022.3169456.
Doran, G.T., 2008. There’s a s.m.a.r.t. way to write managements’s goals and
objectives. https://community.mis.temple.edu/mis0855002fall2015/ﬁles/2015/10/
S.M.A.R.T-Way-Management-Review.pdf, online; 25-Apr-2022.
Ducamp, G., Gonzales, C., 2020. Wuillemin, agrum/pyagrum: a toolbox to build models and algorithms for probabilistic graphical models in python. In: Jaeger, M.,
Nielsen, T.D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Probabilistic Graphical Models. In: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, vol. 138,
pp. 609–612. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v138/ducamp20a.html.
Erola, A., Agraﬁotis, I., Nurse, J.R., Axon, L., Goldsmith, M., Creese, S., 2022. A system to
calculate cyber value-at-risk. Comput. Secur. 113, 102545. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cose.2021.102545.
Frigault, M., Wang, L., 2008. Measuring network security using Bayesian network-based
attack graphs. In: 2008 32nd Annual IEEE International Computer Software and Applications Conference, pp. 698–703.
Ghazo, A.T.A., Ibrahim, M., Ren, H., Kumar, R., 2020. A2g2v: automatic attack graph
generation and visualization and its applications to computer and SCADA networks.
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 50 (10), 3488–3498. https://doi.org/10.1109/
tsmc.2019.2915940.
Greitzer, F., Purl, J., Leong, Y.M., Becker, D.S., 2018. Soﬁt: sociotechnical and organizational factors for insider threat. In: 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW),
pp. 197–206.
Greitzer, F.L., 2019. Insider threats. In: Proceedings of the Northwest Cybersecurity Symposium. ACM, pp. 1–8.
Greitzer, F.L., Purl, J., Sticha, P.J., Martin, C.Y., Lee, J.D., 2021. Use of expert judgments
to inform Bayesian models of insider threat risk. J. Wirel. Mob. Netw. Ubiquitous
Comput. Dependable Appl. 12 (2), 3–47. https://doi.org/10.22667/JOWUA.2021.06.
30.003.
Gx1, NdA994, Ns-unina/insiderthreats, 2022. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.
6471205. https://zenodo.org/record/6471205.
Holroyd, C.B., Coles, M.G.H., 2002. The neural basis of human error processing: reinforcement learning, dopamine, and the error-related negativity. Psychol. Rev. 109
(4), 679–709. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.109.4.679.
Jacob, 2014. Analyzing ponemon cost of data breach. https://datadrivensecurity.info/
blog/posts/2014/Dec/ponemon/, online; 10-Apr-2022.
Jajodia, S., Noel, S., O’Berry, B., 2005. Topological analysis of network attack vulnerability. Springer US, Boston, MA, pp. 247–266.
Jongsawat, N., Premchaiswadi, W., 2013. Solving the NP-hard computational problem in
Bayesian networks using apache hadoop MapReduce. In: 2013 Eleventh International
Conference on ICT and Knowledge Engineering. IEEE, pp. 1–5.
Joshi, C., Aliaga, J.R., Insua, D.R., 2021. Insider threat modeling: an adversarial risk
analysis approach. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16, 1131–1142. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TIFS.2021.3118886.
Kammuller, F., Probst, C.W., 2017. Modeling and veriﬁcation of insider threats using
logical analysis. IEEE Syst. J. 11 (2), 534–545. https://doi.org/10.1109/jsyst.2015.
2453215.
Kappala, M., 2015. Employee Satisfaction Survey. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing.
Kaynar, K., 2016. A taxonomy for attack graph generation and usage in network security.
J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 29, 27–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2016.02.001.
Khosravi-Farmad, M., Ghaemi-Bafghi, A., 2020. Bayesian decision network-based security
risk management framework. J. Netw. Syst. Manag. 28 (4), 1794–1819. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10922-020-09558-5.
Kritzinger, D., 2017. Fault tree analysis. In: Aircraft System Safety. Elsevier, pp. 59–99.
Kweon, E., Lee, H., Chai, S., Yoo, K., 2019. The utility of information security training and
education on cybersecurity incidents: an empirical evidence. Inf. Syst. Front. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10796-019-09977-z.
Lallie, H.S., Debattista, K., Bal, J., 2018. An empirical evaluation of the eﬀectiveness of
attack graphs and fault trees in cyber-attack perception. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur. 13 (5), 1110–1122. https://doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2017.2771238.

Lallie, H.S., Debattista, K., Bal, J., 2020. A review of attack graph and attack tree visual
syntax in cyber security. Comput. Sci. Rev. 35, 100219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cosrev.2019.100219.
Levy, A., 2010. Information in biology: a ﬁctionalist account. Noûs 45 (4), 640–657.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2010.00792.x.
Lindauer, B., 2020. Insider threat test dataset. https://doi.org/10.1184/R1/12841247.V1.
Liu, P., Zhang, R., Yin, Z., Li, Z., 2021. Human Errors and Human Reliability.
John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, pp. 514–572. Ch. 20. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781119636113.ch20. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/9781119636113.ch20.
Logan, P.Y., Clarkson, A.C., 2020. Enhancing information security: a qualitative risk analysis method for overcoming the insider threat. In: Modern Organizations Through
Information Technology.
Magklaras, G., Furnell, S., Brooke, P., 2006. Towards an insider threat prediction speciﬁcation language. Inf. Manag. Comput. Secur. 14 (4), 361–381. https://doi.org/10.
1108/09685220610690826.
Martinez-Moyano, I.J., Rich, E., Conrad, S., Andersen, D.F., Stewart, T.R., 2008. A behavioral theory of insider-threat risks: a system dynamics approach. ACM Trans. Model.
Comput. Simul. 18 (2). https://doi.org/10.1145/1346325.1346328.
Mathew, S., Upadhyaya, S., Ha, D., Ngo, H.Q., 2008. Insider abuse comprehension
through capability acquisition graphs. In: 2008 11th International Conference on Information Fusion, pp. 1–8.
Michiels, M., Larrañaga, P., Bielza, C., 2021. Bayesuites: an open web framework for massive Bayesian networks focused on neuroscience. Neurocomputing 428, 166–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.11.066. https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231220318609.
Munoz-Gonzalez, L., Sgandurra, D., Barrere, M., Lupu, E.C., 2019. Exact inference techniques for the analysis of Bayesian attack graphs. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput. 16 (2), 231–244. https://doi.org/10.1109/tdsc.2016.2627033.
Munshi, A., Dell, P., Armstrong, H., 2012. Insider threat behavior factors: a comparison
of theory with reported incidents. In: 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, pp. 2402–2411.
Murphy, K., Weiss, Y., Jordan, M.I., 2013. Loopy belief propagation for approximate
inference: an empirical study. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1301.6725. https://
arxiv.org/abs/1301.6725, 2013.
National vulnerability database, 2022. https://nvd.nist.gov/. (Accessed 9 March 2022).
Nurse, J.R.C., Buckley, O., Legg, P.A., Goldsmith, M., Creese, S., Wright, G.R.T., Whitty,
M., 2014. Understanding insider threat: a framework for characterising attacks. In:
2014 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. IEEE, pp. 214–228.
NVD, 2021a. Cve-2021-41773. https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE2021-41773, online; 17-Apr-2023.
NVD, 2021b. Cve-2021-44228. https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE2021-44228, online; 17-Apr-2023.
Ou, X., Govindavajhala, S., Appel, A.W., 2005. MulVAL: a logic-based network security analyzer. In: 14th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 05), SSYM’05.
USENIX Association, p. 8.
Ou, X., Boyer, W.F., McQueen, M.A., 2006. A scalable approach to attack graph generation. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’06. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
pp. 336–345.
Palsson, K., Gudmundsson, S., Shetty, S., 2020. Analysis of the impact of cyber events
for cyber insurance. Geneva Pap. Risk Insur., Issues Pract. 45 (4), 564–579. https://
doi.org/10.1057/s41288-020-00171-w.
Pearl, J., 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
Phillips, C., Swiler, L.P., 1998. A graph-based system for network-vulnerability analysis.
In: Proceedings of the 1998 Workshop on New Security Paradigms, NSPW ’98. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 71–79.
Poolsappasit, N., Dewri, R., Ray, I., 2012. Dynamic security risk management using
Bayesian attack graphs. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 9 (1), 61–74.
https://doi.org/10.1109/tdsc.2011.34.
Popovic, B., Radojka, M., Paunović, T., 2015. Employee satisfaction survey in function of
business improvement. Manag. - J. Theory Pract. Manag. 20, 31–40. https://doi.org/
10.7595/management.fon.2015.0021.
Reason, J., 2000. Human error: models and management. BMJ 320 (7237), 768–770.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.320.7237.768.
Roll, L.C., Ling Siu, O., Li, S.Y., Witte, H.D., 2019. Human error: the impact of job insecurity on attention-related cognitive errors and error detection. Int. J. Environ. Res.
Public Health 16 (13), 2427. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16132427.
Ross, R., 1916. An application of the theory of probabilities to the study of a priori pathometry.—part i. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A, Contain. Pap. Math. Phys.
Character 92 (638), 204–230. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1916.0007. https://
royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rspa.1916.0007.
Rothmann, S., Coetzer, E.P., 2003. The big ﬁve personality dimensions and job performance. SA J. Ind. Psychol. 29 (1). https://doi.org/10.4102/sajip.v29i1.88.
Saito, Y., Anuardi, M.N.A.M., Matsubara, R., Sugaya, M., 2021. Preliminary analysis of
human error prediction model by using biological information. In: Engineering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics. Springer International Publishing, pp. 324–335.
Saltelli, A., 2002. Sensitivity analysis for importance assessment. Risk Anal. 22 (3),
579–590. https://doi.org/10.1111/0272-4332.00040.
20

Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano
SANS, 2008. About sans institute. https://www.sans.org/about/?msc=main-nav, online;
15-Apr-2023.
SANS, 2021. The cis critical security controls, version 8. https://www.cisecurity.org/
controls/v8, online; 07-Apr-2022.
Sarkar, K.R., 2010. Assessing insider threats to information security using technical,
behavioural and organisational measures. Inf. Secur. Tech. Rep. 15 (3), 112–133.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.istr.2010.11.002.
Sawilla, R.E., Ou, X., 2008. Identifying critical attack assets in dependency attack graphs.
In: Computer Security - ESORICS 2008. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 18–34.
Shukur, H., Zeebaree, S.R.M., Ahmed, A.J., Zebari, R.R., Ahmed, O., Tahir, B.S.A., Sadeeq,
M.A.M., 2020. A state of art survey for concurrent computation and clustering of parallel computing for distributed systems. J. Appl. Sci. Technol. Trends 1 (4), 148–154.
https://doi.org/10.38094/jastt1466.
Stone, A.G., 2021. The role risk-management plays in reducing insider threat’s in the
federal government. Inf. Secur. J.: Glob. Perspect., 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/
19393555.2021.1998735.
Tayouri, D., Baum, N., Shabtai, A., Puzis, R., 2022. A survey of mulval extensions
and their attack scenarios coverage. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2208.05750.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05750, 2022.
The veris framework, 2022. https://veriscommunity.net/. (Accessed 9 April 2022).
TrustNet, 2022. Security awareness training cost. https://www.trustnetinc.com/securityawareness-training/, online; 10-Apr-2022.
Tuor, A., Kaplan, S., Hutchinson, B., Nichols, N., Robinson, S., 2017. Deep learning for unsupervised insider threat detection in structured cybersecurity data streams. https://
doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1710.00811.
Väänänen, J., 2021. Second-order and higher-order logic. In: Zalta, E.N. (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2021 edition. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Veris csv database, 2008. https://github.com/vz-risk/VCDB/blob/master/data/csv/vcdb.
csv.zip, online; 9-Apr-2022.
Verizon, 2021. 2021 data breach investigations report, online; 01-Jan-2022.
Viegas, V., Kuyucu, O., 2022. Security metrics. In: IT Security Controls. Apress,
pp. 221–244.
Vincent, M.J., Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., Snyderman, B.B., 1960. The motivation to work.
Am. Sociol. Rev. 25 (2), 288. https://doi.org/10.2307/2092643.
Wang, C., Li, K., Tian, Y., He, X., 2019. Network risk assessment based on improved MulVAL framework and HMM. In: Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences,
Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering. Springer International Publishing, pp. 298–307.
Wang, L., Noel, S., Jajodia, S., 2006. Minimum-cost network hardening using attack
graphs. Comput. Commun. 29 (18), 3812–3824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.
2006.06.018.
Warren, M., Hutchinson, W., 2000. Cyber attacks against supply chain management systems: a short note. Int J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 30 (7/8), 710–716. https://
doi.org/10.1108/09600030010346521.
Wing, J., 1990. A speciﬁer’s introduction to formal methods. Computer 23 (9), 8–22.
https://doi.org/10.1109/2.58215.
Wong, K., Chan, A.H.S., Ngan, S.C., 2019. The eﬀect of long working hours and overtime on occupational health: a meta-analysis of evidence from 1998 to 2018. Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health 16 (12), 2102. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16122102.

Xiong, W., Lagerström, R., 2019. Threat modeling – a systematic literature review. Comput. Secur. 84, 53–69.
Yazdanparast, R., Hamid, M., Azadeh, M.A., Keramati, A., 2018. An intelligent algorithm
for optimization of resource allocation problem by considering human error in an
emergency department. Int. J. Ind. Syst. Eng. 11, 287–309.
Yuan, F., Cao, Y., Shang, Y., Liu, Y., Tan, J., Fang, B., 2018. Insider threat detection with
deep neural network. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer International
Publishing, pp. 43–54.
Zenitani, K., 2023. Attack graph analysis: an explanatory guide. Comput. Secur. 126,
103081. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.103081.
Zhang, C., Wang, S., Zhan, D., Yu, T., Wang, T., Yin, M., 2021. Detecting insider threat
from behavioral logs based on ensemble and self-supervised learning. Secur. Commun.
Netw. 2021, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/4148441.

Gaetano Perrone is currently CTO at SECurity Solutions for
Innovation (SECSI), a company based in Naples focused on researching innovative solutions in the network security domain.
Passionate in any area related to network security, cloud computing, and software development, he completed a Ph.D. degree in
computer engineering and systems from the University of Naples
in 2022. He continues conducting research in fuzzing, knowledge
graph, and reinforcement learning domains to automate, formalize and increase the eﬀectiveness of security testing approaches.
Simon Pietro Romano (Member, IEEE) is currently a Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, University of Napoli Federico II. He teaches
computer networks, computer architectures, network security,
and telematics applications. He is also the Co- Founder of Meetecho, a startup and university spin-oﬀ dealing with scalable video
streaming and WebRTC-based uniﬁed collaboration, as well as
of SECurity Solutions for Innovation (SECSI) that focuses on
network security. He actively participates in Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) standardization activities, mainly in the
applications and real time (ART) area. (Based on document published on 10 November
2020.)
Nicola d’Ambrosio is currently an Ph.D. student at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology,
University of Napoli Federico II. He worked as free-lance infrastructural penetration testing with SecSI, a startup and university
spin-oﬀ that focuses on network security. He was also a tutor for
Cyber HackAdemy, a professional cybersecurity course.

21