IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

3717

Robust Anomaly-Based Insider Threat Detection
Using Graph Neural Network
Junchao Xiao , Lin Yang, Fuli Zhong , Xiaolei Wang , Hongbo Chen , and Dongyang Li

Abstract—Misuse or malicious access to critical assets of
information systems by insiders usually causes significant loss
to organizations. The issue of insider threat detection for
information systems has received many researchers’ attention
in both security and data mining fields, and a lot of related
research results were presented. However, there are still many
challenges in capturing the behavior difference between malicious
insiders and normal users accurately, such as lack of labeled
insider threats, the subtle and adaptive nature of insider threats,
complexity, heterogeneity, sparsity of the underlying data, etc.
To detect insider threats with large and complex audit data, a
Multi-Edge Weight Relational Graph Neural Network method
(MEWRGNN) for robust anomaly detection is proposed in this
paper. Unlike most existing approaches, the MEWRGNN adopts
several graph neural networks to capture the contextual relationship of user behaviors over a period of time, which is
a critical factor for achieving accurate anomaly identification.
The MEWRGNN achieves a certain degree of interpretability
through ranking the contribution of different edge-representation
features. Evaluation experimental results demonstrate that the
MEWRGNN can learn a model from limited sample data
sets, and achieve quick and accurate insider threat detection
performance. In addition, other feature ranking results allow
providing security analysts with understandable insights for
investigating the detected insider threats.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, insider threat, graph neural
network.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NSIDER threat is known as a kind of malicious threat to the
information security of companies or organizations. Insider
Threat is often defined as a malicious insider who intentionally exploits his or her privileged access to the organization’s
network, system, and/or data, taking actions in a manner that
negatively affected the confidentiality, integrity or availability

I

Manuscript received 29 October 2021; revised 15 March 2022,
24 June 2022, and 12 November 2022; accepted 13 November 2022. Date of
publication 16 November 2022; date of current version 9 October 2023. This
work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 62102466), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities, Sun Yat-sen University (Grant No. 22qntd1602). The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was S. Kanhere. (Corresponding authors: Fuli Zhong; Hongbo Chen.)
Junchao Xiao, Fuli Zhong, and Hongbo Chen are with the
School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou
510006,
China
(e-mail:
xiaojch3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn;
zhongfli@mail.sysu.edu.cn; chenhongbo@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Lin Yang and Xiaolei Wang are with the National Key Laboratory of
Science and Technology on Information System Security, Institute of System
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100039, China.
Dongyang Li is with the Command and Control Engineering College, Army
Engineering University of PLA, Nanjing 211101, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3222635

of the organization’s information or information system infrastructures [1]. Insider threats can also be non-malicious [2]. The
misuse or malicious behavior from someone in the organization usually causes damage to confidential or commercially
valuable information, or even results in the sabotage of computer systems. Insiders often have authorized access to the
organization’s information systems and detailed knowledge
about the network. Threats caused by insiders are usually challenging to detect. Cybersecurity report [3] claimed that more
than half of organizations have experienced insider threats
in recent years. Insider threat attacks account for a quarter
of all types of organizing attacks. This number is still rising [3]. In the meantime, some discovered insider betrayals
may sell secrets, customer information, intellectual property,
and other important privacy data [4]. Network information
system is a critical part of an organization to maintain the
efficient operations. Most sensitive data such as employee
information, intellectual property and transaction records are
stored in the information systems which malicious insiders
may easily access. The insider threat problem required to be
well addressed to ensure the security of information systems
in organizations or companies.
Insider threats are different from external threats, they
mainly come from the organization or company, and generally have the characteristics of high risk, concealment and
diversity. (i) High risk: Insider threats are more harmful than
external threats because adversaries have the internal knowledge of the organization and are more likely to gain access to
the organization’s core assets (such as intellectual property and
user data), and cause considerable losses to the organization’s
core assets [5]. (ii) Concealment: The adversary comes from
organization, and the insider threat often has strong camouflage, which will lead to quite a challenge for its detection by
existing security mechanisms. Internal attacks do not need to
pass through firewalls and other devices. Thus they can easily evade the detection of traditional external security devices.
Internal attacks often occur during working hours. The mixture of attack data with normal data increases the difficulty
of malicious insider data mining. Additionally, internal adversaries with knowledge of organizational security defense are
more likely to evade security detection [5], [6]. (iii) Diversity:
In the Internet era, the organization’s core assets and business are highly informatized, resulting in a lower threshold
for internal attacks and diversification of attack elements. From
the initial computer login users to employees, contractors, partners and service providers, adversaries can use logic bombs
to paralyze the system, steal intellectual property rights, or

c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

take the advantages of their positions to carry out electronic
fraud [5].
CERT Insider Threat Center classified insider threats into
two categories. One is the intentional behavior, such as
information system sabotage, intellectual property theft and
information technology fraud; The other is the negligence
of employees in using authorized resources, which leads to
information leakage [4]. This paper focuses on detecting the
first category, i.e., intentionally malicious behavior detection.
Based on the works [7] and [4], insider threats of intentionally
malicious behavior are mainly divided into four categories,
they are sabotage, theft, fraud and espionage. Sabotage is
the act of malicious insider employees deliberately damage
or destroy the organization’s information system [8]. Theft
refers to the theft of intellectual property. Insiders send the
intellectual property to a new employer or a competing organization for the profit purpose [8]. Fraud refers to internal
personnel who have the financial authority to abuse organizational finances [9]. Espionage is about a malicious insider
who downloads corporate information in a planned and organized manner to obtain strategic economic, military, or other
benefits [10], [11].
Insider threats detection mainly faces two challenges: (i) In
most organizations, malicious behaviors of insiders occur
infrequently, the available records of malicious behaviors are
limited [12], so extracting suitable features from the limited malicious behavior data becomes one of the challenges.
(ii) Mass data of different types, such as network traffic,
website and file access records, mail receiving and sending
records, need to be investigated and processed [13]. How to
fuse such mass data to extract the complex relationship is
another challenge. Most existing approaches [13], [14], [15],
[16], [17] usually adopt rule-based or statistic-based techniques which are hard to solve these challenges very well.
Rule-based methods are often valid for certain specific dataset
types. While statistic-based methods usually involve feature
engineering, leading to delay in insider threat detection. This
paper uses the CMU CERT r6.2 insider threat dataset with a
large amount of normal behavior data and a small amount of
malicious behavior data which is consistent with real-world
situations. we introduce the Graph Neural Network (GNN)
method to capture the contextual relationship between users’
different behaviors over time to ensure that the proposed
method can deal with various datasets and reduce insider
threat detection time delay. A Multi-Edge Weight Relational
Graph Neural Network model (MEWRGNN) is proposed to
improve the detection accuracy, efficiency, and interpretability. The MEWRGNN method employs Relational Graph
Convolutional Network (R-GCN) to process graphs with
multi-edge weights. Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is
applied to extract relational features between nodes. CANGraph Attention Networks (CAN-GAT) is utilized to discover
critical edges in graphs. The MEWRGNN method can enhance
the interpretability of the model by locating the features that
contribute the most to the model performance in the multiedge weight graph. The model’s multi-feature fusion capability
is improved by combining several GNNs and a multi-edge
weight graph. The proposed approach is mainly aimed at

assisting the organization’s information system administrators
in discovering potential insider threats.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• Inspired by graph neural network, a preprocessing
method is proposed to transform the user behavior log
with time-series features into a graph structure to capture
the contextual relationship of user behavior over a period
of time. In the graph, nodes and edges preserve the context of each behavior log, which can help improve the
detection accuracy.
• The combined graph neural networks method is proposed
to extract different user behavior features. Based on these
features, the proposed MEWRGNN model can accurately
detect insider threats with certain interpretability.
• The proposed MEWRGNN is evaluated with the CERT
dataset, and multiple experiments have been conducted
for performance tests and comparison. The obtained
results show that MEWRGNN outperforms several baseline methods in terms of accuracy and efficiency.
Additionally, based on the edge weight values, the simulation experiment with cutting different types of edges
that the weight given by MEWRGNN can guide the
feature selection and provide security analysts with interpretable results.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, insider threat research work is introduced. The preliminaries of this work, the preprocessing process of input
data sample, and related theory of GNNs are presented in
Section III. In Section IV, the MEWRGNN approach is
explained in detail. Evaluation results are shown in Section V.
Followed by the conclusion in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In the past few years, researchers have developed a variety
of insider threat detection methods [6], [8], [18]. Liu et al. [18]
introduced the organization’s insider threats in detail as well
as various types of threats. Homoliak et al. [8] chose a new
classification method to study insider threats. Yuan and Wu [6]
reviewed the advantages and challenges of insider threat detection using deep learning technique. Representative insider
threat detection methods mainly include psychology-based
methods, machine learning-based methods and graph-based
methods [11].
Some security researchers attempt to solve the insider
threat problem from the psychological perspective [19], [20].
Greitzer and Hohimer [19] analyzed human behavior data
based on psychological theory, and proposed a predictive
model to detect insider threats. Brdiczka et al. [20] explored
the method of psychological context, and constructed a graph
learning model to predict threat behaviors of internal personnel
in the organization. Analyzing insider threats with psychological theory can accurately locate threats based on human
psychology. The above method confirms that the combination
of each employee’s psychological test form and appropriate
psychological theory can help to accurately detect insider
threats. However, this method requires a large amount of
expert knowledge and prior knowledge to provide decision

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

support for detection. Data characteristics analysis should be
carried out in advance for each dataset.
Academic and industrial communities have recently focused
on machine learning and deep learning techniques for anomalybased insider threat detection. The learning model can extract
the user’s normal behavior characteristics, and identify abnormal behaviors based on the degree of their deviation from
the normal behaviors. If an abnormal alarm is triggered, it
may indicate that the user’s behavior has changed significantly. It can be treated as an early warning of insider threats.
Parveen et al. [21] abstracted the insider threat problem as a
streaming data analysis problem, and used the one-class support vector machine (SVM) to deal with drifting features. This
method can effectively solve the problem of insufficient labeled
abnormal data. Insider threat detection methods using Recurrent
Neural Network [22], Convolutional Neural Network [23] and
other deep learning models were reported in recent years.
Chattopadhyay et al. [24] applied statistical single-day features
to construct a time series vector, and used a deep autoencoder
neural network to implement threat detection to obtain better
results than multilayer perceptron. These methods take advantage of the powerful ability of deep learning technique to
capture abstract features. Stream online learning [25], [26] is a
method of insider threat detection based on machine learning
and deep learning as well. It attempts to capture an abstract
representation of the user behavior. Tuor et al. [25] chose
deep neural networks to build different models for each user
and organization for anomalous network activity detection.
Böse et al. [26] proposed the real-time anomaly detection in
streaming heterogeneity for the streaming anomaly detection
at scale. Parveen and Thuraisingham [27] designed an incremental learning model of streaming data for insider threat
detection via using unsupervised learning algorithm. Detection
methods based on machine learning and deep learning have
a certain ability to detect unknown threats. Machine learningbased methods can perform an accurate insider threat detection
as long as they collect enough data and extract suitable features.
It is difficult to judge whether the behavior record is normal
or not based on only a small number of behavior records in
the threat detection. To improve the detection accuracy of the
detection model, multiple behavior records are required for each
sample that is input into the model for detection. However,
when enough behavioral records have been collected to make
up one input sample, the malicious behavior may have passed
hours or even days [15].
Researches on insider threat detection based on graph model
were presented in the past few years [17], [20]. Liu et al. [17]
studied the log2vec which is a heterogeneous graph embedding
based modularized method for cyber threats detection in enterprise, and applied the similarity feature of each user behavior
log as one of the basis to construct graph structure samples
for abnormal user detection. Graph model based method can
use features like sequential relationships among log entries to
improve the threat detection accuracy [17], but often requires
too much prior knowledge and a relatively high amount of
computation which leads to threat detection delay.
In recent years, Graph Neural Network (GNN) technique
has been widely used in the knowledge graph, computer

3719

vision, chemistry, and so forth [28], [29]. For its superior
performance in these application fields, GNN technique was
applied to inside threat detection [30]. Jiang et al. [30] constructed graph format model with users’ behaviors and their
connection relationships, and trained the GCN based anomaly
detection model with the formed input graphs, and then
detected the insider threats with the obtained detection model.
In this method, a large amount of data is input into the model
directly for the training task, which will result in much more
training time cost and higher hardware conditions requirement. As distinct from previous works in the literature, the
MEWRGNN model is proposed to detect insider threats in
this paper. The presented model can automatically discover
the relationship between internal personnel through the constructed graph data, extract detection features, and reduce
the amount of data required for each detection. It helps to
improve the model’s versatility and decreases the delay of
threat detection.

III. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, the CMU CERT datasets used in this
research is introduced, then the methods of dataset preprocessing and how the user behavior logs are transformed into
graphs are presented, followed by the introduction of related
theory of GNN.
A. CERT Insider Threat Dataset
The synthetic CMU CERT datasets [31] were used to evaluate methods in many recent studies. CERT dataset contains
5 log files which record the computer-based operations of all
employees in a simulated organization. Its data generation process reflects the practical constraints. The description of log
files are as follows.
• Logon.csv – The file records the login and logout operations of all employees.
• Email.csv – The file records the sending and receiving
operations and the text content of emails.
• Http.csv – The file records the browser’s upload, download, update and text content.
• File.csv – The file records file opening, writing, copying
and deleting operations.
• Decive.csv – The file records the connection and disconnection of the removable drive.
So far, several versions of the CERT Insider Threat Dataset
have been released, among which the version r6.2 is used more
widely. Version r6.2 records the activities of 5 malicious insiders and 3995 normal users from January 2010 to June 2011.
The average activity log for each user is about 40,000. The
following five insider threat scenarios are involved with the
CERT version r6.2.
• User ACM2278, who has never used a removable drive
before, assessed the system after work, used the removable drive and uploaded data to wikileaks.org.
• User CMP2946, browsed job search websites, searched
for jobs from competing companies, and used a thumb
drive to steal company data before leaving the company.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

TABLE I
T HE N UMBER OF N ORMAL AND M ALICIOUS ACTIVITIES
OF E ACH I NSIDER

Fig. 1. The process of converting the Activity field of log of ACM2278 into
a numeric representation.
•

System administrator PLJ1771 felt dissatisfied. He downloaded the keylogger and uploaded it to the supervisor’s
computer using a thumb drive. The next day, he used his
supervisor account to log into the system and sent out
many alarming emails, causing panic and people to leave
the organization immediately.
• User CDE1846, logged into other users’ computers,
searched for interesting files and sent these files to their
home email addresses.
• User MBG3183, as a laid-off worker, uploaded documents to Dropbox for his profit.
Table I shows the statistics on the number of activities of the
insiders, including their normal activity and malicious activity.
One can find that the insider activity data is imbalanced.
B. Dataset Preprocessing
The activity logs of 4000 users are scattered into five files,
i.e., Logon.csv, email.csv, http.csv, file.csv, and decive.csv. To
facilitate the analysis of user activities, each user’s activity log
is extracted from the five files to form a single user’s activity
log. Take user ACM2278 as an example, one extracts the activity log of user ACM2278 from the five files and arranges them
in chronological order, finally gets 31547 log records. The log
format of the synthesized ACM2278 is shown in Table II.
Other user logs are obtained in the similar way. Related
description of each column of the log format is presented in
the Appendix of this paper.
Most user behavior activity logs extracted from the five files
are recorded in text format. It is necessary to convert the logs
of text format into those of digital format so that the GNN
framework can process these logs data properly.
As shown in Table II, the date field records the date and
time when the activity occurred. To facilitate computer processing, the date field is converted into a Unix timestamp [32].
The User and PC fields are deleted so that the remaining data
fields mainly include attribute parameters of user behavior
activity, which helps the GNN model capture user activities
and maintain its generality. The size field is already of numeric
representation and does not need to be converted any more.
The activity field has only a dozen of different activities.
It is suitable for using a factorization method [33] to obtain
the numeric representation of corresponding activities. The
formula is written as
{1, 2, . . . , N } = F (data(activity))

(1)

where data(activity) is the text description form of the activity field of the activity log, the text is converted into an
integer of numeric representation through factorization method
denoted by F (·), N represents the number of different activities generated by the user. The same activities of different users
are converted into exact numeric representation form. Fig. 1

Fig. 2. The process of converting a storage address recorded in text form
into a numeric representation.

shows the process of converting the activity field of ACM2278
log into the numeric representation form. Other user logs are
converted with the similar method.
Other fields of the log are of text representations with
many words. To convert these texts into a numeric representation form, Word2Vec [34], [35], [36], [37] is applied.
Word2Vec is a group of correlation models for word-vectors
generation, in which the models are composed of shallow
neural networks and are trained for reconstruction of linguistic word text. After well training, Word2Vec model can
map each word to related numerical vector, and help to capture the relation between words. As an unsupervised learning
method, Word2Vec is widely used to measure the correlation
between words in the natural language processing research
field. It is also suitable for achieving the numeric representation of some fields of activity log. Since the “File_tree”,
“Attachments” and “Filename” fields store file addresses. To
use Word2Vec method, these file address texts will be word
segmented, written as
{W1 , W2 , . . . , WN } = D(S1 , S2 , . . . , SL )

(2)

where Si (i = 1, 2, . . . , L) is the i-th storage address record,
Wi (i = 1, 2, . . . , N ) is the i-th separated word from Si ,
and D(·) is the word segmentation program. The gensim
toolkit [38] is used to train Word2Vec vectors for the separated
words {W1 , W2 , . . . , WN }, written as


Ŵ1 , Ŵ2 , . . . , ŴN = Mf ({W1 , W2 , . . . , WN }) (3)
where Mf represents the trained Word2Vec model. Base on
experience, one defines a 100-dimensional vector to represents
a word. To reduce the dimensionality of the activity log, we
performed dimensionality reduction for each word. The dimension reduction process consists of four steps, i.e., steps A, B,
C, and D in Fig. 2. In step A, file addresses are separated into
words by specific symbols such as ‘,’ , ‘:’ and ‘;’. In step B,
each word is mapped to a representation of 100 numbers (for

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

3721

TABLE II
T HE ACTIVITY L OG F ORMAT OF ACM2278

TABLE III
T HE N UMERIC R EPRESENTED ACTIVITY L OG F ORMAT OF ACM2278

TABLE IV
T HE N ORMALIZED ACTIVITY L OG F ORMAT OF ACM2278

example, x1 , x2 , . . . , x100 represents ‘R’) through Word2Vec
method. In step C, the arithmetic mean of the 100 numbers
representing the word is calculated, and then used to represent
the word. In step D, the sum of the numbers representation of
each word obtained in step C is calculated. Thus the numeric
representation of the file address is obtained.
The e-mail addresses stored in the “TO”, “CC”, “BCC” and
“From” fields, and the Web addresses stored in the “URL” field
are converted into their numeric representations in a similar
way to the file addresses. The word segmentation symbols of
the e-mails are ‘@’ and ‘;’, and the word segmentation symbol
of the URL is ‘:’.
The “Content” field stores a large number of words. The pretrained Word2Vec model (wiki-news-300d-1M) proposed by
Mikolov et al. [39] is used to convert the text in the “Content”
field to its numeric representation. Pre-trained Word2Vec
model trained with one million words, including Wikipedia
2017, UMBC webbase corpus and statmt.org news dataset.
Same as other fields for storing text formats, if the dimension
of the activity log is too high, it will increase the computational cost of the model in the training and detection phases.
To keep the dimension of the activity log within a reasonable range and reduce the computational cost, aggregation
function is used to calculate the aggregation value of converted numbers. Based on experience, one performs sensitivity
analysis on arithmatic average aggregation function with the
first 50 to 200 words of the “Content” field of the activity
log to search for the suitable ones. Based on the results in
Table VII, the first 100 words are finally selected to represent

the feature of “Content” field. Another two aggragation functions, arithmatic median and mode (mode is the value that
appears most frequently in a set of data.), are also applied to
calculate aggregation values with the numerical representation
of each word (step C of Fig. 2) for comparison analysis. The
experimental results show that the obtained detection accuracy and some other detection evaluating indicators results
when using the aggregation function median and the arithmetic
average, are the same. For the mode function, the obtained
results (shown in Table VIII) are not so good as the above
ones when detecting user ACM2278. Furthermore, the arithmetic average calculation is fast and can facilitate further
analysis [40].
The “To_removable_media” and “From_removable” fields
stores Boolean variables, and the transition rule is TRUE to 1,
and FALSE to 2. Other default values in the activity log are
filled with 0. Table III shows the result of the numeric representation of the activity log of ACM2278 listed in Table II. In
Table III, the “date” field is replaced with “timestamp” field
and the “user” and “PC” fields are deleted.
To unify the values of different fields and accelerate the
convergence speed of the GNN model in the training phase,
some fields in Table III need to be normalized. According
to Table III, the 13 fields from “timestamp” to “URL” all
need to be normalized (Min-Max Normalization [41]), and
note that the numeric representations of the “Content” field by
Word2Vec have been normalized. As an example for explanation, the normalized activity log format of ACM2278 is shown
in Table IV.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3722

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

The process of converting activity logs into graphs.
Fig. 4. The graph composed of the first 5 records of ACM2278 activity log
through definition 1.

C. Graph Structure
To capture the contextual relationship of different behaviors
over a period of time and give full play to the advantages of
the Word2Vec, the user activity log is transformed into a graph
with topological structure.
The graph construction method is based on the theory
proposed by Li et al. [42]. They proposed two methods for
converting time series data into graphs, one is Visibility Graph
(VG), and the other is Horizontal Visibility Graph (HVG),
which is defined as follows.
Definition 1 (VG): Given a time series T = (t1 , . . . , tn ),
its VG representation G = (V, E) has n nodes, where V =
(v1 , . . . , vn ). An edge e = (i , j ) ∈ E iff ∀k , i < k < j,
(1 ≤ i, j ≤ n), such that inequality tk < tj + (ti − tj ) jj −k
−i is
satisfied.
Definition 2 (HVG): Given a time series T = (t1 , . . . , tn ),
its HVG representation Ĝ = (V , E ) has n nodes, V =
(v1 , . . . , vn ). An edge e = (i , j ) ∈ E iff ∀k , i < k < j,
(1 ≤ i, j ≤ n), such that inequality ti , tj > tk is satisfied.
For insider activity log processing, in the above definitions,
T denotes the user activity log, and ti , (i = 1, 2, . . . , n) is
the energy value of i-th activity item. Mean value calculated
according to the 113 fields of each log record (e.g., log records
of ACM2278 in Table IV), is used as the related energy value.
It is proved in [42] that the VG can represent the global features of time series, while the HVG can represent the local
features.
To construct the graph structure of user activity log, each
activity item is considered as a node, and each graph contains
n nodes. Let V ∈ Rn be a vector as
V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn }

(4)

where vi is the i-th node. The left part of Fig. 3 shows the
process of converting activity logs into nodes when n = 5.
Let vector E ∈ Rz consist of the undirected edges of
the graph structure to represent the contextual relationship
between nodes,
E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , ez }

(5)

where ei is the i-th undirected edge in the graph. For example, e1 = (v1 , v2 ) represents that there is an undirected edge
between nodes v1 and v2 . The right part of Fig. 3 shows the
graph constructed by definition 1 when n = 5 in Eq. (4).
The connection method and number of edges are determined
according to the definition (1 or 2) used and the energy value
of activity item.

Let G represent a graph composed of nodes and undirected
edges, which can be constructed with definition 1 or 2 and
denoted as
G = (V , E )

(6)

The nodes represent the position of activity logs in the
graph, while the undirected edges represent the contextual
relationship between activity logs.
In Table IV, except for the “timestamp” field, the values of
the other fields are stored in the corresponding nodes as node
features. The value of node features represented by a vector
B ∈ R112 is written as
B = {b1 , b2 , . . . , b112 }

(7)

where bi is the i-th numerical representation in Table IV
(calculated from “File_tree” field). For example, b1 is
the numerical representation of the “File_tree” field, b2 is the
numerical representation of the “Activity” field, and b112 is the
numerical representation of the 100-th word in the “Content”
field.
Let vector V̂ represent the set of nodes in the graph,
V̂ = {v̂1 , v̂2 , . . . , v̂n }

(8)

where v̂i is the i-th node which stores the corresponding node
feature Bi .
The edges in the graph can also store features. According to
the stored edge features, the edges can be divided into three
types: Time-based edge, distance-based edge and attentionbased edge.
The time-based edge stores the absolute value of the difference of the timestamps corresponding to the two nodes at the
ends of this edge. This means that the time-based edge feature represents the time interval between the two activity logs.
Fig. 4 shows the graph composed of the first five records of
ACM2278 activity log based on definition 1, and the feature
calculation display of time feature edges.
Euclidean distance is used to calculate the distance-based
edge feature, written as

 112
 

2

v̂ik − v̂jk
(9)
dist v̂i , v̂j = 
k =1

where v̂i and v̂j are the nodes at both ends of an edge. v̂ik
represents the k-th value (bk ) of the node feature (Bi ) stored

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

Fig. 5.

3723

The graph construction of the activity log and the training and detection process of the MEWRGNN model.

in the i-th node (vi ). v̂jk is similar to v̂ik . The distance-based
edge feature indicates the similarity of the two corresponding
activity logs. Euclidean distance is chosen as the distancebased edge feature since it is more suitable for calculating
two rows of data with numerical values, such as floating-point
and integer. It was applied in most instance-based learning
models [41].
The attention-based edge feature is automatically calculated
by the MEWRGNN model, which will be described in detail
later.
Let vectors ÊT , ÊD and ÊA ∈ Rz represent the sets of edge
features of time feature edges (i.e., time-based edges), distance
feature edges (i.e., distance-based edges) and attention feature
edges (i.e., attention-based edges), respectively, written as
ÊT = {êT 1 , êT 2 , . . . , êTz }

(10)

ÊD = {êD1 , êD2 , . . . , êDz }
ÊA = {êA1 , êA2 , . . . , êAz }

(11)
(12)

where êTi , êDi and êAi are the edge features of the i-th
time feature edge, distance feature edge and attention feature

edge, respectively, which store the corresponding edge feature
values.
Let ĜT , ĜD and ĜA represent the graphs using timebased edges, distance-based edges and attention-based edges,
respectively, and they are written as
ĜT = V̂ , ÊT

(13)

ĜD = V̂ , ÊD

(14)

ĜA = V̂ , ÊA

(15)

The input sample for the proposed model is composed of
three types of graphs, i.e., ĜT , ĜD and ĜA corresponding to
the types of edge features ÊT , ÊD and ÊA , respectively. As
shown in the upper part of Fig. 5 (where GT , GD and GA
represent the graphs using time-based edges, distance-based
edges and attention-based edges, respectively.), if the graph is
constructed with 5 nodes (in Eq. (8), n = 5). These 5 nodes
can be used to construct 3 graphs (ĜT , ĜD and ĜA which
are corresponding to GT , GD and GA , separately) with the
same topology and node features but different edge features.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

The constructed 3 graphs are treated as an input sample of the
MEWRGNN model.
The constructed graph will be marked as an anomaly graph
if there are nodes with malicious activity logs in this graph.
Otherwise, it will be labeled as normal graph if there are no
nodes with malicious activity logs in the graph.

where bi ∈ (1, +∞), bi = 100 is set as the default value.

D. Graph Convolutional Network
GCN [43] is a classic GNN originally used for semisupervised classification of graph structure data. Its multi-layer
case can be formed by the layer-wise rule as
1

1

H (l+1) = σ D̃ − 2 ÃD̃ − 2 H (l) W (l)

(16)

where Ã = A + I indicates the adjacency matrix of the graph
which is added self-connections, A is the adjacency matrix of
the undirected graph, I ∈ RN ×N is the identity matrix, H (l) ∈
RN ×D is the matrix of activations in the l-th layer, W (l)
represents the shared trainable weight matrix for node-wise
feature transformation, σ(·) is the activation function.
E. Relational Graph Convolutional Network
R-GCN [44] is an extension of the classic model GCN.
GCN only explores the topological structure features of data
to obtain node representation but does not fully explore the
edge information on the graph. While the R-GCN supplements
this aspect, and it can be formulated as
⎞
⎛
1
(l+1)
(l) (l)
(l) (l)
= σ ⎝W0 hi +
Wr hj ⎠ (17)
hi
c
r i,r
r ∈R j ∈Ni

(l)

(l)

where hi ∈ Rd
is the hidden state of node vi in the
l-th layer of the neural network, d (l) is the dimension of this
layer’s representation, Nir denotes the set of one-hop neighbors of node vi under relation r ∈ R. ci,r = |Nir | denotes
a normalization constant, |Nir | is the number of one-hop
neighbors of node vi under relation r.
F. CAN-Graph Attention Networks
CAN-GAT [45] is a variant of Graph Attention Networks
(GAT) [46], and it can be formulated as
(l)

zi

(l)

= ReLU W (l) hi

(l)

eij = LeakyReLU
exp

(l)

αij = 

(18)
(l)T


V
1

(l)

zi

(l)T


· V
2

(l)
eij

(l+1)

= σ⎝

(l)

zj

(19)
(20)

(l)

k ∈N (i) exp eik
⎞
⎛

hi

are the learnable weight vectors. N (i ) denotes the set of onehop neighbors of node vi . “·” denotes dot-product operation.
(·)T represents transpose, and LeakyReLU (·) is a non-linear
activation function, written as

xi ≥ 0
x
(22)
yi = xii
xi < 0
bi

(l) (l)
αij zj ⎠

(21)

j ∈N (i)
(l)

where hi is the node features of the i-th node of l-th layer,
W (l) is the learnable weight matrix of l-th layer. ReLU (·) =
T
T
 (∗) and V
 (∗)
max (0, ·) is non-linear activation function. V
1

2

IV. A NOMALY D ETECTION U SING MEWRGNN M ODEL
A. Approach Overview
In insider threat detection, GNN method is a powerful tool
for graph structure data processing to facilitate extracting the
contextual relationship between different behaviors of users
over a period of time. It can achieve excellent performance
in the classification of various graph structures [47], [48] and
has significant potential for insider threat detection [17]. For
processing the text information in activity log efficiently with
GNN-like method, Word2Vec is used to derive the numeric
representations of the text. In this paper, the MEWRGNN
model is designed to capture the contextual relationship
between different behaviors of users over a period of time.
The designed model is shown in Fig. 5 where the upper part
is the process of transforming the activity log into a graph, the
lower left part is the training process, and the lower right part
presents the detection process. The constructed graph transformation process is applied to explore the contextual relationship
between activity logs over time to form input sample for the
MEWRGNN model. The training process captures the potential features of the activity log, and obtains a suitable trained
model, while the detection process determines whether the
activity logs are abnormal or not via using the trained model.
B. MEWRGNN
The proposed MEWRGNN model is implemented based
on three models presented bellow (RGCNT, RGCND and
RGNNGAT). The input samples for the MEWRGNN Model
are three kinds of graphs (ĜT , ĜD and ĜA ). First, the node
feature in V̂ of the input sample is linearly transformed twice,
and then 6 weights are obtained through the softmax function,
written as
y1 = W1 V̂ + b1
y2 = W2 y1 + b2

(23)
(24)

M = softmax (y2 )

(25)

where Wi and bi (i = 1,2) are the learnable parameter matrix
and bias, respectively. Eq. (23) and Eq. (24) are related to
the calculation of the fully connected layers of the classic
neural network. The dimension of input sample is reduced
from 112 to 57 through the first layer (Eq. (23)), and to 6
further through the second layer (Eq. (24)). softmax is regarded
as a normalized function. Let M ∈ R6 be a vector, written as
exp(y2i )
Mi = 6
(26)
 
j exp y2j
where y2i and y2j are the values of i-th and j-th dimensions
of y2 , respectively. Mi is the value of i-th dimension to be

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

normalized. Eqs. (23)-(25) are the calculation of the learning
parameters from node features to weights (M1 , M2 , M3 , M4 ,
M5 , M6 ), of which the process is shown in the lower part of
Fig. 5.
Input samples ĜT , ĜD and ĜA are used for feature
extraction with different GNN layers.
Relational Graph Convolutional Network Time (RGCNT)
layers process the input sample ĜT to capture time features
of activity log. The related calculations are written as
⎞
⎛
1
(2)
(1)
(1)
(27)
W
hTi = σ ⎝
hTj êTij M1 ⎠
cij T
j ∈N (i)
⎞
⎛
1
(3)
(2)
(2)
hTi = σ ⎝
(28)
W
hTj êTij M4 ⎠
cij T
j ∈N (i)

(1)

where WT is the shared trainable weight matrix of first layer,
(1)

hTj denotes the feature of the j-th node in ĜT , êTij represents
(2)

edge feature of the edge connecting nodes v̂i and v̂j , hTi and
(2)

WT are respectively used as the input and the shared trainable weight matrix of the second layer of RGCNT, the meaning
of other symbols are similar to what they are in Eq. (17).
Relational Graph Convolutional Network Distance
(RGCND) layers process the input sample ĜD to capture
the distance features (similarity) of activity log. The related
calculations are written as
⎞
⎛
1
(2)
(1)
(1)
hDj êDij M2 ⎠
(29)
W
hD i = σ ⎝
cij D
j ∈N (i)
⎞
⎛
1
(3)
(2)
(2)
hD i = σ ⎝
hDj êDij M5 ⎠
(30)
W
cij D
j ∈N (i)

(1)

where WD is the shared trainable weight matrix of first layer,
(1)

hDj denotes the feature of the j-th node in ĜD , êDij represents edge feature of the edge connecting nodes v̂i and v̂j ,
(2)
(2)
hDi and WD are respectively used as the input and the
shared trainable weight matrix of the second layer of RGCND,
the meaning of other symbols are similar to what they are in
Eq. (17).
Relational Graph Neural Network Graph Attention
Networks (RGNNGAT) layers process the input sample ĜA
to capture importance features of activity log. The RGNNGAT
of the first layer is written as:
(1)

zi

(1) (1)

= ReLU WA hAi

(1)

eij = LeakyReLU
(1)


V
1

(31)
(1)

zi

(1)T


· V
2

(1)

zj

(32)

exp eij

k ∈N (i) exp

(2)

(1) (1)

αij zj
j ∈N (i)

M3
(1)

(1)

where the αij calculated by Eq. (33) is stored in êAij as an
(2)

edge feature. Eq. (34) update node features hAi according to
(1)

the value of edge feature αij . In the same way, the second
layer of RGNNGAT is written as:
(2)

zi

(2) (2)

= ReLU WA hAi

(35)
T

(2)

(33)

eik

(34)

T

 (2) z (2)
 (2) z (2) · V
V
1
2
i
j

eij = LeakyReLU

(36)

(2)

(2)

αij = 

exp eij

(3)

h Ai =

M6

(2)

k ∈N (i) exp eik
(2) (2)

αij zj

(37)
(38)

j ∈N (i)

The node features calculated from each GNN layer need to
be fused to facilitate classification. The node features of each
graph are fused into hg as
N
(3)
j =1 hrj
hg =
(39)
N
r ∈R

where R = {T , D, A}. To implement anomaly detection, the
dimension of the fusion features hg is reduced from 112 to 2
with the formula as
y3 = W3 hg + b3

(40)

where y3 ∈ R2 denotes the output of a linear transformation
calculation, and it is fed into the softmax function to achieve
predicted results,
exp(y3i )
 
j =1 exp y3j

YP i = k

(41)

where YPi  , ∀i = 1, 2, represents the probability that the
prediction result is normal or abnormal, and k = 2 is the
number of categories. Eqs. (23)-(41) constitute a complete
MEWRGNN model in which the GNN layer structure is
shown in the lower part of Fig. 5.
For the train calculation of the MEWRGNN model, the loss
function to evaluate the error between predicted category and
true category is defined as
Leer (w , b) = −

1
m

m



Yi log YP i (w , b)

(42)

i=1

where Yi denotes the true category and YP i denotes predicted
one, w and b are the weight and bias of the MEWRGNN model
in hidden layers respectively.
As batches of groups of inputs are applied to train the
MEWRGNN model, the actual summation effect is the loss
of a batch Lbat , written as
u

(1)

αij = 
h Ai =

(1)T

3725

Lbat (w , b, u) =

(i)

Leer (w , b)

(43)

i=1

where u denotes the number of groups of inputs to form a
batch. In this paper, u = 5 denotes that a batch is composed
of 5 graph structure data of activity logs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

TABLE V
T HE N UMBER OF ACTIVITY L OGS OF N ORMAL U SERS

TABLE VI
D ETECTION ACCURACY OF MEWRGNN M ODEL W ITH D IFFERENT
C ONFIGURATIONS ,(ACCURACY R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

The Lbat (w , b, u) is selected as the final loss function and
optimization object in the training phase of the MEWRGNN
model. The optimal target is to minimize the error calculated by the loss function. In the training phase, the Adam
optimization algorithm [49] is used to search parameter set P ∗ ,
P ∗ = arg

min

{w ,b}∈Ω

Lbat (w , b, u)

(44)

By using parameter set P ∗ , the MEWRGNN model can
implement insider threat detection for user activity logs.
V. E VALUATION
In this section, the implementation of the presented
MEWRGNN model, and the experimental settings are
explained first. Then the effectiveness, accuracy and
interpretability of the MEWRGNN model are evaluated.
Comparison experiments with several baselines are presented.
Following by the discussion of the efficiency evaluation.
A. MEWRGNN Model Implementation
The architecture of the proposed MEWRGNN Model is
shown in Fig. 5. One of its input samples includes three graphs
with different edge features (ĜT , ĜD and ĜA ). First, the
node features stored in V̂ undergo several linear transformations to obtain the weight feature Mi (i = 1, 2, . . . , 6)
(with Eqs. (23)-(26)). Then, the input samples with different
edge features are processed by different GNN layers to obtain
salient features (with Eqs. (27)-(38)). Finally, these salient
features undergo fusion and feature transformation to output
detection results (with Eqs. (39)-(41)). In the training phase,
the number of training iterations of each model is set to 5,
and the Adam method with a learning rate of 0.001 is used
for model training.
B. User Activity Log Dataset
The CERT Insider Threat Dataset version r6.2 is applied as
original experimental data. The activity logs of malicious users
(ACM2278, CMP2946, PLJ1771 and CDE1846) are extracted
from the dataset in chronological order to facilitate analysis.
Activity logs data of MBG3183 are used as test data only,
since there are just four abnormal activity logs in the dataset
which is insufficient to generate enough training and test data.
And the activity logs of 500 normal users (such as DNS1758,
RSR2681, QCD0386 and RJH0219) in the dataset are selected
for comparison experiments. The number of activity logs of
malicious users and four normal users is shown in Table I and
Table V, respectively.
C. Accuracy Evaluation
The accuracy, recall, precision, F1 scores, and False Positive
Rate (FPR) are calculated by collecting the number of true

negatives (TN), true positives (TP), false negatives (FN), and
false positives (FP).
TP
,
(45)
TP + FP
TP + TN
,
(46)
accuracy =
TP + FP + FN + TN
TP
,
(47)
recall =
TP + FN
precision × recall
F1 =
× 2,
(48)
precision + recall
FP
FPR =
.
(49)
FP + TN
Table VI shows the detection accuracy results of the
MEWRGNN model with different configurations, and the
accuracy is recorded in percentage. For the detection of each
user, the MEWRGNN model is trained with Pcert of the
user’s activity logs, and then is applied to detect the rest
(1 − Pcert ) of user’s activity logs. Such an experiment is
implemented 100 times with the same experimental setup
for the user detection, and the mean value of the obtained
100 detection accuracy values for the related user is listed
in the table. VG and HVG denote that the input sample
for the model is a graph constructed with Definition 1 and
Definition 2, respectively. VG-HVG represents that the first
input sample of the model is the graph constructed according to Definition 1, and the second input sample graph is
constructed with Definition 2, the other input samples are constructed by these two methods alternately. n = 20 denotes
that the value of n in Eq. (4), i.e., a graph consists of 20
nodes (activity logs). Pcert (e.g., 60%) represents the percentage (e.g., 60%) of each user’s normal and abnormal activity
logs that are used as the training datasets, while the rest are
used as the test datasets. For constructing abnormal datasets,
the abnormal activity logs of each abnormal user are put
together to form the abnormal datasets. Pcert (e.g., 60%) of
precision =

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

TABLE VII
D ETECTION R ESULTS OF MEWRGNN IN THE C ASES OF U SING
D IFFERENT N UMBER OF W ORDS S ELECTED AS F EATURES F ROM THE
“C ONTENT ” F IELD , (ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE
A RE R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

3727

TABLE IX
T HE ACCURACY R ESULTS OF THE MEWRGNN M ODEL ON THE
D ETECTION OF N ORMAL U SER ACTIVITY L OGS

TABLE X
D ETECTION ACCURACY OF U SERS ’ N ORMAL ACTIVITY P RIOR TO
L EAVING THE C OMPANY, A FTER T HEY A RE D ETECTED AS A NOMALOUS
U SERS

TABLE XI
D ETECTION R ESULTS OF THE C ASES T HAT M ODEL T RAINING AND
T ESTING U SE D IFFERENT U SER DATA (DATA IN “T EST ” C OLUMN A RE
A LL F ROM THE N ORMAL ACTIVITY L OGS OF THE C ORRESPONDING
U SER , AND THE ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE A RE
R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

TABLE VIII
D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR U SER ACM2278 W HEN THE M ODEL U SES
D IFFERENT AGGREGATION F UNCTIONS , (ACCURACY, P RECISION ,
R ECALL AND F1 S CORE A RE R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

TABLE XII
D ETECTION R ESULTS OF THE C ASES T HAT T RAINING AND T ESTING
P HASE U SE D IFFERENT U SER DATA (“T EST ” C OLUMN DATA A RE A LL
F ROM THE A BNORMAL ACTIVITY L OG OF THE C ORRESPONDING U SER ,
AND THE ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE A RE
R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

the abnormal activity logs of each abnormal user constitute
the abnormal training datasets, and the rest constitute the
abnormal test datasets. It can be seen from Table VI that the
MEWRGNN model has good robustness, the performance of
the model is not affected greatly in the cases that the graph
construction method, the number of nodes used in one constructed graph, and the percentage of training datasets, vary
in a certain range. An arithmetic average value of detection
accuracy results is calculated for each parameter configuration
model, to evaluate the model’s overall performance (As is the
“Average” in the table). The table shows that, by using the
definition 1 method to construct the graph of 30 nodes as an
input, 80% of the activity logs as the training datasets, the
model obtains the best results. Next, we choose this group of
configuration parameters for the model to conduct an in-depth
study.
Table VII shows the experimental results of sensitivity analysis on the number of words (indicated with nwords ) selected
as features in the “Content” field, with the parameter configuration selected from Table VI. We can see that the model
obtains the best performance by selecting the first 100 words
in the “content” field as features.

In general, insider threat detection model should has good
capability to detect abnormal user activities and recognize normal user activities. Table IX shows the detection accuracy
performance of the proposed model on normal user activity logs. It indicates that the proposed method has a suitable
recognition rate for normal user activity logs.
The activity log dataset of abnormal user often contains a
large number of normal activity logs and limited abnormal
activity logs, since an abnormal user usually performs normal
activities after implementing threat activities that will generate
corresponding logs. Table X shows the recognition accuracy
of these abnormal users’ normal activity logs. It shows even
if the users have been identified as abnormal, their normal
activity logs can still be classified correctly.
To verify that the proposed model can capture the behavior characteristics of each user well, we select the training
datasets from one of the users and the test datasets from the
different ones to conduct simulation experiments. Table XI and
Table XII are the detection results of the cases that the training
and testing data do not come from the same user simultaneously. The column“train” in the table represents the model
is trained with the corresponding user training datasets. E.g.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3728

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

The visualization of the user ACM2278’s test datasets using t-SNE technology.

the user PLJ1771 in the “train” column in the first row of
Table XI means that the user PLJ1771’s training datasets are
used to train the model. The user data in the “test” column in
Table XI all come from the normal activity logs in the respective test datasets. While the user data in the “test” column
in Table XII all come from the abnormal activity logs in the
respective test datasets. It can be seen from Table XI that, if
someone logs into the system with another person’s account,
the model will treat him as an abnormal user even if his operation is normal. Table XII shows that the user using other
person’s accounts to enter the system and perform malicious
operations are more likely to be detected.
The above experiment results demonstrate that the proposed
model can be applied to insider threat detection in various
scenarios, and the model has strong stability.
D. Interpretability Evaluation
The data features extracted by the MEWRGNN model
can be visualized. Fig. 6 shows the scenario of the user
ACM2278’s test datasets while using the t-SNE [50]
technology for dimensionality reduction and visualization.
Fig. 6 (a), shows the scene that the datasets are directly
visualized by using the t-SNE technology. It can be seen that
normal data points and abnormal data points are mixed and
closely spaced. The two types of data are inseparable linearly.
The visualization result of the ACM2278 test datasets processed by the MEWRGNN model are displayed in Fig. 6 (b),
which shows that the normal and abnormal data are separated
clearly, and are almost linearly separable. Fig. 6 shows that
the MEWRGNN model is good at extracting abstract feature
representation and feature transformation.
To analyze the MEWRGNN model from a quantitative perspective, we focus on explaining the 6 weights
(Mi , i = 1, . . . , 6) of the model. Each weight is closely
related to the update of node features and edge features
of a certain layer. For example, the weight M1 is related
to the update of the RGCNT node of the first layer and

TABLE XIII
T HE I NFLUENCE OF E ACH W EIGHT ON THE D ETECTION OF THE M ODEL
T RAINED W ITH THE DATA OF U SERS PLJ1771 AND QCD0386,
R ESPECTIVELY, (ACCURACY R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

the time feature edge (Eq. (27)). We separately analyze the
MEWRGNN model trained with the activity logs of users
PLJ1771 and QCD0386 to explain the impact of different
types of features on the model’s performance. Table XIII
shows the influence of each weight on the detection of the
model trained with the data of users PLJ1771 and QCD0386,
respectively. In the table, accuracy represents the detection
accuracy of the entire MEWRGNN model. The number listed
below (Mi , i = 1, . . . , 6) is the value of the weight. −Rg
(R = {T , D, A}, g = {1, 2}) denotes to delete the corresponding GNN layer on the trained MEWRGNN model to test
the effect of this layer on the detection ability. For example,
-D1D2 means to test the accuracy of the model after deleting Eqs. (29)-(30) from the trained MEWRGNN model, and
-T2A2 means to test the accuracy of the model after deleting Eqs. (28), (35)-(38) from the trained MEWRGNN model.
It can be seen from Table XIII that M2 and M5 have the
largest weight proportions, and they are related to the RGCND
layer. The update of the node feature in the RGCND layer
depends on distance feature edges. If the RGCND layer of
the model is deleted (-D1D2, -T1T2D1D2, -D1D2A1A2, -D2,
-T2D2, -A2D2), the detection accuracy of the model directly

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

Fig. 7.

3729

The weight distribution of normal data and abnormal data in the user ACM2278 test datasets.

drops. Although other weights have small values, they still
contribute a little to the model (-T1T2A1A2). In addition, the
model detection accuracy in the table does not change, which
may be because the deleted GNN layer weight value is too
small and does not have much impact on the model. The
above experiment shows that the distance feature (the similarity of nodes) is an important feature that contributes to
the model’s detection ability. Mi , (i = 1, . . . , 6) can indicate
each feature’s contribution of distance, time, and attention to
the model’s detection ability. The value of Mi , (i = 1, . . . , 6)
is automatically calculated by the trained MEWRGNN model
according to different input samples to ensure that the model
can automatically evaluate the importance of different features.
To intuitively experience the 6 weights (Mi , i = 1, . . . , 6)
that the MEWRGNN model automatically outputs based on
the input samples. The test datasets of the user ACM2278

are input into the model to generate box plots with 6 weights
under normal and abnormal activities, respectively. In box-plot
(Fig. 7), the hollow dots represent the abnormal points of data.
The green horizontal line in the box represents the median of
the data distribution. The upper and lower edges of the box
are the upper and lower quartiles of the data, respectively.
The whisker edges extending from the upper and lower edges
of the box respectively represent the maximum and minimum
values in the datasets. Mi _normal, (i = 1, . . . , 6) represents
the weight value generated by using the normal activity logs,
and Mi _abnormal, (i = 1, . . . , 6) represents the weight value
generated by using the abnormal activity logs. It can be seen
from Fig. 7 that the weight range generated by the normal
data is closer, and the deviation distance of the abnormal
point is smaller, which shows that normal activity logs have a
certain regularity and generally change in a certain range. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

weight distribution of abnormal data is wider, and the deviation distance of abnormal points is farther. This shows that
the abnormal data has a certain degree of randomness.

TABLE XIV
C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF THE P RESENTED M ODEL AND OTHER
BASELINE M ETHODS

E. Comparison With Other Baseline Methods
To compare the proposed approach with other baseline
methods, we choose GNN’s classic model GCN and other
machine learning methods (k-nearest neighbors, Naive Bayes,
Decision Trees, Multi-layered perceptron) to perform insider
threat detection experiments with the same public datasets.
Table XIV shows the averaged evaluation results using 5-fold
cross-validation with replacement.
The obtained results clearly demonstrate that the comprehensive performance of the MEWRGNN model outperforms
those of other detection methods. The MEWRGNN model
has high detection capabilities on multiple normal and abnormal users. GCN and MEWRGNN are comparable in detecting
users ACM2278, PLJ1771, and DNS1758. However, GCN is
inferior to MEWRGNN in other user detection. The Decision
Tree approach performs poorly in detecting users CMP2946
and CDE1846. One can see that the MEWRGNN model is
superior to Multi-layered perceptron (2 hidden layers, 112 hidden units) developed based on classical neural networks.
Although Multilayer Perceptron has excellent ability to identify malicious activities of most users, the accuracy of activity
detection for users CDE1846 and CMP2946 are slightly lower.
K-nearest neighbor method (The parameter K is set to 2, 3,
and 5, respectively.) also has high accuracy in classifying most
user activities. However, it is not sensitive to the activities of
user RSR2681. The Naive Bayes method has low accuracy
in identifying most user activities. Analyzing Table XIV, we
can see that the MEWRGNN and GCN model has high recognition accuracy for the activities of multiple users. However,
other baseline methods can only accurately recognize the activities of individual users. This shows that the MEWRGNN
and GCN model combined with the graph structure can mine
the correlation between activities, captures better features, and
improves recognition accuracy. Moreover, MEWRGNN can
improve the detection accuracy based on GCN by adding
multi-class relations (time-based edges, distance-based edges,
and attention-based edges).
Table XV shows the FPR of two methods to detect malicious behavior. FPR represents the rate at which malicious
behavior is predicted to be normal behavior. We can see
that MEWRGNN’s malicious behavior detection performance
for users ACM2278 and PLJ1771 are slightly lower than
the method proposed by [15], but the overall detection
performance is better than the one in [15]. Reference [15]
uses a rule-based unsupervised method to implement detection.
The malicious behaviors of users CMP2946 and MBG3183 are
not very aggressive, resulting in relatively high false alarms
on [15]. MEWRGNN uses GNN to learn the normal behavior characteristics of each user, which help decrease the false
alarm rate to a certain extent.
Reference [14] used malicious users ACM2278, PLJ1771,
CDE1846 and 500 other normal users to conduct evaluation
experiments. We use the same malicious user and 500 normal
users for comparative evaluation. The evaluation result shows

that Area Under the Curve (AUC) obtained in Reference [14]
is 0.901. The AUC of our proposed method reaches 0.996.
When using all malicious users and 500 normal users, the AUC

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

3731

TABLE XVI
C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION D ELAY T IME FOR E ACH M ALICIOUS
B EHAVIOR B ETWEEN MEWRGNN AND [15], (U NIT: DAY )

Fig. 8.

The model detection time.

TABLE XV
C OMPARISON OF THE P ERFORMANCE OF M ALICIOUS B EHAVIOR
D ETECTION B ETWEEN MEWRGNN AND THE M ETHOD IN [15]

various malicious behaviors relatively quickly. However, it
takes more than three days for the one in [15] to detect the
malicious behavior of CDE1846.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

of our proposed method is 0.995. AUC is used to evaluate the
model comprehensively. The higher the value, the better the
performance. From the results above, the proposed method has
better performance.
F. Performance Analysis
In an insider threat detection system, it is generally necessary to identify abnormal user activities in a timely manner.
Therefore, the detection time is an important metric for evaluating insider threat detection systems. The detection time [51]
is defined as:
td = tf − to , (tstart ≤ to ≤ tend )

(50)

where tf is the moment when the insider threat is detected
and to is the moment when the insider threat has appeared in
the information system of the organization or enterprise. The
detection time td denotes the length of time from when the
insider threat enters the information system to when the threat
is detected. tstart and tend are the start and end time of collecting 30 activity Logs. tf can be divided into two phases: data
collection tc and model detection tm . Therefore, the detection
time is equivalent to
td = tc − to + tm

A novel robust anomaly-based insider threat detection
approach (i.e., MEWRGNN) using GNN model has been
proposed. By using the combined graph neural networks, time
series like user behavior logs are transformed into a graph for
node feature construction and contextual features extraction.
Multiple node feature extraction can characterize the contextual relationship of different user behavior over a period
of time better. Anomaly-based insider threat detection process with the combined several GNNs is presented in detail.
Then the MEWRGNN is evaluated upon the public known
CERT dataset. The results show that the proposed model has
strong robustness, and can achieve a high detection accuracy
and better performance. The MEWRGNN model possesses
certain interpretability as well, and the weight of each edge
type can indicate the edge feature’s influence on the model’s
ability.
For future work, we will study how to use the relationships among the internal personnel in the datasets better, to
automatically build the graph structure while adding more
features to the weight edge to find better abstract representation, to improve the detection accuracy of the model
further. The hourly threat detection delay may still be slightly
longer, and more real-time detection techniques need further
study.
A PPENDIX
T HE D ESCRIPTION OF E ACH C OLUMN IN THE
L OG F ORMAT

(51)

Fig. 8 describes the time course of model detection. We
can see that during the activity log collection, the insider
threat may occur at any time between tstart and tend . When
to = tstart , the detection time is maximum (td = tc +tm ), and
when to = tend , the detection time is minimized (td = tm ).
Considering that insider threat operations generally occurs
within a continuous period of time.
The detection delay of insider threats is mainly from collecting enough activity logs, while the time spent in the model
detection phase is negligible. Table XVI presents the delay
time for MEWRGNN and the method in [15] to detect each
malicious behavior. Collecting 30 activity logs with varying
times, MEWRGNN presents the arithmetic average of the
detection delay time. We can see that MEWRGNN can detect

•
•

“Date” field records the time of user activity.
“User” field records the user who generated the activity.
• “PC” field records the host used by the user who
generated the activity.
• “File_tree” field records the storage address of the mobile
device.
• “Activity” field records the type of operation of the activity. For example, “Send” means sending e-mails and
“WWW Visit” means browsing Webs.
• “TO” field records the recipient’s email address.
• “CC” field records the email address where the carbon
copy is sent.
• “BCC” field records the email address where a blind
carbon copy is sent.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

•
•
•

[14] L. Liu, C. Chen, J. Zhang, O. De Vel, and Y. Xiang, “Doc2vec-based
insider threat detection through behaviour analysis of multi-source security logs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust Security Privacy Comput.
Commun., Guangzhou, China, 2020, pp. 301–309.
[15] D. C. Le and N. Zincir-Heywood, “Anomaly detection for insider threats
using unsupervised ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1152–1164, Jun. 2021.
[16] D. Li, L. Yang, H. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Ma, and J. Xiao, “Image-based
insider threat detection via geometric transformation,” Security Commun.
Netw., vol. 2021, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 1777536.
[17] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng,
“Log2vec: A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for
detecting cyber threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, London, U.K., Nov. 2019,
pp. 1777–1794.
[18] L. Liu, O. De Vel, Q.-L. Han, J. Zhang, and Y. Xiang, “Detecting and
preventing cyber insider threats: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1397–1417, 2nd Quart., 2018.
[19] F. L. Greitzer and R. E. Hohimer, “Modeling human behavior to anticipate insider attacks,” J. Strategic Security, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 25–48,
2011.
[20] O. Brdiczka et al., “Proactive insider threat detection through graph
learning and psychological context,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security
Privacy Workshops, 2012, pp. 142–149.
[21] P. Parveen, Z. R. Weger, B. Thuraisingham, K. Hamlen, and L. Khan,
“Supervised learning for insider threat detection using stream mining,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Tools Artif. Intell., Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2011,
pp. 1032–1039.
[22] F. Yuan, Y. Cao, Y. Shang, Y. Liu, J. Tan, and B. Fang, “Insider threat
detection with deep neural network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci.,
vol. 10860. Cham, Switzerland, 2018, pp. 43–54.
[23] T. Hu, W. Niu, X. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Lu, and Y. Liu, “An insider
threat detection approach based on mouse dynamics and deep learning,”
Security Commun. Netw., vol. 2019, pp. 1–12, Feb. 2019.
[24] P. Chattopadhyay, L. Wang, and Y.-P. Tan, “Scenario-based insider threat
detection from cyber activities,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 660–675, Sep. 2018.
[25] A. Tuor, S. Kaplan, B. Hutchinson, N. Nichols, and S. Robinson,
“Deep learning for unsupervised insider threat detection in structured
cybersecurity data streams,” Oct. 2017, arXiv:1710.00811.
[26] B. Böse, B. Avasarala, S. Tirthapura, Y.-Y. Chung, and D. Steiner,
“Detecting insider threats using RADISH: A system for real-time
anomaly detection in heterogeneous data streams,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 471–482, Jun. 2017.
[27] P. Parveen and B. Thuraisingham, “Unsupervised incremental sequence
learning for insider threat detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
Security Inform., Washington, DC, USA, 2012, pp. 141–143.
[28] D. Nathani, J. Chauhan, C. Sharma, and M. Kaul, “Learning attentionbased embeddings for relation prediction in knowledge graphs,” 2019,
arXiv:1906.01195.
[29] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[30] J. Jiang et al., “Anomaly detection with graph convolutional networks
for insider threat and fraud detection,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun.
Conf., 2019, pp. 109–114.
[31] J. Glasser and B. Lindauer, “Bridging the gap: A pragmatic approach
to generating insider threat data,” in Proc. IEEE Security Privacy
Workshops, 2013, pp. 98–104.
[32] L. Zeigermann, “TIMESTAMP: Stata module to obtain a UNIX
timestamp and the current time of a user-specified timezone,” Dept.
Economics, Boston College, Newton, MA, USA, Statistical Software
Components Rep. S458182, 2016.
[33] “Pandas.factorize.” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://pandas.pydata.org/
pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.factorize.html
[34] B. Shi, J. Zhao, and K. Xu, “A word2vec model for sentiment analysis
of Weibo,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Serv. Syst. Serv. Manag., Shenzhen, China,
2019, pp. 1–6.
[35] J. Lilleberg, Y. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Support vector machines and
Word2vec for text classification with semantic features,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Cogn. Inform. Cogn. Comput., Beijing, China, 2015,
pp. 136–140.
[36] Y.-A. Chung, C.-C. Wu, C.-H. Shen, H.-Y. Lee, and L.-S. Lee, “Audio
Word2Vec: Unsupervised learning of audio segment representations
using sequence-to-sequence Autoencoder,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH,
San Francisco, CA, USA, Aug. 2016, pp. 765–769.

“From” field records the sender’s email address.
“Size” field records the size of the email.
“Attachments” field records the storage address of email
attachments.
• “Content” field records the contents of emails, websites
and files in a text format.
• “Filename” field records the storage address and type of
the file accessed by the user.
• “To_removable_media” field records whether the file on
the host is moved to a removable device, (“TRUE” is for
the case that the file is moved to a removable device,
while “FALSE” is for the opposite case).
• “from_removable_media” field records whether the file
on the removable device is moved to the host, (“TRUE”
for yes, while “FALSE” for no).
• “URL” field records the Web address that the user visits.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Editor and anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions.
R EFERENCES
[1] G. Silowash, D. Cappelli, A. Moore, R. Trzeciak, T. J. Shimeall, and
L. Flynn, “Common sense guide to mitigating insider threats (4th
edition),” Dept. Softw. Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh,
PA, USA, Rep. CMU/SEI-2012-TR-012, Dec. 2012. [Online].
Available:
https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/TechnicalReport/
2012_005_00_34033.pdf
[2] CERT Insider Threat Center. “Insider threat vulnerability assessment.”
Software Engineering Institute. Nov. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://
resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/Brochure/2015_015_001_51650.pdf
[3] “2018 insider threat report,” Crowd Res. Partners, Rep., 2018. [Online].
Available: https://crowdresearchpartners.com/insider-threat-report/
[4] M. Collins et al., “Common sense guide to mitigating insider threats,”
Dept. Softw. Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA,
USA, Rep. CMU/SEI-2016-TR-015, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://
resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?AssetID=484738
[5] G. Yang, J. Ma, A. Yu, and Z. Meng, “Survey of insider threat detection,”
J. Cyber Security, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 21–36, 2016.
[6] S. Yuan and X. Wu, “Deep learning for insider threat detection: Review,
challenges and opportunities,” 2020, arXiv:2005.12433.
[7] D. Cappelli, A. Moore, and R. Trzeciak, The CERT Guide to
Insider Threats: How to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Information
Technology Crimes (Theft, Sabotage, Fraud). Upper Saddle River, NJ,
USA: Addison-Wesley, Jan. 2012.
[8] I. Homoliak, F. Toffalini, J. Guarnizo, Y. Elovici, and M. Ochoa, “Insight
into insiders and IT: A survey of insider threat taxonomies, analysis,
modeling, and countermeasures,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 2,
pp. 1–40, 2019.
[9] T. Casey, “A field guide to insider threat,” White Paper, Oct. 2015.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
324068663_A_Field_Guide_to_Insider_Threat_Understanding_Insider_
Threat_Vectors_to_Further_Improve_Enterprise_Security_Strategies
[10] M. N. Al-Mhiqani, R. Ahmad, W. Mohamed, A. Hassan, and
K. Hameed, “Cyber-security incidents: A review cases in cyber-physical
systems,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 499–508,
2018.
[11] M. N. Al-Mhiqani et al., “A review of insider threat detection:
Classification, machine learning techniques, datasets, open challenges,
and recommendations,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 15, pp. 1–41, 2020.
[12] A. Azaria, A. Richardson, S. Kraus, and V. S. Subrahmanian,
“Behavioral analysis of insider threat: A survey and bootstrapped
prediction in imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 135–155, Jun. 2014.
[13] D. C. Le, N. Zincir-Heywood, and M. I. Heywood, “Analyzing data
granularity levels for insider threat detection using machine learning,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 30–44, Mar. 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN

[37] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 26, 2013,
pp. 3111–3119.
[38] R. Řehůřek and P. Sojka, “Software framework for topic modelling
with large corpora,” in Proc. LREC Workshop New Challenges NLP
Frameworks, Valletta, Malta, May 2010, pp. 45–50. [Online]. Available:
http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en
[39] T. Mikolov, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, C. Puhrsch, and A. Joulin,
“Advances in pre-training distributed word representations,” 2018,
arXiv:1712.09405.
[40] “Arithmetic average advantages and disadvantages.” Macroption.
Accessed: Jun. 21, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.macroption.
com/arithmetic-average-advantages-disadvantages/#advantage-1-fastand-easy-to-calculate
[41] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, and M. A. Hall, Data Mining: Practical
Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Burlington, MA, USA: Morgan
Kaufmann, 2011, pp. 131–137.
[42] D. Li, J. Lin, T. F. D. A. Bissyandé, J. Klein, and Y. Le Traon,
“Extracting statistical graph features for accurate and efficient time series
classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Extending Database Technol., Vienna,
Austria, 2018, pp. 1–12.
[43] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” Sep. 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[44] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. van den Berg, I. Titov,
and M. Welling, “Modeling relational data with graph convolutional
networks,” in Proc. Eur. Semantic Web Conf., vol. 10843. Cham,
Switzerland, 2018, pp. 593–607.
[45] J. Xiao, L. Yang, F. Zhong, H. Chen, and X. Li, “Robust anomalybased intrusion detection system for in-vehicle network by graph neural
network framework,” Appl. Intell., to be published.
[46] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
[47] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” Sep. 2020, arXiv:2009.02040.
[48] Z. Chen, D. Chen, Z. Yuan, X. Cheng, and X. Zhang, “Learning
graph structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly
detection in IoT,” Apr. 2021, arXiv:2104.03466.
[49] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
Dec. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[50] L. Van Der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[51] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21,
Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.

3733

Lin Yang received the M.S. degree in automation and the Ph.D. degree in communication and
electronic system from the National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, in 1995
and 1999, respectively. Since 2005, he has been a
Senior Engineer with China Electronic Equipment
and System Engineering Corporation. His research
interests include computer security, information
system security, network security, trusted computing,
security protocol analysis, and big-data security.

Fuli Zhong received the B.S. degree in electronic
information engineering and the Ph.D. degree in navigation, guidance and control from the University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China, in 2011 and 2019, respectively. He
is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the School
of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University. His research interests include cybersecurity and resilience, machine learning, cyber-physical
system, prognostics and health management, fullduplex wireless communications, signal processing,
optimization, complex nonlinear dynamic systems, state estimation, and
identification and control of dynamic systems.

Xiaolei Wang received the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in computer science and technology from
the College of Computer, National University of
Defense Technology, China, in 2014 and 2019,
respectively. His research interests include malware
analysis, program analysis, and software security and
defense.

Hongbo Chen received the Ph.D. degree from
the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2007. He is
currently a Professor with the School of Systems
Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
where he is the Dean with the School of Systems
Science and Engineering. His main research interests
include modeling, simulation and analysis of complex systems, intelligent unmanned systems, and
design of aerospace vehicle.

Junchao Xiao received the M.S. degree from
Shanghai Maritime University, China, in 2018. He
is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun
Yat-sen University. His research interests include
deep learning, network security, and intrusion detection system.

Dongyang Li is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the Army Engineering University of PLA. His
research interests include insider threat detection and
network measurement and monitor.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.