IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

3111

6G-Enabled Consumer Electronics Device Intrusion
Detection With Federated Meta-Learning and
Digital Twins in a Meta-Verse Environment
Suli He, Chengwen Du, and M. Shamim Hossain , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The widespread adoption of consumer electronics
devices coupled with the emergence of 6G technology has led
to the establishment of an extensive network of interconnected
devices, forming the underlying infrastructure of the Internet
of Things (IoT). Nevertheless, this interconnectivity introduces a
myriad of security concerns, given that these devices become
susceptible to malicious activities and unauthorized breaches.
Moreover, conventional intrusion detection systems encounter
difficulties in managing imbalanced data scenarios, wherein
the count of normal instances vastly exceeds that of intrusion
instances. To address this issue, we propose a novel framework
for 6G-enabled consumer electronics device intrusion detection,
leveraging the power of federated meta-learning and digital twins
within a Meta-Verse environment. By leveraging the distributed
intelligence of meta-learning across a network of devices, our
framework enables efficient and accurate detection of intrusions
while mitigating the impact of imbalanced data. Furthermore, by
utilizing digital twins within a Meta-Verse environment, we create
a scalable and controlled setting for experimentation, enabling the
development and evaluation of intrusion detection algorithms in a
realistic yet controlled manner. Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework in detecting
intrusions on 6G-enabled consumer electronics devices. The federated meta-learning approach achieves superior performance
compared to traditional intrusion detection methods, especially
in imbalanced data scenarios.
Index Terms—Federated meta learning, intrusion detection,
metaverse, meta learning, digital twin, consumer electronics.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE BURGEONING Computer, Communication, and
Consumer (3C) electronics industry is being propelled by
the escalating demand for consumer electronic devices, including smartphones, tablets, and wearable consumer products [1],
[2]. The emergence of the 6G network has transformed the
connectivity landscape for 3C electronic devices, affording
faster speeds, diminished latency, and augmented capacity [3],
[4]. In conjunction with the pervasive integration of Internet

T

Manuscript received 22 June 2023; revised 28 August 2023; accepted 1
October 2023. Date of publication 3 October 2023; date of current version 26 April 2024. This work was supported by the Researchers Supporting
Project number (RSP2023r32), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(Corresponding author: M. Shamim Hossain.)
Suli He and Chengwen Du are with the Department of Electronics, Software
Engineering Institute of Guangzhou, Guangzhou 510990, China (e-mail:
m15626131598_1@163.com; dxfaihxp@163.com).
M. Shamim Hossain is with the Department of Software Engineering,
College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh
12372, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: mshossain@ksu.edu.sa).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3321846

of Things (IoT)-enabled Consumer Electronics (CE) devices
across diverse sectors like healthcare, transportation, and smart
cities, the 6G network has grown in significance, ensuring
dependable and secure connectivity [5]. Nevertheless, the
adoption of IoT-enabled CE devices introduces novel security challenges, exposing the network to potential malevolent
attacks. Of particular note, Digital Twins (DTs) [6], [7], acting
as virtual replicas of physical entities, have gained paramount
importance within the Metaverse by enabling cost-effective
simulation and optimization of physical systems [8]. Yet,
the sensitive data emanating from DTs and the vulnerability
of these virtual entities to attacks have engendered security
apprehensions [9].
Digital twin-enabled 6G Consumer Electronics Devices
(CEDs) hold the potential to revolutionize our interaction
with the physical world, enabling real-time monitoring, analysis, and control of metaverse systems [10]. However, the
escalating proliferation of CEDs and digital twins introduces
a concomitant escalation in data privacy and security risks.
The substantial volume of data amassed by CEDs and digital
twins can encompass sensitive information, comprising personal and corporate data, thereby rendering them susceptible to
cyberattacks and unauthorized access [11]. To safeguard data
privacy and security in 6G-enabled CEDs with Digital Twins,
organizations must adopt robust security protocols, encompassing data encryption, authentication, and access control [5].
Moreover, instituting periodic security audits and risk assessments is crucial for identifying potential vulnerabilities and
threats. Employing secure communication channels and data
anonymization techniques further diminishes the risks associated with data privacy and security in this context. Through
these measures, organizations can ensure the security and
compliance of their metaverse systems with data privacy regulations, concurrently yielding valuable insights for enhanced
decision-making and business operations.
To mitigate security risks associated with DT 6G-enabled
CEDs in Metaverse, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) [12],
[13], [14], [15], [16] are employed to continuously analyze the
access behavior of CEDs and identify potential attacks [17].
Anomaly-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) categorize access behaviors into normal and anomalous based
on the extent of deviation between observed behavior and
the model [18], [19], [20], [21]. The adoption of Machine
Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) techniques has surged
for creating IDS solutions capable of identifying malicious

c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1558-4127 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

threats [22]. However, aggregating data management across
Consumer Electronics Devices (CEDs) could engender data
privacy concerns. CED owners often resist sharing local data
to preserve privacy, resulting in a data island dilemma that
complicates the development of a robust intrusion detection
model [23].
Therefore, the learning-based IDS model needs to be further developed to address the above two challenges. Federated
Learning (FL) [24] is an efficient distributed learning approach
that enables CEDs participating in training to jointly build a
global intrusion detection model without disclosing local private data. FL enables devices to perform training on local
data and send only local model parameters to the server
for model aggregation [25], [26]. This approach establishes
a parallel framework in the CED ecosystem for cooperative
global intrusion detection model training while preserving data
privacy [27].
Despite the privacy-preserving nature of FL in addressing
the local data privacy concern, a significant challenge persists
in the form of severe class imbalance during local training, as
highlighted in the work by Wang et al. in [28]. Furthermore,
within the heterogeneous FL-based metaverse environment,
the Non-independent and Non-identically Distributed (nonIID) nature of training data, arising from variations in the
proportions of local data among CEDs, has a substantial
impact on the effectiveness of intrusion detection models, as
noted by Zhao et al. in [29]. Consequently, applying existing
FL approaches directly to intrusion detection in CEDs fails to
produce intrusion detection models of high quality. Moreover,
the training data held by each CED device exhibits a significant imbalance between normal and abnormal access behavior.
Typically, normal behavior data dominates the training dataset,
while abnormal behavior data is relatively scarce, resulting in
a class imbalance problem [30]. Consequently, the bias introduced by this class imbalance during local training imposes
limitations on the performance of IDSs.
Presently, the challenge of class imbalance is mitigated
through the adoption of Imbalanced Learning (IL) algorithms,
exemplified by He et al.’s ADASYN algorithm [31]. These
methods seek to rectify bias through data resampling techniques, explored by Wang et al. in [32], or reweighting
strategies, demonstrated by Duggal et al. [33]. However, these
techniques are susceptible to instability and exhibit high computational demands in practical applications, as underscored
by Japkowicz in [34]. Recently, meta-learning techniques have
emerged as a promising avenue to surmount these limitations,
as evidenced by Moniz and Cerqueira in [35]. Yet, these
approaches’ generalization capacity is limited due to their
reliance on a model-specific optimization process. While certain studies have refined FedAvg [24] through modifications
to the loss function and utilization of control variables to rectify client-side bias, these measures offer only partial remedies
for non-IID data issues. Regrettably, these methods fall short
in the realm of intrusion detection models within real-world
scenarios, encompassing both local data class imbalance and
non-i.i.d data dispersion across clients. Consequently, a comprehensive federated intrusion detection framework remains
indispensable to navigate the complexities of heterogeneous
metaverse environments.

In this paper, we propose a novel anomaly detection
framework, rooted in federated meta-learning, tailored for
intrusion detection in Digital Twin (DT) 6G-enabled Consumer
Electronics Devices (CEDs) within metaverse environments.
Our approach aims to tackle the challenges stemming from
non-i.i.d. data distribution and class imbalance encountered
in Intrusion Detection System (IDS) tasks. Specifically, our
framework, called FML-DT, utilizes meta-learning and DT
strategies to develop a sampling strategy for selecting the
most effective samples to train intrusion detection models. The
FML-DT approach enables clients to benefit from the metasampler provided by the server while ensuring data privacy by
training the meta-sampler separately from local model training. This approach effectively mitigates the class imbalance
problem of local data. Additionally, we propose a dynamic
clustering and ranking algorithm for the model upload stage of
FL. The algorithm clusters client-side models based on clientsupplied information vectors, which consist of a set of local
non-private information. It then evaluates the performance
of each model and ranks them accordingly. This algorithm
addresses the issue of global model performance degradation
caused by the non-i.i.d nature of the data by dynamically
removing local models with training state biases. Overall, our
proposed approach provides a novel solution for intrusion
detection in DT 6G-enabled CEDs, which can significantly
enhance the performance and effectiveness of IDS systems in
real-world scenarios.
The main contributions of this paper include:
• We propose a federated meta learning algorithm to
address imbalance data in heterogeneous metaverse environments, which effectively mitigates the negative impact
of imbalance data on intrusion detection performance.
• We leverage meta-learning in FL to construct a
meta-sampler that learns the sampling strategy. The metasampler is optimized through reinforcement learning
during the meta-training stage to continuously sample
the balanced dataset on the client side. This approach
significantly mitigates the impact of the class imbalance
problem in the training data.
• We propose a federated clustering algorithm that
addresses the non-i.i.d data problem by dynamically clustering and ranking client-side models using information
vectors provided by clients. The proposed algorithm
reduces the negative impact of extreme non-i.i.d data
among clients on the FL training process, resulting in
improved model performance.
• We conduct extensive evaluations on the intrusion
detection datasets, and the experimental results demonstrate that our proposed framework is highly effective
and produces intrusion detection models with superior
performance.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Intrusion Detection for DT 6G-Enabled Metaverse
With the increasing use of Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs
in metaverse, the need for effective intrusion detection systems
is paramount to ensure data privacy and security [18]. An IDS
is designed to monitor network traffic and identify potential

HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs

security breaches or unauthorized access attempts [8]. Within
the context of Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs, IDSs play a
pivotal role in detecting anomalies within data flows and pinpointing system vulnerabilities. IDS employs various methodologies including signature-based, anomaly-based, or hybrid
techniques for threat identification. Furthermore, the integration of machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms
enhances the detection prowess of IDS [10], [36].
Nevertheless, with the proliferation of CEDs and the exponential growth of Digital Twins, IDS face the challenge of
managing and processing vast volumes of data in real-time
to enable prompt alerting. Hence, it becomes essential to
integrate IDS with cloud-based analytics and big data technologies, as highlighted in the work by Sasikumar et al. in [9],
to ensure its efficacy. Through the implementation of a robust
IDS, organizations can enhance their capability to identify and
respond to potential security breaches or unauthorized access
attempts, thereby fortifying the security and dependability of
their Digital Twin 6G-enabled Metaverse systems. Among the
most popular approaches to CEDs intrusion detection, machine
learning-based methods have demonstrated great potential and
promise [18]. For example, in [36], the authors introduced
a new regularizer in traditional machine learning to address
the challenges posed by high-dimensional, sparse, and lack of
abnormal data in network data. In another study, the authors
of [37] proposed a smart intrusion detection algorithm for IoT
based on big data mining, using a combination of generative
adversarial network (GAN) and convolutional neural network
(CNN). However, these typical deep neural network methods require the aggregation of data from different devices for
centralized training, which can raise serious privacy concerns.
To address these challenges, scholars have introduced a
pioneering distributed model training framework known as
Federated Learning (FL) [24]. In recent investigations, collaborative intrusion detection approaches grounded in FL
have emerged, as exemplified by the blockchain-utilizing
strategy proposed in [38] for secure storage of training models. Addressing intricate industrial systems, the DeepFed
technique was advanced in [39] to discern cyber threats.
Furthermore, [40] and [41] presented FL-based intrusion
detection algorithms proactively identifying intrusions in CED
networks. Despite their performance-centric focus, these methods have yet to adequately confront the prevalent issues
of data class imbalance and non-i.i.d. disparities among
clients encountered in authentic intrusion detection scenarios.
Consequently, a more robust remedy is requisite to tackle these
challenges effectively.
B. Imbalanced Learning
The challenges stemming from data class imbalance and
non-i.i.d. data substantially impact the performance of FLtrained neural networks [28]. To combat data class imbalance
among clients, a centralized monitoring system is proposed
in [42], aimed at detecting class imbalance within training
data. Monitors employ client-contributed partial data to estimate class distribution. Similarly, [32] presents a strategy to
enhance the global model’s accuracy by sharing training data

3113

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF M AIN S YMBOLS

among clients, thereby reducing the weight variance in FedAvg
arising from non-i.i.d. data. Another avenue, detailed in [43],
augments FedAvg’s performance on non-i.i.d. data through a
reinforcement learning-based client selection mechanism. The
FL server, equipped with an agent, orchestrates client computations in each round, employing a reward function to evaluate
the global model’s validation data accuracy. Notwithstanding,
these solutions entail client data sharing, thereby raising data
privacy concerns [15], [19], [20]. Moreover, the extant research
insufficiently addresses the effective resolution of the non-i.i.d.
and class imbalance issues among client data in FL. Hence,
our objective is to devise an FL-grounded intrusion detection
system tailored for heterogeneous IoT environments, capably
tackling these challenges within real-world scenarios.
III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Federated Learning
Federated Learning (FL) is an innovative collaborative
machine learning paradigm that facilitates the collective training of models by decentralized participants, eliminating the
necessity to share their sensitive data [44]. Within a typical supervised FL framework, a server denoted as S interacts
with K clients. Each client holds a comprehensive labeled
dataset D, while the server lacks direct access to any individual client’s data. The main objective of FL is to aggregate
the locally trained models from all clients while maintaining
data privacy, thereby obtaining a global model that exhibits
comparable performance to centralized learning. One of the
widely employed strategies in FL is FedAvg [24]. The FedAvg
approach involves the distribution of the global model to each
client, and the clients subsequently train their respective models locally using their available datasets. Following local model
training, each client transmits its locally trained model back
to the server. The server then aggregates the model parameters by averaging them and subsequently sends the updated
global model back to the clients. This iterative cycle persists
until the global model achieves convergence. By harnessing
computational resources across multiple clients and amalgamating their models, FL achieves elevated model accuracy,
concurrently upholding the confidentiality of individual client
data. The description of the symbols used in the manuscript
is summarized in Table I.
In practice, clients are permitted to communicate local
model updates to the server, eliminating the necessity of data
sharing while achieving the objective of collectively training

3114

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Overview of the proposed system.

aggregated models. Consequently, the aim of FL centers
around the minimization of the ensuing objective function:
f (ω) =

K

nk
k=1

n

Fk (ω), Fk (ω) =

1 
i (ω),
nk

(1)

i∈Dk

Here, n represents the total sample count. To effect the
minimization of the aforementioned objective function, a collaborative T-round training protocol is executed jointly by the
server and clients. In this process, each client employs a local
optimizer (such as SGD) on their local dataset Dk to refine the
received global model ωt , subsequently conveying the model
updates to the server. Aggregating the updates furnished by
clients, the server employs AGR algorithms to derive an optimized global model denoted as ω∗ . This sequence of steps is
reiterated over multiple rounds (e.g., T rounds) until the global
model attains convergence.

serves as the optimal weight for FL. Consequently, the optimal
objective for FL can be formulated as follows:
K  
 

 f x; w(k) , y) ,
min E(x,y)∼p̂(k)
ω

data

In scenarios involving class imbalance, the distribution p̂(k)
data
of the training data for any client k can exhibit an imbal(k)
ance, where p̂data represents the data distribution of client k.
In such situations, the weight update for the FL server can be
expressed as follows:
ωt+1 =

K

nk
k=1

=

The issue of class imbalance constitutes a pervasive challenge across diverse real-world contexts, frequently resulting
in marked deterioration of ML model performance. In the
realm of FL, which operates within a decentralized framework, class imbalance introduces further complexities. These
imbalances can manifest within individual client datasets or
extend globally. Nonetheless, FL introduces distinct challenges
attributed to the confidential nature of client data distributions,
often safeguarded to uphold user privacy. Consequently, the
task of rectifying class imbalance within the FL paradigm is
notably intricate, diverging from conventional ML approaches
In a recent investigation by [28], it is substantiated through
mathematical analysis that class imbalance in training data can
induce a reduction in the classification accuracy of FL models.
Under the assumption p̂data = ptest , where ptest signifies the
distribution of a balanced test set, and in the context of the loss
function  and the training data distribution p̂data , the optimal
weight update for deep learning is expressed as follows:
n


 

(2)
w∗t+1 = w∗t − η∇w∗t
 f x(i) ; w∗t , y(i) ,
i=1

where (x(i) , y(i) ) ∼ ptest

and weight w∗ denotes the weight
vector that attains the highest accuracy on the test set and

n

K

nk
k=1

B. Class Imbalance in FL

(3)

k=1

n

ωkt+1 ,
ωkt −

nk

 
 
η
∇ω t
 f x; ωkt , y .
k
n

(4)

i=1

It can be seen from the above formula that if the data is unbalanced, it is difficult for us to obtain the optimal solution, so
the performance of the model may decline.
Moreover, the class imbalance issue in FL can be categorized into different types [45]: (i) Local imbalance, where a
client’s local dataset exhibits class imbalance if the ratio of the
number of samples in the majority class to the number of samp
p
ples in the minority class equals IR = maxp {Ni }/minp {Ni }.
(ii) Global imbalance, where an ensemble dataset can be
formed by merging all client datasets, which has a ratio
between the total number of samples in the majority class and
the total number of samples in the minority class. This ratio is
p
p
denoted as IR = maxp { i Ni }/minp { i Ni }. (iii) Mismatch
imbalance, where the imbalance of local data possessed by
p
each client is distinct from the global data imbalance, and Ni
refers to the number of data samples in class p on client i.
This study focuses on the first two types of problems.
Discussion: The distributed nature of FL poses several challenges to model training, such as communication costs, system
heterogeneity, and statistical heterogeneity. Statistical heterogeneity in FL arises due to the non-iid nature of training data,
which is addressed to some extent by the techniques presented
in Section II for intrusion detection data in FL. However, these
techniques assume a balanced distribution of data classes,

HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs

which is not always the case in practical scenarios. While
class imbalance in FL is considered a variant of the non-iid
problem, this view is not entirely accurate. Firstly, the class
imbalance is not limited to non-iid data scenarios. Secondly,
in non-iid scenarios, the class imbalance is often caused by
significant differences in the distribution ratio of each client
class, leading to greater deviations in the FL model’s training
direction. Aggregating global models using biased local models results in biased models. Furthermore, as the non-iid degree
of data increases, the trained model’s performance significantly
deteriorates. Experimental results show that traditional noniid data solutions are ineffective in addressing class imbalance
problems.
C. Clustering Algorithms in FL
Clustering, a data grouping technique, partitions data based
on specific criteria into clusters or classes, aiming to enhance
similarity among data points within the same cluster while
minimizing dissimilarity among those in distinct clusters [46].
Clustering’s core aim is to cohesively group data points of the
same category while segregating those of disparate categories.
In this context, we propose the application of clustering within
Federated Learning (FL) to address the issue of statistical heterogeneity, which can contribute to the degradation of global
model performance. We propose grouping clients based on
similarities in their data distributions, whereby akin data distribution clients are allocated to the same cluster. This approach
diminishes weight discrepancies within clusters at the edge
device level. In the FL setting, we consider K clients and
their respective local datasets denoted as D1 , D2 , . . . , DK . We
partition the K clients and datasets into k (where k (k ≤ K))
distinct, non-overlapping clusters designated as c1 , c2 , . . . , ck ,
wherein clients within the same cluster share akin data distributions. This can be achieved through a straightforward
clustering process.
min

ω1 ,ω2 ,...,ωK

k


1



k=1

l∈ck nl i∈ck

ni


1  k
ni
 ω ; DK .
ni

(5)

3115

of the target IDS task. Specifically, we adopt a meta-learning
framework where the model is initially trained on a set of
source IDS tasks and subsequently adapted to a target IDS task
with limited labeled data available. This approach enables the
leveraging of prior knowledge to improve the effectiveness
of intrusion detection in FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled
CEDs, where data availability and privacy constraints are
critical considerations.
To this end, we formulate the following research questions:
• How can we design a meta-learning approach for intrusion detection in FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled
CEDs?
• How can we transfer knowledge from source IDS tasks
to improve the performance of the target IDS task with
limited data?
• How does the proposed approach compare to state-ofthe-art IDS methods in terms of detection accuracy, false
alarm rate, and training efficiency?
This study endeavors to surmount these challenges through
the introduction of an innovative meta-learning methodology
for intrusion detection within FL-based Digital Twin 6Genabled CEDs. Our approach capitalizes on shared attributes
among diverse IDS tasks, thereby augmenting the performance
of the target IDS task. We postulate that our method can
proficiently identify intrusion attacks even in scenarios characterized by scarce labeled data. Furthermore, our objectives encompass curtailing communication overhead within
FL while upholding paramount data privacy considerations.
By harnessing meta-learning’s potential, our approach is
poised to facilitate the efficient detection of intrusion attacks
in FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs. We anticipate its efficacy in mitigating the challenges posed by limited labeled data, enriching IDS performance, and abating
potential privacy apprehensions. This research contributes to
the evolution of intrusion detection techniques within the
realm of FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs, ultimately heightening the security and dependability of these
systems.

j=1

D. Problem Definition
Digital Twin 6G-enabled Metaverse systems have introduced a groundbreaking paradigm across diverse domains,
encompassing smart cities, autonomous vehicles, and industry 4.0 [47]. Notwithstanding their transformative potential, the escalating complexity and heterogeneity of these
systems usher forth substantial cybersecurity challenges,
with intrusion attacks at the forefront. IDSs have surfaced as potent remedies for detecting and averting such
attacks. Nevertheless, in the realm of Metaverse environments where data is dispersed among numerous CEDs
and privacy considerations restrict data exchange, traditional
IDS methodologies dependent on extensive data may prove
impractical.
In this work, our objective is to develop a meta-learning
approach for intrusion detection in FL-based Digital Twin 6Genabled CEDs. Our proposed approach harnesses knowledge
acquired from similar IDS tasks to enhance the performance

IV. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Meta-Training and Meta-Sampling
In this section, we will present a comprehensive explanation
of the meta-training stage of the server and the meta-sampling
stage of the client, utilizing Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2,
respectively.
(a) Meta-state. To ensure data privacy within FL, it becomes
imperative to render the training phase of samplers independent from the FL training phase, while circumventing the
usage of client-specific local data. Consequently, the identification of a task-agnostic state that imparts guidance for
meta-sampler training without reliance on the client’s local
data is paramount. To surmount this challenge, we present a
novel approach, inspired by prior research [48], wherein we
employ the histogram distribution of training and validation
errors as the guiding meta-state for meta-sampler training. This
meta-state encompasses histograms of both training and validation errors. Concretely, the vector ED is derived utilizing

3116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Algorithm 1 Meta-Sampling Algorithm
Input: Majority set Pτ and minority set Nτ from Dτ ;
Output: Balanced subset Dτ = Nτ ∪ Pτ ;
1: Assign each (xi , yi ) in Nτ with weight:
gμ,σ (|F(xi )−yi |)
wi =
(xj ,yj )∈Nτ gμ,σ (|F(xj )−yj |)
2: Sample majority subset Nτ from Nτ sampling weights w,
where Nτ = |Pτ |
3: return Balanced subset Dτ = Nτ ∪ Pτ

the following formula:
i
=
ÊD

i
(x, y) | i−1
b ≤ abs(Ft (x) − y) b , (x, y) ∈ D

|D|

, (6)

where 1 ≤ i ≤ b and (x, y) denotes a data point, and the classification error e is defined as the absolute difference between
the predicted probability that x is positive and the label y, i.e.,
i , and
|Ft (x) − y|. The i-th component of ED is denoted as ED
the number of bins in the histogram is represented as b.
(b) Meta-sampling. To streamline the sampling process
and accommodate the computational capacities of CEDs, we
refrain from employing an extensive output layer within the
meta-sampler to ascertain the sampling probability of data
samples. Instead, we streamline the procedure through the
adoption of a Gaussian function:


gμ,σ (x) =

Algorithm 2 Federated Learning-Based Meta-Sampling
Algorithm
Input: The server-side model Fs , the server-side dataset Ds ,
the built meta-sampler Q, and the parameters in [49] for RL.
Output: Meta-sampler Q
At the server:
1: for step = 1, . . . , N do
2:
Initializes ωs
3:
Cuts Ds into the training set DsT and validation set DsV
4:
for Meta training step = 1, . . . , n do
5:
Computes EDsT
6:
Computes EDsV
7:
Builds meta-state sn = [EDsT ;EDsV ]
8:
Takes action from Q(μt |sn ), i.e., μn ∼ Q(μt |sn )
9:
Uses Algorithm 1 to obtain Dn
\\ refer to
Algorithm 1
10:
ωsn+1 =ωsn (Dn )
11:
Observes reward rn = A(ωsn+1 , DsV ) -A(ωsn , DsV )
12:
Computes sn+1 with ωsn+1 
13:
Stores transition M = M
(sn , μn , rn , sn+1 )
14:
end for
15:
for each gradient step do
16:
Update ψ, ψ, θ , and ωQ according to [49]
17:
end for
18: end for

2

1
− 1 x−μ
√ e 2 σ ,
σ 2π

(7)

where e represents Euler’s number, and the meta-sampler
calculates μ ∈ [0, 1] while σ is a hyperparameter.
According to Algorithm 1, the meta-sampling stage can be
described as follows: During the meta-sampling phase, the
meta-sampler S first produces a scalar μ by processing the
input meta-state, which is represented as μ ∼ S(μ|s). Then,
the sampling weight of each data sample is determined by
applying the Gaussian function discussed earlier to its classification error, as indicated in line 2 of the algorithm. Lastly,
the data samples from the majority set Pτ are sampled using
these weights to obtain a balanced dataset.
(c) Meta-training. To address the class imbalance problem
in FL, we propose to train a meta-sampler S to obtain a balanced dataset by iteratively sampling data. The meta-state s
of the client serves as input to S, which outputs a scalar μ
to guide the Gaussian function for calculating the sampling
weight of each data sample. It should be noted that training the non-differentiable meta-sampler s is an optimization
problem, which we solve using reinforcement learning (RL).
Algorithm 2 presents the pseudocode for this approach. At
each episode, the classifier F is trained on a randomly balanced
subset. Then, at each step, the current training state st is used
to obtain the action μ from the meta-sampler. Using this μ, the
 , which is
meta-sampling stage obtains a balanced subset Dt+1
used to update the classifier F to Ft+1 , and obtain a new state
st+1 . We define the reward in RL as the performance difference
between Ft and Ft+1 on the validation set, using an evaluation function A. The optimization goal of the meta-sampler is

to sample high-quality data for training a high-performance
model.
For optimization of the meta-sampling process S using
Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques, we use the Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm [50]. SAC stands as an offpolicy deep RL algorithm that functions within the maximum
entropy RL framework. It encompasses multiple advantages
over alternative RL approaches, encompassing heightened
exploration capacities, augmented resilience, and adeptness in
adapting amidst interference. Furthermore, SAC accelerates
training due to its adherence to the maximum entropy principle, which promotes more balanced exploration. The SAC
algorithm consists of several key components, such as the
state value function Vψ (st ), the target network Vψ (st ), the soft
Q function Qθ (st , at ), and the tractable policy Sϕ(at|st ). The
update of the corresponding parameters can be found in line
12 of Algorithm 2.
Complexity of Federated Meta Sampling: Here, we assume
that the cost of the meta-sampler to perform a single gradient
update step is Cupdate (depending on the gradient computation formula). In our implementation, following the SAC
optimization strategy, we need to perform nrandom actions
before updating the meta-sampler and then need nupdate steps
to collect online transitions and perform gradient updates
for ξ(·). Therefore, the overall cost of meta-training can be
expressed as O((nrandom + nupdate )NBC) + O(nupdate Cupdate ).
For training, we assume that there are c clients joining,
then the overall time complexity of the proposed attack is
O(cN log c(log κ +dBC))+O(c log c((nrandom +nupdate )NBC+
nupdate Cupdate )).

HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs

B. Federated Clustering Algorithm
In this section, we explore the use of clustering algorithms
in FL. However, current methods typically require clustering
based on the data distribution of clients, which compromises
the privacy of the clients and makes them more vulnerable to
attacks. To address this issue, we propose a novel federated
clustering method suitable for CEDs that clusters clients based
on a small amount of non-private data.
(a) Information Vector. To address privacy concerns in FL,
a vector-based data representation is proposed to replace the
traditional data distribution for clustering. This new representation enables the transmission of lightweight information
without compromising client privacy. The aim is to identify a set of data that accurately represents the current client
state in a lightweight manner. The proposed approach utilizes three pieces of data, namely the client’s imbalance
ratio (IR), training accuracy, and validation accuracy, to
construct a vector. Under non-i.i.d data partitioning, each
client has a unique imbalance ratio that characterizes their
data’s class distribution. Training and validation accuracy are
selected to capture each client’s training state information,
based on the theory discussed in meta-state. It is believed
that the constructed information vector accurately represents
each client’s unique class distribution and training state
information.
(b) Clustering and Ranking Algorithm. Subsequent to the
clustering process using the information vector discussed
above, the uploaded models from the clients in the k-th
cluster are aggregated to obtain the aggregation model ωk
for that cluster. This leads to the formation of an aggregated model for each category. To filter out the models
with subpar training performance, a ranking algorithm has
been proposed. The ranking algorithm is formulated as
follows:
n

P(ωij ),
8
∀ωin ← max
j=1

where ij ∈ (1, k), i1 = i2 · · · = in . According to this algorithm, we rank the obtained aggregation models and finally
obtain a set of aggregation models with the best performance.
Here, ij represents the number of aggregation models, and
each model is selected only once during the ranking process
(i1 = i2 , . . . = in ). P(·) is the evaluation function, and n is
used as a hyperparameter to control the number of models
after ranking.
Algorithm 3 outlines the workings of the dynamic clustering
ranking algorithm as follows: in each epoch, the server collects the information vector from each client and employs it for
clustering to determine the cluster assignment of each client. It
is noteworthy that the clients provide the information vector at
every upload stage, resulting in frequent clustering. Since the
training status of the clients changes with each iteration, their
clustering also changes correspondingly, making the entire
clustering ranking process a continuous dynamic adjustment.
The frequency of uploading the information vector can be customized based on the requirements of the FL system. Clients
belonging to the same cluster submit updated models, which

3117

Algorithm 3 Federated Learning-Based Clustering Algorithm
Input: The local model ω, the given number of clusters k, the
ranking threshold r, and information vector I;
Output: Clustered aggregation model ωc ;
1: for each client Ci do
2:
Ii ∼ Ci
3:
Update I with Ii
4: end for
5: c = Clustering Algorithm(I, k)
6: for ci in c do
7:
ωci ∼ Aggregation(ωi ∈ ci )
8: end for
9: ωc = [ωc1 ,ωc2 ,ωc3 ... ωcn ]
10: ωc = Ranking(ωc , r)
11: return ωc

are aggregated in step 7. Finally, employing the above equations, the top-k aggregation models with the best performance
are selected.
V. E XPERIMENT
A. Experiment Setup
1) Datasets and Splits: The UNSW-NB-15 and NSL-KDD
datasets are two well-known benchmark data sets commonly
used to evaluate intrusion detection systems (IDS) based on
network traffic data. The UNSW-NB-15 dataset was created
by the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in Australia
and contains 2.5 million network traffic instances captured
in a simulated environment. The dataset includes various
attack categories, such as denial-of-service (DoS), user-toroot (U2R), remote-to-local (R2L), and probing attacks. It is
considered one of the most comprehensive datasets for evaluating network-based IDS, particularly for deep learning models.
The NSL-KDD dataset is a modification of the original KDD
Cup 99 dataset, which was created for the 1999 KDD Cup
competition. The NSL-KDD dataset was created to address
some of the limitations of the KDD Cup 99 dataset, such as
the lack of diversity in the attack types and the presence of
redundant and irrelevant features. The NSL-KDD dataset contains approximately 1.8 million network traffic instances, with
four attack categories and several normal traffic instances. It
is commonly used for evaluating both traditional and deep
learning-based IDS approaches. To simulate number-balanced
and class-unbalanced non-IID settings, we partition the training set into multiple subsets, each corresponding to a different
client, and then assign each client a different number of
samples from each class.
2) Training Details: In our experimental setup, we consider a scenario with a total of K = 100 clients. In each
communication round, the server randomly selects 10 clients
to participate in the training process. We conduct a total of
T = 150 or T = 50 iterations, depending on the specific experiment. For the hyperparameters, we set the Beta distribution
parameter δ to 0.75, the threshold τ to 0.80, the learning rate
η to 0.01, and the local epoch to 5. These values determine
the weights assigned to the client and server models during

3118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE II
R ESULTS OF IDS ON THE UNSW-NB 15 DATASET

TABLE IV
C OMPARING THE P ERFORMANCE OF FML-DT W ITH AND W ITHOUT THE
P ROPOSED F EDERATED C LUSTER R ANKING A LGORITHM

TABLE III
R ESULTS OF IDS ON THE NSL-KDD DATASET

the aggregation process. The weight of the client model is
α = 0.4, the weight of the server model is β = 0.4, and
the weight of the global model from the previous round is
γ = 0.2. These weights control the influence of each model
on the updated global model. To optimize the ResNet-9 ML
model, we employ the Adam optimization algorithm with an
initial learning rate of η = 1e − 3. The client training process consists of a single epoch (Eu = 1) with a batch size of
Bu = 128. Similarly, the server training process involves one
epoch (Es = 1) with a batch size of Bs = 128.

B. Experimental Results
1) IDS Tasks: Table II and Table III demonstrate the IDS
performance of the proposed framework on the UNSW-NB 15
and NSL-KDD datasets. From the experimental results, it can
be seen that the proposed framework outperforms all baselines and is more stable than them. This is mainly because the
proposed framework uses a meta-learning strategy to adaptively sample efficient samples to improve performance. We
can also know that the FedProx algorithm used to solve
the non-IID problem is not suitable for the class imbalance
scenario.
2) Ablation Analysis: The results in Table IV demonstrate
the impact of using the dynamic clustering and ranking algorithm on the performance of the FML-DT framework. The
comparison between using and not using the dynamic clustering ranking algorithm in two cases, and the F1-Score, AUC,
Recall, and Precision are evaluated. It can be observed that
using the algorithm leads to the higher detection performances
under the non-IID conditions. When the algorithm is not used,
the models provided by some clients with the non-IID data
and class imbalance may cause the global model performance
to degrade during the model aggregation. Moreover, even
without using the dynamic clustering and ranking algorithms,
FML-DT’s detection performance is still close to the baseline method shown in Table II and Table III. By utizling
the dynamic clustering and ranking algorithm, it is observed
improved detection performance. This is crucial for the CEDs
intrusion detection, and it highlights the importance of the
proposed algorithm in FML-DT.

Fig. 2.

Convergence performance of the proposed FML-DT.

3) Convergence Analysis: In the initial experiment, we first
examined the convergence of FML-DT with the assumption that there are 100 idle IoT devices. The convergence
performance of FML-DT is depicted in Fig. 2. It reveals that
the F1 score and loss rapidly converge to near-optimal values within 500 training epochs. Furthermore, as the number
of training iterations increases, it shows that there is a gradual improvement in the F1 score and a reduction in loss. It
also indicates that the training process does not exhibit overfitting. Therefore, we can confidently state that our proposed
FML-DT exhibits fine convergence performance.
VI. C ONCLUSION
We proposed an innovative meta-learning approach for
intrusion detection in the FL-based metaverse for digital
twin 6G-enabled CEDs. The proposed approach addresses the
challenge of class imbalance by training a meta-sampler to
iteratively sample data and obtain a balanced dataset. The use
of meta-learning also enables the training of the meta-sampler
without relying on the client’s local data, ensuring data privacy
protection. The experiments conducted on the UNSW-NB15 and NSL-KDD datasets demonstrated the effectiveness
of the proposed approach in achieving high accuracy while
maintaining data privacy.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Choi, A. Azzaoui, S. K. Singh, M. M. Salim, S. R. Jeremiah, and
J. H. Park, “The future of metaverse: Security issues, requirements,
and solutions,” Human-Centric Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 12, pp. 1–15,
Dec. 2022.
[2] H. Peng, P.-C. Chen, P.-H. Chen, Y.-S. Yang, C.-C. Hsia, and
L.-C. Wang, “6G toward metaverse: Technologies, applications, and
challenges,” in Proc. APWCS, 2022, pp. 6–10.
[3] A. Mukherjee, D. De, N. Dey, R. G. Crespo, and E. Herrera-Viedma,
“DisastDrone: A disaster aware consumer Internet of Drone Things
system in ultra-low latent 6G network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 38–48, Feb. 2023.
[4] M. Al-Hawawreh and M. S. Hossain, “Federated learning-assisted distributed intrusion detection using mesh satellite nets for autonomous
vehicle protection” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Sep.
25, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3318727.

HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs

[5] Y. Liu, X. Yuan, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Wang, and D. Niyato,
“Federated learning for 6G communications: Challenges, methods,
and future directions,” China Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 105–118,
Sep. 2020.
[6] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, D. Niyato, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong, “Digital-twinenabled 6G: Vision, architectural trends, and future directions,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 74–80, Jan. 2022.
[7] F. Lin, Y. Zhou, X. An, I. You, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Fair resource
allocation in an intrusion-detection system for edge computing: Ensuring
the security of Internet of Things devices,” IEEE Consum. Electron.
Mag., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 45–50, Nov. 2018.
[8] R. Minerva, G. M. Lee, and N. Crespi, “Digital twin in the
IoT context: A survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1785–1824,
Oct. 2020.
[9] A. Sasikumar et al., “Blockchain-based trust mechanism for digital twin
empowered Industrial Internet of Things,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 141, pp. 16–27, Apr. 2023.
[10] K. M. Alam and A. El Saddik, “C2PS: A digital twin architecture reference model for the cloud-based cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Access,
vol. 5, pp. 2050–2062, 2017.
[11] H. X. Nguyen, R. Trestian, D. To, and M. Tatipamula, “Digital twin
for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 10–15,
Feb. 2021.
[12] E. Biermann, E. Cloete, and L. M. Venter, “A comparison of intrusion
detection systems,” Comput. Security, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 676–683, 2001.
[13] E. Kabir, J. Hu, H. Wang, and G. Zhuo, “A novel statistical technique
for intrusion detection systems,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 79,
pp. 303–318, Feb. 2018.
[14] V. Truong and L. B. Le. “MetaCIDS: A metaverse collaborative intrusion
detection system based on blockchain and federated learning.” 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.22816568.v2
[15] A. Makkar, T. W. Kim, A. K. Singh, J. Kang, and J. H. Park,
“SecureIIoT environment: Federated learning empowered approach for
securing IIoT from data breach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
no. 9, pp. 6406–6414, Sep. 2022.
[16] E. Tcydenova, T. W. Kim, C. Lee, and J. H. Park, “Detection of adversarial attacks in AI-based intrusion detection systems using explainable
AI,” Human-Centric Comput. Inform. Sci., vol. 11, pp. 1–14, Sep. 2021.
[17] C. Alcaraz and J. Lopez, “Digital twin: A comprehensive survey
of security threats,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 1475–1503, 3rd Quart., 2022.
[18] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and
E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques,
systems and challenges,” Comput. Security, vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28,
2009.
[19] X. Wang, W. Liu, H. Lin, J. Hu, K. Kaur, and M. S. Hossain,
“AI-empowered trajectory anomaly detection for intelligent transportation systems: A hierarchical federated learning approach,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4631–4640,
Apr. 2023.
[20] V. Rey, P. M. S. Sánchez, A. H. Celdrán, and G. Bovet, “Federated
learning for malware detection in IoT devices,” Comput. Netw., vol. 204,
Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108693.
[21] K. Yadav, B. B. Gupta, C.-H. Hsu, and K. T. Chui, “Unsupervised federated learning based IoT intrusion detection,” in Proc. GCCE, 2021,
pp. 298–301.
[22] H. Liu and B. Lang, “Machine learning and deep learning methods for
intrusion detection systems: A survey,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 20, p. 4396,
2019.
[23] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning approach
to network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018.
[24] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[25] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection system:
Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun.,
vol. 195, pp. 1273–1282, Nov. 2022.
[26] Y. Zheng, S. Lai, Y. Liu, X. Yuan, X. Yi, and C. Wang, “Aggregation
service for federated learning: An efficient, secure, and more resilient
realization,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 988–1001, Mar./Apr. 2022.

3119

[27] S. A. Rahman, H. Tout, C. Talhi, and A. Mourad, “Internet of Things
intrusion detection: Centralized, on-device, or federated learning?” IEEE
Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 310–317, Nov./Dec. 2020.
[28] L. Wang, S. Xu, X. Wang, and Q. Zhu, “Addressing class imbalance in
federated learning,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, pp. 1–9.
[29] Y. Zhao, M. Li, L. Lai, N. Suda, D. Civin, and V. Chandra, “Federated
learning with non-IID data,” 2018, arXiv:1806.00582.
[30] M. Duan, D. Liu, X. Chen, R. Liu, Y. Tan, and L. Liang, “Selfbalancing federated learning with global imbalanced data in mobile
systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 59–71,
Jan. 2021.
[31] H. He, Y. Bai, E. A. Garcia, and S. Li, “ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic
sampling approach for imbalanced learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint
Conf. Neural Netw., 2008, pp. 1322–1328.
[32] S. Wang, L. L. Minku, and X. Yao, “Resampling-based ensemble methods for Online class imbalance learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1356–1368, May 2015.
[33] R. Duggal, S. Freitas, S. Dhamnani, D. H. Chau, and J. Sun, “HAR:
Hardness aware reweighting for imbalanced datasets,” in Proc. Big Data,
2021, pp. 1–11.
[34] N. Japkowicz, “Assessment metrics for imbalanced learning,”
Imbalanced Learning: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2013, pp. 187–206.
[35] N. Moniz and V. Cerqueira, “Automated imbalanced classification via meta-learning,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 178, Sep. 2021,
Art. no. 115011.
[36] M. Almseidin, M. Alzubi, S. Kovacs, and M. Alkasassbeh, “Evaluation
of machine learning algorithms for intrusion detection system,” in Proc.
SISY, 2017, pp. 277–282.
[37] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
Privacy, Security Trust (PST), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[38] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative intrusion detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
[39] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federated
deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical
systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624,
Aug. 2021.
[40] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Poisoning
attacks on federated learning-based IoT intrusion detection system,” in
Proc. DISS, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[41] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam,
and O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based
smart transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.
[42] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284,
Sep. 2009.
[43] Z. Tang et al., “Data resampling for federated learning with non-IID
labels,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[44] Y. Liu et al., “Deep anomaly detection for time-series data in
industrial IoT: A communication-efficient on-device federated learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6348–6358,
Apr. 2021.
[45] Z. Shen, J. Cervino, H. Hassani, and A. Ribeiro, “An agnostic approach
to federated learning with class imbalance,” in Proc. ICLR, 2022,
pp. 1–12.
[46] A. Ghosh, J. Chung, D. Yin, and K. Ramchandran, “An efficient
framework for clustered federated learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020,
pp. 19586–19597.
[47] R. Gámez Díaz, Q. Yu, Y. Ding, F. Laamarti, and A. El Saddik, “Digital
twin coaching for physical activities: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 20,
p. 5936, 2020.
[48] J. Shu et al., “Meta-weight-net: Learning an explicit mapping for sample
weighting,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019, pp. 1917–1928.
[49] Y. Liu, J. J. Q. Yu, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and S. Zhang,
“Privacy-preserving traffic flow prediction: A federated learning
approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7751–7763,
Apr. 2020.
[50] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Offpolicy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in Proc. ICML, 2018, pp. 1856–1865.