3986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

A Discrepancy Aware Framework for Robust
Anomaly Detection
Yuxuan Cai , Dingkang Liang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Dongliang Luo , Xinwei He ,
Xin Yang , Member, IEEE, and Xiang Bai , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Defect detection is a critical research area in
artificial intelligence. Recently, synthetic data-based selfsupervised learning has shown great potential on this task.
Although many sophisticated synthesizing strategies exist,
little research has been done to investigate the robustness
of models when faced with different strategies. In this article, we focus on this issue and find that existing methods are highly sensitive to them. To alleviate this issue,
we present a discrepancy aware framework (DAF), which
demonstrates robust performance consistently with simple
and cheap strategies across different anomaly detection
benchmarks. We hypothesize that the high sensitivity to
synthetic data of existing self-supervised methods arises
from their heavy reliance on the visual appearance of synthetic data during decoding. In contrast, our method leverages an appearance-agnostic cue to guide the decoder in
identifying defects, thereby alleviating its reliance on synthetic appearance. To this end, inspired by existing knowledge distillation methods, we employ a teacher-student network, which is trained based on synthesized outliers, to
compute the discrepancy map as the cue. Extensive experiments on two challenging datasets prove the robustness
of our method. Under the simple synthesis strategies, it
outperforms existing methods by a large margin. Furthermore, it also achieves the state-of-the-art localization performance.
Index Terms—Artificial intelligence, robustness, selfsupervised learning.

Manuscript received 19 February 2023; revised 23 June 2023 and
23 August 2023; accepted 13 September 2023. Date of publication 4
October 2023; date of current version 23 February 2024. This work was
supported in part by the Young Scientists Fund of the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62302188, and in part by the
National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China under
Grant 62225603. Paper no. TII-23-0558. (Corresponding author: Xinwei
He.)
Yuxuan Cai, Dingkang Liang, and Xiang Bai are with the School of
Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: cyx_hust@hust.edu.cn;
dkliang@hust.edu.cn; xbai@hust.edu.cn).
Dongliang Luo and Xin Yang are with the School of Electronic
Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: ldl@hust.edu.cn;
xinyang2014@hust.edu.cn).
Xinwei He is with the College of Informatics, Huazhong Agriculture
University, Wuhan 430070, China (e-mail: xwhe@mail.hzau.edu.cn).
Code is available at: https://github.com/caiyuxuan1120/DAF.
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3318302.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3318302

I. INTRODUCTION
MAGE anomaly detection plays an important role in many
safety-critical areas, e.g., industrial manufacturing systems [1], [2], surveillance systems [3], and medical image analysis [4]. However, in these areas, acquiring sufficient high-quality
anomaly images is generally difficult or even impossible. This
limitation hinders the effectiveness of training deep-learning
models through supervised methods. As a result, it has induced
growing research interest [5], [6], [7] in exploring approaches
that focus on training anomaly detection models solely on
normal images. Nevertheless, the lack of anomaly data during
training poses significant challenges in extracting discriminative
features for unseen anomaly data during inference.
Recently, some researchers have assumed that models trained
on normal data may fail to reconstruct anomaly patterns, and
have proposed identifying anomaly regions based on reconstruction failures. However, these reconstruction-based methods may
be easily misled in practice because of the identical shortcut
issue [8]. Another promising research direction is based on
self-supervision [9], [10], [11]. Generally, the typical framework
follows an encoder-decoder architecture (Fig. 2(a)). Normal
data is first distorted to generate realistic and diverse outlier
data. Subsequently, the framework is trained to differentiate
normal and synthesized abnormal images. Such a strategy of
exposing models to the synthesized outliers has demonstrated
better empirical results, dominating current research in anomaly
detection. The success of these models heavily relies on generating diverse and close-to-real anomaly images, and much effort
has been endeavored to improve anomaly synthesis strategies.
For instance, DRÆM [10] uses Perlin noise to generate irregular
shapes, simulating the shape of real anomalies. NSA [11] integrates Poisson image editing [12] to eliminate discontinuous
borders of anomalous patterns, making the anomalies more
natural.
Despite great success, few attempts have been made to
study the robustness of current methods to different synthesis
strategies. However, it has been noted [11] in the community
that the decoder tends to overfit to the synthetic anomaly appearance during the training phase. As a result, the decision
boundary tends to generalize poorly to real anomalies during
inference. Moreover, the anomaly patterns generally show large
variances across datasets. Therefore, the synthesis strategy customized for one dataset may not be well-suited to another. As
shown in Fig. 1(b), a carefully-tuned synthesis strategy for

I

1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 1. (a) Detection performance comparison. (b) Real versus Synthetic images. (c) Localization performance under diverse synthetic
strategies.

3987

an anomaly image, the teacher and the student will demonstrate
discrepancy in every nonnormal region, while the segmentation
probability map generated by the decoder will display a clear
decision boundary for identifying anomalies.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate the
robustness of current frameworks to different anomaly synthesis
techniques. Compared with existing self-supervised methods,
our method has the following desired properties. First, our
framework incorporates the teacher-student network into the
self-supervised paradigm, enhancing its capacity to produce
discrepant features for anomaly regions. Second, our method
encodes nonnormal regions derived from the discrepancy map
rather than the nonnormal appearance. This approach reduces
overfitting problems for the decoder during training, thus eliminating the heavy reliance on carefully-tuned anomaly synthesis techniques. As shown in Fig. 1(c), our method reaches
strong performance even with a simple synthesis strategy. Besides, our method also achieves significant performance improvements over existing methods, surpassing them by a large
margin in terms of localization capability on MVTecAD [13].
It also achieves the state-of-the-art detection performance on
DAGM [14].
In summary, the main contributions of this article are as
follows: 1) we introduce a simple and robust self-supervised
framework named DAF for image anomaly detection and localization, which eliminates the practical need for the complicated tuning steps for synthesis; and 2) we propose to combine
the teacher-student network with the self-supervised paradigm,
which utilizes abundant synthesized anomaly images to learn
the discrepancy features, alleviating the overfitting problem to
the nonnormal appearance.
II. RELATED WORK

Fig. 2.

Overview of existing self-supervised methods and ours.

MVTecAD [13] generates unnatural synthetic data for
DAGM [14], which may help explain the dramatic performance
degradation of NSA [11] on DAGM (Fig. 1(a)). Besides, our
preliminary experiments on two representative self-supervisionbased methods, i.e., NSA [11] and DRÆM [10], also indicate
their high sensitivity to different synthesis strategies (Fig. 1(c)).
To tackle the above issues, in this article, we present a discrepancy aware framework (DAF) [Fig. 2(b)], which can maintain
strong performance consistently across various existing anomaly
synthesis techniques. The core idea behind our method is releasing the decoder from the constraint of the synthetic anomaly
appearance. To accomplish this, we leverage the appearanceagnostic discrepancy map derived from a teacher-student network as guidance for the decoder. Since the discrepancy map
is computed based on extracted high-level features, it is less
affected by the synthetic appearance. Moreover, by processing
the discrepancy directly, the decoder will focus on discriminating the normal and nonnormal regions. During inference, given

Early approaches [15], [16] to image anomaly detection typically work by first extracting the feature descriptors or statistical
information and then, calculating the anomaly scores.
Recently, with remarkable progress in deep learning, image
anomaly detection based on deep learning has become a dominant direction. Below, we mainly review the deep learningbased approaches, which can be roughly grouped into three
categories: 1) reconstruction-based; 2) self-supervision-based;
and 3) knowledge distillation-based approaches.
A. Reconstruction-Based Approaches
These approaches [17], [18] assume that anomalies are difficult to be reconstructed by models trained only on normal
images. Thus, the anomaly regions can be spotted by examining
regions with larger reconstruction errors. In these methods, autoencoders are frequently adopted as reconstruction models. For
instance, Baur et al. [19] introduced deep spatial autoencoding
architectures, which were trained by a pixel-wise reconstruction
loss and an adversarial loss to improve the construction quality.
Besides, generative adversarial networks [20], [21] are also
attractive models for reconstructing the input image. However,
the assumption behind the reconstruction methods might not

3988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

TABLE I
SYMBOL DESCRIPTION

always be valid, as neural networks sometimes generalize to
anomalies well and yield good reconstruction results.
B. Self Supervision-Based Approaches
Driven by the success of self-supervised learning in visual representation learning [22], [23], approaches under this paradigm
have emerged rapidly and advanced the state-of-the-art. For
instance, [24] trains an autoencoder to reconstruct the masked
image to the original one first, and then uses the reconstruction error as the anomaly score. Different from [24], which
constructs masks on images, SSPCAB [25] applies the idea of
masking in convolution blocks. In this way, it can be integrated
into any CNN architecture.
Recent works [10], [11] proved that anomaly detection benefits from synthesized defects that are close to real ones. These
works carefully design synthetic data strategies, then train segmentation models such as U-Net [26] for pixel-level prediction,
ensuring that the segmentation model can learn a suitable decision boundary between normal and abnormal regions. However,
the segmentation model is likely to be ineffective when there
is a significant difference between the distribution of synthetic
defects and actual ones. Even though DRÆM [10] tries to
prevent the model from overfitting to the synthetic data by
introducing anomaly-free reconstruction, as mentioned above,
the reconstruction model will also fail to restore the anomalous
region to normal one during inference if the anomaly manifold
is unseen during training. Moreover, SPD [27] shifts its focus
to self-supervised pretraining. Specifically, it proposes a novel
augmentation strategy to encourage models to be locally sensitive, making the representations more suitable for the defect
detection task.

sensitivity of the reconstruction model to anomalies, enabling
effective identification and classification of abnormal patterns.
However, all the aforementioned knowledge distillationbased methods assume training models using clean data. Recently, SoftPatch [30] has addressed the scenario where the training data is contaminated with real defect data. They proposed a
patch-level denoising strategy to improve the robustness of the
model.
Different from previous knowledge distillation-based methods, our method incorporates the teacher-student model into a
synthetic data-based self-supervised framework. It is designed
to distinguish between normal patterns and abnormal ones.
This objective enables our method to establish a discriminative decision boundary. Furthermore, unlike previous arts that
focus on using the discrepancy for defect localization, our
method leverages the teacher-student model to incorporate an
appearance-agnostic cue into the self-supervised framework,
thereby improving its robustness to synthetic anomaly images.

C. Knowledge Distillation-Based Approaches
This group of approaches detects anomalies by reflecting
images to different representation spaces, assuming that the representations of normal regions in different spaces are identical
while those of abnormal regions will differ. The teacher-student
framework is adopted to achieve the different-space reflection.
For instance, prior works [5], [6], [28] train the student network
to mimic the pre-trained teacher on normal images. As a result,
the student and the teacher tend to hold consistency on normal
regions and display discrepancies on anomalies. In the STAD [5]
framework, multiple students with the same structure are trained
to regress the teacher network. The discrepancies between the
teacher and students, along with the variance of students, are
adopted to represent the anomaly score. MKDAD [28] and
STPM [6] proposed distilling features from various layers of
the teacher to the corresponding layers of the student. RDAD [7]
utilized reverse distillation to prohibit comparable anomaly representations in different feature spaces. SSMRKD [29] further
incorporated reverse distillation with the masking strategy and
constructs a two-stage framework. In the first stage, it uses reverse distillation to construct a reconstruction network, enabling
the student model to accurately reconstruct normal patterns. In
the second stage, the masking strategy is applied to enhance the

III. OUR METHOD
A. Overview
The framework consists of a teacher-student network, a segmentation decoder, and a series of auxiliary heads, as shown in
Fig. 3. For clarity and ease of reference, Table I summarizes
essential symbols and their corresponding descriptions utilized
in the following text. Given an input image, the teacher-student
network (T -S) is expected to demonstrate discrepancies on
nonnormal regions. To accomplish this, the student is trained
to maintain consistency with the teacher on normal regions
during training. The discrepancy maps yielded by the T -S
are subsequently fed into the segmentation head, along with
representations of synthesized data, to localize anomalies. Finally, auxiliary heads are employed to further supervise the
student model to derive more discriminative representations for
anomalous regions.
B. Teacher-Student Network
In practice, anomalies occur in various, sometimes unconstrained formats. Some can be easily discerned by their distinct
textures or colors from normal patterns, while others may require

CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 3.

3989

(a) Overview of our method. (b) The fusion process.

contextual information to be localized. Therefore, both low-level
and high-level representations are vital for accurately localizing anomalies in such challenging scenarios. In our design,
the teacher-student framework follows a multiscale knowledge
distillation paradigm to represent anomalies at different levels
of granularity.
Following existing knowledge distillation methods [5], [6],
we adopt a powerful convolutional neural network, pre-trained
on a large-scale dataset ImageNet [31], to initialize the teacher.
As for the student, we choose the same architecture, but initialize
it randomly. Note that any off-the-shelf pretrained networks
could be adopted. Here, we use ResNet18 [32], following
STPM [6]. For the multiscale knowledge distillation, we transfer
the knowledge of three-stage features from the teacher to the
student. The distillation process is elaborated as follows.
1) Training Strategy: Given an anomaly-free training set
D = {Im }N
m=1 , we first distort each Im ∈ D to obtain the synthetic anomaly image Pm using predefined anomaly strategies.
The teacher network takes the anomaly-free image Im as input,
while the student network takes the corresponding synthetic
anomaly image Pm as input. During training, we keep the teacher
frozen and train the student to mimic the responses of the teacher
on normal regions.
Following previous works [6], [28], cosine similarity is applied to measure the consistency between the representations of
the teacher and the student. The cosine similarity loss is defined
as

Lcos =

3


⎛
⎝1 −

i=1

1
Nneg


Ωneg

⎞
Vti · Vsi ⎠
||Vti || · ||Vsi ||

(1)

where i denotes the ith stage. Ωneg represents the normal regions
and Nneg indicates the total number of pixels in normal regions.
Vti and Vsi represent the feature vectors yielded by the teacher
and the student, respectively.
However, the cosine similarity only constrains each feature
vector in isolation, disregarding local contextual information.
Thus, we further introduce structural similarity (SSIM ) loss
for compensation by considering neighboring vectors. The structural similarity is formulated as
SSIM (p, q) =

(2μp μq + λ1 )(2σpq + λ2 )
(μ2p + μ2q + λ1 )(σp2 + σq2 + λ2 )

(2)

where μ and σ represent the mean and variance, and λ1 and λ2
are adopted for numerical stability.1 The SSIM is in the range
of [–1,1]. In particular, when p is the same as q, SSIM (p, q)
is equal to 1. Based on SSIM , the structural similarity loss is
formulated as follows:
LSSIM =

3


(1 − SSIM (fti , fsi )) ,

(3)

i=1

where fti and fsi represent the ith stage feature maps of the
teacher and the student, respectively. Note that we only constrain
fti and fsi on normal regions. Finally, we combine the above
two losses to form the training objective of the teacher-student
framework
Lkd = Lcos + LSSIM

(4)

2) Discrepancy Map: Compared with existing knowledge
distillation methods [6], [7], rather than directly taking the
discrepancy map as the anomaly localization result, we serve
it as an additional robust cue for the segmentation task. Taken
a test image Im ∈ RH×W ×3 as input, where H and W denote
the height and width, respectively. The teacher and the student
output corresponding feature representations fti and fsi . Then,
the discrepancy between fti and fsi is measured by cosine and
structural similarities. Specifically, the discrepancy map at location (x, y) is defined as
i
M(x,y)
=2−

Vti · Vsi
− SSIM (fti , fsi )(x,y)
||Vti || · ||Vsi ||

(5)

where SSIM (·)(x,y) represents the structural similarity of the
feature patches centered at (x, y), and the patch size is set to
11 × 11 in practice. The discrepancy map of each layer M i is
then upsampled to H × W and summed together as the final
discrepancy map M ∈ RH×W .
Feeding the discrepancy map into the following segmentation
head brings two desirable merits. On the one hand, the segmentation head can yield more discriminative representations
under this strong guidance, thereby localizing anomalies more
accurately. On the other hand, the discrepancy map releases the
segmentation head from being only constrained by the synthetic
appearance, enhancing its perception of unseen anomalies. Such
a strategy can greatly boost the robustness of our method under various simple and cheap synthesis strategies, making our
method easy to use in practice.
1 λ , λ are empirically set to 1e-1, 9e-4 to avoid division by zero, respectively.
1 2

3990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

C. Segmentation Head

The final anomaly score map is formulated as

The segmentation head aims at identifying the anomaly regions. As illustrated in Fig. 3(a), the segmentation head takes
both the discrepancy map (i.e., M ) and anomaly features (i.e.,
{fsi }3i=1 ) as the input, where the discrepancy map indicates the
location of anomalies while the anomaly features carry both
low-level textual and high-level semantic information.
The detailed fusion process of the discrepancy map and
anomaly features is shown in Fig. 3(b). The segmentation module processes them progressively in a coarse-to-fine manner via
the three blocks, which is formulated as
c fs3 )
c fs2 )
c fs1 )
MS = Seg3 (Seg2 (Seg1 (M 

(6)

where Seg1 , Seg2 , Seg3 denote the three blocks of the segmenc denotes concatenation.
tation module, and 
We apply the binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss as the segmentation loss. Note that the anomaly (positive) pixels are much
fewer than normal (negative) pixels. To overcome the imbalance
of positive and negative pixels, a hard negative mining strategy is
adopted. Mathematically, the segmentation loss Lseg is defined
as

yi logxi + (1 − yi )log(1 − xi )
(7)
Lseg =
i∈Sub

where Sub is a subset sampled from MS , xi is the predicted
anomaly probability in Sub, and yi is its corresponding label.
D. Auxiliary Supervision
In the teacher-student framework, the student is trained to
regress representations of the teacher on normal regions. However, there is no constraint for the student on anomalous regions,
which hinders the student from providing discriminative representations for the segmentation head Seg.
To enhance the discrimination capability of the student on
anomalous regions, we add an auxiliary head after each student
layer, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Each head Auxi takes its corresponding anomaly feature fsi as input, and outputs the probability map of the corresponding size. The training strategy is the
same as that of the segmentation head, meaning that we adopt
the BCE loss and hard mining strategy as the discriminative loss
Ldis . Note that auxiliary heads are discarded during inference,
incurring no extra cost.
E. Anomaly Localization
During inference, we localize the anomalous regions from
two aspects. First, since the segmentation head Seg is trained to
distinguish the normal distribution from that of the abnormal, the
segmentation probability map is expected to localize anomalies
accurately. Second, the discrepancy map between the teacher and
the student can also localize anomalies, since the student is likely
to demonstrate inconsistency with the teacher on anomalous
patterns. Since the discrepancy map is irrelevant to the synthetic
appearance, combining it and the segmentation probability map
desires both accurate and robust properties.
In summary, the anomalies are located by incorporating the
discrepancy map M with the segmentation probability map MS .

MScore = G(M + λMS ).

(8)

The G means Gaussian smooth. λ is set to 3 in practice.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: MVTecAD [13] contains 5354 images, including ten object categories and five texture categories. The training
set has 3629 normal images, while the testing set contains
1725 images, covering both normal and anomaly images. Pixel
annotations are provided for the anomaly areas.
DAGM [14] includes ten categories of texture images. The
training set contains anomaly images, and weak annotations
are provided for anomalous regions. During training, we only
use normal images. Since the annotations are coarse, we do not
evaluate the localization performance on DAGM.
2) Model Training: All the images are resized to 256 × 256.
The weights of the teacher are frozen, and the remaining components are trained using AdamW for 1200 epochs. The batch size
is set to 8, and the weight decay is set to 1e−5. The learning rate
is gradually increased to 2e−4 in 50 epochs and multiplied by
0.2 after 700 and 1000 epochs. We first follow the synthetic
strategies in DRÆM [10] and NSA [11] and then, adopt a
series of simple synthetic approaches to further investigate the
effectiveness of our method. Note that DRÆM [10] introduces
an external dataset (i.e., DTD [33]) for synthesizing.
3) Evaluation Metrics: Following Salehi et al. [28], we evaluate the performance of anomaly detection and localization
by image-level AUC (I-AUC) and pixel-level AUC (P-AUC),
respectively. Meanwhile, following [13] and [10], we also
focus on the Per-Region-Overlap (P-PRO) and mean Average
Precision (P-mAP) to further evaluate localization accuracy.
4) Baselines: We mainly compare DAF with knowledge
distillation-based methods and self-supervision-based methods.
For ease of description, we abbreviate these two methods in the
following tables as KD and Self-Sup, respectively, and are as
follows.
1) Knowledge distillation-based methods: STAD [5], STPM
[6], MKDAD [28], RDAD [7]: These methods compare
activations of the teacher and student, where features of
anomaly regions are distinct.
2) Self-supervision-based methods: CutPaste [9], DRÆM
[10], NSA [11]: These methods introduce extra supervision through synthetic anomalies to help proxy tasks
such as segmentation.

B. Evaluation on MVTecAD Using Complicated
Strategies
1) Quantitative Analysis: Table II reports the detection and
localization performance on the MVTecAD [13] dataset2 . In our
method, the image-level score is acquired by the mean of the top
50 values of the anomaly score map MScore .
2 ∗ represents the reproduced result using the official code. † denotes the
reproduced results using the unofficial code.

CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION

3991

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON MVTECAD

method. Both DRÆM and our method are trained using the
DRA strategy. It can be observed that RDAD can roughly
localize anomalies, but the localization areas tend to be larger
than the ground truth (Row 3, Columns 2,4,5,6). DRÆM can
sometimes deliver clear decisions for normal and abnormal areas
(Row 4, Column 5), but it also fails in some cases (Row 4,
Columns 1–4). The last row suggests that our method achieves
the most accurate localization, performing well across various
anomalies and closely matching the ground truth.

C. Evaluation on MVTecAD Using Simple Strategies

Fig. 4.

Visualization of localization results.

Compared with knowledge distillation methods, our method
achieves a comparable result of 97.6% I-AUC with RDAD [7]
on the detection task. In terms of the localization task, benefiting
from the discriminative capacity of the segmentation head Seg,
our approach surpasses RDAD by 1.1% P-AUC and 14.0%
P-mAP. Compared with self-supervised methods, while using
the synthesis strategy of N SAB , we exceed NSA [11] by 1.5%
I-AUC and 7.3% P-mAP, respectively. Furthermore, compared
with DRÆM [10], our method achieves significant improvements of 13.0% I-AUC and 20.1% P-mAP. Notably, when using
the synthesis strategy of DRA, our detection performance is
slightly lower than DRÆM [10] by 0.4%. However, our localization performance exceeds it by 0.8% P-AUC. Please note that
the computation complexity (FLOPS), the model size (#param),
and the FPS of DRÆM are much higher than ours. When training
with synthetic data, the supervised method TSDD [34] obtains
relatively poor performance, indicating that the distribution gap
with real anomalies may hurt its generalization.
2) Qualitative Analysis: Fig. 4 shows localization results
of the existing state-of-the-art knowledge distillation method
RDAD [7], the self-supervised method DRÆM [10], and our

Simple Texture means that the textures of the synthetic anomalies are random colors, rather than natural textures sampled from
the DTD dataset [33]. Simple Shape indicates that the shapes
of synthetic anomalies are rectangles, in contrast to irregular
shapes. Simple Texture-Shape replaces shapes and textures with
rectangles and randomly sampled colors.
1) Quantitative Analysis: Table III reports the results. Under
the Simple Texture strategy, it can be observed that our method
achieves competitive results of 97.8% P-AUC, 91.9% P-PRO
and 62.2% P-mAP, while DRÆM [10] and NSA [11] perform
relatively lower. Specifically, compared with DRÆM, we bring
5.2% (97.8% vs. 92.6%) P-AUC and 5.7% (62.2% vs. 56.5%)
P-mAP gains, and outperform NSA by 13.4% P-AUC and 19.3%
P-mAP. Similarly, compared with these two prior arts, we also
achieve significant improvements under the Simple Texture and
Simple Texture-Shape strategies. These results demonstrate the
superior robustness of our framework.
2) Discussions: NSA [11] carefully designs a synthesis
strategy to simulate natural images. Since the optimization
process is only influenced by the anomalous appearance, the
model is likely to overfit to the synthetic anomalies. Hence, it
can perform well if the real anomalies are similar to the synthetic
ones. However, it is challenging to localize anomalies when there
is a distribution discrepancy between them. DRÆM [10] attempts to solve the overfitting issue by jointly using the synthetic
anomaly data and anomaly-free reconstruction. However, the
reconstruction model also suffers from the overfitting problem,
failing to restore anomalies when unseen anomalies occur. Our
method benefits from the discrepancy map, which inherently

3992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

TABLE III
LOCALIZATION PERFORMANCE COMPARISON UNDER SIMPLE AND CHEAP SYNTHESIS STRATEGIES

TABLE IV
DETECTION PERFORMANCE ON DAGM [14] UNDER DIFFERENT SYNTHESIS STRATEGIES

indicates the location of anomaly regions, providing strong evidence for the segmentation head. This alleviates its dependence
on the synthetic appearance. Moreover, the supplement of the
discrepancy map can further promote robustness.
D. Evaluation on DAGM
Table IV shows the detection performance on DAGM [14].
The two knowledge distillation methods RDAD [7] and
STPM [6] achieve comparable performance (90.2% versus
90.7%). When training with DRA, the self-supervised methods
DRÆM [10] and NSA [11] outperform knowledge distillation
methods by a large margin. Our method obtains the state-ofthe-art performance of 99.2%. We assume that DRA can synthesize anomalies that match real ones during training, helping

the self-supervised methods to yield clear decision boundaries
to classify the normal and abnormal regions. However, these
methods demonstrate unsatisfactory results when the synthetic
strategies are simpler, e.g., Simple Texture and Simple Shape.
In contrast, our method demonstrates strong robustness to these
synthesis strategies. The improvement is thanks to the discrepancy map, which reveals the location of anomalies, releasing
the segmentation task from the constraint of the anomaly appearance. Additionally, the supplement of the discrepancy map
during inference has further enhanced robustness.
E. Ablation Study
For simplicity and fairness, we conduct all the ablation studies
on MVTecAD [13].

CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF EACH COMPONENT

3993

TABLE VII
IMPACT OF THE DISCREPANCY MAP M ON SEGMENTATION

TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY ON THE DISCREPANCY MAP
TABLE VIII
ABLATION STUDY ON THE HYPERPARAMETER UNDER DRA STRATEGY

TABLE IX
COMPARISON WITH THE MODEL ENSEMBLE

1) Effectiveness of Different Components: Table V displays
the impacts of different components. Only T -S indicates that
only the teacher-student framework remains, and only the discrepancy map is employed for evaluation. We also only keep
the student and the segmentation head to build a segmentation
network (Only Seg). To demonstrate the effectiveness of the
auxiliary heads, we remove them from the pipeline (W/O Aux).
Compared with only Seg, only T -S shows its advantage in
P-AUC and P-PRO. In contrast, only Seg brings higher P-mAP.
W/O Aux brings gains in both detection and localization. By
incorporating the auxiliary heads during training (Ours), we
achieve the best localization performance. This observation
indicates that the auxiliary heads promote the student to yield
more discriminative representations for anomalies.
2) Effectiveness of the Discrepancy Map: We further conduct several settings to prove that the discrepancy map M is
a useful supplement to the segmentation probability map MS .
Table VI shows that with M , we have observed 2.6% P-AUC,
14.6% P-PRO, and 1.4% P-mAP improvements under the DRA
strategy. It can also be observed that the combination of the
discrepancy map M and the segmentation probability map MS
brings significant increases in both detection and localization
performance under the simple strategies.
3) Influence of the Discrepancy Map on Segmentation: To
investigate the influence of the discrepancy map on the segmentation task, we remove it from the input of the segmentation
head Seg. As shown in Table VII, the performance suffers
from degradation when the discrepancy map is not incorporated.
For instance, under the Simple Texture strategy, the detection
performance drops from 97.5% to 96.5%, while the localization
P-mAP reduces by 2.1%. We hypothesize that our improvements
lie in the discrepancy map, which provides an effective cue for
the segmentation task. This alleviates the segmentation head
from the limitation of the synthetic appearance, thereby enhancing its capacity to identify previously unseen anomalies.

4) Influence of the Hyperparameter in the Synthesis Strategy: Following DRÆM [10], we evaluate how the hyperparameter β impacts the performance of our method. The result is
reported in Table VIII, where DTD and Perlin noise are utilized
to simulate the appearance and shape of anomalies in the DRA
strategy. β controls the opacity in blending. Compared with
DRÆM, our method is more robust on β. We keep the same
P-mAP as DRÆM, but show advantages in I-AUC (97.6% versus
97.4%) and P-AUC (97.8% versus 95.0%) when training via
strategy DRA without β.
5) Model Ensemble versus End-to-End: Table IX reports the
performance of the model ensemble (Ensem.). Here we train the
teacher-student (T -S), and a segmentation model with auxiliary
heads alone, then add the discrepancy and the segmentation
probability map for evaluation. Compared with Ensem., we
achieve improvements in both anomaly detection and localization. The result suggests that with the guidance of the discrepancy map, our end-to-end framework could distinguish normal
and abnormal regions more accurately.
6) Influence of Initialization for the Student: Table X studies
the impact of parameter initialization on the student S. As
shown, the student initialized randomly performs better, indicating that pre-trained parameters hinder S from yielding disparate
representations from the teacher on anomalies. We assume that
the discrepancy map derived from T -S provides only limited cue
for the segmentation head Seg in this case, resulting in reduced
robustness of Seg.

3994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

TABLE X
IMPACT OF INITIALIZATION FOR THE STUDENT

TABLE XI
ABLATION STUDY ON THE LOSSES IN THE T-S FRAMEWORK

7) Influence of the Distillation Loss: Table XI shows the
effectiveness of the SSIM loss. Since the cosine similarity loss
solely distills knowledge at each position in isolation, we introduce SSIM loss to consider neighboring vectors. The study
reveals the effectiveness of the SSIM loss. DAF achieves the
best results when the cosine similarity and SSIM are adopted
simultaneously.
8) Limitations: While synthesized anomalies boost performance, the training time increases due to the computationally expensive synthesizing steps. Although adopting simple and cheap
ones accelerates the process, it is still slower than unsupervised
methods that are solely trained on normal images.
9) Future Work: In future work, investigating lightweight
architectures and developing real-time approaches will be important for industrial applications. Moreover, integrating the rich
knowledge derived from large models such as CLIP [35] into our
method will be helpful for further enhancing the generalization
capacity.

V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we have observed that the existing selfsupervised methods are susceptible to the quality of synthetic
data. To improve the robustness of the prior arts, we have
proposed a simple yet effective framework, named DAF. DAF
introduces the teacher-student model to yield the discrepancy
map and serves it as an additional cue that reveals the location of anomalies to the segmentation decoder, alleviating the
decoder’s reliance on the appearance of synthetic data. Meanwhile, the complement of the discrepancy map for segmentation
contributes significantly to robustness as well. Extensive experiments have shown that DAF surpasses previous self-supervised
methods significantly when faced with simple synthetic strategies in anomaly detection and localization, demonstrating its
excellent robustness.

REFERENCES
[1] X. Ni, Z. Ma, J. Liu, B. Shi, and H. Liu, “Attention network for rail
surface defect detection via consistency of intersection-over-union(IoU)guided center-point estimation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 1694–1705, Mar. 2022.
[2] D. Carrera, F. Manganini, G. Boracchi, and E. Lanzarone, “Defect detection in SEM images of nanofibrous materials,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 551–561, Apr. 2017.
[3] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 1705–1714.
[4] Y. Cai, H. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Zhou, and K. Cheng, “Dual-distribution
discrepancy for anomaly detection in chest X-rays,” in Proc. Med. Image
Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv., 2022, pp. 584–593.
[5] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020,
pp. 4183–4192.
[6] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature pyramid
matching for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2021,
pp. 1–14.
[7] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from oneclass embedding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[8] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in Proc.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
[9] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “Cutpaste: Self-supervised
learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 9664–9674.
[10] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “Draem - A discriminatively
trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
[11] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic anomalies
for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 474–489.
[12] P. Pérez, M. Gangnet, and A. Blake, “Poisson image editing,” in ACM
SIGGRAPH Papers, 2003, pp. 313–318.
[13] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTEC ad–A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
[14] M. Wieler and T. Hahn, “Weakly supervised learning for industrial optical inspection,” 2007. Accessed: Jan. 10, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://hci.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/content/weakly-supervisedlearning-industrial-optical-inspection
[15] Ž. Hocenski, S. Vasilic, and V. Hocenski, “Improved canny edge detector
in ceramic tiles defect detection,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Annu. Conf. Ind.
Electron., 2006, pp. 3328–3331.
[16] W.-C. Li and D. Ming Tsai, “Defect inspection in low-contrast LCD images
using hough transform-based nonstationary line detection,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inform., vol. 7, pp. 136–147, 2011.
[17] W. Liu et al., “Towards visually explaining variational autoencoders,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 8642–8651.
[18] S. Venkataramanan, K.-C. Peng, R. V. Singh, and A. Mahalanobis, “Attention guided anomaly localization in images,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 485–503.
[19] C. Baur, B. Wiestler, S. Albarqouni, and N. Navab, “Deep autoencoding
models for unsupervised anomaly segmentation in brain MR images,” in
Proc. Int. MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop, 2018, pp. 161–169.
[20] H. Yang, Q. Zhou, K. Song, and Z. Yin, “An anomaly feature-editing-based
adversarial network for texture defect visual inspection,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 2220–2230, Mar. 2021.
[21] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. SchmidtErfurth, “F-ANOGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44,
2019.
[22] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Doll’ar, and R. B. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 15979–15988.
[23] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. B. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 9726–9735.
[24] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, 2021,
Art. no. 107706.

CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION

[25] N. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive block
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 13566–13576.
[26] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv., 2015, pp. 234–241.
[27] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spot-the-difference
self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in
Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408.
[28] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 14902–14912.
[29] G. Tong, Q. Li, and Y. Song, “Two-stage reverse knowledge distillation
incorporated and self-supervised masking strategy for industrial anomaly
detection,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 273, 2023, Art. no. 110611.
[30] X. Jiang et al., “Softpatch: Unsupervised anomaly detection with noisy
data,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 15433–15445.
[31] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009, pp. 248–255.
[32] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[33] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi, “Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2014, pp. 3606–3613.
[34] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “End-to-end training of a two-stage
neural network for defect detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.,
2021, pp. 5619–5626.
[35] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8748–8763.

Yuxuan Cai received the M.S. degree in electronics information, in 2022, from the School
of Electronic Information and Communications,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in artificial intelligence with the School of Artificial
Intelligence and Automation.
Her research interests include visual anomaly
detection.

Dingkang Liang (Graduate Student Member,
IEEE) is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in artificial intelligence with the School of
Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China.
He has served as a Reviewer for several top
journals and conferences such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), and European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
His research interests include computer vision.

Dongliang Luo received the B.S. degree in
electronics and information engineering, in
2020, from the Huazhong University of Science
and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, where
he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
in information and communication engineering
with the School of Electronic Information and
Communications.
His main research interests include anomaly
detection and OCR.

3995

Xinwei He received the Ph.D. degree in electronics and information engineering from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 2020.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan. His research interests
include visual anomaly detection, image captioning, 3-D shape analysis, and 3-D object detection.

Xin Yang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Department of Electrical Computer Engineering, University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB), CA, USA, 2013.
She has authored or coauthored more than
90 technical papers and holds 12 patents. She
is currently a Professor with the Department
of Electronic Information and Communications,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Her research interests include medical image analysis and 3-D vision.
Dr. Yang was the recipient of the National Natural Science Fund of
China for Excellent Youth Scholar and China Society of Image and
Graphics Qingyun Shi Female Scientist Award. She is an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING and Multimedia System,
an Area Chair of MICCAI’19–21 and ACM MM’18, and a PC member of
CVPR, ECCV, and ICCV. She is also a Reviewer for top journals such as
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS,
MedIA, etc.

Xiang Bai (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 2003, 2005, and
2009, respectively, all in electronics and information engineering.
He is currently a Professor with the School
of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, HUST.
He is also the Vice Director of the National
Center of AntiCounterfeiting Technology, HUST.
His research interests include object recognition, shape analysis, scene text recognition and intelligent systems. He
is an Associate Editor for Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
Pattern Recognition, Pattern Recognition Letters, Neurocomputing, and
Frontiers of Computer Science.