IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

2389

A Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning Method for
Network Intrusion Detection
Lei Du , Zhaoquan Gu, Member, IEEE, Ye Wang, Le Wang , Member, IEEE, and Yan Jia

Abstract—With the rapid development of information technologies, the security of cyberspace has become increasingly
serious. Network intrusion detection is a practical scheme
to protect network systems from cyber attacks. However, as
new vulnerabilities and unknown attack types are constantly
emerging, only a few samples of such attacks can be captured
for analysis, which cannot be handled by the existing detection
methods deployed in real systems. To handle this problem, we
propose a few-shot class-incremental learning method called
Branch Fusion Strategy based Network Intrusion Detection (BFSNID for short), which can continuously learn new attack classes
with only a few samples. BFS-NID includes a feature extractor
module and a branch classifier learning module. The feature
extractor module uses a vision transformer to learn better
feature representations in a self-supervised manner, and the
parameters of the feature extractor are fixed to avoid catastrophic
forgetting when the model learns incrementally. The branch
classifier learning module sets re-projection for different branch
sessions to enhance the feature representation ability between
classes and employs a branch fusion strategy to associate the
context of learned attack classes with new classes in different
sessions. We conducted extensive experiments on two popular
network intrusion detection benchmark datasets (CIC-IDS2017
and CSE-CIC-IDS2018) and the results demonstrate that BFSNID surpasses the baselines and achieves the best performance.
Index Terms—Cyber security, network intrusion detection,
few-shot class-incremental learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the emergence of innovative information technologies, a large number of devices and applications
have been adopted in various areas, such as autonomous
driving systems [16], Internet of Things smart devices [25],

W

Manuscript received 27 April 2023; revised 7 September 2023 and
4 November 2023; accepted 9 November 2023. Date of publication
13 November 2023; date of current version 15 April 2024. This work was
supported in part by the Major Key Project of PCL(PCL2022A03), National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62372137), and Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
(2022B1212010005). The associate editor coordinating the review of this
article and approving it for publication was V. Fodor. (Corresponding author:
Zhaoquan Gu.)
Lei Du, Zhaoquan Gu, and Yan Jia are with the School of Computer
Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055,
Guangdong, China, and also with the Department of New Networks,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China (e-mail:
21b951040@stu.hit.edu.cn; guzhaoquan@hit.edu.cn; jiayan2020@hit.edu.cn).
Ye Wang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China, and also
with the College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: wangye2020@hit.edu.cn).
Le Wang is with the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: wangle@gzhu.
edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3332284

and industrial cyber-physical systems [23]. These devices and
applications bring convenience to the modern daily life of
humans, but they also have become the target of attackers,
which significantly threaten the assets and data security of
individuals, enterprises, and even the country [1], [6]. Hence,
detecting and blocking malicious attacks in time is critical for
ensuring the security of networked systems.
Network intrusion detection is a practical scheme for
detecting attacks. Most of the traditional network intrusion
detection methods utilize rule-based methods to detect intrusions, and the detection rule is generated from known attack
samples [2], [24]. For example, Syrius is proposed in [2]
which uses benign and malicious traffic samples to generate
Suricata’s detection rules. Bayesian networks are adopted
in [24] to learn attack patterns and translate them into IFTHEN detection rules. These methods can detect known
network attacks accurately and efficiently, but cannot deal with
variants of known attacks and new types of attacks. In practice,
attackers often use a variety of techniques to cover up their
attack behaviors in order to evade detection, thereby making
detection more difficult. For example, obfuscation techniques
have been used to generate variants from known attacks that
evade traditional detection methods [4]. In addition, attackers
might utilize the latest vulnerability to launch attacks, such
as the 0-day and n-day vulnerabilities. These unknown (new)
attacks cannot be effectively detected since they have not
appeared before [29]. Even though some cyber security teams
will analyze such new attacks once they appear, the number
of samples is quite small.
To handle these problems, many researchers attempt to
employ Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies for network
intrusion detection [7], [12], [37], [38], [40], [41], as AI
technologies have reached or even surpassed human-like
performance in many tasks. Regarding the problem of attack
variants, there has been some significant progress [47], but it
is quite limited to the problem of detecting new attacks.
The existing methods of detecting new attacks can be
divided into two categories: anomaly-based binary classification [7], [38] and fine-grained multi-classification [12], [41].
Anomaly detection methods use benign samples for modeling,
and any behavior patterns that deviate from expectations
are identified as anomalies. For example, Regularization and
autoencoders are introduced in [7] to improve potential representations for anomaly detection. OnlineBPCA is proposed
in [38] which converts network traffic into a two-dimensional
tensor and analyzes the changes of principal directions for
anomaly detection. However, anomaly detection is rarely

c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 1. The setting of FSCIL for network intrusion detection. FSCIL can
continuously learn new attack classes from sessions without forgetting the
former attack classes and without overlapping attack classes in sessions. The
base session as the initial model training phase contains sufficient samples,
while the subsequent sessions as the class increment phase learn new attack
classes with only a few samples. After learning of the session, the classifier
model is able to classify among all seen classes.

deployed in realistic situations due to the inability to provide
detailed diagnostic information about attack types and the high
false positive rate [40]. Fine-grained detection methods are
trained and evaluated using supervised learning based on predefined classes. In the study [12], a system called FT-GCN was
proposed that leverages the underlying traffic flow pattern and
converts intrusion detection into a special node classification
task for detecting intrusions. PBCNN is a few-shot learning
method [41] that uses a byte-packet-flow data structure to
automatically extract features to detect attack classes with only
a few samples. However, these methods require the attack
class of the detected samples to appear in the pre-defined
classes [37]. In the realistic network, new attack classes are
constantly appearing and these detection models cannot cope
with the classification of the new attack samples.
In recent years, Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
(FSCIL) has emerged in several research fields [14], [30], [44],
[45], such as in the computer vision area [26], [46], which
for incrementally learning new classes from a few of labeled
samples without forgetting previously learned classes [19].
However, few of them study network intrusion detection. We
envision that combating the new attacks requires establishing
a network intrusion detection system with FSCIL to incrementally learn new attack classes with only a few samples
without forgetting previously learned classes. When handling
network intrusion detection using FSCIL, it is important to
maintain the distinction between the emerging new classes
and the learned classes. The task set is shown in Fig. 1.
The FSCIL suffers from a serious class imbalance problem
between the base session and the new session, which not only
makes the model prone to over-fitting to new classes but also
exacerbates the catastrophic forgetting of learned attack class
knowledge.
Previous works have made extensive efforts to resist catastrophic forgetting from different perspectives. For example,
optimizing the feature representation space with the learning

ability of the model [30], pre-assigning virtual prototypes
in the feature representation space [45], or using a freeze
pre-trained unified feature extractor [44]. These FSCIL methods employ a standard supervised manner to pre-training
models. The parameters of the feature extractor are frozen
to obtain a better feature representation to resist catastrophic
forgetting. However, the feature representation of the feature
extractor relies on large-scale labeled samples. Furthermore, as
incremental learning proceeds, the classifier accommodates an
increasing number of classes. We find that the feature extractor
extracts highly similar feature representations for different
class samples.
In this paper, we propose a few-shot class-increment learning method for network intrusion detection with a branching
fusion strategy, called BFS-NID. The proposed method is
able to learn a generalization feature representation and
continually keep with the discriminative ability between all
seen attack classes. In detail, the method consists of two
modules: a feature extractor module and a branch classifier
learning module. The feature extractor module uses a vision
transformer to learn the behavioral patterns of network traffic
samples and is pre-trained in a self-supervised manner without
relying on sample labels. The branch classifier learning module
includes two stages to learn branch classifiers for different
sessions. For each session, the branch classifier has a reprojection to enhance the discriminability of the original
feature representation of different classes. The base session
with ample samples is used for the training of the initial branch
projection layer. The remaining session projection layers are
fine-tuned according to the initial projection layer parameters.
The learned branch classifiers and new attack samples jointly
optimize a new branch projection layer. Further, the branch
fusion strategy associates the contextual relationship between
sessions and assists the training and inference of the model.
The contribution of this work is summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose
a few-shot class-incremental learning method for network
intrusion detection using grayscale images, which is
effective against catastrophic forgetting and overfitting.
• We explore the ability of self-supervised manner feature
representation for unseen classes in the cybersecurity area
and propose combining branch fusion strategy to enforce
the distinction between new classes and seen classes in
different sessions.
• We propose a concise and intuitive representation of
network traffic that converts raw network traffic into
grayscale images while maintaining the time-series relationship between packets of bi-flows.
We also conduct extensive experiments on two benchmarks,
the CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 datasets, and the
results demonstrate that BFS-NID significantly outperforms
the baselines with significant advantages.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses the related work about few-shot class-incremental
learning and network intrusion detection. Section III introduces the preliminaries and Section IV describes the
representation of network traffic. Section V introduces the
proposed method BFS-NID. Afterward, the experimental

DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

results and discussion are shown in Section VI. Finally,
Section VII concludes this paper and prospects for future work.

II. R ELATED W ORK
This section presents related work on network intrusion
detection, class incremental learning, and few-shot classincremental learning.
A. Network Intrusion Detection
Network Intrusion detection methods can be divided into
rule-based detection methods, anomaly-based detection methods, and fine-grained-based detection methods. The rule-based
detection method uses the known attack patterns in the rule
sets to generate alarms. The capability of detection is limited
by the rule sets. Therefore, it is necessary to continuously generate and update rules to improve the quality of the rule sets.
Due to manually generating detection rules for attack samples
is time-consuming and error-prone. Some researchers propose
automated methods to generate detection rules, such as deep
packet inspection techniques [2], and Bayesian networks [24].
However, these methods are unable to detect unknown attacks.
Anomaly-based detection methods use benign samples to
build models and any biases are identified anomalies. An
anomaly detection method is proposed in [7] to improve
latent representations through regularization and autoencoders.
OnlineBPCA is proposed in [38] which can fast and accurate
detection anomalies. IDERES [28] adapts network profiling
and machine learning algorithms to identify malicious attack
traffic in IoT networks.
To effectively detect unknown anomalies, a probabilistic
method [29] is proposed through constructing samples as a
Bayesian network for identifying zero-day attacks. PPPL [17]
uses the domain adaptation method to build a network
intrusion detection system for detecting unseen anomalies.
However, anomaly-based detection methods cannot provide
detailed diagnostic information about attacks and have a
high false positive rate. Other methods use few-shot learning to identify new attacks [8]. A meta-learning framework
based method FC-Net is proposed for new attack detection
by comparing pairs of samples to distinguish classes [37].
DPNSA [9] proposes a dynamic prototype network based on
sample adaptation for detecting malware attacks with few
samples. However, existing methods can only recognize new
attack patterns by comparison and cannot incrementally learn
new attack types that are constantly emerging. To alleviate this
problem, IDFSCIL [35] proposes a few-shot class-incremental
learning strategy that uses meta-learning for initially training
on old data and trains new classifiers by fine-tuning new attack
class data. Then, the logit layers of all classifiers are jointly
optimized on a small amount of old and new class data using
a fully connected network. This strategy requires retaining
and replaying small amounts of old data, and the amount of
retained data will increase as the number of sessions increases.
In contrast to IDFSCIL, the method proposed in this work uses
only new data for incremental learning sessions on the base
model and employs re-projection to improve the discrimination

2391

of different classes of samples and avoid the overhead of
storing old data.
B. Class-Incremental Learning
The goal of class-incremental learning (CIL) is to
continuously learn new classes without forgetting the learned
classes. The main challenge is catastrophic forgetting. To
overcome this challenge, several regularization methods have
been proposed. Lwf [21] uses regularization terms to preserve
class knowledge that has been learned. MAS [3] and EWC [18]
are proposed to use regularization terms to constrain the
range of variation of important parameters when learning new
sessions. SDC improves the performance of the model by
incorporating semantic drift compensation [42]. Other methods
dynamically adjust the structure of the model to adapt to
the learning of new sessions [39]. From another perspective,
existing methods can be divided into exemplar-based methods
and nonexemplar-based methods. Exemplar-based methods
store some of the learned class examples and replay them
when learning new sessions. The nearest neighbor classifier
iCaRL [27] is combined with a distillation loss to prevent
forgetting when learning new sessions. Considering the imbalance between the exemplar classes of the base session and new
sessions, LUCIR [15] imposes constraints on the exemplars of
the base session classes when learning new classes. A dynamic
reinforced memory management method RMM [22] optimizes
the incremental phase and different classes. FOSTER [36]
proposes a two-stage learning paradigm for adaptive learning
of new classes. However, the CIL method leads to poor
performance due to the limited number of training samples in
new sessions [46].
C. Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Few-shot class-incremental learning was recently proposed,
which leverages the knowledge learned from large datasets to
help learn new classes with few samples [19], [43]. TOPIC
proposes [33] to preserve the topology structure between
learned classes and new classes during incremental learning.
To tackle the overfitting that may be caused by the few samples
of new classes, FSLL [26] proposes to select a few parameters
for updating. FACT [45] proposed a forward-compatibility
method to compress the embedding of learned classes by
virtual prototypes in preparation for learning new classes.
LIMIT [46] constructs a generalization feature space for the
new session and utilizes a calibration module to calibrate the
semantic relationship between the old classifier and the new
prototype. C-FSCIL [14] uses hyperdimensional embedding
and loss functions to preserve the orthogonal relationship
between class vectors. Other methods [30], [44] find that using
pre-trained backbone networks can achieve good performance
even for new classes that have not been seen before. On the
basis of this discovery. A coupled training strategy CEC [44]
is proposed, which uses a graph model to adapt the classifier
to an incremental process across different sessions. F2M [30]
proposes to find a flat minimal region in the base session
and finetune the new session within the region. Different

2392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

from existing methods, our proposed method performs a reprojection on the original feature embedding of different
sessions to improve the discriminability of classes and uses
a branching strategy to fuse classifiers from different branch
sessions.
III. P RELIMINARIES
FSCIL for network intrusion detection aims to achieve
incremental learning of new attack classes with only a few
available samples, without forgetting the learned knowledge
of classes. Let D = {D 0 , D 1 , . . . , D i , . . . , D N } denotes a
sequence train datasets of different sessions, where D i =
|D i |
{(xn , yn )}n=1 is the train dataset of session i. xn is a sample
of class yn ∈ C i . C i is the label space of session i. There
are no overlapped classes across different sessions, i.e., ∀i =
j , C i ∩ C j = ∅. It is noted that each session contains
new classes of attacks identified based on factors such as
time, user/host context, network connections, or operational
scenarios. The first session provides a large train dataset
with sufficient samples and classes, which is also denoted as
the base session. The subsequent sessions only have a few
new attack samples and classes, e.g., ∃i > 0, session D i
contains C new attack classes in the training dataset, and
per class has K attack samples. Hence it is often called a
C-way K-shot. For each session i training, only the dataset of
session D i is available, the train datasets of former sessions
are not available. At the evaluation, the model evaluates the
s
test dataset from all encountered classes, i.e., C = ∪s=i
s=0 C .
FSCIL faces continuous learning of new attack classes with
only a few samples. The main challenge is catastrophic
forgetting, where the learned classes are forgotten as the model
learns new attack classes. Especially for new types of attacks
with few attack samples, the problem of catastrophic forgetting
is more serious due to the phenomenon of overfitting.
Problem Definition: To ensure the security of cyberspace,
we aim to develop an ideal detection model using the
continuously generated flow data D in real-world network
applications, which can incrementally learn new attack classes
C i with few attack samples, and maintain the detection
performance of the model.
IV. N ETWORK T RAFFIC R EPRESENTATION
Network traffic is a complex data structure, according
to the OSI model, the network model has seven layers
for information transmission and exchange. The minimum
transmission unit of network traffic is a packet, which includes
one or more headers and a payload. For example, an HTTP
protocol packet is composed of a MAC layer header, an IP
layer header, a TCP layer header, an HTTP layer header, and
a payload. The network traffic transmitted by the network
is captured and further stored as Pcap files for analysis to
protect the target networked system from malicious attacks.
The analysis granularity of network traffic is very important in cybersecurity research. Summarized in [10], the five
commonly used granularities are flows, bidirectional flows
(bi-flows), TCP connections, services, and hosts. This work
uses the bi-flows as analysis granularity. The bi-flows can be

extracted from network traffic by using quintuple data (source
IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, protocol),
and the source IP - port and destination IP - port can be
interchangeable. According to the quintuple, the captured
network traffic or Pcap files can split into a large number
of bi-flows, and each one contains many packets. It needs to
be further divided into attack or benign samples for analysis
and modeling. We adopt the same process as [41], including
timeout and periodic reset strategies. The timeout strategy
refers to the information exchange being terminated when
the communication link has been waiting for a long time.
The threshold is set to 64 seconds. Considering only the
timeout strategy may still lead to a sample containing too
many packets. A periodic reset strategy is further used and
the threshold is set to 120 seconds. In order to facilitate the
processing of the model, the sample needs to be converted
into a unified representation format. There are two mainstream
ways of utilizing the divided samples: statistical features of
the sample or raw bytes data in the packets of the sample.
The former way requires different feature extraction rules
for different protocols that are designed by cybersecurity
experts, which lack adaptability and feature engineering is
complex and time-consuming. Furthermore, this way pays
more attention to the information in the packet header and
ignores the payload [37]. However, malicious information in a
successful attack may be in the protocol header or a payload.
e.g., SQL injection attacks use benign protocol headers and
a payload containing malicious SQL statements. The latter
represents network traffic as visual images, such as bi-flows
of raw network traffic converted to several color images [5] or
to an RGB image [37]. These works demonstrate the promise
of the converted images for network intrusion detection,
where different classes of images still have different visual
representations [47]. However, the existing network traffic
representation uses color images with complex structures or
does not take into account the time-series relationship between
bi-flows packets, which seriously hinders further research in
image-based network intrusion detection.
This section proposes a concise and intuitive representation
of network traffic, which converts raw network traffic into
grayscale images while maintaining the time-series relationship between packets of bi-flows. Specifically, each sample
consists of a different number of packets, and each packet
consists of variable-length bytes. The representation of the
sample uses the first M packets, each packet is represented
by the first B bytes. In addition, it is also necessary to check
whether the sample meets the requirements of the number
of packets ≥ M and the length of packet bytes ≥ B ,
respectively. If it is insufficient, fill in with 0; otherwise, the
excess part will be truncated. Then, the B bytes in the packet

are reshaped into a matrix ∈ R h ×w , the M packets are
arranged according to the arrival time series of the packet,
and the final sample is converted into a grayscale image

∈ R 1×(h ×M ) ×w . For the convenience of processing, the
grayscale image is set as a square h = w = h  × M . M
and B are set to 16 and 256 respectively, which is consistent
with [37], [41]. The conversion process is shown in Fig. 2.
Taking a DoS-GoldenEye attack sample as an example, each

DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 2.
The process of converting network traffic to grayscale images.
First, the captured network traffic is segmented into bi-flows. Then, a timeout
strategy and a periodic reset strategy are used to split the bi-flows to obtain
samples. After that, packets or bytes are padded or truncated (bytes are padded
in denoted blue and truncated in denoted red) and IP and MAC addresses
are anonymized. Finally, the grayscale image is converted by a reshape of B
bytes and an organization of time-series relationships of M packets.

packet is converted into a matrix ∈ R 4×64 , and the attack
sample is represented by a grayscale image ∈ R 1×64×64 . The
code is publicly available1 .
Note that there are three key points in the process. Firstly,
the first M packets - the first B bytes can represent the
whole sample. These packets containing the most important
information are usually transmitted first, and the appropriate
bytes are sufficient to represent most of the information
in the packet. Second, the sample data conforms to the
grayscale image format. The byte of the packet is encoded
hexadecimal with 8 bits, the numerical type of each byte
corresponds to a pixel value in a grayscale image, ranging
from 0-255. Third, the converted grayscale image does not
contain sensitive information. The MAC and IP addresses have
special significance in cyberspace and will leak user privacy.
For security and privacy reasons, anonymization is used to
replace the MAC and IP addresses in packets with all 0s.
V. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : BFS-NID
In this section, we introduce a few-shot class-incremental
learning method for network intrusion detection combined
with branch fusion strategies. The overview of the method
consists of two modules: the feature extractor module and
the branch classifier learning module, as depicted in Fig. 3.
We first present a pre-trained feature extractor using a
self-supervised manner. Then, we describe how the branch
classifier helps the learning of the base session and the new
sessions. To coordinate the training and inference of branch
classifiers, we further propose a fusion strategy.
A. The Feature Extractor Module
Recently research demonstrated that pre-trained feature
extractors in a standard supervised manner only with base session data can achieve competitive performance in the FSCIL
task [44]. However, this manner relies on a large number of
labeled samples to train a robust feature extractor for better
feature representation. Self-supervised learning utilizes the
intrinsic structural information of samples for representation
learning without labeled samples. Therefore, we employ a selfsupervised manner to pre-train the feature extractor. Generally,
there are two common network architectures used to extract
feature embedding from image samples: Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) and Vision Transformers (ViT) [11]. In

2393

Section IV, the converted samples are not directly equivalent
to grayscale images due to the time-series nature of network
traffic. Thus, the feature extractor should be able to learn
two aspects of information including the feature of each
packet and the contextual time series relationship between
packets in bi-flows samples. CNN learns the pixel-level feature
representation of the grayscale image, which cannot capture
the time-series relationship of bi-flows packets. The ViT
divides the grayscale image into multiple patches, and the
sequence relationship between patches is represented by position encoding. It can meet network traffic data requirements:
the packets correspond to the divided patches and the timeseries relationship of the packets corresponds to the position
encoding between the patches. Therefore, we choose ViT as
the backbone network of the feature extractor. Furthermore, for
better generalization, we employ a patch mask data augmentation technique to train the feature extractor [13]. As depicted
in Fig. 3 (a), the task of a self-supervised feature exactor is
to reconstruct grayscale image samples. The grayscale image
samples are divided into patches, and then patches and position
embedding are fed into the model. Each patch size is ∈ R 4×64 ,
which corresponds to one packet of bi-flows packets.
B. The Branch Classifier Learning Module
The pre-trained feature extractor has different optimization
goals for applications, where the self-supervised pre-trained
backbone network is a grayscale image reconstruction task,
and the downstream task is an intrusion detection task.
Therefore, it is very necessary to optimize the parameters
of the feature extractor before being applied to intrusion
detection. We follow the way of the Prototype Network [32] as
the classifier, which is slightly different from the conventional
classifier when calculating the classification probability. The
Prototype Network adopts the idea of metric. In each episode,
the data fed to the model are the support set and query set.
The support set contains samples from multiple classes and is
used to compute the prototype vectors of classes. The class
prototype is the average of the feature embedding of the class
samples, calculated as:



1
fφ (xn )
(1)
pik Dki , φ =
i
|Dk |
i
(xn ,yn )∈Dk

pik represents the prototype vector of the k-th class in the
session i, pik ∈ R 1×d , Dki is the support set, and fφ is the
feature extractor. The predicted label of a query set sample is
the class with the highest similarity score calculated with class
prototype vectors. In the FSCIL task, only the training data is
available, instead of dividing it into support and query sets, we
use it as a query set to train the feature extractor, which is then
used as a support set to update the class prototype vectors.
Furthermore, we implement more simple training strategies
rather than episodic meta-learning. For this reason, we utilize
randomly initialized prototype vectors and feature embedding
of the sample to train the feature extractor and compute the
similarity score.
Consider the procedure of FSCIL using a pre-trained feature
extractor. The base session contains a large number of classes

2394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 3. Illustration of our method. BFS-NID mainly includes two modules: (a) The feature extractor module to learn pre-trained backbone network with
basic session data in a self-supervised manner, and (b) the branch classifier learning module, which contains two stages base and new session branch classifier
learning, to learn the parameters of the projection layer for different sessions and uses a fusion strategy to help model training and inference.

and data, while the new session has few classes and limited
samples. The problem of class imbalance between the base
session and the new session will exacerbate catastrophic
forgetting. To handle this issue, the base session data is used
to pre-train and fine-tune the feature extractor, which is frozen
during the learning process of subsequent new sessions. To
this end, the learning of all sessions is divided into two stages:
the base session stage and the new session stage. In the base
session stage, the pre-trained feature extractor is used to extract
feature embedding of samples, as follows:
feax = fθ (x )

(2)

fθ is the pre-trained feature extractor, and the feature embedding of the sample x is denoted as feax . Then, the cosine
distance cosine is used as a metric function to calculate the
similarity score between the feature embedding of the sample
and the prototype vectors of classes in the base session:


|pik |
j
(3)
score(x , Pi ) = ∪j =0
cosine feax , pi
Pi is the class prototype vectors in the session i, |Pi | =
j
|C i |. pi represents the prototype vector of the j-th class
in the session i. The training loss for the base session is
calculated using the Cross-Entropy loss function, and the
model is optimized using the backpropagation algorithm:


i



J D , P i , fθ = −

|D i |



yn log(score(feaxn , Pi )))

(4)

n=1

yn is the ground truth of the sample xn . When the base session
training is completed, class prototype vectors are updated via
Eq. (1). Further, these class prototype vectors are stored in the
fully connected layer W for the classification of the i-th session
classifier. Such as i = 0, W0j = p0j , where W0 belongs to
R n×d , n is the number of classes in the base session, and d is
the dimension of the class prototype vector. In the subsequent

sessions, the sample feature embedding is used to compute
prototype vectors of the classes in the new session, which are
continuously merged into the previous classifiers. After the
new session is learned, the fused classifier can be used to
classify all seen classes.
In Eq. (2), a frozen feature extractor is used to extract
feature embedding of samples for different classes across
different sessions. However, if the feature extractor is designed
to extract feature embedding for seen class samples, it is
inevitable to impair the discriminative representation of different classes in new sessions. To relieve this problem, a
re-projection for different sessions is proposed to improve
the discriminative of feature embedding for different classes
within the session. As shown in Fig. 3 (b), these sessions
are divided into two stages, the base session branch classifier
stage and the new session branch classifier stage, each session
with a projection layer Proj. In the learning stage of the base
session branch classifier, finetuning the feature extractor and
training the projection layer Proj0 . During the new session
branch classifier learning stage, only training the projection
layer Proji of the new session:

Proj0 (fθ (x )) x ∈ D i , i = 0

(5)
feax =
Proji (fθ (x )) x ∈ D i , i = 0
The projection layer Proj is a linear transformation that
transforms the original feature embedding of samples into
another feature representation space. Since only a few samples
of classes are available in the new session, the Proj0 of the
base session is used as an initialization for the Proji of the
new session and then fine-tuned to accommodate the learning
of classes in the new session.
We need to further modify the formula to enable incremental
training across different sessions. In Eq. (3) and (4), the
measure of the similarity score and the training of the model
are session-independent, new sessions did not participate in
training. In addition, in the new session learning, only use

DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

the samples in the current session, and cannot utilize the
class prototype vector that has been learned in the previous
session. However, an incremental classifier should break down
the boundaries between sessions. It should continuously adapt
to new classes, and maintain the ability to discriminate from
learned classes across different sessions. Hence, we metric the
similarity score between the feature embedding of samples and
the class prototype vectors in previous sessions during the reprojection training of the new session. P represents all classes
that have been seen already.
J





i

D , P , fθ , Proji



|D i |

=−





yn log score(feax n , P ) (6)

n=1

During the incremental learning and inference process of
the model, the re-projection of the branch classifier needs
to be continuously adjusted to select feature embedding of
the sample corresponding to the session. To achieve this
goal, we propose a branch fusion strategy that fuses the
similarity scores of different branch classifiers. Specifically,
the similarity scores between the feature embedding of different session re-projections of the query sample and known
class prototypes are first calculated. Then the similarity scores
with the corresponding class prototypes in different sessions
are selected. Further, the repository Repo is used to store
the parameters of projection layers in order to facilitate
management. The process of the algorithm is summarized as
Alg. 1. During the branch classifier training process in the base
session, the class prototype vectors and the projection layer
are randomly initialized, and then these parameters are finetuned and updated by the similarity score. In new sessions,
the class prototype vectors need to be randomly initialized
and updated. The projection layer is initialized with the base
session projection layer and updated by computing a similarity
score with learned class prototypes. During branch classifier
inference, the feature embedding of query samples is fed
into the corresponding projection layers, and similarity scores
are computed using it and seen class prototype vectors. The
similarity scores of different sessions are fused into a similarity
score matrix, and the label predicted by the classifier is the
one with the highest score.
VI. E XPERIMENT
In this section, we evaluate the proposed BFS-NID on
two popular datasets in network intrusion detection. First, we
present dataset statistics and experimental details. Then, we
comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of the BFS-NID.
Finally, we compare with baseline methods, including finetune,
CIL, and FSCIL methods.
A. Datasets and Experiment Setting
Datasets. We used CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 as
benchmark datasets [31], which are widely used in network
intrusion detection research. The CIC-IDS2017 dataset collects
five days of network traffic, and the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 contains ten days of network traffic, both of which include benign
traffic and 14 classes of malicious traffic. Each dataset provides

2395

Algorithm 1 Our Proposed Method
Require: The sequence sessions datasets D, pre-trained model
fθ , a randomly initialized prototype vector matrix W.
Ensure: Network Intrusion Detection Classifier.
1: // Training the base branch classifier.
2: Randomly initialize the parameters of the projection layer
Proj0 ;
3: for epoch p = 1, 2, . . . do
4:
for batch b = 1, 2, . . . , do
5:
Sample training samples from the base session D 0 ;
6:
Extract feature embedding of samples by Eq. (5);
7:
Calculate the similarity score using Eq. (3);
8:
end for
9:
Update fθ , Proj0 with the loss J  defined in Eq. (6);
10: end for
11: Update each prototype vector of the classes in the session;
12: Save the prototype vectors of the base session to W0 and
Proj0 to Repo.
13: // Incremental training of the new branch classifier.
14: for session i = 1, 2, . . . , N do
15:
Initialize the parameters of the projection layer Proji
with Proj0 from the repository Repo;
16:
for epoch p = 1, 2, . . . do
17:
Sample training samples from the new session D i ;
18:
Extract feature embedding of samples by Eq. (5);
19:
Calculate the similarity score Eq. (3);
20:
Update Proji with the loss J  defined in Eq. (6);
21:
end for
22:
Save the prototype vectors of the new session to Wi
and Proji to Repo.
23: end for

Pcaps files of raw network traffic and CSV files of statistical
features extracted by CICFlowMeter. As mentioned before,
we use the Pcaps files of the raw traffic for experiments.
Limited by the number of specific attack samples and label
mismatches, we choose classes with sufficient samples for
experiments. As shown in Table I, the settings of datasets are
as follows:
• There are 12 classes in CIC-IDS2017, which are divided
into 8 classes in the base session and 4 classes in the
new sessions. The 4 classes are divided into two sessions,
each session contains 2 classes.
• The CSE-CIC-IDS2018 includes 14 classes, the base
session contains 8 classes and 6 classes are further
divided into 2 new sessions, each session contains 3
classes.
• In the training phase, each class of the base session contains 2000 samples, while each class of the new session
only has 5 samples. In the testing phase, each class from
different sessions has 100 samples for evaluation.
Implementation Details: We use the Vitlarge model [11] as
the backbone network for the experiments of CIC-IDS2017
and CSE-CIC-IDS2018. We modify the parameters of the
backbone network, the dimension of the feature embedding
is changed to 512, and the patch is modified to 4 × 64.
We follow the MAE [13] to pre-train the backbone network

2396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE I
T HE S ETTINGS OF D IFFERENT S ESSIONS

TABLE II
A BLATION A NALYSIS ON T WO B ENCHMARK DATASETS TO A NALYZE THE E FFECTIVENESS OF D IFFERENT M ODULES IN BFS-NID. FE I S THE F EATURE
E XTRACTOR P RE -T RAINING M ODULE , REPROJ I S THE R E -P ROJECTION , AND BFS I S THE B RANCH F USION S TRATEGY

using a self-supervised manner, modify the decoder feature
embedding dimension to 384, and keep the patch mask ratio
at 75%. Our network is built using the deep learning library
PyTorch and optimized by SGD. In the base session branch
classifier training stage, the CIC-IDS2017 dataset is iterated
40 epochs with a learning rate of 0.05, and the CSE-CICIDS2018 dataset is iterated 80 epochs with a learning rate of
0.002. The training stage of the new session branch classifier
is iterated 100 epochs on both datasets with a learning rate of
0.0002, and the batch size is 128.
Evaluation Protocol: To quantitatively evaluate the
performance and resist forgetting the ability of different
methods, follow [46], we use Top 1 accuracy and performance
dropping rate (PD) as evaluation indicators. Top 1 accuracy
is used to indicate the model prediction accuracy, and the
accuracy of the first session is represented by A. PD is used
to measure the accuracy drop rate of the sessions, that is,
PD=A-B, where A is the accuracy of the base session, and B
is the accuracy of the last incremental session. The model with
a smaller PD means a better anti-forgetting effect. In addition,
we also use multi-class evaluation indicators to measure
the false positives and false negatives of network intrusion
detection, which will be reported through the confusion
matrix.
B. Experimental Analysis
We conducted multiple experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of modules in the proposed method. Further, we
compare and analyze the pre-trained models of the standard
supervised manner and the self-supervised manner. Finally, the
false positives and false negatives of the proposed method are
analyzed during the incremental learning process.
Ablation Analysis: We first performed an ablation analysis on two benchmark datasets to observe the effectiveness
of different modules, as shown in Table II. We gradually

introduce our designs to observe their impact on predictive
performance. For example, only use the self-supervised
features extractor (FE), use the re-projection (REPROJ), and
further combine the branch fusion strategy (BFS). From
Table II, we can observe that the self-supervised model has
competitive incremental learning ability. But it still faces
serious overfitting and catastrophic forgetting problems. In
the last session, the PD performance dropped by 11.21% and
12.88% on the CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 datasets
respectively. After adding the REPROJ, the accuracy of different sessions is improved, and the PD performance is improved
by 4.13% and 2.88% on the two datasets, respectively. It
should be noted that although the backbone network uses a
vision transformer as an encoder network, these parameters
will be frozen after the base session branch is trained.
The main reason for the model performance improvement
is the establishment of corresponding re-projection feature
embedding for different sessions. In addition, when the BFS
is considered, the prediction performance of the model will be
further improved. We can infer that considering the prototype
vector relationship when optimizing the re-projection feature
embedding helps to improve the distinction between the old
and new classes. These results imply that our proposed method
can achieve stable performance improvements on the few-shot
class-incremental learning task.
To further observe the predictive performance improvement
brought by the REPROJ, we visualize the feature embedding
of test samples and the learned decision boundary in a lowdimensional space using t-SNE [34]. As depicted in Fig. 4, the
classes encountered during the incremental learning sessions
of two network intrusion detection datasets CIC-IDS2017 and
CSE-CIC-IDS2018 are visualized. Fig. 4 (a) and (c) show the
decision boundary using the self-supervised manner of the
feature extractor. The decision boundary with the REPROJ
is visualized in Fig. 4 (b) and (d). By comparing before
and after adding REPROJ, we can observe that the sample

DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

2397

Fig. 4. t-SNE [34] visualization of data embedding and classifier decision
boundaries before and after the REPROJ on two benchmarks. The shaded area
depicts the decision boundary for each class.

feature embedding of different classes in the feature space
is clearly separated, while the sample feature embedding
of the same class is tightly embedded or clustered. This
indicates the REPROJ is able to update class prototype
vectors and calibrate decision boundaries through re-projection
feature representation in the new session branch classifier
learning stage, even though a few samples of new incremental
classes. For example, a 2-way 5-shot branch incremental task
contains 2 classes, and only 5 samples of each class are
available.
We demonstrate the predictive performance of without
and with branch fusion strategy in the last session using a
confusion matrix with normalization. As shown in Fig. 5,
we present the confusion matrix on two datasets, with bold
blue lines separating the classes of the base session and
the new classes of subsequent sessions. The x-axis of the
confusion matrix indicates the ground truth, and the y-axis
indicates the prediction by the model. The diagonal elements
of the confusion matrix represent classification accuracy.
Fig. 5 (a) and (c) are the normalization confusion matrix
of the datasets CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 without
adding the branch fusion strategy. The normalization confusion
matrix of the branch fusion strategy is shown in Fig. 5
(b) and (d). By comparison, we can observe that the overall
false positive rate of all classes has decreased. For example,
in the CSE-CIC-2018, the Benign class was misclassified to
the other six classes when the branch fusion strategy was not
added. The number of misclassified to other classes was four
after the addition. The figure demonstrates the branch fusion
strategy can effectively maintain and utilize the discriminative
relationship between the learned class prototype and the new
class knowledge, thereby helping the re-projection to complete
the adaptive update of the new class feature embedding.
Analysis of model pre-training manner: Further, we compare the performance impact of BFS-NID employing different

Fig. 5.
Normalized confusion matrices with REPROJ and BFS on two
benchmark datasets. We use bold blue lines to separate regions of the base
session classes and incremental classes of new sessions.

Fig. 6. Comparison of different training manners for pre-trained model on
two benchmarks: (a) CIC-IDS2017 and (b) CSE-CIC-IDS2018.

pre-training manners. As shown in Fig. 6, we evaluate the
performance of the same backbone network on different
sessions using two pre-training manners, a standard supervised manner, and a self-supervised manner. From the figure,
we can observe that the self-supervised manner model has
a better resist-forgetting ability. In the CIC-IDS2017, the
self-supervised manner of the model maintains superior
performance and PD in different sessions. In the CSE-CICIDS2018, the model of the self-supervised manner has an
explicit advantage in the PD, but the model of the standard
manner in session 1 has better predictive performance. We
infer there are two main reasons. First, the self-supervised
pre-training model can obtain feature embedding with better
generalization through representation learning. In addition, the
data augmentation with patch mask utilizes the transformer
structure to simulate the context sequence relationship of
different packets to enhance the generalization of the model

2398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 7. Normalized confusion matrices on two benchmarks between two
sessions. We use bold blue lines to separate regions of the base session classes
and incremental classes of new sessions.

further. Second, the standard supervised pre-training model
relies on a large amount of training data and requires the
training data to maintain diversity to obtain better model
generalization. On the contrary, when the training data lacks
diversity, higher classification accuracy can be achieved, but
the generalization ability of incremental learning is lost. From
the perspective of the incremental learning task, compared
with the standard pre-training manner the self-supervised
pre-training manner can effectively resist the catastrophic
forgetting problem.
False Positive and False Negative Analysis: In the application of network security, false positives and negatives are
important indicators that affect whether the intrusion detection
system can be deployed. A large number of false negatives
will lead to the inability to detect intrusion in time, and
important assets or data will be stolen. Many false positives
will lead to excessive manpower and time costs for analysis.
To this end, we present normalized confusion matrices to
evaluate false positives and negatives in different incremental
learning tasks. Since 100% accuracy was achieved in the
base session phase, we only plot the confusion matrix for
the subsequent two incremental phases. As shown in Fig. 7,
we report the confusion matrices on two network intrusion
detection datasets, with bold blue lines separating the classes
of the base session and the new classes of subsequent sessions.
The x-axis of the confusion matrix indicates the ground
truth, and the y-axis indicates the prediction by the model.
The diagonal elements of the confusion matrix represent the
classification accuracy of the model.
First, we analyze the false negatives of BFS-NID. In CICIDS2017, the false negative rate of session 1 and session

2 remains the same at 2%. In CSE-CIC-IDS2018, the false
negative rate of session 1 was 1%, and session 2 increased
to 5%. It can be observed that BFS-NID has a maximum
false negative rate of 5%. Then, we analyze the false positives
in the case of benign and attack binary classification. In
CIC-IDS2017, benign samples in session 1 are misclassified
into two attack classes SSH-Patator and Bot with 1% and
14% probabilities, respectively. The number of misclassified attack classes increased to three in session 2, namely
SSH-Patator 1%, Bot 13%, and WEB-BruteForce 1%. In CSECIC-IDS2018, benign samples in session 1 were misclassified
into four attack classes: DOS-Slowloris 1%, BruteForce-Web
4%, BruteForce-XSS 1%, DDoS-LOIC-UDP 3%. In session
2, the number of misclassified attack classes remained the
same, but the attack classes were modified to BruteForce-Web
1%, DDoS-LOIC-UDP 1%, Infiltration 8%, and BroteForceSSH 1%. According to observations, BFS-NID produces a
large false positive rate, 15% of benign samples that are
misclassified as attacks. We infer the main reason is benign
data contain a wider diversity, which is very easy to confuse
with the behavior patterns of existing attack class samples.
Finally, we analyze the false positives among attack
classes. Alerts triggered by attacks provide detailed descriptive
information for subsequent analysis by cybersecurity experts.
Therefore, we not only need to pay attention to whether an
attack has occurred but also need fine-grained attack class
description information. It can be seen from the figure that
most of the attack classes maintain good distinguishability, but
some attack classes are seriously confused. In Fig. 7 (b), the
attack samples of Web-BruteForce are misclassified as SSHPatator and Web-XSS with 14% and 13%, respectively. The
Web-XSS samples are misclassified as DoS-SlowHTTPTest
at 13% and Web-BruteForce at 20%. In Fig. 7 (d), 49% of
the attack samples of BruteForce-Wed are misclassified as
BruteForce-XSS, and 14% of BruteForce-XSS are misclassified as BruteForce-Wed. In addition, DDoS-LOIC-UDP was
misclassified as DDoS-LOIC-HTTP with 24%. We observe
that these severely confused attack classes share some of
the same attack tricks and techniques, making it difficult
to distinguish them from the feature representation level.
For example, in CIC-IDS2017, both brute force and XSS
belong to Web attacks but use different attack methods.
In CSE-CIC-IDS2018, both DDoS-LOIC-HTTP and DDoSLOIC-UDP are distributed denial-of-service attacks, but they
use different network protocols.
C. Comparison With Baseline Methods
We compare the performance of BFS-NID with five existing
baseline methods on two benchmark datasets. The results are
in Fig. 8 and details are shown in Table III. From Fig. 8,
we observe that our proposed method achieves the highest
accuracy across different sessions and maintains the lowest PD
during the overall incremental learning. It is particularly noteworthy that the accuracy rate of benchmark datasets exceeds
the existing baseline methods by 1%, and the PD exceeds
1%. The finetune suffers from severe catastrophic forgetting
problems when learning new class knowledge because it

DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

2399

TABLE III
C OMPARISON W ITH BASELINE M ETHODS ON CIC-IDS2017 AND CSE-CIC-IDS2018 DATASETS

Fig. 8.

Comparison with baselines on two benchmarks: (a) CIC-IDS2017 and (b) CSE-CIC-IDS2018.
TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS IN P RECISION ,
R ECALL , AND F1-S CORE

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ODELS . A LL E XPERIMENTS RUN ON
NVIDIA T ESLA P100. FLOP S A RE T ESTED W ITH O NE S AMPLE AND
THE I NFERENCE S PEED (S AMPLES /S ECOND ) I S THE AVERAGE OF 100
RUNS W ITH A BATCH S IZE OF 100 A FTER H ARDWARE WARM -U P

does not consider the learned class knowledge. The class
incremental learning methods iCaRL [27] and FOSTER [36],
can maintain the balanced relationship between the learned
class and the new class knowledge when learning new class
knowledge, but require many available samples during incremental learning. We observe that these methods face serious
overfitting problems when only a few samples are available.
IDFSCIL [35], LIMIT [46] and C-FSCIL [14] are few-shot
class incremental learning methods that use standard pretraining models to achieve competitive performance. We also
compared the precision, recall, and f1-score of the last session
with the baseline methods, as shown in Table IV. Compared
with them, we think the BFS-NID advantage mainly lies in

two aspects. The self-supervised manner pre-trained model
provides better feature representation ability. In addition, BFSNID performs a re-project feature embedding for different
incremental stages, which relieves the feature embedding
of samples of other classes from being embedded into an
approximate feature space. Overall, our proposed method
outperforms the baseline methods and achieves the best model
prediction performance on two network intrusion detection
benchmark datasets.
We also observed some flaws in the computational
performance of BFS-NID. In Table V, we show the floatingpoint operations (FLOPs), memory usage, and inference speed
for all models in the last session. The FLOPs is often used to

2400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

measure the theoretical complexity of an algorithm or model.
We observe that BFS-NID has high complexity and poor
inference performance. Although C-FSCIL has higher FLOPs,
it still demonstrates superior inference speed than BFS-NID.
The reason is that FLOPs is an indirect measure that ignores
important factors such as memory access cost and model
execution parallel. Furthermore, IDFSCIL and BFS-NID use
the same backbone network architecture, show similar FLOPs,
and have the bottom two inference speeds. We can infer that
the reason for the low computational performance of BFSNID is that the backbone network architecture used and the
multiple branches implemented are not conducive to parallel
operations. An alternative solution may involve alternative
backbone network architectures such as lightweight ViT [20].
VII. C ONCLUSION
Network intrusion detection is one of the most critical
ways to find and detect intrusion. However, existing network
intrusion detection methods should not be able to incremental
learning of new attack classes with a few samples. The main
challenge is catastrophic forgetting and overfitting. In this
paper, we propose BFS-NID for the few-shot class-incremental
learning of network intrusion detection. The BFS-NID contains the pre-train feature extractor module and the branch
classifier learning module. The pre-train feature extractor
using a self-supervised is used to learn powerful feature
representation ability. In the branch classifier learning module,
re-projection is used to enhance the feature embedding, and a
branch fusion strategy helps to correlate different sessions and
build up the contextual relationship between class prototypes.
We conduct experiments on two network intrusion detection
datasets and the results demonstrate that BFS-NID achieves the
best predictive performance. In future work, we will explore
fine-grained network intrusion detection in the open world,
and verify the detection performance of the adopted network
traffic representation method on the encrypted network traffic.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. Anthi, L. Williams, M. Słowińska, G. Theodorakopoulos, and
P. Burnap, “A supervised intrusion detection system for smart home
IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 9042–9053,
Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2926365.
[2] L. Alcantara, G. Padilha, R. Abreu, and M. D’Amorim, “Syrius:
Synthesis of rules for intrusion detectors,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 71,
no. 1, pp. 370–381, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TR.2021.3061297.
[3] R. Aljundi, F. Babiloni, M. Elhoseiny, M. Rohrbach, and T. Tuytelaars,
“Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget,” in Proc.
15th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vision (ECCV), vol. 11207, 2018, pp. 144–161,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9_9.
[4] J. M. Beaver, C. T. Symons, and R. E. Gillen, “A learning system
for discriminating variants of malicious network traffic,” in Proc.
8th Annu. Cyber Secur. Inf. Intell. Res. Workshop, 2013, pp. 1–4,
doi: 10.1145/2459976.2460003.
[5] G. Bendiab, S. Shiaeles, A. Alruban, and N. Kolokotronis, “IoT
Malware network traffic classification using visual representation and
deep learning,” in Proc. 6th IEEE Conf. Netw. Softw. (NetSoft), Ghent,
Belgium, 2020, pp. 444–449, doi: 10.1109/NetSoft48620.2020.9165381.
[6] M. M. Alani and A. I. Awad, “An intelligent two-layer intrusion
detection system for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 683–692, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TII.2022.3192035.
[7] V. L. Cao, M. Nicolau, and J. McDermott, “Learning neural representations for network anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 49,
no. 8, pp. 3074–3087, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2018.2838668.

[8] Y. Chai, J. Qiu, L. Yin, L. Zhang, B. B. Gupta and Z. Tian, “From
data and model levels: Improve the performance of few-shot malware
classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4,
pp. 4248–4261, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3200866.
[9] Y. Chai, L. Du, J. Qiu, L. Yin, and Z. Tian, “Dynamic prototype network
based on sample adaptation for few-shot malware detection,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4754–4766, May 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2022.3142820.
[10] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40,
Jan./Feb. 2012, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2012.6135854.
[11] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–21.
[12] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow
topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in
label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3213807.
[13] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans, LA, USA,
2022, pp. 15979–15988, doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01553.
[14] M. Hersche, G. Karunaratne, G. Cherubini, L. Benini, A. Sebastian, and
A. Rahimi, “Constrained few-shot class-incremental learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans,
LA, USA, 2022, pp. 9047–9057, doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.00885.
[15] S. Hou, X. Pan, C. C. Loy, Z. Wang, and D. Lin, “Learning a unified
classifier incrementally via rebalancing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Long Beach, CA, USA, 2019,
pp. 831–839, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00092.
[16] X. Hou, J. Zhang, C. He, Y. Ji, J. Zhang, and J. Han, “Autonomous
driving at the handling limit using residual reinforcement learning,” Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 54, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 101754,
doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2022.101754.
[17] M. J. Hashemi, E. Keller, and S. Tizpaz-Niari, “Detecting unseen
anomalies in network systems by leveraging neural networks,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2515–2528, Sep. 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3220775.
[18] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
networks,” 2016, arXiv: 1612.00796.
[19] A. Kukleva, H. Kuehne, and B. Schiele, “Generalized and incremental
few-shot learning by explicit learning and calibration without forgetting,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Montreal, QC,
Canada, 2021, pp. 9000–9009, doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00889.
[20] Y. Li et al., “Rethinking vision transformers for MobileNet size
and speed,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023,
pp. 16889–16900.
[21] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, Dec. 2018,
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2773081.
[22] Y. Liu, B. Schiele, and Q. Sun, “RMM: Reinforced memory management
for class-incremental learning,” Proc. 35th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., NeurIPS 2021, pp.3478–3490.
[23] Y. Lian, Q. Yang, Y. Liu, and W. Xie, “A spatio-temporal constrained
hierarchical scheduling strategy for multiple warehouse mobile robots
under industrial cyber-physical system,” Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 52,
Apr. 2022, Art. no. 101572, doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2022.101572.
[24] Q. Liu, H. B. Keller, and V. Hagenmeyer, “A Bayesian rule learning
based intrusion detection system for the MQTT communication protocol,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Availab., Rel. Secur., Vienna, Austria, 2021,
pp. 1–10, doi: 10.1145/3465481.3470046.
[25] K. Liu et al., “Security analysis of mobile device-to-device network
applications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2922–2932,
Apr. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2877174.
[26] P. Mazumder, P. Singh, and P. Rai, “Few-shot lifelong learning,” in Proc.
35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp.2337–2345.
[27] S. A. Rebuffi, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and C. H. Lampert, “iCaRL:
Incremental classifier and representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 2017,
pp. 5533–5542, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.587.
[28] J. R. Rose et al., “IDERES: Intrusion detection and response system
using machine learning and attack graphs,” J. Syst. Architect., vol. 131,
Oct. 2022, Art. no. 102722.
[29] X. Sun, J. Dai, P. Liu, A. Singhal, and J. Yen, “Using Bayesian
networks for probabilistic identification of zero-day attack paths,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Foren. Secur., vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 2506–2521, Oct. 2018,
doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2018.2821095.

DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

[30] G. Shi, J. Chen, W. Zhang, L.-M. Zhan, and X.-M. Wu “Overcoming
catastrophic forgetting in incremental few-shot learning by finding flat
minima,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.(NeurIPS),
2021, pp. 6747–6761.
[31] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, (ICISSP), Funchal, Portugal,
2018, pp. 108–116.
[32] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
learning,” in Proc. 31st Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
pp. 4077–4087.
[33] X. Tao, X. Hong, X. Chang, S. Dong, X. Wei, and Y. Gong, “Fewshot class-incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 2020, pp. 12180–12189,
doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01220.
[34] L. Van Der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” in
Proc. J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, 2008, pp. 2579–2605.
[35] T. Wang, Q. Lv, B. Hu, and D. Sun, “A few-shot class-incremental
learning approach for intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), Athens, Greece, 2021, pp. 1–8,
doi: 10.1109/ICCCN52240.2021.9522260.
[36] F. Y. Wang, D. W. Zhou, H. J. Ye, and D.-C. Zha, “FOSTER: Feature
boosting and compression for class-incremental learning,” in Proc. 17th
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vision (ECCV), vol. 13685, 2022, pp. 398–414,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-19806-9_23.
[37] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network
intrusion detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020,
doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2020.2991876.
[38] K. Xie et al., “On-line anomaly detection with high accuracy,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1222–1235,
Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TNET.2018.2819507.
[39] S. Yan, J. Xie, and X. He, “DER: Dynamically expandable representation
for class incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Nashville, TN, USA, 2021, pp. 3013–3022,
doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00303.
[40] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage learning
approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, 2021, pp. 3538–3553,
doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3083422.
[41] L. Yu, et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
Art. no. 108117. doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108117.
[42] L. Yu et al., “Semantic drift compensation for class-incremental
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 2020, pp. 6980–6989,
doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00701.
[43] H. Zhao, Y. Fu, M. Kang, Q. Tian, F. Wu, and X. Li, “MgSvF:
Multi-grained slow vs. fast framework for few-shot class-incremental
learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., early access, Dec. 9,
2021, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3133897.
[44] C. Zhang, N. Song, G. Lin, Y. Zheng, P. Pan, and Y. Xu, “Fewshot incremental learning with continually evolved classifiers,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Nashville, TN,
USA, 2021, pp. 12450–12459, doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01227.
[45] D.-W. Zhou, F.-Y. Wang, H.-J. Ye, L. Ma, S. Pu, and D.-C. Zhan,
“Forward compatible few-shot class-incremental learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans,
LA, USA, 2022, pp. 9036–9046, doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.00884.
[46] D.-W. Zhou, H.-J. Ye, L. Ma, D. Xie, S. Pu, and D.-C. Zhan, “Fewshot class-incremental learning by sampling multi-phase tasks,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 12816–12831,
Nov. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3200865.
[47] J. Zhao, R. Masood, and S. Seneviratne, “A review of
computer vision methods in network security,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1838–1878, 3rd Quart., 2021,
doi: 10.1109/COMST.2021.3086475.

2401

Lei Du received the master’s degree from the Hebei
University of Science and Technology in 2021. He
is currently with the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
(Shenzhen), China. He is also with Peng Cheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His research focuses
on cyberspace security, machine intelligence, and
open-world learning.

Zhaoquan Gu (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from
Tsinghua University in 2011 and 2015, respectively.
He was a Professor and the Associate Dean of
the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
Guangzhou University, China. He is currently a
Professor with the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
(Shenzhen), China. He is also a Professor with
the Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His research interests
include cyberspace security, cyber range, big data analysis, and artificial
intelligence security.

Ye Wang received the Ph.D. degree in information
and mathematical science from Victoria University,
Australia, in 2019. She is currently a Research
Fellow with the Harbin Institute of Technology
(Shenzhen) and an Assistant Professor with the
National University of Defense Technology. Her
research interests include social network analysis,
information content security, and knowledge graph
reasoning.

Le Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from NUDT, China, in
2008. He is currently an Associate Professor with
the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
Guangzhou University as well as a Part Time
Associate Professor with Pengcheng Laboratory,
China. He has authored 20+ journal and conference
papers in these areas, as well as a book in Chinese.
His current research interests include network and
big data security. He also served as the co-chair and
the general chair of international conferences. He is
a member of the China Computer Federation.

Yan Jia is a Professor with the Harbin Institute
of Technology (Shenzhen). She is also a Professor
with the Department of New Networks, Peng
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. As a Principal
Investigator, she has undertaken more than 20
national projects, including the National Key Project
of 863 Program and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China. Her research interests cover
big data analysis, artificial intelligence, online social
network analysis, and security situation awareness
and analysis in cyberspace. She serves as the Vice
Chairman at the Chinese Information Processing Society of China and the
Chair of the Specialty Committee of Big Search in Cyberspace.