2190

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

A Multihead Attention Self-Supervised
Representation Model for Industrial Sensors
Anomaly Detection
Yiqun Qiao , Jinhu Lü , Fellow, IEEE, Tian Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Kexin Liu ,
Baochang Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Hichem Snoussi

Abstract—Industrial sensors capture critical information for intelligent manufacturing maintenance. To promote
equipment upgrading and manufacturing processes, intelligent decisions, and information learning play an important
role. Although deep learning methods historically obtain
excellent results, there is always a tradeoff between finetuning existing networks or designing models from scratch
for sensor data processing. In this article, we propose the
multihead attention self-supervised (MAS) representation
model, which is a self-supervised learning-based sensor
feature extraction network. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first time a self-supervised contrastive learning
method using positive samples that represent multidimensional industry sensor data is being used for anomaly detection. We review alternative data augmentation methods
proposed for better-representing sensor sequence data. We
use this insight to design a new structure that adapts to
the temporal characteristics of the application. We apply
our method to a real-world water circulation system that
uses a variety of industrial sensors. The effectiveness of
the proposed MAS methods is demonstrated.

Manuscript received 1 June 2022; revised 7 December 2022 and
20 March 2023; accepted 13 May 2023. Date of publication 21 June
2023; date of current version 19 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant
2022YFB3305600; in part by the National Science Foundation of China
under Grant 92067204, Grant 62141604, Grant 61972016, and Grant
62032016; and in part by the Beijing Nova Program under Grant
2022122. Paper no. TII-22-2332. (Corresponding author: Jinhu Lü.)
Yiqun Qiao is with the School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
Qfrank@buaa.edu.cn).
Jinhu Lü is with the School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and also with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: jhlu@iss.ac.cn).
Tian Wang and Baochang Zhang are with the Institute of Artificial
Intelligence, the State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and also with
the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: wangtian@buaa.edu.cn; bczhang@buaa.edu.cn).
Kexin Liu is with the School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: kxliu@buaa.edu.cn).
Hichem Snoussi is with the Charles Delaunay Institute (ICD),
University of Technology of Troyes, 10004 Troyes, France (e-mail:
hichem.snoussi@utt.fr).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3280337.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3280337

Index Terms—Anomaly detection, multihead attention
self-supervised (MAS) feature representation method, sensor time-series data, the industrial Internet of things (IIoT).

I. INTRODUCTION
NDUSTRIAL Internet of things (IIoT) has been rapidly
developing in the last few years, e.g., in smart factories,
unmanned logistics sorting, and collaborative production. IIoT
integrates industrial production equipment, industrial sensors,
and monitoring devices. Intelligent analysis is embedded into
different industrial production parts through wired and wireless
transmission data. The processing and analysis of data are
particularly important in industrial production processes [1].
And these important data are captured by industrial sensors. The
collected information extracted from various datasets provides
valuable information for subsequent evaluation and decisionmaking. An implementation of IIoT is the timely detection of
system abnormalities via sensor data, which must be meaningful
to ensure the safety and stability of industrial production.
Data generated by many sensors are widely transmitted. Fig. 1
depicts an industrial scenario of industrial production processes.
There are a variety of different sensors that can collect industrial
data, such as temperature and vibration. These data are dynamic
and high-dimensional, processed and stored on edge computing via data transfer, and further transferred to the cloud by
network technology [2]. Some tasks, such as status monitoring
and anomaly detection, have been further implemented. Data
processing methods are often adapted to mine information, but
effective analysis is very important for anomaly detection or
traffic analysis of an industrial system.
Data acquired by industrial sensors are usually in the form of
a time series. The status information is represented via a single
sensor, such as current data, temperature data, vibration data,
and other data from various types of sensors. In some cases, the
cooperation of multisensor information is required. For example,
it may be difficult for a single sensor to capture a system-level
abnormality, but the abnormality can be analyzed from data
collected by multiple sensors. For a single sensor, the data
currently obtained often have a particular correlation with data
collected previously, indicating that the data are time-dependent.
Data analysis is important for IIoT status surveillance.
Anomaly detection is one of the key implementations. Abnormal

I

1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL

Fig. 1. Framework diagram of the IIoT. In industrial sites, data are
collected by sensors and transmitted to the edge plane. And further, it is
transmitted to the cloud plane through the network to accomplish some
tasks, such as state monitoring. Therefore, effective data processing and
analysis will aid in the mining of sensor data features and the information contained within them, which is of great importance for industrial
production.

data include values that are too large or too small and can be
defined by using expert knowledge. However, due to complex
environments and operating conditions, abnormalities are often
related to normal values. Hardware anomalies, such as various
equipment failures, and anomalies caused by environmental
disturbances are common in industrial systems. These industrial
anomalies can disrupt the entire industrial system’s production,
and may even result in extremely significant mishaps. As a
result, abnormalities in the system should be captured timely
and accurately by using many sensors. This is also an important
task of industrial internet intelligence and security.
In a nutshell, there are two types of anomaly detection
approaches: traditional machine learning methods and deep
learning methods. Traditional anomaly detection methods include time-series models, such as autoregressive moving average
models [3], Markov models [4], and Kalman filters [5]. These
methods do not generally have high detection accuracy and
are also not good enough for high-dimensional long-sequence
time-series feature extraction. In deep learning, neural networks
apply to anomaly detection and show better detection performance than traditional methods. In the training network phase
of supervised learning, training data must be labeled. Label samples for industrial data require manual labeling by experienced
engineers, which is costly and time-consuming. If the quantity
of negative samples marked throughout the training process is
insufficient, the unbalanced training results will induce inadequate learning. Unsupervised learning refers to solving the
problem of pattern recognition on unlabeled datasets. In anomaly
detection, prediction-based or reconstruction-based methods are
the most used. Unsupervised learning can far exceed supervised
learning in terms of training set size. It is normally important
to employ a normal dataset during training, and the proportion
of the abnormal data in training samples may cause distinct
accuracies. As a result, in real-world scenarios, that means the
dataset must be carefully screened and selected. For example,
Malhotra et al. [6] introduced an LSTM-based encoder–decoder
model that learns to represent feature vectors of normal timeseries behavior for the sensor anomaly detection problem and
then applies reconstruction error to detect abnormalities. These
unsupervised methods rely on the reconstruction of the input
from the output or prediction tasks. However, prediction or

2191

reconstruction approaches may not be necessary for representation learning.
It is hard work to train the model when the training set has
abnormal data. Therefore, we consider that contrast learning
is appropriate when applied to the field of anomaly detection.
Meanwhile, Yann LeCun also believes that self-supervision is
an important point for future AI research [7]. He thinks that
self-supervised learning (SSL) is one of the most promising
ways to build background knowledge and approximate a form
of common sense in Al systems. Background knowledge can
be considered as data generality representations. In the pretraining stage, the SSL model captures general representations
through certain specific tasks or ingenious design by using
unlabeled data. It is difficult to label all the data for AI systems,
but self-supervision pretraining can learn the representation of
unlabeled data. So we start to do some preliminary work in
the field of industrial anomaly detection using self-supervised
representation learning methods.
Despite artificial intelligence technology in different fields
sharing some common intuition and model structure, details for
specific fields are quite different. Simply adopting methods from
other fields usually leads to bad performance. Hence, in practice,
algorithms designed for specific fields should be applied to make
the model effective. Specifically, for sensor data, we need careful
design to modify the algorithms including data preprocession,
data augmentation, representation, and network structure.
In this work, we propose the multihead attention selfsupervised (MAS) representation model, a novel end-to-end approach for self-supervised representation-based anomaly detection method. The MAS method allows the existence of outliers
in the training set, which is more in line with the characteristics
of actual collected data. The method does not depend on the
assumption of a statistical distribution of the data. The main
contributions of our article are as follows.
1) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a selfsupervised representation contrastive learning method
with positive samples is used for anomaly detection of
industrial sensors. The network extracts general features
of time-series data via a set of tasks. After the feature
extraction work is completed in the pretraining stage, the
process is applied to the anomaly detection task.
2) For the enhancement of time-series data, we propose three
different enhancement strategies: adding noise, random
masking, and flipping data. These methods are compared
via experiments. Since abnormal samples can be regarded
as a way of data enhancement and the number of abnormal
samples is typically modest in real-world scenarios, there
is no need to remove abnormal data in the pretraining
stage.
3) A sensor data feature extraction network is proposed. The
network can extract effective and generic features from
time series data. In industrial production environments,
there are also many sensors with sample values scattered
over a wide range. Only raw sensor data are required when
utilizing the MAS model.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. We review
related work in Section II and describe our approach in detail in

2192

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Section III. We describe the dataset and perform experimental
analysis in Section IV, and summarize our work in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review the existing approaches for industrial anomaly detection. Since we also use a contrastive learning
approach applied for anomaly detection tasks, as contrastive
learning is the key technology of SSL, we also introduce it to
anomaly detection.
A. Industrial Data Analysis
Anomaly detection techniques for IIoT have received much
attention in recent years. Anomaly detection methods in IIoT can
be divided into traditional machine methods and deep learning
methods. Rodrigo et al. [8] proposed autoregressive integrated
moving average model (ARIMA) to detect anomalies in sensors.
The ARIMA method can transform a dynamic time series into
a stationary one, and then predict future values based on past
values by setting prediction intervals as criteria for anomaly
detection. However, this method is typically applied to a onedimensional time series, while the accuracy deserves further
improvement.
A growing number of machine learning approaches are being
applied to anomaly detection problems with the development of
deep learning. Some neural networks, such as long short-term
memory (LSTM) network, have been extensively researched and
applied to time series data. Wu et al. [2] proposed a LSTMGauss–Bayes method for outlier detection for IIOT. They combined LSTM and Gaussian Bayesian models to introduce model
prediction errors into a normally distributed Naive Bayesian
model to detect anomalies.
LSTM is relatively lightweight, however, it cannot be parallelized during training. The attention mechanism focuses on a
part of the information while ignoring other parts of the information. This methodology has been successful in transformers [9].
The attention mechanism is effective and can be trained in
parallel; it is being gradually applied to anomaly detection
in time-series data. Liu et al. [10] proposed a LSTM model
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based on attention
mechanisms for federal learning frameworks, resulting in data
acquisition of fine-grained features. Li et al. [11] proposed a
model using multihead attention mechanism to detect anomalous behavior in ICS network traffic data when smart charging
piles. The model does not require preprocessing of the data, it can
extract high-dimensional information between the original flows
better than many other methods (such as CNN-LeNET [12],
CNN-sVGG [13], CNN-sAlexNET [14], SVM-rbf [15], random
forest [16], and decision tree [17]).
In addition to the approaches discussed previously, there
are methods for detecting data anomalies based on generative
adversarial networks (GAN) [18] or variational autoencoders
(VAE) [19]. Both GAN model and VAE model are generative
models that use training data to build real data distributions, and
then use the learned models and distributions to generate modeling to model new data. Gong et al. [20] used a memory module to
improve the autoencoder, where the most relevant memories are

recovered for reconstruction. The model makes no assumptions
about the data type and in unusual instances, can increase the
reconstruction error. Zhou et al. [21] proposed a variational
LSTM network based on reconstructed representations for the
industrial big data network intrusion problem. The work learns
low-dimensional feature representations from high-dimensional
raw data to identify not only the presence of anomalies, but
also the class of anomalies. In addition, Qi et al. [22] addressed
the issue of cyber-attacks in industrial logistics networks and
proposes the multiaspect data streams detection method. This
method combines the techniques of locality-sensitive hashing,
isolation forest, and PCA. On the dataset UNSW-NB15, it
achieves state-of-the-art performance. Su et al. [23] combined
a Gaussian mixture model with a one-dimensional CNN to
detect instance anomalies for servers in large data centers. It has
also been validated and achieves the best performance on the
ByteDance server dataset. Lin et al. [24] proposed an anomaly
detection model that combines VAE and LSTM. The VAE model
is used to construct robust local features over a brief window,
and the LSTM method is used to estimate long-term correlations
over VAE-inferred features. Although GAN model and VAE
model sometimes have high precision for anomaly detection,
the computational cost is high and such reconstruction may not
be necessary for feature learning. Instead, various network structures are used to enhance data feature learning. For the problem
of anomaly detection in industrial sensors, it is very important
to design a reasonable model for representation learning.
B. Self-Supervised Representation Learning
Self-supervised representation learning has been rapidly developing in recent years and has been applied to the fields
of image processing [25], video processing [26], and natural
language processing [27] with good results.
Contrastive learning is a technique that allows a model to
learn which data points are similar or different to understand the
general characteristics of a dataset. In general, self-supervised
representation learning is realized by constructing positive samples and negative samples and measuring the distance between
positive and negative samples. The frequent loss function is InfoNCE [28], which seeks to bring the distance between positive
sample pairs closer and the distance between negative sample
pairs farther.
Many current contrastive learning approaches concentrate on
vision processing and natural language processing. In the field
of computer vision, methods of self-supervised representation
learning are gradually gaining attention from researchers. Doersch et al. [29] suggested using jigsaw puzzles to build an auxiliary task. By segmenting the image and predicting the relative
positions of these parts, the network is trained. Methods based on
contrast learning have produced positive results in recent years.
Chen et al. [30] began by emphasizing the significance of various
data enhancement methods before arguing that introducing nonlinear transformations between data representation and contrast
loss can improve the quality of the learned representations. Recently, generative-based self-supervised representation learning
methods have gradually received attention from researchers.

QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL

TABLE I
TABLE OF SYMBOLS, THE CORRESPONDING MEANINGS OF
DIFFERENT SYMBOLS

He et al. [31] proposed a mask-based autoencoder to pretrain the
backbone network via an asymmetric encoder–decoder structure; the literature [32] improved on this basis by predicting
the features of the masked region rather than reconstructing the
original image.
At present, there are few kinds of research on contrast learning
in the field of time series anomaly detection. In literature [33],
Deldari et al. first proposed the method of contrastive learning for
time-series change point detection. In this research, a temporal
convolutional network [34] is used to extract sequence features.
The effect of batch size, code size, and windows size on the
outcomes are investigated.
Finding appropriate auxiliary activities is critical for boosting model training accuracy in self-supervised representation
learning. In the pretraining stage, various auxiliary tasks in the
video, image, and natural language processing are designed to
increase the ability of model feature extraction. However, applying contrastive learning methods to industrial time-series data
instead poses some unique challenges. We attempt to address
the problem of using self-supervised representation learning to
provide effective representations for anomaly detection.
III. METHODOLOGY
We introduce a self-supervised representation contrastive
learning model [35].
From the previous analysis, we know that industrial sensor
data is time-dependent. When an abnormality occurs in the
system, many sensors may gather abnormal data concurrently.
To build more accurate and efficient detection models, we need
to be able to capture time-dependent characteristics and use
information collected from multiple sensors. At the same time,
a self-supervised representation training strategy is adopted to
learn more representation of the data.
In this work, we use anomaly detection task to test the performance of the network. The model shows good performance in
the anomaly detection task. The following section will describe
the details. The symbols’ definitions are shown in Table I.
A. Data Representation Learning
A feature extractor, which maps time-series features into
a compact embedding representation, is at the foundation of
contrastive learning. The structure of the feature extractor will

2193

be described later. The overall structure of contrastive learning
is shown in Fig. 2.
The data collected by industrial sensors is a continuous
sequence (x1 , . . . , xn ), with each moment being a vector of
multisensor. A vector sequence (xi , . . . , xseq ) sampled from
(x1 , . . . , xn ), and the network generates two different enhanced
data v  t(x) and v   t (x) by using various data augmentation methods. The data augmentation approaches will be introduced later. Subsequently, the data representations y and y 
are obtained after the feature extraction network fθ and fδ ,
respectively. The feature qθ is obtained by y via the projector
and the predictor, and the feature zδ is obtained by y  via the
projector. Finally, we calculate the 2 loss between the feature
qθ and the feature zδ
Lθ,δ  q̄θ − z̄δ 22

(1)

where, q̄θ  qθ /qθ 2 and z̄δ  zδ /zδ 2 . The loss function
in (1) is also the loss function in Fig. 2. The significance of
using the l2 loss function is that representations of the same
property are closer. In addition, the weight update method of fθ
is stochastic gradient descent, and the weight update method of
fδ is as follows:
δ ← τ δ + (1 − τ ) θ

(2)

where, τ is a decay rate, its ranges from 0 to 1. After completing the training, we obtain the sequence feature extraction
network fθ . For further information on the specific process, see
Algorithm 1.
B. Data Augmentation
We use data augmentation for contrastive learning to compare
positive data, e.g., by constructing negative sample pairs as
in [33]. This article proposes three data enhancement approaches
for industrial sensor data processing. The following are introduced.
1) Adding Noise: The mean and standard deviation of the
time-series data gathered by each sensor are calculated separately. The approach for introducing Gaussian white noise is as
follows:
x = x + γ · noise(0, std)

(3)

where, x is the enhanced data, γ ∈ [0, 1] is noise rate,
noise(0, std) represents white Gaussian noise with a mean of
0 and a standard deviation of std.
2) Data Flip: For the sliced sensor data (xi , . . . , xseq ), the
data at each moment is a vector. There are two methods for
flipping data. One method flips the series in temporal order and
gets the flipped sequence (xseq , . . . , xi ). An alternate approach
is to transpose by dimension, and the resulting data sequence is
(xi , . . . , xseq ), where xi  , xseq is the transpose of xi , xseq .
3) Data Mask: Mask or replace a portion of the data in the
time series at random. First, use the Bernoulli distribution to
determine the segment to be masked in the data. Each training
epoch has a different mask position to improve the network’s
ability to extract characteristics from the data.

2194

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 2. Overall architecture of the MAS model. The data collected from the sensors are first enhanced via means of data augmentation, followed
by a feature extractor to obtain representations of the data. The output features are obtained from these representations by running them through
a projector/predictor head. The features are normalized before the l2 loss is calculated. The significance of using the l2 loss function is to make the
features obtained by the predictor closer to the features of the projector head. The network’s projector or predictor head is made up of two linear
layers, a BN layer, and an activation function. After the feature extractor finishes training, a fully connected layer is added to complete the data
anomaly detection.

Algorithm 1. Multi-Head Attention Self Supervised Feature
Representation Model.

associations. The use of CNN leads to a proliferation of layers
and model parameters, while recurrent neural network or LSTM
has sequential inputs and has gradient explosion or slow training
problems.
We employ dilated casual convolution [34] instead of general
convolution and obtain a large perceptual field while using fewer
network layers and model parameters in the MAS model. Causal
convolution allows the output of the net at moment t to be only
associated with the input before the moment t, as shown in
Fig. 4. This operation is achieved by zero padding. This can
avoid the influence of future information on the network output
at the current moment.
2) Multihead Attention: The attention mechanism process
can be described as calculating scores by queries and keys, and
then multiplying the scores with values to obtain the output. The
queries, keys, values, and output are all vectors.
The features extracted by dilated causal convolution are inputted into the multihead attention mechanism. The input then
undergoes a linear mapping that yields the values of queries (Q),
keys (K), and values (V ). The dimension of Q and K is dk [31],
and the dimension of the values is dv . After calculating the dot
product of the queries and keys, we can obtain the weight of
values through the softmax layer

attention = softmax

C. Feature Extraction Network
1) Dilated Casual Convolution: Industrial sensor data are
time-series data, and the determination of anomalies often requires analysis from a period before the anomaly. Neural networks require larger receptive fields to establish longer temporal

Q · KT
√
dk


V

(4)

where dk is the scaling factor to prevent the result of the dot
product from being too large.
The multihead attention mechanism is an improvement over
the attention mechanism, which establishes different projection
information in different spaces. The input matrices are projected
differently and stitched together after many output matrices are
obtained
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = ZW O
Z = Concat (head1 , . . . , headh )

(5)

QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL

2195

Fig. 3. Structure of the feature extractor. The data collected from industrial sensors are first sliced and sent through a dilated casual convolution
with residual connection, then through a batch norm layer. The extracted features are processed via a multihead attention network with residual
connections, followed by a fully connected layer, to obtain a representation of the data.

TABLE II
SENSOR DETAILS, INCLUDING SENSOR TYPE, DATA ACQUISITION UNIT, AND
QUANTITIES OF DIFFERENT SENSORS

Fig. 4. Difference between normal convolution, causal convolution,
and dilated convolution. Convolution with a kernel size of 3 is shown.
The output of each layer of the causal convolution is obtained from the
corresponding unknown input of the previous layer and the input of its
previous positions. Dilated convolution skips part of the input and the
filter can be applied to regions larger than the length of the filter itself so
that a large perceptual field can be obtained.

where, headi = attention(QWiQ , KWiK , V WiV ), Q ∈ Rn×dk ,
K ∈ Rn×dk , V ∈ Rn×dv . A linear layer, behind the multihead
attention mechanism, is used as the output of the entire network. For features extracted by dilated casual convolution, the
multihead attention model is used to capture the implied features
between the multidimensional data.
3) Network Structure: The feature extractor’s overall structure is shown in Fig. 3, which includes dilated casual convolution, batch norm model, RELU, and multihead attention
mechanism. For the data collected from industrial sensors, the
data are first sliced into sequences, and then the features are
extracted through dilated casual convolution. The dilated casual
convolution has a large perceptual field and a time-dependent
feature that can process sensor input more effectively. The
convolved features are then fed into the multihead attention
mechanism. The multihead attention model aids in the extraction
of characteristics from multidimensional data. The batch norm
and residual modules serve to increase training stability in the
self-supervised representation learning process. The end of the
network structure is a fully connected layer for feature mapping. As a result, the data gathered from the industrial sensors
are extracted as characterization information during network
processing.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, experiments are designed to evaluate the
MAS method to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method.

A. Data Description
To evaluate the performance of our method in an industrial
sensor environment, a publicly available dataset SKAB [36]
is used. The dataset contains eight sensor data collected from
real water circulation systems. The types of sensors and data
collection units are shown in Table II.
The dataset adopted in our work has various types of sensors, including acceleration, current, and others. The physical
quantities and ranges of data collected by sensors are different,
and data are time-dependent. The information provided by these
sensors reflects the overall operational status of the experimental
platform system. The sensors are commonly used in industry;
we admit that the scale of the system is small compared to the
real industrial environment. However, it can reflect the characteristics of industrial sensor networks. In addition, we apply to
preprocess the data before training and testing. The specific steps
are: calculating the mean and standard deviation values of each
sensor data and then performing normalization.
B. Parameter and Structure
We experiment with the MAS model and some other algorithms on the same dataset. In our experiments, we use Pytorch
and Nvidia 2080Ti for model acceleration. We use the SGD optimizer during model training. The target decay rate is τ = 0.999.
In the feature extractor, the output dimension of the two-layer
dilated casual convolution is 32. Subsequently, the output and
input dimensions are kept the same size after a multihead attention mechanism is applied. Then going through a batch norm
and a linear layer, we get a ten-dimensional output. Projection
and prediction both have the same structure, the dimension of
the projection input is ten and the dimension of the output is
eight. The prediction input is eight and the dimension of output
is eight.

2196

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

We compare other machine learning methods with our proposed MAS method, including LSTM, multivariate state estimation technique (MSET), multiscale convolutional recurrent
encoder–decoder (MSCRED), LSTM variational autoencoder
(LSTM-VAE), Hotelling’s T-squared statistic (T-squared), autoencoder, and isolation forest.

TABLE III
EFFECT OF DIFFERENT DATA AUGMENTATION METHODS ON THE RESULTS.
THERE ARE THREE MAIN DATA AUGMENTATION METHODS: ADDING NOISE,
RANDOM MASK, AND DATA FLIPPING

C. Evaluation Metrics
We apply accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 to determine the
performance of the model comprehensively [2]. The detailed
formulas for the metrics are as follows:
TP + TN
(6)
Accuracy =
TP + FN + FP + TN
TP
Recall =
(7)
TP + FN
TP
(8)
Precision =
TP + FP
2 · Precision · Recall
F1 =
(9)
Precision + Recall
where TP, TN, FP, and FN are four classification results, denoting
true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative,
respectively.
The recall metric represents how many abnormal samples are
found. Precision represents how many of the samples judged to
be abnormal are true. F1 represents the combined accuracy of
model detection, which is a combination of recall and precision.
D. Results and Analysis
1) Data Augmentation: We address the problem of anomaly
detection by contrastive learning. Anomaly detection aims to
distinguish the difference between normal and abnormal sample
features. In general, there is an imbalance of samples, and the
amount of abnormal events is small. Contrastive learning can get
a good feature extraction with few negative samples. Data augmentation is an important method in contrastive learning. During
the training phase, contrastive learning reduces the distance
between similar samples and increases the distance between negative samples, to realize the representations of normal samples
and abnormal samples. The model is adopted to extract features
of sensor data. Through the method of data augmentation and
contrastive learning, the model will extract better features in the
pretraining phase.
We explore how different data augmentation strategies affect
feature extraction. In this article, we apply three data enhancement techniques: adding noise, randomly performing mask, and
data flipping. The data flip includes an up and down flip (UD
flip) and a left and right flip (LR flip). The simulation results are
shown in Table III.
For using two data enhancement methods, the combination
of noise and flip is better than the combination of mask and
flip, but both are slightly weaker than the comparative learning
approach of noise and mask in terms of the F1-score. UD flip
outperforms LR flip in terms of results. This indicates that it is
easier for the network to extract features when only changing the
temporal order of the sequence data without adjusting the spatial

features. As can be observed from simulation results, there is
a certain improvement in detection accuracy when employing
multiple data enhancement with LR flip compared with only
using the two data augmentation methods with LR flip. For the
multiple data enhancement methods using UD flip, there is no
significant improvement in the highest accuracy compared with
the corresponding two data augmentation approaches using UD
flip, and both are the same in F1-score. We can see that using
three means of data augmentation is not always as effective as
using two. We consider that as the quantity of data augmentation
methods grows, modified segments of original data will also
increase. Too much change in the data will damage its properties.
The model can effectively learn representations if augmented
data is within a certain range. When too much data augmentation
is used, the effectiveness of model extraction representation will
be reduced.
Contrastive learning aims to learn representations that are
invariant under different distortions. Intuitively, if anomaly samples appear in the training phase, their representations will also
be learned as well as those of the normal. While contrastive
approaches of SSL learn representations by minimizing the
distance between two augmented views of the same data point
(positive pairs) and maximizing views from different data points
(negative pairs), recent noncontrastive SSL shows remarkable
performance without negative pairs. Compared to contrastive
methods, these noncontrastive methods do not require large
batch sizes or memory queues [25] to provide negative pairs.
Therefore, excluding the negative pairs, the noncontrastive
learning that we use is generally more efficient and conceptually
simple.
We use the method of adding noise and random masking as an
example to explain the effectiveness of data augmentation. After
adding noise to the data, data will fluctuate within a range. The
random mask method selects a set of data points and masks them.
These masked data points may be normal or abnormal. When
the network converges to a nonzero nontrivial solution, the entire
network can work. The network can learn representations of both
anomaly and normal features from the training data. This is also
verified by the relevant experiments described in the article. The
network can achieve a relatively high F1-score with noise and
masks, demonstrating the effectiveness of the design strategy.
2) Effect of Augmentation Parameters: We investigate the
effect of different enhancement parameters on the simulation
results. Analyze the effect on the imitation results when different

QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL

TABLE IV
EFFECT OF DIFFERENT MASK RATE PARAMETERS ON THE RESULTS. THE
KEY POINTS INCLUDING ACC, PRECISION, RECALL, AND F1-SCORE
ARE REPORTED

2197

TABLE VI
RESULTS OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS

Fig. 6. Effect of noise rate parameter on accuracy and F1-score. Acc
and F1-score have basically the same trend. The Acc and F1-score of
anomaly recognition are low when the noise rate is small or large. When
the noise is between 0.05 and 0.3, the network can achieve a better
result.

Fig. 5. Effect of the mask rate parameter on accuracy and F1-score. It
can be seen that the effects of this parameter on Acc and F1-score are
basically synchronized. The Acc and F1-score of anomaly recognition
are low when the mask rate is small or large. The mask rate between
0.05 and 0.4 is better.
TABLE V
EFFECT OF DIFFERENT NOISE RATE PARAMETERS ON THE RESULTS. THE
KEY POINTS INCLUDING ACC, PRECISION, RECALL, AND F1-SCORE
ARE REPORTED

values of the mask are given separately. For example, mask = 0.2
means that 20% of the data are masked out. The evaluation
results are shown in Table IV and Fig. 5. As the mask values
range from 0.01 to 0.7, the MAS model works better when the
mask ratio is between 0.05 and 0.4. The maximum F1-score is
obtained when the mask ratio is 0.2. When the mask proportion
is too low, the model has a hard time learning data features,
which results in lower anomaly detection accuracy. It is also
difficult for the network to extract useful information because
a large amount of information is masked away when the mask
proportion is higher.
Similarly, the impact of noise magnitude on the results is
examined further down. In the experiments, the value of the
mask rate is given as 0.2 and the noise ratio is given in the
range of 0.01–0.7. Table V and Fig. 6 illustrate the evaluation
results. The simulation results demonstrate that when the noise
rate is small and the F1-score of anomaly detection is low,
the network cannot successfully extract features from the data
through contrast learning. It can be inferred that the network does
not learn valuable features from data. When the noise rate level
is between 0.05 and 0.1, relatively high detection accuracy can

be obtained. Because noise reduces the proportion of relevant
information in the sensor network, the useful features extracted
by the network will decrease as the noise rate grows, resulting
in a fall in overall anomaly detection accuracy.
3) Ablation Study: Experiments for the ablation study are
shown the performance of the modules in Table VI.
The ablation study results show that the major indexes have
obviously reduced when removing dilated casual CNN module
or multihead attention module. The addition of the BN layer is
helpful to improve the metric of the model. Experimental results
show the effectiveness of the modules.
4) Algorithm Complexity Analysis: The algorithm’s complexity is examined below. In industry, the ability to anomaly
detection quickly is critical. We analyze the proposed algorithm’s time complexity. We refer to article [9] for the complexity analysis of the algorithm. The algorithm can simply
be thought of as consisting of two parts: the dilated causal
convolution module and the multiheaded attention module. The
higher proportion of time complexity is the multihead attention
module. The complexity of the multiheaded attention mechanism is O(nd2mh + n2 dmh ). As a comparison, the time complexity of LSTM is O(nd2l ). When dl = dmh , the complexity
of our proposed model is slightly higher than that of LSTM.
In practice, because of its better effect on feature extraction,
MAS can be experimentally verified to have a lower dimension
of d. In addition, unlike LSTM, the dilated causal convolution
and multihead attention mechanisms can perform operations
in parallel in practice. Furthermore, to determine the speed of
detection of the sensor sequence by the algorithm, we run our
program on the CPU (i7-10875 h). For a given time sequence,
the single anomaly detection time is 0.00134 s. The LSTM
(dl = dmh ) runtime is 0.00086 s, Bi-LSTM runtime is 0.00168,
LSTM (dl > dmh ) is 0.00249 s, the running time of LSTM-VAE
is 0.00471 s. Experimental comparisons with these classical
algorithms prove that our algorithms can be effectively deployed
in industrial scenarios.
5) Overall Results: We compare several alternative baseline
approaches on the dataset. The F1-score is an important metric

2198

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE VII
COMPARISON OF OUR PROPOSED MAS MODEL WITH OTHER ALGORITHMS
IN SOME METRICS, INCLUDING ACC, RECALL, PRECISION, AND F1-SCORE

data. Compared with other methods, our proposed MAS
approach achieves good results.
In the future, we will further investigate the application of
self-supervised representation learning in anomaly detection.
In addition, we are looking into other approaches for detecting
anomalies in industrial sensors. At the same time, we will further
develop our model to achieve better performance and be more
adaptable in a wide range of usage scenarios.
REFERENCES

Fig. 7. Comparison of the MAS method with other methods in several
metrics of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. It can be seen
that our method has the highest score on the F1-score. This indicates
that our model trainable strategy can extract the features well from the
industrial sensor data.

for expressing anomaly detection performance because it represents the harmonic mean of precision and recall. F1-score is
only high when both precision and recall are high. Table VII and
Fig. 7 show and compare the evaluation results. Both isolation
forests and LSTM are unsupervised learning methods. LSTM
can produce good results, outperforming isolation forests. The
MAS method obtains the highest F1-score among all methods,
with 81.19% for precision, 78.08% for recall, and 79.6% for
F1-score. Overall, the findings show that our method can effectively extract the temporal properties of sensor data and can
better distinguish abnormal values from normal ones.
E. Discussion
Although self-supervised representation learning does not
provide data labels in the pretraining stage, it merely allows the
network to learn to extract features of the data on its own through
comparison learning. When applied to anomaly detection tasks,
a high F1-score can be obtained with simple training, compared
to other methods.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we focus on detecting system anomalies
from sensor data in real-world scenarios. In our work, we
first present a contrastive learning strategy for training feature
extractors, which can be applied to detect anomalies in
industrial sensor data. Subsequently, we propose three different
data augmentation approaches, so that outliers in the training
sequence do not have to be used. Extensive experiments
prove that our MAS model is effective. Finally, we present an
end-to-end neural network to handle the problem of extracting
potential time-dependent relationships in high-dimensional

[1] Z. Pu, D. Cabrera, Y. Bai, and C. Li, “A one-class generative adversarial
detection framework for multifunctional fault diagnoses,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8411–8419, Aug. 2022.
[2] D. Wu, Z. Jiang, X. Xie, X. Wei, W. Yu, and R. Li, “LSTM learning
with Bayesian and Gaussian processing for anomaly detection in industrial
IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 5244–5253, Aug. 2020.
[3] G. E. Box, G. M. Jenkins, G. C. Reinsel, and G. M. Ljung, Time Series
Analysis: Forecasting and Control. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2015.
[4] J. Lü and G. Chen, “A time-varying complex dynamical network model and
its controlled synchronization criteri,” IEEE Trans. Auto. Contr., vol. 50,
no. 6, pp. 841–846, Jun. 2005.
[5] S. S. Haykin and S. S. Haykin, Kalman Filtering and Neural Networks,
vol. 284. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2001.
[6] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G.
Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016.
[7] Meta AI, “Self-supervised learning: The dark matter of intelligence,”
2022. [Online]. Available: https://ai.facebook.com/blog/self-supervisedlearning-the-dark-matter-of-intelligence/
[8] R. Rodrigo, D. H. Patiño, and G. Schweickardt, “ARIMA and neural
network for sensors failure detection,” in Proc. Congreso Argentino de
Ciencias de la Informática y Desarrollos de Investigación, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[9] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[10] Y. Liu et al., “Deep anomaly detection for time-series data in industrial
IoT: A communication-efficient on-device federated learning approach,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6348–6358, Apr. 2021.
[11] Y. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Lv, and W. Wang, “Detecting anomalies in intelligent
vehicle charging and station power supply systems with multi-head attention models,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 555–564,
Jan. 2021.
[12] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11,
pp. 2278–2324, Nov. 1998.
[13] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1409.1556
[14] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6,
pp. 84–90, 2017.
[15] W. Sunhem and K. Pasupa, “An approach to face shape classification for
hairstyle recommendation,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Intell.,
2016, pp. 390–394.
[16] T. K. Ho, “The random subspace method for constructing decision forests,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 832–844,
Aug. 1998.
[17] B. Kamiński, M. Jakubczyk, and P. Szufel, “A framework for sensitivity
analysis of decision trees,” Cent, Europ. J. Oper. Res., vol. 26, pp. 135–159,
2018.
[18] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[19] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2014, pp. 1–14.
[20] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 1705–1714.
[21] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced
anomaly detection for industrial Big Data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 17,
no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May. 2021.
[22] L. Qi, Y. Yang, X. Zhou, W. Rafique, and J. Ma, “Fast anomaly identification based on multi-aspect data streams for intelligent intrusion
detection toward secure industry 4.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 18, no. 9,
pp. 6503–6511, Sep. 2022.

QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL

[23] Y. Su et al., “Detecting outlier machine instances through gaussian mixture variational autoencoder with one dimensional CNN,” IEEE Trans.
Comput., vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 892–905, Apr. 2022.
[24] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
“Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech Signal Process, 2020,
pp. 4322–4326.
[25] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast
for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[26] T. Han, W. Xie, and A. Zisserman, “Self-supervised co-training for video
representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, pp. 5679–5690.
[27] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.04805.
[28] A. Van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[29] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual representation learning by context prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2015, pp. 1422–1430.
[30] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[31] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 15979–15988.
[32] C. Wei, H. Fan, S. Xie, C.-Y. Wu, A. Yuille, and C. Feichtenhofer, “Masked
feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 14668–14678.
[33] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change point
detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in Proc. Web
Conf., 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
[34] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018,
arXiv:1803.01271.
[35] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
pp. 21271–21284.
[36] I. D. Katser and V. O. Kozitsin, “Skoltech anomaly benchmark (SKAB),”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/1693952
[37] R. Singer, K. Gross, S. Wegerich, and D. Henke, “MSET: Multivariate
state estimation technique,” Argonne National Lab.(ANL), Argonne, IL,
USA, Tech. Rep. ESTSC-001140MLTPL00, 1996.
[38] P. Filonov, A. Lavrentyev, and A. Vorontsov, “Multivariate industrial time
series with cyber-attack simulation: Fault detection using an LSTM-based
predictive data model,” 2016, arXiv:1612.06676.
[39] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[40] S. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. Dai, R. Jozefowicz, and S. Bengio,
“Generating sentences from a continuous space,” in Proc. 20th SIGNLL
Conf. Comput. Nat. Lang. Learn., 2016, pp. 10–21.
[41] D. S. Kim, C. K. Yoo, Y. I. Kim, J. H. Jung, and I.-B. Lee, “Multivariate
quality control, illustrated by the air testing of sample bombsights techniques of statistical analysis multivariate quality control, illustrated by the
air testing of sample bombsights techniques of statistical analysis, 1947,”
J. Cml. Eng. Jpn., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 1025–1034, 2005.
[42] Z. Chen, C. K. Yeo, B. S. Lee, and C. T. Lau, “Autoencoder-based network
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Telecommun. Symp., 2018,
pp. 1–5.
[43] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE
8th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
Yiqun Qiao received the B.S. degree in automation from the Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China, in 2017, and the M.S. degree
in control engineering from Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligent system with the School of
Automation Science and Electrical Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing, China.
His research interests include industrial Internet and machine learning.

2199

Jinhu Lü (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in applied mathematics from the Academy
of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2002.
He is currently the Dean with the School of
Automation Science and Electrical Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing, China. He is also
a Professor with the AMSS, Chinese Academy
of Sciences. He is/was a Chief Scientist with
National Key Research and Development Program of China and a Leading Scientist with the
Innovative Research Groups of National Natural Science Foundation of
China. He was a Professor at RMIT University, Melbourne VIC, Australia,
and a Visiting Fellow at Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. His
research interests include cooperation control, complex networks, and
industrial Internet.

Tian Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
M.S. degree in control science and engineering
from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in
2010, and the Ph.D. degree in system optimization and reliability from the University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2014.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang
University, Beijing, China. His research interests
include computer vision and pattern recognition.

Kexin Liu received the M.Sc. degree in control
science and engineering from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D.
degree in system theory from the Academy of
Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2016.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Automation Science and Electrical
Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China.
From 2016 to 2018, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at Peking University, Beijing, China. His research interests include multiagent systems and complex networks.
Baochang Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in
computer science from the Harbin Institute of
the Technology, Harbin, China, in 1999, 2001,
and 2006, respectively.
From 2006 to 2008, he was a Research Fellow at the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, and also at Griffith University, Brisban, QLD, Australia. His research interests include pattern recognition, machine learning,
and face recognition.
Hichem Snoussi received the diploma in electrical engineering from the École Supérieure
d’Electricité (Supélec), Gif-sur-Yvette, France,
in 2000, and the D.E.A. and Ph.D. degrees in
signal processing from the University of ParisSud, Bures-sur-Yvette, France, in 2000 and
2003, respectively.
From 2003 to 2004, he was a Postdoctoral
Researcher at the Institut de Recherche en
Communications et Cybernétiques de Nantes,
Nantes, France. Since 2010, he has been a Full
Professor with the University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes, France.
His research interests include Bayesian techniques for source separation, information geometry, differential geometry, advanced signal processing techniques, and computer vision.