2720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

A Preference-Driven Malicious Platform Detection
Mechanism for Users in Mobile Crowdsensing
Haotian Wang , Jun Tao , Member, IEEE, Dingwen Chi , Yu Gao ,
Zuyan Wang , Dikai Zou , and Yifan Xu , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Exploiting mobile crowdsensing to conduct data
collection and analysis brings unprecedented opportunities to
promote the development of the Internet of Things(IoT). However, malicious platforms may provide untrusted data or illegally
leak users’ information, which leads users in crowdsensing
networks to be reluctant to participate in sensing activities.
Besides, users are unwilling to report malicious platforms without
sufficient incentives. To tackle the problem, a new incentive
mechanism is proposed by modeling users’ preferences in this
paper. Specifically, two scenarios are considered to detect malicious platforms when users join sensing activities according to
the system grasps user’s information, i.e., complete information
scenario and partial information scenario. Different incentive
algorithms are designed for each scenario to optimize the systems
incentive cost. In the complete information scenario, we minimize
the total incentive cost by ranking users’ preferences. In the
partial information scenario, uniform Distribution and Laplace
Distribution are employed to model the distribution of users’
preferences to find the optimal cost. Specifically, we incorporate
the concept of non-convexity into design the incentive mechanism, when user preferences obey the Laplace Distribution.
By conducting an in-depth exploration the properties of Laplace
Distribution, we can transform it into a convex problem to solve
it efficiently. The analysis based on these mechanisms lays a
theoretical foundation on the detection of malicious platforms.
Furthermore, the soundness of modeling and the accuracy of
analysis are verified through extensive simulation, which also
guides the design of more sophisticated incentive schemes for the
detection of malicious platforms.
Index Terms— Mobile crowdsensing, malicious platforms,
incentive mechanism, uniform distribution, Laplace distribution.

I. I NTRODUCTION

M

OBILE CrowdSensing (MCS) is a new data acquisition
model that combines crowdsourcing ideas and mobile
device sensing capabilities. The research shows that MCS has
Manuscript received 30 April 2023; revised 7 September 2023 and
12 December 2023; accepted 2 January 2024. Date of publication 10 January
2024; date of current version 24 January 2024. This work was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSF China) under Grant
U22B2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript
and approving it for publication was Dr. Andrew Clark. (Corresponding
author: Jun Tao.)
Haotian Wang, Dingwen Chi, Yu Gao, Zuyan Wang, Dikai Zou, and
Yifan Xu are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210000, China (e-mail: haotianwang@seu.edu.cn;
dwchi@seu.edu.cn; yugao@seu.edu.cn; zywang92@seu.edu.cn; dkzou@seu.
edu.cn; xyf@seu.edu.cn).
Jun Tao is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering and the
Key Laboratory of CNII, MOE, Southeast University, Nanjing 210000, China,
and also with Purple Mountain Laboratories for Network and Communication
Security, Nanjing 210000, China (e-mail: juntao@seu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3352412

the advantages of flexible deployment [1], low requirements on
users knowledge [2], low deployment cost [3], etc. Therefore,
adopting MCS to carry out data collection and analysis has
become a mainstream hotspot. Thus far, MCS has been widely
used in various fields, e.g., environmental monitoring, smart
cities and intelligent transportation systems (ITS) [4], [5], [6].
A typical system framework for MCS is shown in Fig. 1,
which includes three parts: the sensing platform, sensing
users and task providers [7]. After receiving service requests
from the task provider, the sensing platform assigns sensing
tasks [8], [9], [10], [11]. to sensing users. Meanwhile, the
sensing platform also has the ability to handle sensing data
and perform other management functions. After receiving the
sensing task, sensing users will perform the collection of
sensing data [12], [13], [14]. Then, sensing users upload the
data to the sensing platform [15]. When the sensing platform
returns the sensing data to the task provider, a complete
sensing link is completed. It is noticed that compared to
traditional wireless sensor networks (WSNs) [16], there is a
significant advantage of MCS in collecting sensing data.
Although MCS emerges as the significant functionality for
promotion sensing services, new issues and challenges are
also exposed due to the following factors. On one hand,
malicious sensing platforms may provide false information or
expose users’ privacy [17], [18]. for illegal profits, which may
destroy the security of MCS and users’ reluctance to actively
participate in sensing tasks. On the other hand, if there is
not sufficient incentive, users are reluctant to actively report
malicious sensing platforms in MCS, which will reduce the
number of users participating in sensing tasks. Therefore,
designing a reliable incentive scheme in MCS to help the
system detect malicious sensing platforms remains an open
and vital problem.
In mobile crowdsensing, since the difference between normal platforms and malicious platforms is not obvious, it is
difficult for the sensing system to directly detect malicious
platforms by the historical behavior of platforms. Moreover,
the detection of malicious platforms can take more time and
cost, when the system is directly involved. Therefore, in this
paper, a new approach is proposed from a fresh perspective,
i.e., a user-incentive-based detecting mechanism for malicious
sensing platforms.
However, user preferences can usually lead to users having
insufficient incentives to report malicious platforms. In this
paper, user preference is defined as the rational and tendentious choice made by the user in the face of malicious

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS

2721

The rest of this paper is organized as following: Section II
reviews the related work. In section III, we introduce the problem description and the system model. The model of malicious
platform detection based on continuous type distribution is
described in section IV. Performance evaluations are shown
in section V, and section VI concludes this paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Fig. 1.

A typical architecture of a crowd sensing system.

platforms. Specifically, user preference in this paper is similar to human preference, which is actually the result of a
combination of multiple factors. In MCS, users have self-will
and exhibit varied preferences, which significantly has cast on
their responses and attitudes to malicious platforms, e.g., some
users are more tolerant of ad injections from malicious platforms. Furthermore, in order to avoid being reported by users,
malicious platforms may offer compensation, such as coupons
and money. Therefore, we analyze the user preferences and
the possible compensation offered by malicious platforms.
We combine Continuous Probability Distribution [19] with
MCS to stimulate users to report malicious sensing platforms.
The basic idea is to establish a user reporting scheme based
on the interaction behaviours between users and sensing
platforms, where the malicious platforms will be restricted or
eliminated for MCS to enhance the service security. In this
method, the system administrator is not directly involved in
the detection process. Instead, the approach achieves malicious platform screening by incentivizing users with detection
tasks. When the number of times a sensing platform has
been reported exceeds the threshold we have set, the system
will determine if it is a malicious platform. Meanwhile, the
designed method under Continuous Probability Distribution
can guarantee the individual rationality (IR) [20] and incentive
compatibility (IC) [21] properties.
The major contributions of this paper are threefold.
We propose a novel and efficient method, i.e., crowdsensing, to detect malicious platforms in sensing network.
Moreover, to motivate enough users to participate in the
detection task, we design the corresponding user incentive
model.
• We consider two scenarios, i.e., the complete information
scenario and the partial information scenario, and design
the incentive mechanism separately. In the complete
information scenario, optimal incentives are designed
based on the analysis of user preferences. In the partial
information scenario, we take the premise that users’
preferences conform to the Uniform Distribution and the
Laplace Distribution while developing the corresponding
incentives to optimize the system cost.
• Besides the proof and analysis of the correctness and
complexity, we conduct extensive simulations to evaluate
the performance of our scheme. The numerical results
show that the proposed scheme can effectively improve
the quality of sensing service and minimize the system
incentive costs.
•

In this section, we review the related work including the
trust evaluation scheme, the threshold-based filtering scheme
and the classification-based filtering scheme.
A. The Trust-Based Evaluation Scheme
Trust evaluation is an important factor to evaluate the credibility of users and sensing platforms in MCS. Xia et al. [22]
proposed a novel trust inference model, where two trust
attributes named subjective trust and recommendation trust,
are selected to quantify the trust level of specific nodes. The
authors combine subjective trust and recommendation trust to
obtain the overall trust of the nodes, which can be used to
classify nodes as either honest or malevolent. Liu et al. [23]
designed a novel consensus mechanism to guarantee decentralization, i.e., a decentralized intrusion detection framework for
network trust evaluation, where intrusion detection and network trust evaluation are integrated into node detection. Since
genuine information is discrete, the literature [24] showed a
technique for computing malicious node impact for a dynamic
VANET topology. The author develop a twofold framework to
change logical information to continuous information, which
analyzes to deal with the correlation between node discovery
of exchanged information and impact of malicious nodes,
to assign score to each malicious data for the identification
of malicious vehicular nodes. Hu et al. [25] proposed a
reliable trust-based recommendation scheme for platooning
services(REPLACE), which collects and models feedback
from users to design the reputation system. Liu et al. [26]
proposed an approach called Perceptron Detection (PD), which
uses both perceptron and K-means methods to compute IoT
nodes’ trust values and detect malicious nodes accordingly.
B. The Threshold-Based Filtering Scheme
To solve the problem that high thresholds fail to detect
malicious nodes and low thresholds may increase the false
alarm rate, an outlier-based adaptive threshold approach is
proposed by Chae et al. [27]. The authors created effective
rules to analyze internet packets collected from dynamic environments based on historical information. The result shows
that high thresholds reduce the true positive rate and low
thresholds increase the false positive rate. Meng et al. [28]
designed a blockchain-based trust management scheme, which
dynamically set thresholds to identify malicious nodes more
efficiently. Liu et al. [29] proposed a malicious model detection
mechanism based on the isolation forest (iforest), named
D2MIF. In the D2MIF, an iforest is constructed to compute
the malicious score for each model uploaded by the corresponding participant, and then, the models will be filtered if

2722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

their malicious scores are higher than the threshold, which
is dynamically adjusted using reinforcement learning (RL).
In the [30], Liu et al. proposed a simple voting scheme to
identify malicious nodes, which uses the 1/0 decision. It considers nodes with more than half of the votes as malicious,
however, this scheme is not suitable for the scenario where
the number of nodes is small.
C. The Classification-Based Filtering Scheme
Singh et al. [31] proposed a framework for the detection of
malicious users, non-malicious users and celebrities, which
uses an attribute set for user classification based on user
characteristics. The authors analyzed the detection mechanism
used for spammers and calculated two parameters user score
and tweet score to detect malicious users. In the [32], a malicious detection method based on multi-variate classification
is proposed by Dai. To filter malicious nodes, the author
extracted the preferences with known nodes to generate classifiers. Abubaker et al. [33] utilized federated learning for the
detection of malicious nodes, where Support Vector Machine
(SVM) and Random Forest (RF) are used in federated learning
to identify and remove malicious nodes.
In the trust-based evaluation scenario, additional costs will
be incurred when the system evaluates the trust of the users.
Some malicious users cannot be recognized by the system
if a reasonable threshold cannot be set in the threshold-based
filtering scenario. It is also a challenge to ensure fairness when
using voting to screen malicious users. Most of these existing
efforts are not applicable to the scenario, where the system
cannot easily detect malicious users directly. Moreover, when
malicious users provide motivation to other normal users, the
normal user may show dishonesty. Therefore, we propose
a novel malicious user detection scheme by modeling the
preference distribution of users.
III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION AND S YSTEM M ODEL
Currently, most of the current motivational work investigates
the scenario, where a single sensing platform releases sensing
tasks [15]. Nevertheless, users usually receive sensing tasks
from different platforms at the same time. Therefore, the
user’s choice of sensing platforms is crucial. In general,
voluntary participation in the crowd sensing platform may
not be sustainable. This is from the fact that mobile users
need to spend their own resources, e.g., smart phone battery,
CPU computing power, storage memory, to accomplish the
sensing tasks [34], [35]. In order to save energy and maximize profitability, users will purposefully choose the sensing
platform. However, malicious sensing platforms can launch ad
injections, phishing attacks and expose users’ privacy. Thus it
is particularly important to design a reasonable mechanism
to help the system detect malicious sensing platforms and
motivate users to participate in tasks.
As shown in Fig. 2, we consider MCS networks consisting
of a number of mobile users and sensing platforms. When the
network size is relatively large, it is difficult for the system to
detect sensing malicious platforms independently. Therefore,
the system can indirectly detect malicious sensing platforms

Fig. 2.

Framework of MCS networks.

by analyzing the historical behavior of some users and relying
on reports from these users. Depending on the characteristic of
the sensing network, we assume that users are independent of
each other in the system. Thus, the system must provide certain
inducements which motivate the user to report MSP. Then,
we consider a set of users denoted by u = {u 1 , u 2 · · · u n },
where u i is able to choose the sensing platform by their own
wish.
For convenience, we classify sensing platforms into two
types, one called NSP(normal sensing platform) and the other
called MSP(malicious sensing platform). To encourage users
to join sensing tasks, the NSP must compensate users for
the cost of performing sensing tasks. Moreover, the MSP
also offers certain motivation.1 In general, the motivation is
related to users preferences pi . When the motivation provided
by the MSP meets exactly the u i ’s preference, the user’s
favorable opinion of the platform is positive, and the opposite
is negative. This leads to the fact that the MSP may have
different motivations for users with different preferences.
For simplicity, we define the motivation provided by the
MSP as S, where the S is a constant. After users understand the
behavior of the MSP and systems, users can choose whether
to report the MSP. We set the utility for the u i to report and
not report MSP as m i and S + pi , respectively. Thus, the
utility function of u i can be defined as Ui = max{m i , S + pi }.
In the system, Ci is used to indicate the u i ’s choice. Assuming
that Ci obeys the Bernoulli Distribution [36], which can be
expressed as
(
1
(S + pi < m i )
Ci =
(1)
0
(S + pi > m i ),
Here, 1 and 0 indicate that the u i report and not report the
MSP, respectively. Clearly, the cost of the incentive provided
N
P
by the system is M =
mi .
i=1

We stipulate that the system rewards reporting users
when more than N0 users report the MSP. N0 is our predefined threshold and the model’s criterion for choosing
N0 is to reduce the likelihood that users may arbitrarily adopt
1 Motivation, The MSP offers benefits to users in order to avoid being
reported.

WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS

‘ballot stuffing’ or ‘bad-mouthing’ methods to gain benefits.
In general, if users adopt ‘ballot stuffing’ or ‘bad-mouthing’
methods, then the number of users who choose to report MSP
is difficult to exceed N0 . Therefore, they can’t actually get
additional benefits.
To avoid malicious users from providing false feedback to
discredit the platform, we propose two approaches, ‘appeal’
and ‘punishment’. ‘Appeal’ means that the reported perceived
platform can provide feedback to the system, and the system
will determine whether the platform is malicious based on
its historical behavior. ‘Punishment’ means that the user who
reports the sensing platform will be flagged once the sensing
platform has been determined by the system to be nonmalicious. When the number of times a user has been flagged
exceeds the set threshold, the system will limit the user to a
period of time where the user will not be able to participate in
the activities of the reporting sensing platform and any sensing
tasks to earn rewards.
To reduce the incentive cost of the system, it needn’t to
provide additional incentives to users other than N0 . For the
MSP, since the preference of the user cannot be known, it will
provide the same motivation to each user. Specifically, the
problem investigated in this paper is how to ensure that more
than N0 users report the MSP and minimize the system’s cost.

Fig. 3.

The PDF and CDF of uniform distribution.

their preferences by observing users’ interactions over a long
period of time, i.e., the partial information is carried out in
on-demand manner. In this scenario, the incentive mechanism
we designed satisfies
N
X

P[Ci = 1] =

In this paper, we divide the system’s knowledge of user’s
preferences into two types: complete information scenario
and partial information scenario. In the complete information
scenario, the system has a clear understanding of the user’s
preferences. However, in the partial information scenario, the
user’s historical behavior is the only way for the system to
understand the user’s preferences. This section focuses on
these two scenarios to design an incentive mechanism that
minimizes the incentive cost of the system while screening
for malicious platforms.
A. Complete Information Scenario
Focusing on the complete scenario, where the users’ information are shared, the system can get the preference of each
user. Then, sorted result on the users’ collection preferences
is obtained, which guide the system’s decision. For i < N0 ,
we discuss different cases.
Case1: if S + pi ≤ 0, then the u i has sufficient motivation
to report the MSP, so the system can set the user’s incentive
to 0.
Case2: if S + pi > 0, then the system can set the u i ’s
incentive to S + pi .
On the other side, the system can also categorize users based
on preferences. For the scenario, where users are categorized,
users under the same category have the same preferences.
However, this analysis of this situation is the same as the
ranking of preferences.
B. Partial Information Scenario
Targeting on the partial information, where users are reluctant to share their preferences, the system can only accumulate

N
X

P[m i ≥ S + pi ] ≥ N0 ,

(2)

i=1

i=1

IV. I NCENTIVE M ECHANISM D ESIGN

2723

where P[Ci = 1] and P[m i ≥ si + pi ] represent the
probabilities of Ci = 1 and m i ≥ si + pi , respectively. Not
surprisingly, the incentive cost of the system increases with
P[Ci = 1] and P[m i ≥ si + pi ]. Thus when the incentive cost
is minimal, we have
N
X
i=1

P[Ci = 1] =

N
X

P[m i ≥ S + pi ] = N0 .

(3)

i=1

1) Uniform Distribution: When the system only knows
the range of values of user preferences, but not the specific
preferences of each user, Literature [37] consider the values of
user preferences within the range of values to be equiprobable
and user preferences conform to the Uniform Distribution.
Therefore, we also assume that users’ preferences conform to
the Uniform Distribution in this paper. Then, the probability
density function(PDF) of S + pi is set to
X ∼ U ni f or m(a, b),

0
x <a


 1
f (x) =
a≤x ≤b


 b−a
0
x > b.

(4)

The cumulative distribution function(CDF) of S + pi can be
expressed as
Z a


0d x,
x <a




Z x
 Z−∞
a
1
0d x +
d x,
a≤x ≤b
F(x) =
b
−
a

−∞
a

Z
Z
Z
 a
x
+∞

1


0d x +
dx +
0d x,
x > b.

−∞
a b−a
x
(5)

2724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 4.

The PDF and CDF of laplace distribution.
Fig. 5.

where a and b are the lower and upper limits of the Uniform
Distribution, respectively. For different values of a and b, the
images of CDF and PDF are shown in Fig. 3.
We only consider the scenario, where a ≤ x ≤ b. If b < 0,
we can see that S + pi < 0, which means that the users in the
system have enough motivation to report the MSP. Therefore,
the system does not provide any rewards. When a ≤ 0 and
b > 0, we discuss two Rcases.
0 1
Case1: if F(x) = N a b−a
d x <N0 , we have
F(x) =

N Z mi
X
i=1

0

N

X mi − a
1
dx =
= N0 ,
b−a
b−a

(6)

i=1

from which we know that
M=

N
X

Then, the total cost of the system can be expressed as
′

M=

N0
X

mi

i=1
N ′

0
a
1 X
mi − N
=
b−a
b−a

i=1

= (b − a)N0 + N0 ′ a,

1
b−a

(11)

′

N
X

N0 ′ a ≤
mi − N

i=1

= (b − a)N0 + N a,

a
b−a
a ≤ m i ≤ b.

(7)

(8)

Then,
Z b
N
0

1
d x ≤N0 .
b−a

m i ≤ N0 ′ b,

i=1

Hence, the system can set the rewards for each user to

R0 1
Case2: if F(x) = N a b−a
d x ≥N0 , we have
Z b
Z 0
1
1
N
d x = 1−N
d x, a ≤ m i ≤ b.
b
−
a
b
−
a
0
a

N0
X

N0 ′ a ≤ (b − a)N0 + N0 ′ a ≤ N0 ′ b,

(b−a)N0
+ a.
N

(9)

In this case, the system does not provide any rewards for
users according to Eq.(2).
We assume that there are N0′ users, who are motivated by
the system at a > 0. It is obvious that the range of values of
N0′ is between 0 and N . Then, we can notice that the value
of m i is zero when m i < a. Therefore, we have
N0 ′ Z m i
X
1
d x = N0 .
(10)
b
−
a
0
i=1

a ≤ m i ≤ b.

Based on the Eq.(11), the total cost of the system has a
declining trend with the m i increase. Due to a ≤ m i ≤ b,
we can get

mi

i=1

=

The shaded area under different values.

(12)

from which the N0 ′ ≥ N0 can be obtained. It has been
theoretically proved that a necessary and sufficient condition
for N0 ′ = N0 is M = N0 b. Therefore, b is the motivation
provided by the system to the N0 users in the system.
2) Laplace Distribution: In general, user preferences are
influenced by several factors, e.g., user attributes (age, hobbies,
and temperament), the state of the device, and the degree to
which the sensing platform affects the user, each of which is
limited in its effect. Moreover, user preferences may differ at
different times and are independent. Laplace Distribution [38]
has the properties of symmetry, sharp peaks and thick tails, and
adjustable parameters which make it flexible to better describe
the range of values and degree of user preferences. Therefore,
according to the law of large numbers, we adopt the Laplace
Distribution to model the users’ preferences. This means that
we can denote the PDF of S + pi as
X ∼ Laplace(µ, b),
1
|x − µ|
ex p(−
),
f (x|µ, b) =
2b
b

(13)

WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS

Fig. 6.

Fig. 7.

x1 moves to 0.

x1 and x2 move to µ.

i=1

Fig. 9.

−∞

We can see that if 2b −∞ esp(− |x−µ|
b )d x ≥ N0 , which
means that more than N0 users will report the MSP in the
system.
Hence, we only need to consider the case where
R
|x−µ|
N 0
esp(−
2b −∞
b )d x < N0 . First, we have analytically
investigated the scenario where µ > 0. It can be noticed that
N
P
each
F(m i ; µ, b) is the integral of f (x) from 0 to m 0 ,
i=1

which is the area enclosed by f (x), x = m i , and y = 0. For
convenience, the area enclosed can be expressed as si . Then,
as shown in the Fig. 5, we translate Eq.(15) into
(16)

Previously, we transform the incentive problem into a nonconvex optimization problem. P is assumed to be the solution to
the problem, then, the analysis is performed in the form of P.
Lemma 1: The symmetric elements in P are moved by
equal distances in the same direction and the sum of the
enclosed areas remains the same.
Proof: As shown in Fig. 6, it can be assumed that P
contains such symmetric elements of x1 and x2 concerning µ.
We can move x1 or x2 to x = 0 and the other to the opposite

µ < x1 < x2 .

Fig. 10.

x2 > x1 ′ .

side by the same distance. Similarly, we can also move both
x1 and x2 to x = µ, as shown in Fig. 7. Then, we have
Z x1
Z 0
′
S1 = |
f (u)du −
f (u)du|
−∞
−∞
Z x2
Z 0
=|
f (u)du −
f (u)du|
−∞

= S2′ ,

R
N 0

s1 + s2 + · · · + sn =N0 .

0 < x1 < x2 < µ.

Fig. 8.

where µ is the position parameter and b is the scale parameter.
Then, the CDF of Laplace Distribution can be expressed as
Z x
F(x) =
f (u)du
−∞
1
x −µ

 1 − ex p(−
),
x ≥µ
2
b
= 1
µ
−
x

 ex p(−
),
x <µ
2
b
1
= [1 + sgn(x − µ)(1 − ex p(−|x − µ|/b))]. (14)
2
For different values of µ and b, the images of CDF and
PDF are shown in Fig. 4. Thus, our incentive mechanism can
be translated into
N
N Z mi
X
X
F(x) =
f (u)du = N0 .
(15)
i=1

2725

S1′ = |

Z x1
Z−∞
x2

=|

−∞

x2 > x1 ,
f (u)du −
f (u)du −

Z µ
Z−∞
µ

−∞

= S2′ ,

(17)
f (u)du|
f (u)du|

−∞

x2 > x1 ,

(18)

where S1′ and S2′ represent the change in the area after moving
x1 and x2 , respectively. Clearly, we can see that the total cost
remains the same and Eq.(15) is still valid.
Lemma 2: No two or more elements in P are greater than
0 and less than µ.
Proof: In Fig. 8, we move x1 and x2 to x = 0 and x = x2 ′ ,
respectively, under the condition of 0 < x1 < x2 < µ. To keep
the original area, it should satisfy x1 − 0 > x2 ′ − x2 . However,
it can be noticed that this will lead to a reduction in the total
area. Hence, P is not the solution to the problem.
Lemma 3: All elements in P that are not less than µ are
equal to each other.
Proof: As shown in Fig. 9, let us consider the case where
µ < x1 < x2 . For convenience of description, we assume that
there exists x ′ and x1 < x ′ < x2 . Then, we move both x1 and

2726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE I
M ALICIOUS P LATFORM D ETECTION R ESULTS OF PARTIAL I NFORMATION S CENARIO

the problem. Then, let us consider the case where x2 is less
than x1′ . The change in area after moving x1 and x2 is plotted
in Fig. 11. Similarly, the
Z x1
Z 0
S1′ = |
f (u)du −
f (u)du|
−∞

−∞

Z x2 ′

Z x2

=|
Fig. 11.

= S2′ ,

x2 to x = x ′ . Similarly, the distance from x1 to x ′ should be
greater than the distance from x2 to x ′ to keep the same area
after moving x1 and x2 . Therefore, if
Z x1
Z x′
S1′ = |
f (u)du −
f (u)du|
−∞

−∞

Z x2

Z x′

=|

f (u)du −

= S2′ ,

f (u)du|

−∞

−∞

x2 > x1 > u,

(19)

is valid, we can get x1 +x2 > 2x ′ . It can be noted that the total
cost will be lower and P is not the solution to the problem.
Lemma 4: There are no elements in P that are greater than
0 and less than µ.
Proof: Let us consider a scenario where x1 to x2 are the
two elements in P. According to the symmetry of the function,
the symmetry point x1 ′ can be found,i.e. |x1 − µ| = |x1 ′ − µ|.
Next we will analyze whether P is the solution to the problem
under the three scenarios.
First, we consider the case where x2 is greater than x1′ .
We can see from this Fig. 10 that the gray area and the blue
area indicate the increased area after moving x1 to µ and the
decreased area after moving x2 to x2′ , respectively. To keep
the
Z µ
Z x1
′
S1 = |
f (u)du −
f (u)du|
−∞

−∞

Z x2 ′

Z x2

=|
−∞

= S2′ ,

f (u)du −

f (u)du|

−∞

x2 > µ > x1 ,

f (u)du −

−∞

x2 < x1 ′ .

(20)

is valid, we have |x1 − µ| < |x2 − x2 ′ |. However, the total
cost will be reduced, which lead to P is not the solution to

f (u)du|

−∞

x1 < µ < x2 ,

(21)

is valid on the premise that |x1 −0| < |x2 −x2 ′ |. It can be noted
that the total cost will decrease as the elements move. Hence,
P is not the solution to the problem. At last we investigate the
case where x1′ = x2 . It is clear that this case is the same as
Pr oo f 4.1, the total area of the elements symmetric about µ
remains the same after moving to 0 or µ. However, this leads
to inequality between elements larger than µ. Therefore, P is
not the solution to the problem.
According to the previous proof, we can find that the
optimal solution can be obtained only when some elements
are 0 and others are greater than or equal to µ. In other words,
there exist n elements equal to 0 and all elements greater than
µ are m. Therefore, we have
(N − n)F(m) + n F(0) = N0 ,

(22)

then
N0 − n F(0)
).
(23)
N −n
Thus from (22) and (23), the cost total can be obtained
N0 − n F(0)
M = (N − n)F −1 (
).
(24)
N −n
Based on the fact that 0 ≤ n < N and n is an integer,
the above incentive design problem can be transformed into
computing the n. The solution process of n is described in
Algorithm 1. After the value of n is determined, the system
provides incentives to n and N − n users in the system as
F(0)
0 and F −1 N0 −n
N −n , respectively.
Next, we analyze the two cases where µ < 0 and µ = 0.
Similar to lamma 4.3, we can conclude that all elements are
the same and no element is equal to 0. Therefore, the incentive
scheme is to give each user the same m,
N0
m = F −1 ( ).
(25)
N
m = F −1 (

WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS

Algorithm 1 Laplace Cost Optimization
Require: N ;N0 ;
Ensure: M,n
1: n ←− 1;
N −n F(0)
2: M ←− N F −1 0 N −n ;
3: while n ≤ N do
F(0)
4:
M ′ ←− (N − n)F −1 N0 −n
N −n ;
′
5:
if M < M then
6:
M ←− M ′ ;
7:
n ←− n + 1;
8:
end if
9: end while
10: return (M, n)

Fig. 14.

Fig. 15.
Fig. 12.

Fig. 13.

2727

Impact of S and N0 on the total cost.

Impact of S on the total cost in the uniform distribution.

The participation ratio with different number of MSP and task.

The participation ratio with different number of MSP and user.

The results of the partial information scenario are shown in
Table I.
V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
algorithm and the impact of different parameters on the total
cost through simulation.
A. Impact of MSP
We first evaluate the impact of the number of MSP on the
participation ratio, where the number of sensing platform is 10.
With the increased number of tasks when the number of users
is 200, the impact of the number of MSP on the participation
ratio is shown in Fig. 12. We can see from this figure that the
participation ratio of four scenarios increases as the number of

tasks increases. This is because when the number of tasks is
relatively less than the number of participants, the number of
participants who can undertake the task is also relatively small.
Therefore, the participation ratio of all three scenarios is at a
low level. As shown in Fig. 13, the participation ratio of the
four scenarios decreases as the number of users increases when
the number of tasks is 1000. This is because the increasing
number of users quickly saturates the number of tasks that can
be performed.
From the result of Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, it can be noted
that in the same condition, the higher the number of MSP the
lower the participation ratio. The reason is that users may fear
that their interests are being violated by malicious platforms,
therefore, they refuse to join perception activities.
B. Complete Information Scenario
We assume that the user’s preference pi follows the Laplace
Distribution pi ∼ Laplace(-10,2) in the complete information
scenario. Then, the system evaluates the impact on the total
cost by changing the motivation of the MSP. To observe
the total cost, different values of S (from 0 to 100) are set
previously. As shown in Fig. 14, the total cost tends to increase
as the number of N0 . It can be observed that the total cost for
different numbers of N0 on the left side is 0. The reason is
that the sum of the user’s preference and the MSP’s motivation
is less than 0, i.e., p Ni ≤ −s, which means that more than
N0 users will report MSP. Therefore, the system does not
need to provide additional rewards. Simultaneously, as the
motivation S increases, we can see that the total cost will also
increase. This is due to the fact that the increase of S will lead

2728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 16.

Impact of S on the total cost in the laplace distribution.

Fig. 17.

Impact of b on the total cost in the laplace distribution.

to the decrease in the number of users whose preferences are
not higher than −S.
C. Uniform Distribution Scenario
In the case, where N = 1000 and N0 = 600, we set the
user’s preferences to obey pi ∼ Uniform(2,8), pi ∼ Uniform
(-8,2), and pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) respectively. As shown in
Fig. 15, we compare the impact of S on total cost in the partial
information scenario and the complete information scenario.
It can be observed that the total cost increases with the
increase of S. The cost of the three cases pi ∼ Uniform(-8,2),
pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) and the complete information scenario
is 0, when the S is relatively small. The reason is that most
users will choose to report MSP. The slope of pi ∼ Uniform
(-8,2) and pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) will change from N to
N0 when p Ni + S > 0. This is because the total cost is
determined by Eq.(11) in the initial stage, but as S increases
the total cost will be determined by N0 b.
Furthermore, Fig. 15 demonstrates that the total cost of pi
∼ Uniform(2,8) is higher than that of pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) and
pi ∼ Uniform(-8,2) as S increases. Since, under the conditions
of pi ∼ Uniform(2,8), the user’s preferences for MSP are
non-negative, the system needs to provide more incentives for
users to report MSP. This also proves that the cost of pi ∼
Uniform(2,8) is not 0 when S is small. However, in the real
world, pi ∼ Uniform(2,8) is non-existent. Because users have
a negative preference for malicious platforms in most cases.
Users of pi ∼ Uniform(-8,2) are more tolerant than users of
pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) towards MSP, so the total cost of the
former is greater than the latter.
D. Laplace Distribution Scenario
Similarly, we set the user’s preference to match pi ∼
Laplace(-8,2) and the threshold is N0 = 600. Then, the
change of total cost in the partial information scenario and
the full information scenario is observed by changing S of
MSP, which is plotted in Fig. 16. It can be noted that the total
cost of the two scenarios increases as the S increases. This
is because the total cost in both scenarios is a linear function
of S. Furthermore, when n is determined, the effect of F(0)
is ignorable. Intuitively, the total cost in the full information
scenario is lower than that in the partial information scenario
under a certain S.

Fig. 18.

Impact of µ on total cost in the laplace distribution.

Fig. 19.

Impact of N0 on total cost in the laplace distribution.

In the following, we observe the total cost by changing
the value of b. In the Fig. 17, it can be observed that the
total cost of the partial information scenario shows an upward
trend as the b increase, where N0 = 600, pi ∼ Laplace(2,b) and pi ∼ Laplace(2,b). The reason for this is that the
total cost of the partial information scenario is determined
F(0)
−1 N0
by (N − n)F −1 ( N0 −n
N −n ) and N F ( N ). When n is given
by Algorithm 1, the total cost and b are linearly related.
But, we can see that the total cost of the full information
scenario does not increase rapidly with b, which means
that it’s performance is better than the partial information
scenario.
Simultaneously, the impact of the value of µ on the total
cost is plotted in Fig. 18, where N0 = 600. In Fig. 18, it can
be seen that as the value of µ increases, the total cost also
increases. The reason for this is that an increase in µ means

WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS

Comparison of accuracy.

Fig. 22.

Impact of different number of tasks on participation ratio.

Comparison of task coverage ratio.

Fig. 23.

Impact of different number of users on participation ratio.

Fig. 20.

Fig. 21.

2729

that the number of users with a low preference for MSP
is decreasing. Thus, the system must pay more rewards to
motivate users to report MSP. The total cost is determined
F(0)
by N F −1 ( NN0 ) and (N − n)F −1 ( N0 −n
N −n ) for conditions
µ ≤ 0 and µ > 0, respectively. This leads to the fact that
the total cost in the partial information scenario increases at a
different rate in the two cases µ ≤ 0 and µ > 0.
To make the experimental results more rigorous, we investigate the change of the total cost under different N0 , where pi
∼ Laplace(2,2) and pi ∼ Laplace(4,2). As shown in Fig. 19,
in the partial information scenario, the total cost shows an
upward trend as N0 increases. Simultaneously, we can note
that the total cost of µ = 2 is lower than the total cost of
µ = 4 when the N0 is certain. This is because the value of
F(0)
(N − n)F −1 ( N0 −n
N −n ) increases as µ increases when b is
certain, which makes the total cost increase. Moreover, in the
full information scenario, the total cost increases slowly as
N0 increases.
E. Accuracy of MSP Detection
We assume separately that the user’s preferences obey pi
∼ Uniform(-8,2) and pi ∼ Laplace(4,2). Next, we analyzed
the accuracy of MSPs detection under different N0 , where
S = 60 and N = 1000. From Fig. 20, it can be seen that
all three scenarios show an increasing trend as N0 increases.
This is because the increase in N0 reduces the impact of some
users reporting NSPs, which makes detection more accurate.
In complete information scenario, the system is fully aware of
the user’s preferences, which means that most users choose to
report MSPs. Therefore, the accuracy of complete information

scenario is higher than uniform distribution scenario and
laplace distribution scenario.
F. Task Coverage Ratio
We assume that the user’s preferences obey pi ∼ Laplace(8,2) and N0 = 120. Then, five MSPs are put into the
sensing system and release sensing tasks with the other five
NSPs. Fig. 21 shows the comparison of the task coverage
ratio by TDC(A Trust-Driven Contract Incentive Scheme
for Mobile Crowd-Sensing Networks) [37], SGA(A Stackelberg Game Approach Toward Socially-Aware Incentive
Mechanisms for Mobile Crowdsensing) [39], APT(Accurate
and Privacy-Preserving Task Allocation for Edge Computing
Assisted Mobile Crowdsensing) [40] and our algorithm. Under
the number of users is 200, we can observe that all four algorithms have different degrees of decline as the number of tasks
increases. This is because when the number of participants is
fixed, the number of participants who can perform tasks will
reach saturation. It can be noticed that the task coverage ratio
of TDC is higher than SGA and APT, but lower than our
algorithm. The reason for this is that the TDC filters MSPs by
trust thresholds, however, the MSP can provide motivation to
trick user’s confidence. The reason for the lowest task coverage
ratio of SGA and APT is that there is no mechanism to remove
MSPs in SGA. SGA encourages users to complete sensing
tasks by offering them rewards, but when the MSPs exist, the
rewards are not valid for users. APT focus on task allocation
and users’ privacy protection, therefore, the existence of MSPs
has the greatest impact on it’s task coverage ratio. To sum up,
our algorithm is superior to the other three algorithms.

2730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

G. User Participation Ratio
Finally, the participation ratios of we proposed and the
other three mechanisms are compared. The user’s preferences
obey pi ∼ Laplace(-8,2) and N0 = 120. Then, we set five
MSPs and five MNPs in the simulation environment. With the
number of tasks increasing, the evaluation results on the five
mechanisms are plotted in Fig. 22, where the number of users
is 200. We can observe that the participation ratio of the four
mechanisms increases as the number of tasks increases. The
reason for this is that when the number of tasks is relatively
less than the number of participants, the number of participants
who can undertake the task is also relatively small. However,
as the number of tasks increases, the participation ratio of the
four mechanisms shows an increasing trend.
As shown in Fig. 23, the participation ratio of these mechanisms decreases as the number of participants increases, where
the number of tasks is 1000. This is because that the increasing
number of participants quickly saturates the number of tasks,
which can be performed when the number of tasks is fixed.
Thus when the number of remaining tasks is insufficient, many
participants are unable to undertake tasks. It can be noted that
the mechanism of we proposed is superior to the other three
mechanisms. Because APT focuses on user privacy, it has the
lowest performance when MSPs are present in the system.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have analytically investigated the MSP
detection problem in MCS. To encourage users to participate
in sensing activities, we design the MSP detecting algorithm in
terms of user’s preferences. Two scenarios, namely complete
information scenario and partial information scenario, have
been considered to detect the MSP when users join sensing
activities. In the complete information scenario, the system is
fully aware of the user’s preferences. Therefore, we design an
incentive mechanism that makes users report MSPs by ranking
their preferences. We assume that the users’ preferences obey
Uniformly Distributed and Laplace Distributed in the complete
information scenario. Then the incentive mechanism for them
is designed, respectively, which to optimize the total incentive
cost. These incentive mechanisms help us to understand the
impact of different user’s preferences on the detection of
MSPs, and the corresponding analytical results can serve
as important guidelines on the design of more sophisticated
detection schemes of MSPs. The soundness of the models
and the accuracy of the analysis have been verified through
extensive simulation. Our simulation results have shown that
the impact of different factors on total cost and the proposed
incentive mechanism outperforms other benchmarks substantially.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Hu, J. Wang, B. Wu, and S. Helal, “RL-Recruiter+: Mobilitypredictability-aware participant selection learning for from-scratch
mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, no. 12,
pp. 4555–4568, Dec. 2022.
[2] X. Gong and N. B. Shroff, “Truthful mobile crowdsensing for strategic
users with private data quality,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 27, no. 5,
pp. 1959–1972, Oct. 2019.

[3] B. Jia et al., “An incentive mechanism in expert-decision-based
crowdsensing networks,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 122, Jun. 2022,
Art. no. 108834.
[4] C. H. Liu, Z. Dai, H. Yang, and J. Tang, “Multi-task-oriented vehicular
crowdsensing: A deep learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. (INFOCOM), Jul. 2020, pp. 1123–1132.
[5] A. Cecaj, M. Lippi, M. Mamei, and F. Zambonelli, “Sensing and forecasting crowd distribution in smart cities: Potentials and approaches,”
IoT, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 33–49, Jan. 2021.
[6] Z. Ning et al., “Blockchain-enabled intelligent transportation systems:
A distributed crowdsensing framework,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 4201–4217, Dec. 2022.
[7] D. Yang, G. Xue, X. Fang, and J. Tang, “Incentive mechanisms for
crowdsensing: Crowdsourcing with smartphones,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1732–1744, Jun. 2016.
[8] F. Yucel, M. Yuksel, and E. Bulut, “Coverage-aware stable task assignment in opportunistic mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3831–3845, Apr. 2021.
[9] B. Yin, J. Li, and X. Wei, “Rational task assignment and path planning
based on location and task characteristics in mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE
Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 781–793, Jun. 2022.
[10] R. Sleem, N. Mekky, S. El-Sappagh, L. Alarabi, N. A. Hikal, and
M. Elmogy, “Enhancing task assignment in crowdsensing systems based
on sensing intervals and location,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 71,
no. 3, pp. 5619–5638, 2022.
[11] Y. Wu, Y. Suo, F. Yu, and Y. Liu, “A utility-based subcontract method
for sensing task in mobile crowd sensing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1210–1219, Feb. 2022.
[12] T. N. Nguyen and S. Zeadally, “Mobile crowd-sensing applications: Data
redundancies, challenges, and solutions,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol.,
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1–15, May 2022.
[13] X. Xia, Y. Zhou, J. Li, and R. Yu, “Quality-aware sparse data collection
in MEC-enhanced mobile crowdsensing systems,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1051–1062, Oct. 2019.
[14] Y. Sun et al., “On enabling mobile crowd sensing for data collection in
smart agriculture: A vision,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 132–143,
Mar. 2022.
[15] N. B. Truong, G. M. Lee, T.-W. Um, and M. Mackay, “Trust evaluation
mechanism for user recruitment in mobile crowd-sensing in the Internet
of Things,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 10,
pp. 2705–2719, Oct. 2019.
[16] N. Javaid, “NADEEM: Neighbor node approaching distinct energyefficient mates for reliable data delivery in underwater WSNs,” Trans.
Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 33, no. 8, p. e3805, Aug. 2022.
[17] M. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Yang, and J. Zhang, “Dynamic pricing for privacypreserving mobile crowdsensing: A reinforcement learning approach,”
IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 160–165, Mar. 2019.
[18] B. Zhao, S. Tang, X. Liu, X. Zhang, and W.-N. Chen, “IronM: Privacypreserving reliability estimation of heterogeneous data for mobile
crowdsensing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 5159–5170,
Jun. 2020.
[19] W. B. Poland III, “Decision analysis with continuous and discrete
variables: A mixture distribution approach,” Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford
Univ., p. 147, 1994. [Online]. Available: https://www.proquest.com/
dissertations-theses/decision-analysis-with-continuous-discrete/
docview/304113214/se-2.
[20] C. Dai, X. Wang, K. Liu, D. Qi, W. Lin, and P. Zhou, “Stable task
assignment for mobile crowdsensing with budget constraint,” IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 3439–3452, Dec. 2021.
[21] P. Sun et al., “Towards personalized privacy-preserving incentive for
truth discovery in mobile crowdsensing systems,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 352–365, Jan. 2022.
[22] H. Xia, S.-S. Zhang, Y. Li, Z.-K. Pan, X. Peng, and X.-Z. Cheng,
“An attack-resistant trust inference model for securing routing in vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 7,
pp. 7108–7120, Jul. 2019.
[23] G. Liu, Z. Yan, W. Feng, X. Jing, Y. Chen, and M. Atiquzzaman,
“SeDID: An SGX-enabled decentralized intrusion detection framework for network trust evaluation,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 70, pp. 100–114,
Jun. 2021.
[24] S. Sultan, Q. Javaid, A. J. Malik, F. Al-Turjman, and M. Attique,
“Collaborative-trust approach toward malicious node detection in vehicular ad hoc networks,” Environ., Develop. Sustainability, vol. 24,
pp. 7532–7550, Jun. 2022.
[25] H. Hu, R. Lu, Z. Zhang, and J. Shao, “REPLACE: A reliable trust-based
platoon service recommendation scheme in VANET,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 1786–1797, Feb. 2017.

WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS

[26] L. Liu, Z. Ma, and W. Meng, “Detection of multiple-mix-attack malicious nodes using perceptron-based trust in IoT networks,” Future Gener.
Comput. Syst., vol. 101, pp. 865–879, Dec. 2019.
[27] Y. Chae, N. Katenka, and L. DiPippo, “An adaptive threshold method
for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 18th Int. Symp.
Netw. Comput. Appl., Sep. 2019, pp. 1–4.
[28] W. Meng, W. Li, and L. Zhu, “Enhancing medical smartphone networks
via blockchain-based trust management against insider attacks,” IEEE
Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1377–1386, Nov. 2020.
[29] W. Liu et al., “D2MIF: A malicious model detection mechanism for
federated-learning-empowered artificial intelligence of things,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2141–2151, Feb. 2023.
[30] F. Liu, X. Cheng, and D. Chen, “Insider attacker detection in wireless
sensor networks,” in Proc. 26th IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
(INFOCOM), May 2007, pp. 1937–1945.
[31] M. Singh, D. Bansal, and S. Sofat, “Detecting malicious users in Twitter
using classifiers,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Secur. Inf. Netw., Sep. 2014,
pp. 247–253.
[32] H. Dai, H. Liu, Z. Jia, and T. Chen, “A multivariate classification
algorithm for malicious node detection in large-scale WSNs,” in Proc.
11th Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., Jun. 2012,
pp. 239–245.
[33] Z. Abubaker, N. Javaid, A. Almogren, M. Akbar, M. Zuair, and
J. Ben-Othman, “Blockchained service provisioning and malicious node
detection via federated learning in scalable Internet of Sensor Things
networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 204, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108691.
[34] S. Zhou, Y. Lian, D. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Liu, and K. Li, “Compressive
sensing based distributed data storage for mobile crowdsensing,” ACM
Trans. Sensor Netw., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1–21, 2022.
[35] A. Capponi, C. Fiandrino, B. Kantarci, L. Foschini, D. Kliazovich, and
P. Bouvry, “A survey on mobile crowdsensing systems: Challenges,
solutions, and opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 2419–2465, 3rd Quart., 2019.
[36] K. Uribe-Murcia, Y. S. Shmaliy, and J. A. Andrade-Lucio, “Unbiased
FIR, Kalman, and game theory H∞ filtering under Bernoulli distributed random delays and packet dropouts,” Neurocomputing, vol. 442,
pp. 89–97, Jun. 2021.
[37] M. Dai, Z. Su, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, and N. Lu, “A trust-driven contract
incentive scheme for mobile crowd-sensing networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1794–1806, Feb. 2022.
[38] W. Croft, J.-R. Sack, and W. Shi, “Differential privacy via a truncated
and normalized Laplace mechanism,” J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 37,
no. 2, pp. 369–388, Apr. 2022.
[39] J. Nie, J. Luo, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “A Stackelberg game
approach toward socially-aware incentive mechanisms for mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 724–738,
Jan. 2019.
[40] Z. Wang et al., “Accurate and privacy-preserving task allocation for
edge computing assisted mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Computat.
Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 120–133, Feb. 2022.
Haotian Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His
research interests include mobile crowdsensing and
resource allocation in VANETs.

Jun Tao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in computer science from the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Northeast University, in 1998 and 2001, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the Department
of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, in 2005. He is currently a Full Professor
and a Supervisor of Ph.D. students in cyber science
and engineering with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Southeast University. His
research interests include social networking, D2D,
and information security.

2731

Dingwen Chi is currently pursuing the B.S. degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
interests include edge computing.

Yu Gao received the M.S. degree from Yangzhou
University, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His current research interests include
mobile edge computing (MEC) and mobile ad-hoc
networks (MANETs).

Zuyan Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
interests include wireless rechargeable sensor networks (WRSNs), secure communication, and their
applications in the Internet of Things (IoTs).

Dikai Zou is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
interests include mobile crowdsensing and edge
computing.

Yifan Xu (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s
degree from the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China,
in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree from the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, in 2021. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University. His research interests include
mobile crowdsourcing and resource allocation in
VANETs.