IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

7121

A Privacy-Preserving Framework for Efficient
Network Intrusion Detection in Consumer
Network Using Quantum Federated Learning
Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE, Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE,
Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE, and Muhammad Adil , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The proliferation of consumer networks has
increased vulnerabilities to network intrusions, emphasizing the
critical need for robust intrusion detection systems (IDS). The
data-driven Artificial Intelligence (AI) approach has gained
attention for enhancing IDS capabilities to deal with emerging
security threats. However, these AI-based IDS face challenges in
scalability and privacy preservation. More importantly, they are
time-consuming and may perform poorly on high-dimensional
and complex data due to the lack of computational resources. To
address these shortcomings, in this paper, we introduce a novel
framework, called Quantum Federated Learning IDS (QFL-IDS),
that merges Quantum Computing (QC) with Federated Learning
(FL) to allow for an efficient, robust, and privacy-preserving
approach for detecting network intrusions in consumer networks.
Leveraging the decentralized nature of FL, QFL-IDS enables
multiple consumer devices to collaboratively train a global
intrusion detection model while preserving the privacy of individual user data. Furthermore, we leverage the computational
power of quantum computing to improve the efficiency of model
training and inference processes. We demonstrate the efficacy
of our framework through extensive experiments. The obtained
results show significant improvements in detection accuracy and
computational efficiency compared to the current traditional
centralized and federated learning approaches. This makes QFLIDS a promising framework to cope with the new emerging
security threats in a timely and effective manner.
Index Terms—Intrusion detection systems (IDS), quantum
computing (QC), federated learning (FL), quantum federated
learning, consumer network.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

N THE digital era, the expansion of consumer networks
has been exponential, serving as the backbone for various

Manuscript received 31 March 2024; revised 3 July 2024; accepted
14 August 2024. Date of publication 12 September 2024; date of current
version 31 December 2024. This work was supported by INRS-EMT.
(Corresponding author: Zakaria Abou El Houda.)
Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the Centre Énergie Matériaux
Télécommunications, UMR INRS-UQO, Institut National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Gatineau, QC H3T 1J4, Canada (e-mail: zakaria.abouelhouda@
inrs.ca).
Hajar Moudoud is with the Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie,
Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau, QC J1K 2R1, Canada (e-mail:
hajar.moudoud@uqo.ca).
Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of
Computing and Informatics, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, UAE (e-mail:
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae).
Muhammad Adil is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14215 USA (e-mail:
Muhammad.adil@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3458985

smart devices and Internet of Things (IoT) applications. These
networks, characterized by their vastness and diversity, have
become critical infrastructures for personal, commercial, and
governmental operations. However, this expansion has led to a
surge in network vulnerabilities, making them prime targets for
cyber-attacks. The financial losses are anticipated to increase
from $6 trillion in 2021 to $10.5 trillion by 2025 [1]. This
highlights the need to develop reliable, robust, and effective Intrusion Detection systems (IDSs) to protect consumer
networks [2], [3]. Traditional IDS often struggle with scalability issues due to the growing volume and complexity of data.
They also face challenges in preserving user privacy while
ensuring timely and accurate detection of malicious network
traffic. Moreover, the computational demands of processing
and analyzing such vast datasets can overwhelm conventional
computing resources, leading to inefficiencies and delays in
threat detection and mitigation.
Quantum Computing (QC), particularly Quantum Machine
Learning (QML), emerge as promising technologies that are
capable of significantly strengthening IDS capabilities by
addressing their main issues, including scalability, privacy, and
computational efficiency [4]. QML leverages the principles of
quantum physics to perform computations, leveraging quantum
resources like entanglement and superposition of states. This
allows quantum computers to handle exponential growth in the
dimensions of attack data. Unlike traditional computers that
use bits, quantum computers utilize qubits, which can exist
in multiple states simultaneously. The intrinsic parallelism
capability of quantum computers allows them to handle highdimensional datasets and execute mathematical operations
and linear algebra much faster than classical computers. In
2019, Google demonstrated quantum supremacy by solving a problem in 200 seconds that would take a classical
computer 10,000 years, while IBM is actively developing
larger quantum computers with, a clear roadmap for scaling up quantum technologies with more than 1000 qubits.
These advancements that result from quantum algorithms
such as Shor’s and Grover’s algorithms, quantum approximate
optimization algorithm (QAOA), and Boltzmann quantum
machines (QBM), are rapidly leading to the large deployment
and integration of quantum computer capabilities, in several
fields. Quantum Federated Learning (QFL) merges classical
Federated Learning (FL) [5], [6], [7], [8] with quantum computing to address the rising complexities in data processing.

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1558-4127 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

7122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

QFL, will not only preserve data privacy and initiate more
institutions to share their knowledge to detect zero-day attacks
but also, allow for local training given the fragile nature
of computing qubits and the difficulty of transferring them
through the networks. QFL leverages the decentralized data
processing of FL with the unparalleled computational power
of QC, offering a transformative solution to enhance IDS
capabilities to deal with zero-day attacks. This ensures that
the initial deployment of QFL can leverage the robustness and
widespread availability of current classical systems, enabling
a smoother transition and more efficient implementation. By
utilizing these pre-optimized parameters, QFL can effectively
bridge the gap between quantum and classical computing environments, promoting a more practical and scalable adoption of
quantum technologies in the immediate future. By harnessing
QC’s potential, QFL significantly enhances the efficiency of
model training and inference processes [9]. This integration
promises to overcome the computational bottlenecks of traditional IDS, reducing the training time and an improvement
in detection accuracy over traditional methods [9], [10]. This
approach not only preserves the privacy of individual users but
also reduces the bandwidth requirements typically associated
with centralized learning approaches [10], [11].
In this context, we introduce a novel framework, called
Quantum Federated Learning IDS (QFL-IDS), that merges
Quantum Computing (QC) with Federated Learning (FL) to
allow for an efficient, robust, and privacy-preserving approach
for detecting network intrusions in consumer networks.
Leveraging the decentralized nature of FL, QFL-IDS enables
multiple consumer devices to collaboratively train a global
intrusion detection model while preserving the privacy of
individual user data. Furthermore, we leverage the computational power of quantum computing to improve the efficiency
of model training and inference processes. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our framework through extensive experiments,
which show significant improvements in detection accuracy
and computational efficiency compared to the current traditional centralized and federated learning approaches. This
makes QFL-IDS a promising framework to cope with the new
emerging security threats in a timely and effective manner
while preserving the privacy of consumer networks.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• We design a novel distributed architecture that enables
multiple consumer devices to collaboratively train a
shared model while preserving their privacy and enhancing efficiency via quantum training mechanisms.
• We propose a novel framework (QFL-IDS) that leverages
FL and QC to ensure an efficient, robust, and privacypreserving approach for detecting network intrusions in
consumer networks.
• We demonstrate the efficacy of our framework through
extensive experiments using the NSL-KDD public
dataset, which shows significant improvements in detection accuracy and computational efficiency compared to
traditional AI-based solutions.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II presents the background of QML and reviews

the state-of-the-art solutions. Section III describes our system
model. The performance evaluation is presented in Section IV.
Section V concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
The convergence of quantum computing and machine
learning offers the potential to solve complex computational
problems more efficiently than classical methods, potentially
advancing the detection and mitigation of emerging cyber
threats, such as zero-day attacks. This section provides an
overview of QML and reviews key studies that utilize QML
for attack detection.
A. Quantum Computing
Quantum computing represents a fundamental shift from
classical computing paradigms, harnessing the principles of
quantum mechanics to process information in a profoundly
different way. At its core, quantum computing utilizes qubits
(quantum bits) instead of the traditional bits seen in classical
computing. Quantum computation involves initializing qubits
in a certain state, applying a series of quantum gates (quantum
circuit) to perform operations, and finally measuring the qubits
to collapse their state to a classical output. The power of
quantum computing lies in the ability to perform operations on
all possible states simultaneously and to exploit interference
and entanglement phenomena to solve certain problems more
efficiently than classical computers.
For a system of n qubits, the general state can be described
as:
| =

n −1
2

cx |x

x=0

where |x represents the binary representation of x in the
n-qubit system, and cx are complex coefficients satisfying

|cx |2 = 1.
Qubits: A qubit is the basic unit of quantum information,
analogous to the bit in classical computing. Unlike a classical
bit, which can be in one of two states (0 or 1), a qubit can
be in a state of superposition, where it represents both 0
and 1 simultaneously. The state of a qubit can be represented
as:
|ψ = α|0 + β|1
where |ψ is the quantum state of the qubit, |0 and |1 are
the basis states (analogous to the classical states 0 and 1), and
α and β are complex numbers that satisfy the normalization
condition |α|2 + |β|2 = 1. This condition ensures that the total
probability (the probability of finding the qubit in either state
upon measurement) is 1.
Quantum Gates: Quantum gates manipulate the state of
qubits and are the building blocks of quantum circuits, similar
to logic gates in classical circuits. Quantum gates are represented mathematically by unitary matrices. A unitary matrix
U has the property that its conjugate transpose U † is also its
inverse, i.e., UU † = U † U = I, where I is the identity matrix.
This property ensures that quantum operations are reversible
and preserve the total probability.

ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR EFFICIENT NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

A simple example is the Hadamard gate (H), which puts a
qubit into a state of superposition:


1 1
1
H=√
2 1 −1
Applying H to |0 results in:
1
H|0 = √ (|0 + |1)
2
This operation puts the qubit into an equal superposition of
|0 and |1.
Quantum Encoding: Encoding classical information into
quantum states involves mapping classical data to qubits or
groups of qubits. There are several methods for quantum
encoding, including:
1) Basis Encoding: Basis encoding directly maps classical
bits to qubits, with each qubit representing a single classical
bit. For a classical bit string x = x1 x2 . . . xn , the corresponding
quantum state is:
|x = |x1  ⊗ |x2  ⊗ · · · ⊗ |xn ,

(1)

where ⊗ denotes the tensor product, combining individual
qubit states into a multi-qubit state.
2) Amplitude Encoding: Amplitude encoding maps classical data to the amplitudes of a quantum state, allowing for the
compact representation of 2n classical values using n qubits.
For a normalized classical vector x ∈ RN with N = 2n , the
quantum state is:
|x =

N−1


xi |i,

(2)

i=0

where |i represents the i-th basis state in an n-qubit system.
3) Angle Encoding: Angle encoding uses the angles of
rotation gates to encode classical data into qubits. A common
approach is to use the rotation around the Y-axis (Ry ) for a
single qubit:
 
 
θ
θ
|0 + sin
|1,
(3)
|x = Ry (θ )|0 = cos
2
2
where θ is a parameter encoding the classical information.
B. Related Work
The classically optimized nature of QML parameters allows
for seamless integration into existing classical communication
infrastructures. Several hybrid quantum-classical AI algorithms have demonstrated superior performance compared to
classical AI algorithms. These hybrid models utilize quantum
gates and circuits that emulate the operational principles of
classical machine learning models. The most popular ones
include Quantum support vector machine (QSVM) and variational quantum circuits (VQCs), which have shown great
performance in detecting network attacks. VQC architectures
include Quantum neural networks (QNNs), Quantum convolutional neural networks (QCNNs) [12], and also Quantum
recurrent neural networks (QRNNs) [13]. Fully quantum
ML models also have been well investigated to handle the
complex nature of quantum systems, known as Parametrized

7123

Quantum Circuits (PQC) [14]. Blekos et al. [15] have
begun exploring quantum algorithms for feature selection and
network intrusion detection. Quantum algorithms, such as the
Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) and
Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), have been proposed
to optimize the feature selection process, potentially improving
the accuracy and efficiency of intrusion detection models.
Salek et al. [16] integrated classical machine learning models
with quantum processing units (QPUs) to perform data encoding and quantum parallelism. Kukliansky et al. [17] developed
QNNs within the constraints of current quantum computing
capabilities specifically focusing on Noisy Intermediate-Scale
Quantum (NISQ) devices, to detect network attacks. More
specifically, the authors have developed an optimized multilayered QNN architecture that leverages quantum computational
power that is available today for network attack detection. The
authors Implemented a compact version of this architecture on
IonQ’s Aria-1 quantum computer. They achieved an F1 score
of 0.86 using the NF-UNSW-NB15 dataset, demonstrating
the feasibility and effectiveness of their proposed approach.
Additionally, the authors introduced a new metric, the certainty
factor, which quantifies the model’s inherent sharpness and
degree of separation between the predicted class probability
distribution versus other classes. To address the degradation in
performance of the current ML models when dealing with big
data (i.e., 106 samples or more), Kalinin and Krundyshev [18]
proposed QSVM and QCNN to detect network attacks and
they have compared their obtained results with traditional AIbased IDS in terms of accuracy and efficiency. They have
developed a novel technique to encode data into quantum
states. Their experimental results demonstrated that QMLbased intrusion detection systems, such as QSVM and QCNN,
can efficiently process large datasets with 98% accuracy,
performing at twice the speed of traditional ML algorithms
used for similar tasks. In [19], Suryotrisongko and Musashi
proposed a hybrid quantum-classical deep learning models
for detecting Domain Generation Algorithms (DGA)-based
botnet threats. They proposed a novel approach that integrates
quantum computations within a classical deep learning framework. The model incorporates Pennylane’s quantum circuit
embeddings and layer circuits to process features from the
Botnet DGA dataset, including MinREBotnets, CharLength,
TreeNewFeature, and nGramReputation_Alexa. They have
studied the performance of their model under realistic quantum computing conditions by including noise models. Their
obtained results showed that the hybrid model can achieve
high accuracy (up to 94.7% in specific settings), outperforming
traditional deep learning models in intrusion detection. In [20],
Gouveia and correia proposed an unsupervised QML scheme
to detect network attacks. The authors have explored the efficacy of a Quantum-Assisted NIDS that incorporates quantum
circuits as an integral layer within a deep learning model.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL
In the following, we present a mathematical formulation of
our proposed system model, focusing on quantum data encoding, quantum model training, federated learning aggregation,

7124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

and the hybrid integration of classical and quantum machine
learning.
A. Data Encoding
The first step involves encoding classical network data into
quantum states. Given a classical feature vector xi ∈ Rn ,
where n is the number of features, the angle embedding
strategy maps each feature xij to a rotation angle for a
corresponding qubit in a quantum circuit. The encoding can
be mathematically expressed as follows for each feature and
qubit:
 
 
 
 
(4)
QE xij = Rx xij ⊗ Ry xij ⊗ Rz xij |0j ,
where Rx , Ry , and Rz are rotation gates around the x, y, and
z axes of the Bloch sphere, respectively, applied to the j-th
qubit initialized in the state |0.
where θi = 2xi is the rotation angle derived from the i-th
element of the vector x.
The process for encoding the entire vector x into an n-qubit
quantum system involves:
1) Initializing the quantum system in the ground state
|0⊗n .
2) Applying the rotation Ry (θi ) to qubit i, for each feature
xi in the vector x.
The quantum state of the system after encoding can be
represented as:
|ψ =

n


Ry (2xi )|0i ,

(5)

i=1

where
denotes the tensor product, and |0i represents the
initial state of the ith qubit. This state |ψ effectively encodes
the classical data vector x into the quantum system.
B. Quantum Model Structure
A Quantum Neural Network (QNN) is utilized for processing the encoded data. The QNN consists of parameterized
quantum circuits (PQCs) that act as variational models. The
PQCs involve sequences of quantum gates, including rotation
gates (Rx , Ry , Rz ) and entangling gates (CNOT), parameterized
by a set of angles θ . The output of the QNN for a given input
|x can be represented as:
|ψ(θ ) = U(θ )|x,

(6)

where U(θ ) represents the unitary operation of the quantum
circuit parameterized by θ .
C. Measurement and Classical Integration
The output of the quantum circuit is obtained through
measurement operations on each qubit, which collapses the
quantum state into classical information:
M(|xi ) = xi

n


σz(j) xi ,

j=1
(j)

where M represents the measurement operation and σz is
the Pauli-Z observable for the j-th qubit. The result of these

Algorithm 1 QFL-IDS Process
Input: Distributed datasets D across K clients, where each
dataset Dk consists of pairs (xi , yi )
Input: Number of features in each data vector xi after preprocessing, n
Input: Number of layers in the Quantum Neural Network
(QNN), L
Input: Total number of federated learning rounds, T
Output: Trained global QNN parameters θglobal and classical
model parameters Wglobal
1: Initialize global QNN parameters θglobal and classical
model parameters Wglobal
2: for t = 1 to T do
3:
Distribute the current global parameters θglobal and
Wglobal to all K clients
4:
for each client k = 1 to K do
5:
Quantum Encoding:
6:
Transform each data vector xi in Dk into a
quantum state |ψi  using angle encoding
7:
QNN Processing:
8:
Apply the QNN with parameters θk to each
quantum state |ψi , resulting in |ψi 
9:
Measure |ψi  to obtain classical output vectors oi
10:
Classical Neural Network Processing:
11:
Input the classical vectors oi into the classical
model with parameters Wk
12:
Perform forward propagation, loss calculation,
and backpropagation to update θk and Wk based on Dk
13:
end for
new
14:
Aggregate updates from all clients to obtain θglobal
new
and Wglobal
new and W new back to each client
15:
Distribute θglobal
global
16: end for
17: Finalize θglobal and Wglobal as the trained model parameters
18: Evaluate the trained model on a separate test dataset to
assess IDS performance

measurements, a vector of expectation values, is then fed into
the classical neural network for further processing.
D. QFL-IDS Training Process
The training process involves adjusting the parameters θ to
minimize a loss function that measures the difference between
the predicted and actual labels. The loss function for a binary
classification task can be defined as:
1 
(ym − ψ(θ )|O|ψ(θ ))2 ,
M
M

L(θ ) =

(7)

m=1

where M is the number of samples, ym is the actual label of
the m-th sample, and O is an observable whose expectation
value determines the prediction.
Consider a federated system of N nodes, each possessing a
quantum dataset Di , where i ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N. Each node trains
a local QNN model, characterized by quantum parameters θi ,

ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR EFFICIENT NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

7125

Fig. 1.

Loss values per client for 5 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 2.

Loss values per client for 10 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

TABLE I
H YPERPARAMETERS AND S CENARIOS

where | · |quantum denotes a norm appropriate for quantum
parameters, and iteration ceases when θ quantum is less than
a predetermined threshold quantum .
Each node’s local quantum model aims to minimize its
quantum loss function. The global quantum optimization
objective is defined as:

N
1  quantum
quantum
Li
(θ ) ,
(10)
min Lglobal (θ ) = min
θ
θ
N
i=1

on its dataset. The aim is to minimize the local quantum loss
function Li (θi ), reflective of the quantum dataset Di .
Upon completing T training epochs on local quantum models, nodes transmit their model parameters θit to a centralized
server. The server then performs quantum aggregation to
t
for the t-th round:
update the global model parameters θglobal
N
t
θglobal
=

t
i=1 |Di |θi

N

i=1 |Di |

,

(8)

where |Di | represents the quantum data’s magnitude or weight
at node i, adjusting the contribution of each node’s parameters
based on its dataset size or importance.
The iterative quantum training and aggregation proceed
until the global model’s parameter change between successive
rounds meets a specified quantum convergence criterion:
t−1
t
− θglobal
|quantum ,
θquantum = |θglobal

(9)

In the quantum setting, the update rule for a local
model’s quantum parameters at node i during the t-th round,
considering a quantum-specific learning rate ηquantum , is:
quantum  t 
θit+1 = θit − ηquantum ∇Li
θi ,
(11)
quantum

where ∇Li
(θit ) represents the gradient of the quantum
quantum
loss function Li
with respect to the quantum parameters
θit at node i. Algorithm 1 summarizes our QFL-IDS training process. QFL-IDS framework underscores the intricacies
of integrating quantum computing techniques with classical
machine learning in a federated learning setting, highlighting
the innovative approach to enhancing IDS capabilities.
IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
To develop QFL-IDS, we leverage PennyLane [26], a quantum machine learning library. For the attack traffic, we have
used the NSL-KDD dataset that is derived from the original
KDD Cup 1999 dataset, addressing various shortcomings
such as redundancy and bias. The dataset comprises network

7126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 3.

Loss values per client for 25 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 4.

Model accuracy values per clients for 5 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 5.

Model accuracy values per clients for 10 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 6.

Model accuracy values per clients for 15 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

traffic data collected from a simulated environment, covering
different types of attacks and normal activities. Each data
instance includes a comprehensive set of features such as

duration, protocol type, service, and flags, providing valuable
insights into network behavior. Furthermore, the dataset offers
a diverse range of attack scenarios, including Denial of Service

ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR EFFICIENT NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 7.

Confusion matrices for 15 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 8.

ROC Curves for 15 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

(DoS), User to Root (U2R), Remote to Local (R2L), and
Probing attacks, making it suitable for training and evaluating
intrusion detection models. In our simulated environment (see
Table I), we explored a range of configurations by varying the
number of clients from 5 to 15 and adjusting the number of
epochs from 25 to 200. For encoding, we employed the angle
embedding technique with 5 qubits. We also utilized the Adam
optimizer and binary entropy as the loss function for training
the model. The evaluation of our proposed framework involved
an extensive examination using several performance metrics,
including accuracy, F1 score, receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves, and a comprehensive confusion matrix. The
ROC curve is a graphical plot that illustrates the diagnostic
ability of a binary classifier system as its discrimination
threshold is varied. It is created by plotting the true positive
rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR), while the
Area Under the Curve (AUC) is the area under the ROC curve
and provides an aggregate measure of performance across all
classification thresholds. To evaluate QFL-IDS, we used the
following metrics:
TP + TN
(12)
Accuracy =
TP + TN + FP + FN
TP
Precision =
(13)
TP + FP
TP
Recall (Sensitivity) =
(14)
TP + FN
Precision × Recall
F1 Score = 2 ×
Precision + Recall
2TP
(15)
=
2TP + FP + FN
where TP (True Positives) indicate network attacks that are
correctly classified as intrusions, FN (False Negatives) indicate
network attacks that are identified as normal samples, FP
(False Positives) indicate normal samples that are classified

7127

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF O UR P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK AND
C URRENT AI-BASED M ETHODS U SING NSL − KDDTest+

as network attacks, and TN (True Negatives) indicate normal
samples that are classified as normal ones.
Figs. 1, 2, and 3 show our obtained QFL-IDS loss values
per client across varying numbers of training epochs (from
25 to 200), with 5, 10, and 15 distributed clients respectively.
The loss values for each client consistently decrease over time,

7128

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

reaching a minimum, indicating rapid learning in detecting
attacks without compromising the data privacy of other clients.
Figs. 4, 5, and 6 show QFL-IDS model accuracy value
per client across varying numbers of QFL training epochs
(from 25 to 200), with 5, 10, and 15 distributed clients
respectively. We observe that the accuracy of our proposed
QFL-IDS framework increases, reaching a maximum of 98%.
This shows that the federated clients learn from each other
while preserving privacy, leading to a high accuracy score in
the implemented model. This shows the effectiveness of our
proposed framework in collaborative learning while preserving
privacy. Figs. 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c) show the confusion matrix
curves of our framework, which shows its performance across
25, 50, and 200 QFL training epochs, respectively. Moreover,
Figs. 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) show the ROC curves of QFLIDS over 25, 50, and 200 QFL training epochs, respectively,
providing, while Table II shows the values of the metrics
(i.e., accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and training time)
of our proposed QFL-IDS and current AI-based methods,
using the NSL − KDDTest+ dataset. We observe that QFL-IDS
achieves the highest accuracy of 98% and the highest F1 score
of 98% with only 14.21 seconds of training time. This results
in a time savings of over 99% compared to the RNN method.
Thus, Our proposed QFL-IDS framework demonstrates not
only high accuracy in intrusion detection but also significant
time efficiency, making it a promising solution for efficient
and secure consumer networks.

V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have introduced a novel framework, called
QFL-IDS, that uses QFL to ensure an efficient, robust, and
privacy-preserving approach for detecting network intrusions
in consumer networks. Leveraging the decentralized nature of
FL, our framework enables multiple devices to collaboratively
train a global intrusion detection model while preserving
the privacy of individual user data. We demonstrated the
efficacy of our framework through extensive experiments
using the NSL-KDD public dataset, which shows significant
improvements in accuracy by 15.29%, F1 Score by 13.95%,
and computational efficiency by 99% compared to the current traditional AI-based approaches. Our results confirm the
potential of our proposed QFL-IDS as a promising solution for
efficient and privacy-preserving network intrusion detection in
consumer networks.

R EFERENCES
[1] “Cybercrime damages $6 trillion by 2021.” 2020. Accessed: Mar.
31, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.cybersecurityventures.com/
hackerpocalypse-cybercrime-report-2016/
[2] M. Yamauchi, Y. Ohsita, M. Murata, K. Ueda, and Y. Kato, “Anomaly
detection in smart home operation from user behaviors and home
conditions,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 183–192,
May 2020.
[3] S. Mumtaz, A. Alsohaily, Z. Pang, A. Rayes, K. F. Tsang, and
J. Rodriguez, “Massive Internet of Things for industrial applications:
Addressing wireless IIoT connectivity challenges and ecosystem fragmentation,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 28–33,
Mar. 2017.

[4] M. Wazid, A. Kumar Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchainenabled security framework against ransomware attacks for smart
healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28,
Feb. 2023.
[5] M. K. Hasan et al., “Federated learning for computational offloading
and resource management of vehicular edge computing in 6G-V2X
network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3827–3847,
Feb. 2024.
[6] J. Huang et al., “Incentive mechanism design of federated learning for
recommendation systems in MEC,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2596–2607, Feb. 2024.
[7] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and
K. Ayyakannu, “Blockchain assisted hybrid intrusion detection system in
autonomous vehicles for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 881–889, Nov. 2023.
[8] P. Verma, N. Bharot, J. G. Breslin, D. O’Shea, A. Vidyarthi, and
D. Gupta, “Zero-day guardian: A dual model enabled federated
learning framework for handling zero-day attacks in 5G enabled
IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3856–3866,
Feb. 2024.
[9] C. Qiao, M. Li, Y. Liu, and Z. Tian, “Transitioning from federated
learning to quantum federated learning in Internet of Things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., early access, May 10,
2024, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2024.3399612.
[10] J. Smith and A. Doe, “Leveraging quantum computing for security applications,” J. Quant. Comput. Cybersecurity, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 234–245,
2022.
[11] M. Chen, S. Mao, and Y. Liu, “Big data: A survey,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 171–209, 2019.
[12] Y. Chen, “Quantum dilated convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 20240–20246, 2022.
[13] A. Safari and A. A. Ghavifekr, “Quantum neural networks (QNN)
application in weather prediction of smart grids,” in Proc. 11th Smart
Grid Conf. (SGC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[14] T. D. Manjunath and B. Bhowmik, “Quantum-enhanced deep Q learning
with parametrized quantum circuit,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. VLSI
Syst., Archit., Technol. Appl. (VLSI SATA), 2024, pp. 1–6.
[15] K. Blekos et al., “A review on quantum approximate optimization
algorithm and its variants,” Phys. Rep., vol. 1068, pp. 1–66, Jun. 2024.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2024.03.002
[16] M. S. Salek et al., “A novel hybrid quantum-classical framework for an in-vehicle controller area network intrusion detection,”
Aug. 2023, Preprint. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.36227/
techrxiv.21907443.v2
[17] A. Kukliansky, M. Orescanin, C. Bollmann, and T. Huffmire, “Network
anomaly detection using quantum neural networks on noisy quantum computers,” IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng., vol. 5, pp. 1–11,
2024.
[18] M. Kalinin and V. Krundyshev, “Security intrusion detection using
quantum machine learning techniques,” J. Comput. Virol. Hack Tech.,
vol. 19, pp. 125–136, Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11416-022-00435-0
[19] H. Suryotrisongko and Y. Musashi, “Evaluating hybrid quantumclassical deep learning for cybersecurity botnet DGA detection,”
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 197, pp. 223–229, Jan. 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1877050921023590
[20] A. Gouveia and M. Correia, “Towards quantum-enhanced machine
learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Symp.
Netw. Comput. Appl. (NCA), 2020, pp. 1–8.
[21] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
Intell. Security Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
[22] S. Z. Lin, Y. Shi, and Z. Xue, “Character-level intrusion detection based
on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.
(IJCNN), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[23] Z. Li, Z. Qin, K. Huang, X. Yang, and S. Ye, “Intrusion detection using
convolutional neural networks for representation learning,” in Proc.
Neural Inf. Process., 2017, pp. 858–866.
[24] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for
intrusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 5, pp. 21954–21961, 2017.
[25] M. Al-Qatf, Y. Lasheng, M. Al-Habib, and K. Al-Sabahi, “Deep learning
approach combining sparse autoencoder with SVM for network intrusion
detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 52843–52856, 2018.
[26] “PennyLane,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://pennylane.ai/