IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

1

A Survey of Graph-Based Deep Learning for
Anomaly Detection in Distributed Systems
Armin Danesh Pazho , Student Member, IEEE, Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre , Student Member, IEEE,
Arnab A Purkayastha , Jagannadh Vempati , Otto Martin , and Hamed Tabkhi , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Anomaly detection is a crucial task in complex distributed systems. A thorough understanding of the requirements
and challenges of anomaly detection is pivotal to the security of
such systems, especially for real-world deployment. While there are
many works and application domains that deal with this problem,
few have attempted to provide an in-depth look at such systems.
In this survey, we explore the potentials of graph-based algorithms
to identify anomalies in distributed systems. These systems can
be heterogeneous or homogeneous, which can result in distinct
requirements. One of our objectives is to provide an in-depth look
at graph-based approaches to conceptually analyze their capability
to handle real-world challenges such as heterogeneity and dynamic
structure. This study gives an overview of the State-of-the-Art
(SotA) research articles in the field and compare and contrast their
characteristics. To facilitate a more comprehensive understanding,
we present three systems with varying abstractions as use cases.
We examine the specific challenges involved in anomaly detection
within such systems. Subsequently, we elucidate the efficacy of
graphs in such systems and explicate their advantages. We then
delve into the SotA methods and highlight their strength and
weaknesses, pointing out the areas for possible improvements and
future works.

TABLE I
EXAMPLE OF DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS WITH SAMPLE SOURCE OF ANOMALIES

Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, distributed
systems, dynamic systems, graphs, heterogeneous systems.

I. INTRODUCTION
NOMALY detection refers to finding abnormal behavior
or patterns in the data or a system that does not match the
expected behavior [1]. In other words, a non-benign change in
the known and correct behavior of a system can be detected as
an anomaly. Anomaly detection is critical in both homogeneous
and heterogeneous distributed systems. In heterogeneous distributed systems, different components, from small variations
like sensors, work all the way up to large components like
control facilities to achieve the overall goal of the system. All
these components are spread out in a big network; hence the

A

Manuscript received 19 May 2022; revised 16 April 2023; accepted 1 June
2023. Date of publication 5 June 2023; date of current version 27 November
2023. This work was supported by Siemens Technology. Recommended for
acceptance by B. He. (Armin Danesh Pazho and Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Armin Danesh Pazho.)
Armin Danesh Pazho, Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre, and Hamed Tabkhi are with
the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC 28223 USA (e-mail:
adaneshp@uncc.edu; galinezh@uncc.edu; htabkhiv@uncc.edu).
Arnab A Purkayastha is with the Western New England University, Springfield, MA 01119 USA (e-mail: arnab.purkayastha@wne.edu).
Jagannadh Vempati and Otto Martin are with the Siemens Technology, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA (e-mail: jagannadh.vempati@siemens.com;
m.otto@siemens.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3282898

word distributed, and they are dissimilar with respect to their
structure and data production, hence the word heterogeneous.
Homogeneous systems can be seen as a special case of heterogeneous systems where all the components are very similar if
not identical.
Many distributed systems are operational in critical and/or important fields (e.g., Power Generation and Distribution systems).
Thus, their security and correctness are critical. Vulnerabilities
can be seen in every aspect of these systems and in different
levels of abstraction; from problematic individual components
within a system or a network to seeing abnormalities or irregularities where these components connect with each other to accomplish a more advanced task. Table I shows several distributed
networks and possible sources of anomalies in them. Anomaly
detection in these systems must meet many requirements, making the task even more complicated. Anomalies must be detected
by processing large quantities of data, considering the nature of
anomalies, which makes detecting them a challenging task and
the real-world setup limitations.
In recent years, neural networks have shown great potential
and are being explored extensively. They have opened new

1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

avenues and increased interest in extending deep learning approaches for anomaly detection [2], [3]. Traditional methods are
mostly dependent on handcrafted features defined by domain
experts which makes them less generalizable and flexible for
different domains. Feature selection can be time-consuming
and error-prone. In contrast, deep learning methods are highly
adaptable to the specific requirements of each domain. Deep
learning models help with automation as they need minimal
effort and supervision for identifying the prominent features
without manual feature selection. They are more suitable for
learning complex information, their result is more generalizable
and less prone to over-fitting, and they are model free. Another
advantage of deep learning algorithms in the context of anomaly
detection is that they can handle large input data more efficiently
and scale up compared to traditional methods. This characteristic
makes them ideal for anomaly detection in complex distributed
systems. Deep learning-based algorithms have proved to be more
effective and generally show better results. This is due to the
fact that they are capable of building more enriched features and
detecting complex patterns compared to traditional methods.
Real-world distributed systems are an intertwined network of
numerous components, each of which representing distinctive
properties, changing over time. Graphs prove to be advantageous
in capturing the relational dynamic of these components as
well as their individual features. Mapping a system to nodes
and edges of a graph, allows for a better comprehension of the
system. It is noteworthy that not all types of graphs are capable
of capturing every aspect of a system. While conventional graph
representations are adequate for homogeneous systems, heterogeneous systems require the more complex attributed graphs.
Attributed graph is a type of data structure where each node
and edge is associated with a set of attributes or properties. In
heterogeneous systems, they allow for a the representation of
multiple variations of entities and relationships, each with their
own unique attributes [4]. On the other hand, to address the
changing nature of distributed systems, dynamic graphs come to
aid. In dynamic graphs, nodes and edges can appear, disappear,
or change over time, rendering them ideal for dynamic systems.
Hence, When surveying graph-based methods, we analyze their
ability to handle attributed and dynamic graphs.
Numerous studies have reviewed techniques and tools for
general anomaly detection problems [2], [3], [5], [6], [7]. Some
of the existing surveys focus on anomaly detection in Big Data
such as [8], [9]. In addition, certain studies investigate methods
utilized for anomaly detection in specific narrow domains such
as fake news detection [10], social media interactions [11],
financial transactions [12], etc. Several articles concentrate on
the applications of graphs for identifying anomalies in different
systems. [13] overviews anomaly detection algorithms in graphs
of dynamic networks; however it mostly mentions the traditional
methods and neglects state-of-the-art deep learning methods
without mentioning the challenges and difficulties of anomaly
detection in such systems. A recent study [14] tries to fill this gap
and focuses on deep learning methods for anomaly detection in
graphs. [14] also mentions the challenges in this area, but falls
short in categorizing the challenges and analyzing the real-world
requirements and constraints. Both [13], [14] do not provide

different use cases and analyze them with respect to review
algorithms. Another work [15] provides a general overview of
methods for anomaly detection in data represented as graphs
and discusses the challenges and use cases of these methods.
However, this work did not focus on deep learning methods
for anomaly detection, as these techniques were not yet widely
established at the time of the study.
The major focus of this survey is to provide a comprehensive
overview of the state-of-art graph-based techniques to solve the
problem of anomaly detection. In particular, we look at realtime complex distributed systems and qualitatively model those
to identify and analyze various methods in anomaly detection
that utilize the benefits of graphs. In a nutshell, we make the
following notable contributions to this survey:
r Modeling three conceptual use cases and employing them
for exploring the requirements, challenges, and benefits of
anomaly detection algorithms.
r Identifying the logical, algorithmic, and implementation
requirements and challenges of anomaly detection in realworld distributed systems.
r Comparing and contrasting the different characteristics
of the graph-based anomaly detection algorithms, tools,
and techniques in-depth for dealing with anomalies and
qualitatively modeling them over the three conceptual use
cases that we introduce.
r Providing future research direction for graph-based
anomaly detection in distributed systems.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
describes three use cases that are the representatives of realworld distributed systems. Section III identifies the challenges
and requirements of anomaly detection in the context of realworld distributed systems. Next, Section IV argues the benefits
of moving toward using graphs in distributed systems. Section V
aptly delve into the graph-based approaches and the means
of utilizing graphs for anomaly detection. Finally, Section VI
discusses and compares these methods and their complexity, the
new challenges and requirements that graphs add, and the future
directions that this research field can take.
II. CONCEPTUAL USE-CASES
In this section, we introduce three conceptual use cases that
will be used throughout the paper for better understanding.
While these three conceptual use cases are good samples of heterogeneous distributed systems, if necessary, these systems can
be segmented into homogeneous subgroups to fit the anomaly
detection method’s requirements.
We have made sure to cover different levels of abstraction
to help with the development of a richer understanding of the
concepts. The aim is to clarify that anomalies can occur in all
levels of a system, whether it is a small component or it is a large
subgroup of the whole system.
A. Smart Surveillance System
Here we use an example from [16]. Real-time Edge Video
Analytics for Multi-camera Privacy-aware Pedestrian Tracking
or REVAMP2 T [16] is designed for tracking pedestrians across

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

3

Fig. 1. REVAMP2 T [16] setup. This setup can be expanded or shrunk to a
new setup. Each edge server only sees the data of its own location and the cloud
server is able to see all the locations connected to it. For privacy purposes, a
supervised amount of information is transmitted from each location to the cloud
server.

multiple cameras. The overview of the model is shown in Fig. 1.
The installed edge nodes at each place of interest consist of a
number of edge cameras empowered for analyzing streaming
video. These cameras are connected to an edge server that acts
as a database that contains information about seen objects. The
video can be sent to a number of surveillance monitors with the
extracted information if necessary and allowed. Also, the whole
information can be sent to a cloud server for further processing
of less sensitive information. An anomaly can happen throughout this whole complex distributed heterogeneous system. For
example, a camera might get broken, or even there can be a
hacker trying to steal the extracted information from the edge
server.
This distributed system is completely attributed and dynamic,
leading to a dynamic attributed graph representation. Benign
changes such as removing or updating the components can
happen in this system, which should not be counted as anomalies.
Other events such as receiving noisy video from a camera,
information mismatch between the edge server and the cloud
server, and unwanted access to data at any point of the network
can be seen as anomalies.
B. Sensor Network
We next look at the conceptual use case of a heterogeneous
Sensor Network that illustrates a complex distributed system.
To accurately depict the security aspects of such a system, we
take inspiration from the Purdue Model for ICS security [17].
The Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture was created by
mapping the interconnections and inter-dependencies of the
high-level components of typical industrial control systems
(ICS) to provide guidance on how to defend IT (Information
Technology) and OT (Operations Technology) systems against
malicious actors. Fig. 2 shows the model of such a system

Fig. 2.

Sensor network.

modified to incorporate all the possible components of a heterogeneous system. Here, Level 0 (L0) through Level 4 (L4) are
the functional levels that span two broad zones, namely IT and
OT. OT systems can be further classified into two sub-categories
which will be discussed as follows.
r L0: Physical components that build products. Eg. motors,
pumps, sensors, valves, etc
r L1: Systems that monitor and send commands to devices
at L0. Eg. PLCs, RTUs, IEDs, etc
r L2: Overall process controllers. Eg. HMIs, SCADA, etc
involves humans managing and controlling the processes
r L3: Management of production workflows. Eg. batch management, operations management, etc
r L4: ERP software, databases, email servers and other
systems that manage the logistics of the manufacturing
operations and provide communications and data storage
The anomaly tri-junction barrier (shown in red) serves as a
demarcation of communication between the various levels and
possible sources of anomalies.
C. Internal Local Area Network
An internal Local Area Network (LAN) is also a good sample
model of a complex distributed heterogeneous system. The
graph representation of the system is attributed, dynamic, and
directed. It is dynamic because all the components in the network
are subject to change. For example, clients can change their
devices, the hardware of the server can change (e.g., adding more
memory or upgrading the CPU), the mediums for connections

4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

TABLE II
CHALLENGES OF ANOMALY DETECTION

can change, a client can get removed, or the framework of each
platform can get updated.
To emphasize, benign changes to the system must not be
counted as an anomaly. We are dealing with a dynamic system that does not have a unique normal state. Thus, capturing
anomalies is a more difficult task than when we are dealing with
static systems.

III. CHALLENGES
When it comes to anomaly detection, especially in real-world
systems, a number of requirements must be met. In this section,
we identify the general requirements and challenges of anomaly
detection in real-world distributed systems. We look at these
challenges from four aspects, each of which examines anomaly
detection from an alternative standpoint: Data, Anomaly Nature,
Graph, and Real-world aspects.

Table II summarizes all the requirements and the challenges
that follow them. In the rest of this section, we discuss each one
of them in more detail.

A. Data and Evaluation Aspect
1) Big Data: When it comes to anomaly detection with learning approaches, the data becomes an immediate challenge. In
many applications, the amount of data that has to be processed
is immense, pushing the problem into the Big Data category.
Big data meaning is best described through the 5Vs of Big Data:
Volume, Velocity, Variety, Veracity, and Value, each exhibiting
a series of challenges. For anomaly detection, especially in
distributed systems, a huge amount of data (Volume) is being
generated and processed at a very high speed (Velocity), containing multiple data types and formats coming from several
sources (Variety), with uncertainty about the data and its quality

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

(Veracity), all or most of it important, and must be considered
for extracting a worthy output (Value).
2) High Dimensionality: This is another challenge that arises
from the data. In many applications, the data that should be
processed has a large number of features (dimensions). Huge
dimensions of the dataset can cause numerous challenges in
many applications. However, these challenges are exacerbated
in the context of anomaly detection. The phrase “curse of dimensionality” generally refers to the problems that arise when the
number of dimensions increases. A dataset is high-dimensional
when we can see the curse of dimensionality. The growth of
dimensions will increase the size of the data accordingly and
causes sparsity which eventually results in the data points having
relatively the same distance from each other. As a result, it would
be more difficult to detect hidden anomalies in high-dimensional
space. This issue is still a controversial topic in scientific society.
3) Heterogeneity: Distributed systems, specially in real-world
scenarios, normally include various types of entities, each with
their own set of characteristics and behaviors. Consequently the
relation between these components is also specific based on the
type of the component. The data produced from such systems
are heterogeneous, and many methods are not able to handle
complex variable heterogeneous data. Thus, heterogeneity is
another challenge for the task of anomaly detection. Heterogeneous systems often have large and complex data structures,
with a high degree of interconnectivity and variability.
4) Labeled Data: In data-driven approaches, the quality of
the data has a vital role in the outcome of the model. When it
comes to anomaly detection, the number of labeled datasets is
alarmingly low. This fact encourages the use of unsupervised or
semi-supervised approaches. Thanks to new technologies and
advancements in devices, a huge amount of data is available.
However, in most cases, this data does not incorporate information regarding anomalous behavior. On the other hand, it is
both expensive and time-consuming to obtain high-quality labels
for available data. In many cases, anomalies must be discovered and labeled by experts who have field-specific knowledge,
making the task harder and more demanding. Also, we should
consider the noises added to the dataset by imprecise labeling.
Undetected anomalies can have a huge cost in critical situations
of real-world applications. Thus, using supervised learning is
somewhat problematic in the context of anomaly detection.
However, several approaches try to overcome this challenge
by taking advantage of synthetic labeled datasets, but many
other approaches have moved toward using semi-supervised,
unsupervised, and self-supervised algorithms.
5) Unbalanced Data: Another point to be mentioned is that
anomalies are rare. Supervised learning approaches need to
see enough examples while training to learn and understand
anomalies. However, the number of anomalies is usually very
subtle, causing the dataset to become unbalanced. Anomalies
are out-of-the-ordinary incidents, and it is not rational to expect
enough samples of each type of anomaly to be available in
the dataset. This challenge requires the direction of solving the
problem to adapt to it. The abundance of normal data points
may result in neglecting the detection of anomalous data points
which are valuable in anomaly detection. This problem arises

5

from the fact that many machine learning algorithms are based
on the hypothesis that classes of data have the same distributions
which is not realistic in the case of anomaly detection.
6) Unclean Data: Many approaches, such as anomaly detection with autoencoders (discussed in Section V need datasets that
only contain normal datapoints for training. These approaches
learn the normal state and decide whether an anomaly has
happened or not based on the divergence from features of normal
datapoints. However, as discussed, anomalies can be rare and
very subtle. There is a very high chance that an anomalous
datapoint slips through the fingers of the responsible individual
or team, or it might not even be considered an anomaly until later.
As a result, often datasets include undesired outliers that make
the dataset unclean. This unclean data can confuse the model
about the features and representation of the normal datapoints
and deteriorate the accuracy of the model.
7) Metrics and Benchmarks: On top of all the challenges,
the most important one seems to be the fact that there is no
unified metric or benchmark, where models can assess themselves and compare the results. Various kinds of metrics have
been introduced and we discuss a number of important ones in
Section VI-A, but almost none of the works assess those metrics
on a single unique domain, to make the comparison between
models possible.
B. Anomaly Nature
1) Changing Nature: Anomalies have a specific nature and
a collection of characteristics that lead to a particular set of
challenges. The first and most important challenge is the changing nature of anomalies. Anomalies are not predefined static
occurrences. They can transpire in different shapes and formats,
and not all of them can be considered prior to the occurrence
of an anomaly. There can always be novel anomalies that have
never been considered. They can adapt to anomaly detection
mechanisms and evolve to pass through the defenses of anomaly
detection algorithms. Because of this characteristic, most algorithms tend to skew toward online learning, unsupervised
learning, or semi-supervised learning, where there are no predefined anomalies, and the algorithm learns based on what it
sees at the moment on its own. In other words, most of the
algorithms make an effort to eliminate external artificial biases
and proceed toward generic solutions. This instigates the use of
online learning, where the algorithm is constantly learning about
the behavior of the system.
2) Disparate Sources: Distributed systems typically incorporate multiple layers (resources), resulting in a complex and
intricate system as a whole. The role of each of these layers,
disregarding its majority or minority can not be neglected.
Anomalies can penetrate each and every one of those components, making it very difficult to track them. Especially in
large facilities, the number of components grows exponentially,
and all of them are potential points of anomaly. This disparate
source of anomalies is one of the challenging complications that
is troubling anomaly detection algorithms.
3) Obscured Anomalies: In addition to these challenges, a
considerable number of anomalies, predominantly the ones that

6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

came into existence because of a smart entity, do not like to
be found. They might be disguised, or hidden. For example,
a cyber-attack tries to be as masked as possible. On the other
hand, there are anomalies that are not concealed and are just
the result of a malfunctioning component in the system. Being
conscious of both of these aspects and prepared for obscured
anomalies is another challenging task on the way to generic
anomaly detection.
4) Noise Resilience: Systems are subject to experiencing a
profuse number of internal or external noises. These noises are
not anomalies until they pass a certain threshold. However, they
are still an irregularity in the system. The anomaly detection
algorithms must be capable of distinguishing between noises
and anomalies. If not, they might raise too many false positive
alarms, resulting in supererogatory attention and costs. These
noises can have a wide variety of origins. Some of them are
back-breaking to discover, and it is best to introduce a means of
filtering those noises out inside the algorithm itself, instead of
putting an effort to find the source of the noise.
C. Real-World Challenges
1) Inference Time: When it comes to using anomaly detection,
time is of the essence, especially in real-world applications. It
is expected, time-wise, that the detection of the anomaly does
not sit far from the actual happening of the anomalous behavior.
Particularly, in a critical environment such as healthcare applications, a long latency in detecting a malfunctioning device might
lead to catastrophic results, and it is impermissible. Thus, necessary actions must be taken to avoid such a latency. However,
anomaly detection techniques based on deep learning are often a
heavy task, requiring a colossal amount of computational power.
2) Privacy: Privacy is another important hindrance that must
be considered in a real-world environment. Anomaly detection
algorithms are involved with all the data circulation and the
state of the system to the furthest extent. They know everything
about a system, and if that kind of information leaks out of
the environment, it can lead to cataclysmic undesirable results.
Hence, an anomaly detection algorithm must be obliged to
preserve privacy and be as secure as possible if it desires to
be deployed in a real-world environment.
3) Ciphered Data: The fact that anomaly detection algorithms
need to be aware of everything that is going on related to a system
brings about another challenge. Many systems such as financial
systems, social media, or facilities like power generation and
distribution networks do not intercommunicate in plain, raw
data. They encode the data and then transmit it. This ciphered
data usually is not related to the original data in an obvious
manner and that is the whole purpose of encoding the data.
Hence, algorithms face yet another arduous challenge. For example, wireless communication between a sensor and the server
contains an encoder at the edge transmitter, ciphering the data for
privacy and security reasons, and a decoder at the receptor that
deciphers the data for further processing. When an algorithm
tries to discover anomalies on the medium (here the wireless
connector) it cannot access the raw data before the transmission
stage.

4) Dynamic Systems: Furthermore, static systems are extremely rare in a real-world environment. Real-world distributed
systems are extremely dynamic. Components get removed,
added, changed, or updated. These benign transformations must
not be counted as anomalous behavior. The anomaly detection
algorithms might consider these transformations as anomalies.
If so, the number of false-positive alarms might rise to a point
that makes the algorithm non-functional and impractical for
real-world adoption. On the other hand, the anomaly detection
model should be flexible enough to learn about the updated
features and structure of the network to fully incorporate existing information. Online learning is a tool for overcoming
this challenge, however, this is still a very hot topic in research
communities.
5) Interpretability: Another important challenge is the interpretability of the anomalies. Particularly, in real-world deployments, the tendency to see the actual type of anomaly and not
just the detection is more desired. One reason behind this is that
recognizing the source of the anomaly, realizing the actual type
of the anomaly (e.g., cyber attacks on sensor 1 A), and informing
the responsible individuals is very important. Finding the root
of the anomaly is important for maintaining the availability of
the system.
6) Domain Shift: Last but not least, anomaly detection approaches become handy, when you are able to generalize over
different domains. However, since we are dealing with learningbased approaches, this domain shift comes with a huge cost.
Neural Networks learn about the environment and adapt to
it, making it difficult to switch to another domain. This fact
discourages the use of supervised learning and also pushes novel
techniques toward online learning. This challenge is shared
between graph-based anomaly detection and other approaches.
IV. MOTIVATION: WHY GRAPH-BASED?
The use of graphs for anomaly detection is a very recent topic
of interest in the machine learning and deep learning community.
In this section, we highlight the benefits of graphs in the context
of anomaly detection.
Ability to Represent Complex Dependencies: Graphs are
widely used for modeling and analyzing complex systems
with non-Euclidean data and intricate relationships among system components. This characteristic is particularly useful for
anomaly detection problems since anomalies in nature can arise
from complex interactions between variables that are hard to
capture using traditional models.
Flexibility: Complex systems consist of many different components each with its own set of characteristics. Graph-based
models are highly flexible and can be adapted to a wide range
of structures and data types. Graphs suit well for both structured
(symbols, images, grid-based data) and unstructured (knowledge
graphs, social network data, distributed systems, citation networks, network traffic) that can be easily represented by regular
and/or irregular graph structures.
Scalibilty: Anomaly detection often deals with highdimensional data with a large number of features. Due to this
fact, it is hard to capture the underlying patterns and distribution

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

7

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF REVIEWED APPROACHES AND THEIR CAPABILITIES

of data for finding outliers. Graphs are useful for capturing the
underlying structure of the input data and its relationships in a
more compact and interpretable format. This can help with more
efficient processing of the data and helps with scalability.
Robustness: Graphs are capable of incorporating relationships
and the holistic structure of the data which is particularly beneficial in anomaly detection. Graph-based algorithms analyze
each datapoint by taking into account the context related to them
which improves the robustness and helps reduce the number of
false negatives. This is due to the fact that often outliers do not
fit into the global patterns of the system.
Interpretability and Visualization: Graph-based models can
provide more insights into the relationships between nodes of the
system, making them more interpretable than many traditional
models. This can be particularly useful in understanding the
underlying causes of anomalies and identifying potential areas
for improvement and vulnerabilities of the system.
V. GRAPH-BASED TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES FOR ANOMALY
DETECTION
In this section, we aim to introduce and compare techniques
that combined with graphs have a great potential for solving

the problem of anomaly detection in distributed systems. The
summary of all reviewed works and their capabilities can be
seen in Table III.
Many of the surveyed methods are not able to handle heterogeneity or dynamic behavior that might be present in the systems.
Approaches that are capable of managing attributed graphs are
better suited for heterogeneous systems. It is noteworthy that the
inability of certain methods to handle attributed graphs does not
mean they can not be adopted in heterogeneous systems. Two viable strategies exist for their utilization. First, large systems can
be subdivided into smaller homogeneous sub-systems. Second,
a simplified version of data can be employed to accommodate
the limitations of such methods.

A. Federated Learning
In the context of anomaly detection in distributed systems
and when dealing with Big Data, while graphs can offer the
ability to capture complex dependencies and handle scalability
and robustness, Federated Learning (FL) can be a solution
for improved privacy, model generalization, and more efficient
learning. The combination of the two seems to be perfectly suited

8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 3. Federated learning for anomaly detection applied on two distributed clusters viz. LAN and Sensor. Here N is the number of clusters connected to the
Federated cloud server. Each network has its own testing and training dataset, local storage, and loss function. The server receives individual weights from all the
network’s local models and then aggregates them based on their useable graph attributes while sending back the global weights.

for anomaly detection in distributed systems, and it is a great area
to be explored by scholars and researchers.
Federated Learning is a technology that has recently emerged
as an alternative to centralized systems. It focuses on collaboration while preserving the security aspect of client data information used for training machine learning algorithms [124],
[125], [126], [127], [128]. It also greatly reduces communication overhead [129]. FL employs collaborative and experiential
learning by training without the need to transfer data over to a
centralized location. This feature has recently led to a rise in
the applicability of FL in a variety of applications, ranging from
medical to IoT, transportation, defense, and mobile apps.
Anomaly detection and prediction of static and dynamic time
series data have been a popular topic, especially for IoT-based
data [130], [131], [132]. These approaches look at multi-sensor
systems as a collection of centralized sensors where abnormal
sensor behavior is detected by a central model that runs on the
server. Such systems are prone to failures, require longer access
times, and are vulnerable to malicious invasion attacks leading
to a potential data breach from clients to the server [133]. [134]
looks at the data collected by IoT sensors for energy-efficient
applications like HVAC in smart buildings and proposes a federated stacked Long Short-time Memory model (LSTM) on time
series data generated by IoT sensors for classification and regression tasks. [103], on the other hand, proposes a self-learning
distributed system for security monitoring.
While such approaches deal with Autonomy (concerns association and communication requirements) nature of systems, they
fall short of the benefits of graph-based relational learning. Federated Graph Learning is a fairly recent topic. [135] introduces
Federated Graph Learning (FGL) as a seminal paper discussing
the definition and challenges of FGL. It further categorizes FGL
into four distinct learning types. Graph edges and nodes in each
sub-graph heavily overlap each other and therefore play a pivotal
role in extracting the features and adding to contextual and
relational learning benefits. A sub-classification of this work

was introduced in [104] as a complete methodology to apply
the Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) algorithm for graph
convolutional networks. The approach, along with Homomorphic Encryption (HE), was developed to ensure privacy while
maintaining accuracy.
A general structure of a complex distributed system can be
easily depicted using the Federated Learning framework (Fig. 3).
Here we show two different network clusters. In this framework,
the models are trained at the device level or client side, where
they are brought over to the data sources or devices for training
and prediction. The updated values are sent back to the federated
cloud server for aggregation. One consolidated model gets transferred back to the devices to enable tracking and redistribution
of each model to various devices. During the training phase, the
input is reconstructed in the output until reconstruction error is
minimized, which calculates the threshold value. This threshold
value decides whether the observed patterns are anomalous or
not.
Table III summarizes the strong points and weaknesses of
two discussed works DIoT [103] and VFL [104]. Both of these
works are unable to process the additional information provided
by attributed graphs which in real-world scenarios are common.
It should be mentioned that for supervised models such as
DIot [103] a crucial requirement is available labeled data that
is hard to provide. Based on mentioned shortcomings, although
FGL addresses data diversity, data security and real-time continuous learning it is not mature enough yet for real-world
applications.
B. Autoencoders
Anomaly Detection is often considered an open-set problem,
where it is very unlikely to have complete knowledge of all types
of possible anomalies. As a result, researchers have focused on
developing semi-supervised or unsupervised powerful neural
network models such as Autoencoders. The combination of

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

autoencoders with graphs has become a popular topic as it
helps with overcoming the challenges of anomaly detection,
specifically in the context of distributed systems.
Autoencoders are typically made of two main modules; encoders and decoders. The encoder part is responsible for mapping the input space to a bottleneck latent space, and the decoder
reconstructs the original input based on the latent representation.
In order to find the best possible latent representation, they try
to minimize the reconstruction error of the original input. Thus,
the network will learn to preserve the most informative parts of
the input features in the latent representation. They were traditionally used for dimension reduction prior to feeding the data to
the main network, but nowadays, they have vast applications in
information retrieval, image processing, and anomaly detection.
In the context of anomaly detection, autoencoders can be
used as a tool for calculating anomaly scores. After training the
autoencoder with data that does not contain anomalous points,
if any outlier data points are fed to the network, it will perform
poorly. The reconstruction loss of that data point will be larger
compared to normal ones since the network is not familiar
with this type of data. As a result, the reconstruction error can
be used as a measure of deviation from normal data points.
This approach has been used for detecting anomalies in highperformance computing systems [105] and has shown promising
results. Convolutional Autoencoders can improve the parameter
efficiency and training time since they have shared parameters.
Works such as [106], [107] have made use of convolutional
autoencoders for anomaly detection and achieved significant improvements. DeepSphere [112] proposed a method for detecting
anomalous snapshots in a dynamic network. This work adopts
an LSTM autoencoder with an attention mechanism. In the
constructed hidden space, DeepSphere [112] learns a spherically
shaped boundary around the encoded normal representations.
As a result, the encoded representation of an unseen anomalous
snapshot of the network will fall outside the hyper-sphere and
is detected as an anomaly.
All the aforementioned methods are developed based on the
hypothesis that clean data (data that does not contain anomalous
points) is available for training, but in many real-world cases,
we do not have enough data points that satisfy these constrain.
Thus, the reconstruction error for anomalous points will be
lower, and the accuracy of finding outliers will degrade. To solve
this issue, Robust Deep Autoencoder (RDA) [108] inspired by
Robust Principal Component Analysis [136], [137], [138] uses a
filter layer that separates anomalous data points of input data. By
removing these noisy and anomalous data points, the network
will be able to better reconstruct the normal data points. On top
of RDA [108], they add an anomaly detection algorithm to test
the effectiveness of the proposed method. Iterative Training Set
Refinement (ITSR) [109] adapts adversarial autoencoder network [139] architecture to add a prior distribution to constructed
latent representation and places anomalies to the regions with
lower likelihood. By this means, the model will be robust against
noises and anomalies in the training data. DONE [111] is another
network proposed for detecting anomalous nodes in attributed
graphs. DONE makes use of two parallel autoencoders; one
for encoding link structure and another one for attributes of

9

nodes. These autoencoders are trained to preserve proximity
and homophily in the network. The proposed loss function
is designed to minimize the contribution of outliers, and by
minimizing the loss equation, the anomaly scores for each node
are calculated. Finally, the top k nodes are reported as anomalous
points. They also propose AdONE [111] that makes use of
adversarial learning to be able to construct an outlier-resistant
network embedding.
Traditional autoencoder networks and convolutional autoencoders are limited to a fixed input length which makes them
unsuitable for detecting anomalies in dynamic networks. Also,
they are limited to Euclidean data; thus, they are unable to
model complex relationships that may occur in a dynamic
heterogeneous network. Graph Neural Networks (GNN) can
overcome these issues and generalize the network. They can
also incorporate multi-dimensional edge and node attributes.
Convolutional graph autoencoders have been used in [110]
for detecting anomalies. This model uses both node features
and edge features. Also, the decoder module has two separate
branches for node reconstruction and edge reconstruction. The
final reconstruction loss is the combination of edge reconstruction loss and node reconstruction loss and is used as a measure
for finding anomalies.
Fig. 4 shows the workflow for detecting anomalies using
autoencoder networks in the LAN Cluster example mentioned
in Section II-C. In the case of anomaly detection in a complex
system, such as the three conceptual models that we introduced
earlier, after training the model with normal data, the graph of
the network is fed to the encoder module to be transformed
into the latent space. In this case, since we are dealing with
a heterogeneous network, the encoder and decoder modules
should be able to incorporate the edge and node information
and aggregate them to get the most of the available information.
Also, at any time, the graph of the network can change. Thus, it is
vital to employ a network architecture that can handle dynamic
graphs, such as Graph Neural Networks. The decoder will try
to reconstruct the original graph of the network from the latent
representation. Anomalous edges, nodes, or sub-graphs of the
network will have a high reconstruction error. In the most basic
approach, only a fixed threshold can be used to decide whether
the edge, node, or sub-graph should be considered anomalous
or not.
For more clear scrutiny, Table III shows the different features of reviewed works. As mentioned before, one important
characteristic of the autoencoder structure is that it is trained
in an unsupervised manner that directly solves the problem of
the availability of labeled data. Also, the changing nature of
anomalies will not be a problem in these types of models since
they will learn the normal behavior of the system and anything
different from that will be counted as an outlier.
C. Graph Embedding
The first obstacle that we face in many tasks like anomaly
detection in large networks is finding a way to map the data
hidden in the network graph into a low-dimensional space. To
do so, there are many different approaches. In general, we can

10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 4. Graph autoencoder network for anomaly detection in the LAN Cluster example introduced in Section II-C. Two malicious users (equal to anomalous
nodes in the network graph) have connected to the network. The network graph is fed to the autoencoder and the reconstruction loss for nodes and edges will be
calculated. In this simple case, just by comparing the reconstruction loss to a constant threshold, the anomalies can be detected, but these processes can be more
advanced and precise.

separate these methods into two different classes. The first type
of encoder is “Shallow Encoders” which will transform each
node of a graph into exactly one vector in the latent space. On the
other hand, there are methods called “Deep Encoders” which get
the use of more complicated networks and are able to generate
more complex embedding compared to “Shallow Encoders.”
In the following, we will see details of each of these methods
and their strengths and weaknesses. After obtaining the latent
representations, an anomaly detection algorithm can be used on
top of the embedding network in order to detect outliers and
anomalies.
1) Shallow Embedding: Shallow Embedding methods try to
find a unique latent representation for each vertex of a graph.
The main difference between different approaches to shallow
embedding is in the definition of similarity function. The similarity function basically describes how relationships in the latent
space are mapped to the original input space. DeepWalk [113]
is a random walk approach for node embedding that tries to
find the best embedding that preserves similarity. Each random
walk is an unbiased sequence of nodes with a fixed length.
Authors claim that random walks can be treated as sentences of
a text since the frequency of occurrence of the nodes in random
walks follows the power law. DeepWalk [113] tries to find the
feature representation for each node such that it maximizes the
likelihood of visiting nodes seen in the random walks starting
from that particular node. Another method to be mentioned is
Node2Vec [114]. This algorithm makes it possible to have more
flexible random walks in order to obtain richer latent representations. It combines breath-first sampling and depth-first sampling
together to introduce a flexible biased sampling strategy that
allows local and global views of the network.
Similar approaches such as LINE [115], and TADW [116]
have been proposed. One might think of these algorithms as
finding a simple look-up table for assigning each node in the
original graph to a latent representation. As a result, these kinds
of methods have limitations when we want to apply them to
large heterogeneous networks. The first limitation comes from
the fact that each node has to have its own unique embedding
and there are no shared parameters in these kinds of networks.
As a result, when the number of nodes grows, the number of
parameters will grow respectively, and we will need V × D
number of parameters where D is the dimension of latent space.
Also, they are unable to generalize to unseen nodes, and we

cannot use them in dynamic networks. NetWalk [117] solves the
problem with the changing networks and dynamically updates
the representations as the network evolves. This model tries to
satisfy two constraints: clique constraints which minimize the
pairwise distances between representations of vertices in each
random walk to preserve locality and autoencoder constrain,
which serve as a global constraint and minimize the reconstruction error of input using the output embedding. Still, there are
more issues with these types of graph embedding algorithms;
another problem is that in complex heterogeneous systems, each
node may have its own specific features, but “Shallow Encoders”
are unable to make use of these node-specific features.
2) Deep Embedding: Most of the methods that we have discussed until now are not capable of modeling more complicated
dependencies such as complex inter-sensor relationships, but
“Deep Encoders” have more capacity and are able to build richer
latent representations. Graph Deviation Network (GDN) [94] introduced a structure learning approach in which the graph edges
are initially unknown and have to be learned. GDN [94] is consist
of four important components. The first component is Sensor
Embedding which captures the characteristics of each node or
sensor. In the next step, Graph Structure Learning Learns the
complicated relationships between pairs of sensors and models
them to the edges of the graph. After the construction of the
graph, Graph Attention-Based Forecasting predicts the behavior
of sensors in the future time step. Finally, Graph Deviation
Scoring will compare these predictions and the actual values in
each time step and identify anomaly points that deviate from
expected values. AddGraph [118] is able to aggregate more
information such as structural, temporal, and content features
to be able to build a more powerful embedding for anomaly
detection in dynamic graphs. This model makes use of a graph
convolutional neural network (GCN) for capturing structural and
content features. By adding Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) with
attention modules, AddGraph [118] makes it possible to combine the long-term and short-term states of each node. Finally,
based on the representation that contains structural, temporal,
and content features, AddGraph [118] computes the anomalous
score for edges using a single-layer network.
Smart Video Surveillance Systems (Section II-A), Sensor
Network (Section II-B), and LAN Network (Section II-C) all
contain many nodes. As a result, Shallow embedding techniques
are not adequate for modeling these kinds of networks. We

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

11

Fig. 5. This figure shows the AddGraph model applied to the LAN Cluster conceptual use case discussed in II-C. In the first step, Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) takes the graph snapshot at time step t and combines it with the hidden state of the previous time step to construct the node embedding. GRU and attention
module combine the long-term and short-term states to generate the current hidden state. In the last step, the scoring function assigns an anomaly score to edges
based on the nodes connected to them.

should also consider that all of these three conceptual use-cases
are also dynamic (as an example adding a new camera to the
Smart Video Surveillance System changes the graph of the network); thus, methods like DeepWalk [113], and Node2Vec [114]
are not suitable since they are unable to generalize to unseen
nodes. Another important issue is that nodes and edges can
have features with different schemes that are useful for anomaly
detection. Consider the Sensor Network; in each time step, a
huge amount of data is generated by a large number of interconnected sensors. The data from each sensor can be related to
other sensors with a complex non-linear relationship. Shallow
embedding techniques fail to take advantage of this kind of
information. Thus, Deep Embedding methods that are more
complicated such as GDN [94], and AddGraph [118] can be
helpful in this case. Based on what we discussed, let’s use one
of the introduced examples discussed in Section II for better
understanding. In the LAN Cluster example, AddGraph seems
to be a suitable choice.
Fig. 5 shows the structure of AddGraph which is applied to
the LAN Cluster example. Previous hidden states and current
snapshot of the network graph is used for constructing the node
embedding. Also, an attention module and GRU combine the
long-term and short-term states to generate the current hidden
state. In the final step, a scoring function is responsible to assign
a normality score to the current hidden state. The main points of
discussed techniques are available in Table III.
D. Graph Transformers
The concept of attention mechanism introduced by [140]
was first used for natural language processing. This mechanism

aims to do one-step prediction instead of recurrent processing
of the data. By this means, the attention mechanism reduces
the path length of the computation, which means reducing the
information loss and focusing on the most important features
for predicting the output. Adapting this technique to graphs can
improve the outcome in many applications, such as anomaly
detection. Graph transformer networks are able to automatically
generate meta-paths by learning and solving the aforementioned
problem enabling many applications such as anomaly detection
to work on complex heterogeneous systems [141]. In [119],
the model takes advantage of relational graph transformers for
finding anomalous nodes in a supervised manner. In this work,
first, the heterogeneous graph of the network is extracted, and
relational graph transformers and a semantic attention network
are used for modeling the complex relationships between the
nodes and encoding them, and then classifying them for finding
anomalous nodes.
Supervised learning is not possible in many applications due
to the lack of labeled data. Using an unsupervised setting, the
transformer-based Anomaly Detection framework for Dynamic
graphs (TADDY) [120] detects anomalous edges in dynamic
graphs. TADDY [120] consists of four main modules as shown
in Fig. 6. Edge-based substructure sampling captures the spatialtemporal context of each target edge using the graph diffusion
method [142], [143]. For each edge, this module constructs a
fixed-length importance-aware set of neighboring nodes. Then,
TADDY [120] leverages a novel spatial-temporal node encoding
for generating node embedding. After acquiring the embedding
from the previous step, a transformer network is used as an
encoder to capture spatial and temporal features, followed by
a pooling module for aggregating the embedding of all nodes

12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 6. The figure shows the frame work of TADDY [120]. (A) shows the edge-based substructure sampling module which chooses subgraphs based on the target
edge. (B) is the spatial-temporal node encoding module which is responsible for encoding nodes and capturing the global, local, and temporal information hidden
in the subgraphs using diffusion-based spatial encoding, distance-based spatial encoding, and relative temporal encoding respectively. The final node encoding
is built by combining all previously mentioned encoding. (C) shows the dynamic graph transformer module. This module constructs the edge embedding using
a modified multi-headed attention network. Finally, in (D) you can see the discriminative anomaly detector which is trained using samples and pseudo labels
generated by a negative sampling strategy. Given that TADDY is only capable of handling non-attributed graphs, we assume that a simplified version of data is
utilized to accommodate this limitation.

in the same neighboring set. In the final step, the discriminative
anomaly detector (which consists of a fully connected layer).
Graph Learning with Transformer for Anomaly detection
(GTA) [84], leverages a modified transformer network. This
model detects anomalies on multivariate time series generated
from different sensors. These sensors can be related to each
other in complicated unknown connections. GTA [84] first
learns the dependencies using Gumbel-Softmax Sampling [144]
strategy. Once this topological structure is established, a graph
convolution block updates each node representation by aggregating neighbors’ information and message passing to enrich
the representations. Now, dilated convolution [121] is used for
extracting temporal context, but with one novel modification.
They have used a hierarchical scheme to make GTA [84] capable
of capturing temporal patterns with different lengths. On top of
these, a more sophisticated and efficient version of transformers
is introduced. Multi-branch attention module that is used in
GTA [121] extracts long-distance temporal dependencies and
neighboring nodes’ information. In the anomaly scoring module,
the original input time series are divided into training sequences
(for the encoder) and label sequences (for the decoder). The
decoder predicts the behavior of the time series in the target
section, and by comparing the predicted output and the actual
values, outliers can be detected
Capabilities of all mentioned models can be seen in Table III.
Unfortunately, none of the anomaly detection models using
graph transformers are compatible with attributed graphs which
makes them less practical in real applications. Future research
can move in the direction of solving this issue to overcome the
complex nature of heterogeneous distributed systems.
E. Graph Signal Processing
Graph Signal Processing (GSP) is another technique that
utilizes classical signal processing tools like Fourier transform,

filtering, frequency response etc., to process data defined on
both regular and irregular graph networks. [145] presents the
recent advances in the currently developing GSP tools. Graph
signals can be filtered and sampled to apply low-level processing
techniques such as denoising and compression. One of the major differences between GSP and traditional Machine learning
algorithms is that ML typically considers a graph as a discrete
version of a complex network. However, this assumption falls
flat for many real-world applications associated with graphs.
GSP, on the other hand, looks at existing problems from different
perspectives. As an example, defining a graph for sensor-based
networks involves choosing edge weights as a decreasing function of the distance between nodes represented by sensors.
Observations from similar nodes can lead to a smooth graph
function that can detect outliers or abnormal values through
high pass filtering or thresholding [146]. Moreover, a sparse set
of sensor readings can also be used to build signal reconstruction methods that can be used to save on resources in sensor
networks [147], [148].
Anomaly detection with GSP filtering on Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) has been a topic of interest in several
works. [122] captures proximity information such as data between sensors to capture local anomalous behavior. They present
three graph designs and use GSP filtering to find the cut-off
frequency and Lambda for the filters. This is used to separate
normal and anomalous sub-spaces for unsupervised detection.
The anomalous space projections are finally utilized to generate
anomaly scores as shown in Fig. 7. The main advantage of
such a system is that in addition to raw sensor data, relational
characteristics between the nodes, like proximity information
between sensors and their environment, can be effectively captured. Graph-based filtering is found to be particularly useful
for both regular and irregular graph structures for unsupervised
anomaly detection. In Table III, specification of the reviewed
model is available. The ability to work on dynamic attributed

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

13

Fig. 7. A small part of the Sensor Network introduced in Section II-B is used to show Graph Signal Processing for anomaly detection. A 3-stage process that
begins with Graph construction from 3 adjacency matrices to generate an undirected, weighted, and connected graph G(N, E, W). Filtering and Optimization
methods are next used to get the cut-off frequency of the GSP filter that is further projected as a normal and an anomalous subspace. Both these values in addition
to a thresholding function are used to generate the anomaly scores.

graphs makes [122] aligned with real-world requirements. On
the other hand, leveraging GSP techniques can add deeper
perspectives to anomaly detection problems and equip them with
more relational information helpful for detecting outliers which
is essential in real-world applications.
F. Graph Contrastive Learning
In graph contrastive learning techniques, the objective is to
construct a representation by contrasting pairs of data points.
The loss function is designed in such a way that by optimizing
it, the positive pairs (matching pairs) of data points are brought
together, and the negative pairs will be separated. As a result,
using this approach, the model is able to learn higher-level
representations that are more powerful and distinguishable. In
the context of anomaly detection, contrastive learning can be
helpful since it is designed to provide a measure of similarity
between data pairs. The main idea in GCCAD [123] is to detect
anomalies using their distance from average normal points or
global context. The key concept is that the outliers will have
different features than most points; thus, by contrasting each
node with the global context, we can define a measure for
detecting anomalies.
GCCAD [123] has shown that the node embedding made by
traditional GNN encoders is not able to discern anomalous nodes
properly. However, GCCAD [123] is able to construct a more
powerful embedding that highlights the differences between
anomalous nodes and the global context. This work uses a
context-aware loss function in a supervised manner. The loss
function is optimized in the GNN encoder which consists of
three modules; edge update, node update, and graph update
module. The edge update module is responsible for calculating
the likelihood of being a suspicious edge (an edge that connects
a normal node to an anomalous one) and removing it, and
updating the adjacency matrix. These modules are designed
to conserve the homophily assumption between neighboring
nodes. This assumption suggests that the neighboring nodes

have the same labels. Still, homophily is violated in the case
of a connection between a normal node and an anomalous one,
and this violation has not been considered in traditional GNN
networks. In the next step, the node embedding is updated using
message passings by the node update module. Lastly, the graph
update module updates the global context. The updated global
context is the weighted aggregation of all the nodes. The authors
also introduced a self-supervised version of this network named
GCCAD-pre [123].
CoLA [86] focuses on anomaly detection in large-scale attributed graphs, which is applicable to real-world problems.
This novel network has three main components: pair sampling,
a GNN-based contrastive learning model, and the score computation module. The instance pair sampling is designed to
generate the pairs of data for the training phase. In contrast
with GCCAD [123] that contrasts nodes with the global context,
the definition of pairs in CoLA [86] focuses on the relationship
between a node and its neighbors. Hence the strategy for defining
the pairs is ”target node versus local subgraph”. The GNN-based
contrastive learning module consists of three sub-modules: (1)
GNN model, (2) readout module, and (3) discriminator module.
After acquiring the pairs, the GNN module will extract embedding for the target node and the local subgraph. Then the readout
module uses the average pooling function to create a vector of
embedding of all nodes in the embedded subgraph. In the discriminator module, the positive and negative pairs are contrasted,
and a score is generated. Finally, the score computation module
measures the anomaly score for all nodes, and anomalous nodes
can be picked by choosing the nodes with the highest scores.
SL-GAD [64], introduced a novel generative and contrastive
self-supervised model.
SL-GAD [64] is made of three major components similar to
CoLA [86]; graph view sampling, contrastive self-supervised
learning, and graph anomaly scoring. In the graph view sampling, for each target node, two local subgraphs are extracted.
Next, in the contrastive self-supervised learning module, a GNN
constructs the latent representation of the samples. In addition to

14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 8. In this figure we have applied the SL-GAD [64] frame work to the LAN conceptual use-case discussed in Section II-C. (A) shows the Graph view sampling
module which chooses the target node and samples two subgraphs. (B) is the generative and contrastive discrimination modules. First, the target node and the two
subgraphs are fed to the GNN encoder and graph embedding is created. In the next step, two different objectives, the discriminator and regressor try to capture
anomalies in the graph structure and attributes. The generative regression module is designed for capturing anomalies in the attributes of each node, while the
discriminator module is responsible for finding anomalies in the structure of the graph. Finally, in (C) the contrastive scores and the generative scores are combined
to calculate the final anomaly score.

contrastive scores, SL-GAD [64] also leverages a graph autoencoder network for reconstructing the feature vector of the target
node in order to fully utilize the contextual information of target
nodes. Finally, graph anomaly scoring predicts the final scores
based on both generative scores (from the graph autoencoder)
and contrastive scores (from contrastive learning).
Fig. 8 shows the work flow of the SL-GAD [64] applied to the
LAN Cluster example introduced in Section II-C. The sampled
subgraphs are fed to the GNN Encoder and the encoded representations are fed to two different branches, the discriminative
and the generative modules. at the final step, anomaly scores
from these two branches are combined to construct the final
anomaly score.
Characteristics of all mentioned models can be seen in
Table III. As discussed, Graph Contrastive Learning approaches
show promising results and are extremely adaptable to realworld scenarios. The discussed works are all able to overcome
the dynamic complex nature of distributed heterogeneous systems and the unsupervised/self-supervised learning adaptability
of these models can alleviate the problem of available labeled
data mentioned in Section III.
VI. COMPARISON AND DISCUSSION
In this section, first, we discuss the metrics that are available
for evaluation and then we try to compare the methods discussed
in Section V from an algorithmic perspective. Then we discuss

the requirements and challenges that utilizing graphs adds to
previously mentioned requirements discussed in Section III, and
finally, we discuss the future directions that research in this field
can take.
A. Metrics and Comparison
The performance and viability of any anomaly detection
algorithm, graph-based or non-graph-based, can be evaluated by
Precision, Recall, Accuracy, Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curve, and Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC). While
Precision, Recall, and Accuracy are a measure of the true positives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives, AUC,
on the other hand, summarizes the information contained in the
ROC curve. Larger AUC values indicate better performance at
distinguishing between anomalous and normal observations.
A major challenge while reporting the above-mentioned metrics is the absence of unified evaluation criteria amongst the
diversity of algorithms, the application type, and the heterogeneous nature of data and devices involved. As an example, if we
want to compare the latency of the two algorithms, we have to
make sure that they are both tested on particular hardware, they
are getting tested on a specific job, and we have to eliminate
different variables that have an effect on that metric.
In contrast, Time Complexity is The only metric that can give
us some insight into the algorithm’s performance. Table IV
shows the time complexity of reviewed algorithms. In order

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

15

TABLE IV
TIME COMPLEXITY OF REVIEWED ALGORITHMS. FOR SYMBOL DESCRIPTIONS PLEASE REFER TO TABLE V

to assess how well an algorithm performs compared to other
algorithms, and also with respect to points in Section III, we
can refer to Time Complexity. It gives us a good understanding
of how fast and efficient the method is, a general idea of the
algorithm’s complexity, and whether it is suitable for specific
tasks or hardware based on the power it needs.
B. Graph-Specific Challenges
Graphs are extremely powerful for catching relational information, especially in distributed systems. They help with
addressing challenges and meeting the requirements discussed
in Section III, as well as capturing important features of the
data like relational features and information. However, there is a
cost to all these benefits. While utilizing graphs these challenges
should be addressed:
Types of Graphs: Each system can be represented by a specific
type of graph. Each type of graph has its features and is suitable

for a group of domains. For example, attributed graphs add
more complexity by introducing the features of the connection
between the nodes, and the features of the nodes themselves.
Also, a graph representing a system might be dynamic or static,
depending on the nature of the original system. All these subclasses of graphs add to the complexity of graph-based learning
techniques. Subsequently, the introduced models should be able
to handle these diverse types of network graphs, but as we
discussed in previous sections, many of the models can just
work on plain static graphs which is not satisfactory in many
applications. [149], [150], [151], [152], [153], [154]
Graph Anomalies: By introducing graphs, we get a better
representation of a system. Graphs and Graph Neural Networks
make us capable of modeling complicated dependencies in real
networks. But if we look at it from another perspective, this
adaptation of graph representation introduces different places
for anomalies to take place. In graphs, outliers can occur in
nodes, edges, subgraphs, and even the whole graph. But models

16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

TABLE V
TABLE IV SYMBOL DESCRIPTION

dataset. Generating or preparing a proper dataset can be a substantial contribution to the field of anomaly detection. However,
in the context of anomaly detection, usually, an expert must
supervise the process of labeling and collecting data and this
fact makes the generated dataset prone to human errors. All of
these are added to the actual cost of creating such a dataset.
Synthetic datasets are another option, and creating them can be
explored through a whole line of research.
Numerous methods of anomaly detection are designed to
discover whether an anomaly has happened or not. They are
able to notify a responsible person or group to look for further
investigation. However, they are not able to identify what sort
of anomaly has occurred. A major subject for further work and
research is the interpretability of anomalies. Down the road,
there is a tendency to distinguish between anomalies using
the algorithms at hand. For example, in the Sensor Network
mentioned in II-B we like the model to be able to distinguish
between a cyber attack and power shortage and raise the correct
alarm. If we go further than that, the ways that the model can
restore the system or stop the anomaly can be investigated.
VII. CONCLUSION

are usually only able to detect one kind of foresaid anomalies,
and there is no unique framework to address them all together.
This means that the approaches must specifically determine what
is the objective of their detection, which types they handle, and
where they show the best performance. [91], [155], [156]
C. Future Research Directions
The most important research direction at the moment seems
to be finding a means of quantifying the results of anomaly
detection algorithms in a unified manner, thereby enabling comparison in various domains and fields. A great share of all the
advancements in technology originates from quantifying and
comparing new findings with already existing works. However,
considering the variety in this field, comparing algorithms to
each other is nearly impossible. First, the best metric for evaluating a model must be identified. Alongside that, an evaluation mechanism, general enough to be applicable to disparate
anomaly detection algorithms is also needed. As an example,
in computer vision, COCO [157] provides such an environment
for emerging algorithms. A framework of testing can also be
another fruitful tool. In this direction, creating a simulator, or
a system that can serve as a toy sample of a large distributed
system can be beneficial as well. To recapitulate, there is a need
for a unified evaluation of graph-based and non-graph-based
anomaly detection algorithms and techniques. Following this
path, an extension that this survey can benefit from is to include
experimental results, by conducting a unified benchmarking.
This aspect is particularly promising, as incorporating experimental analysis alongside algorithmic and conceptual analysis
can yield a more comprehensive and nuanced understanding of
the subject matter.
As discussed in the Challenges Section, the second-largest
issue in the way of anomaly detection is the lack of a suitable

In this survey, we have discussed several state-of-the-art
graph-based approaches for anomaly detection in details. We
introduce three unique conceptual use-cases based on real-time
complex distributed systems. Our work builds on the existing
traditional machine learning and deep learning paradigms used
for anomaly detection and goes on to introduce four separate
categories of graph neural network algorithms. We further apply
our formulated models to each of the methods and provide a
thorough review and summarization of the categories. At last,
we comprehensively look at graph specific big-data challenges
and provide a couple of future research directions in this field.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.
[2] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 1–38, 2021.
[3] G. Pang, L. Cao, and C. Aggarwal, “Deep learning for anomaly detection:
Challenges, methods, and opportunities,” in Proc. 14th ACM Int. Conf.
Web Search Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 1127–1130, doi: 10.1145/3437963.3441659.
[4] Y. Wang, Y. Li, J. Fan, C. Ye, and M. Chai, “A survey of typical attributed
graph queries,” World Wide Web, vol. 24, pp. 297–346, 2021.
[5] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
survey,” 2019, arXiv: 1901.03407.
[6] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
[7] G. Fernandes, J. J. Rodrigues, L. F. Carvalho, J. F. Al-Muhtadi, and M.
L. Proença, “A comprehensive survey on network anomaly detection,”
Telecommunication Syst., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 447–489, 2019.
[8] R. A. A. Habeeb, F. Nasaruddin, A. Gani, I. A. T. Hashem, E. Ahmed,
and M. Imran, “Real-time Big Data processing for anomaly detection: A
survey,” Int. J. Inf. Manage., vol. 45, pp. 289–307, 2019.
[9] S. Thudumu, P. Branch, J. Jin, and J. J. Singh, “A comprehensive survey
of anomaly detection techniques for high dimensional Big Data,” J. Big
Data, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–30, 2020.
[10] S. Ahmed, K. Hinkelmann, and F. Corradini, “Combining machine learning with knowledge engineering to detect fake news in social networks-a
survey,” 2022, arXiv:2201.08032.

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

[11] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media
anomaly detection,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–14,
Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1145/2980765.2980767.
[12] M. Ahmed, A. N. Mahmood, and M. R. Islam, “A survey of anomaly
detection techniques in financial domain,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 55, pp. 278–288, 2016.
[13] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos, and N. F.
Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: A survey,” Wiley
Interdiscipl. Reviews: Comput. Statist., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 223–247, 2015.
[14] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with
deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 8, 2021,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3118815.
[15] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection
and description: A survey,” Data mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 626–688, 2015.
[16] C. Neff, M. Mendieta, S. Mohan, M. Baharani, S. Rogers, and H.
Tabkhi, “REVAMP2T: Real-time edge video analytics for multicamera
privacy-aware pedestrian tracking,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 2591–2602, Apr. 2020.
[17] T. J. Williams, “The purdue enterprise reference architecture,”
Comput. Ind., vol. 24, no. 2–3, pp. 141–158, Sep. 1994,
doi: 10.1016/0166–3615(94)90017-5.
[18] I.-Y. Song and Y. Zhu, “Big data and data science: What should we
teach?,” Expert Syst., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 364–373, 2016.
[19] A. Katal, M. Wazid, and R. H. Goudar, “Big data: Issues, challenges,
tools and good practices,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Contemporary
Comput., 2013, pp. 404–409.
[20] K. Shin, B. Hooi, J. Kim, and C. Faloutsos, “D-cube: Dense-block
detection in terabyte-scale tensors,” in Proc. 10th ACM Int. Conf. Web
Search Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2017, pp. 681–689, doi: 10.1145/3018661.3018676.
[21] E. M. Knorr and R. T. Ng, “Algorithms for mining distance-based outliers
in large datasets,” in Proc. 24 rd Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases,
San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1998,
pp. 392–403.
[22] S. Ramaswamy, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “Efficient algorithms for mining
outliers from large data sets,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2000,
pp. 427–438, doi: 10.1145/342009.335437.
[23] F. Angiulli and F. Fassetti, “Very efficient mining of distance-based
outliers,” in Proc. 16th ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2007, pp. 791–800,
doi: 10.1145/1321440.1321550.
[24] A. Arning, R. Agrawal, and P. Raghavan, “A linear method for deviation
detection in large databases,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, AAAI Press, 1996, pp. 164–169.
[25] K. W. Pettis, T. A. Bailey, A. K. Jain, and R. C. Dubes, “An intrinsic
dimensionality estimator from near-neighbor information,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. PAMI- 1, no. 1, pp. 25–37, Jan. 1979.
[26] N. Tatbul, “Streaming data integration: Challenges and opportunities,” in
Proc. IEEE 26th Int. Conf. Data Eng. Workshops, 2010, pp. 155–158.
[27] R. Bellman, Dynamic Programming. Chelmsford, MA, USA: Courier
Corporation, 2013.
[28] K. Beyer, J. Goldstein, R. Ramakrishnan, and U. Shaft, “When is “nearest
Neighbor” Meaningful?,” in Database Theory — ICDT’99, C. Beeri and
P. Buneman Eds., Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1999, pp. 217–235.
[29] P. Hall, J. Marron, and A. Neeman, “Geometric representation of high
dimension, low sample size data,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B, vol. 67,
pp. 427–444, Feb. 2005.
[30] J. Ahn, J. S. Marron, K. M. Muller, and Y.-Y. Chi, “The high-dimension,
low-sample-size geometric representation holds under mild conditions,”
Biometrika, vol. 94, no. 3, pp. 760–766, 2007. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/20441411
[31] M. Radovanović, A. Nanopoulos, and M. Ivanović, “Reverse nearest
neighbors in unsupervised distance-based outlier detection,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1369–1382, May 2015.
[32] S. Sadik and L. Gruenwald, “Research issues in outlier detection for data
streams,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 33–40, Mar. 2014,
doi: 10.1145/2594473.2594479.
[33] F. Keller, E. Muller, and K. Bohm, “HiCS: High contrast subspaces for
density-based outlier ranking,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Int. Conf. Data Eng.,
2012, pp. 1037–1048.
[34] M. Iturbe, I. Garitano, U. Zurutuza, and R. Uribeetxeberria, “Towards
large-scale, heterogeneous anomaly detection systems in industrial networks: A survey of current trends,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2017,
2017.

17

[35] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multiperspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021.
[36] D. Stiawan, M. Y. Idris, R. F. Malik, S. Nurmaini, and R. Budiarto,
“Anomaly detection and monitoring in Internet of Things communication,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Elect. Eng., 2016,
pp. 1–4.
[37] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Yang, and M. R. Lyu, “Heterogeneous
anomaly detection for software systems via semi-supervised cross-modal
attention,” 2023, arXiv:2302.06914.
[38] N. Görnitz, M. Kloft, K. Rieck, and U. Brefeld, “Toward supervised
anomaly detection,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 235–262, 2013.
[39] S. Suthaharan, M. Alzahrani, S. Rajasegarar, C. Leckie, and M.
Palaniswami, “Labelled data collection for anomaly detection in wireless
sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Intell. Sensors Sensor Netw.
Inf. Process., 2010, pp. 269–274.
[40] M. Luo, K. Wang, Z. Cai, A. Liu, Y. Li, and C. F. Cheang, “Using imbalanced triangle synthetic data for machine learning anomaly detection,”
Comput. Mater. Continua, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 15–26, 2019.
[41] W. Lin, J. Gao, Q. Wang, and X. Li, “Learning to detect anomaly
events in crowd scenes from synthetic data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 436,
pp. 248–259, 2021.
[42] M. Frasca, A. Bertoni, M. Re, and G. Valentini, “A neural network
algorithm for semi-supervised node label learning from unbalanced data,”
Neural Netw., vol. 43, pp. 84–98, 2013.
[43] S. N. Kalid, K.-H. Ng, G.-K. Tong, and K.-C. Khor, “A multiple classifiers system for anomaly detection in credit card data with unbalanced
and overlapped classes,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 28 210–28 221,
2020.
[44] H. H. Pajouh, G. Dastghaibyfard, and S. Hashemi, “Two-tier network
anomaly detection model: A machine learning approach,” J. Intell. Inf.
Syst., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 61–74, 2017.
[45] S. El Hajjami, J. Malki, M. Berrada, and B. Fourka, “Machine learning for
anomaly detection. Performance study considering anomaly distribution
in an imbalanced dataset,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput.
Artif. Intell.: Technol. Appl., 2020, pp. 1–8.
[46] Z. Kang, H. Pan, S. C. Hoi, and Z. Xu, “Robust graph learning from noisy
data,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1833–1843, May 2020.
[47] R. Evans and E. Grefenstette, “Learning explanatory rules from noisy
data,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 61, pp. 1–64, 2018.
[48] Y. Kim, J. Yim, J. Yun, and J. Kim, “NLNL: Negative learning
for noisy labels,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019,
pp. 101–110.
[49] N. Moran, D. Schmidt, Y. Zhong, and P. Coady, “Noisier2Noise: Learning
to denoise from unpaired noisy data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 12 064–12 072.
[50] J.-X. Zhong, N. Li, W. Kong, S. Liu, T. H. Li, and G. Li, “Graph
convolutional label noise cleaner: Train a plug-and-play action classifier
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2019, pp. 1237–1246.
[51] M. Z. Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, M. Astrid, A. Mahmood, and S.-I. Lee, “Cleaning
label noise with clusters for minimally supervised anomaly detection,”
2021, arXiv:2104.14770.
[52] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised realtime anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262,
pp. 134–147, 2017.
[53] Z. K. Maseer, R. Yusof, N. Bahaman, S. A. Mostafa, and C. F. M.
Foozy, “Benchmarking of machine learning for anomaly based intrusion
detection systems in the CICIDS2017 dataset,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 22
351–22 370, 2021.
[54] A. F. Emmott, S. Das, T. Dietterich, A. Fern, and W.-K. Wong, “Systematic construction of anomaly detection benchmarks from real data,”
in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Workshop Outlier Detection Description, 2013,
pp. 16–21.
[55] C. R. Banbury et al., “Benchmarking tinyml systems: Challenges and
direction,” 2020, arXiv: 2003.04821.
[56] G. A. Noghre, A. D. Pazho, J. Sanchez, N. Hewitt, C. Neff, and H.
Tabkhi, “ADG-Pose: Automated dataset generation for real-world human
pose estimation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell., 2022,
pp. 258–270.
[57] G. Yu, Z. Cai, S. Wang, H. Chen, F. Liu, and A. Liu, “Unsupervised online
anomaly detection with parameter adaptation for KPIs abrupt changes,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1294–1308,
Sep. 2020.
[58] W. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Liu, X. He, and L. Tang, “A distributed online
learning approach to detect anomalies for virtualized network slicing,”
in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6.

18

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

[59] A. Guezzaz, Y. Asimi, M. Azrour, and A. Asimi, “Mathematical validation of proposed machine learning classifier for heterogeneous traffic and
anomaly detection,” Big Data Mining Analytics, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 18–24,
2021.
[60] S. Li, Y. Cheng, Y. Liu, W. Wang, and T. Chen, “Abnormal client behavior
detection in federated learning,” 2019, arXiv:1910.09933.
[61] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems:
A multi-perspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1566253520303717
[62] Y. Dou, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Deng, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Enhancing graph
neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters,” in
Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 315–324.
[63] S. Bhatia, Y. Wang, B. Hooi, and T. Chakraborty, “Graphanogan: Detecting anomalous snapshots from attributed graphs,” in Proc. Joint Eur.
Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, 2021, pp. 36–51.
[64] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen,
“Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 12, 2021,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3119326.
[65] Y. Liu, T. Dillon, W. Yu, W. Rahayu, and F. Mostafa, “Noise removal
in the presence of significant anomalies for industrial IoT sensor data in
manufacturing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7084–7096,
Aug. 2020.
[66] Y. Tang et al., “Detection of magnetic anomaly signal based on information entropy of differential signal,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 512–516, Apr. 2018.
[67] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2018, pp. 6479–6488.
[68] F. Muharemi, D. Logofătu, and F. Leon, “Machine learning approaches
for anomaly detection of water quality on a real-world data set,” J. Inf.
Telecommunication, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 294–307, 2019.
[69] A. Castellani, S. Schmitt, and S. Squartini, “Real-world anomaly detection by using digital twin systems and weakly supervised learning,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4733–4742, Jul. 2021.
[70] A. Ukil, S. Bandyoapdhyay, C. Puri, and A. Pal, “Iot healthcare analytics:
The importance of anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Conf. Adv.
Inf. Netw. Appl., 2016, pp. 994–997.
[71] S. A. Haque, M. Rahman, and S. M. Aziz, “Sensor anomaly detection in wireless sensor networks for healthcare,” Sensors, vol. 15,
no. 4, pp. 8764–8786, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/
1424--8220/15/4/8764
[72] X. Liu et al., “Privacy and security issues in deep learning: A survey,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 4566–4593, 2020.
[73] Y. Shen, G. Leus, and G. B. Giannakis, “Online graph-adaptive learning
with scalability and privacy,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 9,
pp. 2471–2483, May 2019.
[74] B. Wang, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “Graph-based security and privacy
analytics via collective classification with joint weight learning and
propagation,” 2018, arXiv: 1812.01661.
[75] C. Yang, H. Wang, K. Zhang, L. Chen, and L. Sun, “Secure deep graph
generation with link differential privacy,” 2020, arXiv: 2005.00455.
[76] V. Duddu, A. Boutet, and V. Shejwalkar, “Quantifying privacy leakage
in graph embedding,” in Proc. 17th EAI Int. Conf. Mobile Ubiquitous
Systems: Comput. Netw. Serv., 2020, pp. 76–85.
[77] J. Zhou et al., “Vertically federated graph neural network for privacypreserving node classification,” 2020, arXiv: 2005.11903.
[78] S. Sajadmanesh and D. Gatica-Perez, “Locally private graph neural
networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021,
pp. 2130–2145.
[79] C. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. James, and S. Yu, “FASTGNN: A topological
information protected federated learning approach for traffic speed forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 8464–8474,
Dec. 2021.
[80] Q. Li, M. Coutino, G. Leus, and M. G. Christensen, “Privacy-preserving
distributed graph filtering,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Eur. Signal Process. Conf.,
2021, pp. 2155–2159.
[81] T. Bakhshi and B. Ghita, “Anomaly detection in encrypted internet traffic
using hybrid deep learning,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–6,
2021.
[82] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong,
“MAppGraph: Mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic
using deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proc. Annu. Comput.
Secur. Appl. Conf., 2021, pp. 1025–1038.

[83] Y. Wu, H.-N. Dai, and H. Tang, “Graph neural networks for anomaly
detection in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
no. 12, pp. 9214–9231, Jun. 2022.
[84] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.
[85] A. Protogerou, S. Papadopoulos, A. Drosou, D. Tzovaras, and I. Refanidis, “A graph neural network method for distributed anomaly detection
in IoT,” Evolving Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 19–36, 2021.
[86] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
Jun. 2022.
[87] R. Zhou, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, L. Niu, and X. Lin, “Anomaly detection
in dynamic attributed networks,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2125–2136, 2021.
[88] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection
in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. 28th
Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4419–4425.
[89] T. Pourhabibi, K.-L. Ong, B. H. Kam, and Y. L. Boo, “Fraud detection: A systematic literature review of graph-based anomaly detection
approaches,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 133, 2020, Art. no. 113303.
[90] M. Salehi and L. Rashidi, “A survey on anomaly detection in evolving
data: [with application to forest fire risk prediction],” ACM SIGKDD
Explorations Newslett., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 13–23, 2018.
[91] K. Ding, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Interactive anomaly detection on attributed
networks,” in Proc. 12th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2019,
pp. 357–365.
[92] G. Xue, M. Zhong, J. Li, J. Chen, C. Zhai, and R. Kong, “Dynamic
network embedding survey,” Neurocomputing, vol. 472, pp. 212–223,
2022.
[93] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause
analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM
Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2022.
[94] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[95] H. Wang et al., “Groot: An event-graph-based approach for root cause
analysis in industrial settings,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 36th Int. Conf.
Automated Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 419–429.
[96] K. Ding, K. Shu, X. Shan, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Cross-domain graph
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2406–2415, Jun. 2022.
[97] Y. Ganin and V. Lempitsky, “Unsupervised domain adaptation by backpropagation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 1180–1189.
[98] J. Hoffman et al., “LSDA: Large scale detection through adaptation,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27, 2014.
[99] R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen, K. Kavukcuoglu, and P.
Kuksa, “Natural language processing (almost) from scratch,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2493–2537, 2011.
[100] Q. Li, “Literature survey: Domain adaptation algorithms for natural
language processing,” 2012.
[101] A. Søgaard, “Semi-supervised learning and domain adaptation in natural
language processing,” Synth. Lectures Hum. Lang. Technol., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 1–103, 2013.
[102] Y. Zhang et al., “Collaborative unsupervised domain adaptation for
medical image diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 29,
pp. 7834–7844, 2020.
[103] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan,
and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DïoT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst., Dallas,
TX, USA, 2019, pp. 756–767.
[104] X. Ni, X. Xu, L. Lyu, C. Meng, and W. Wang, “A vertical federated learning framework for graph convolutional network,”
2021, arXiv:2106.11593.
[105] A. Borghesi, A. Bartolini, M. Lombardi, M. Milano, and L. Benini,
“Anomaly detection using autoencoders in high performance computing
systems,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 9428–9433.
[106] Z. Chen, C. K. Yeo, B. S. Lee, and C. T. Lau, “Autoencoder-based network
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Telecommun. Symp., 2018,
pp. 1–5.
[107] S. Park, M. Kim, and S. Lee, “Anomaly detection for HTTP using
convolutional autoencoders,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 70 884–70 901,
2018.

PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS

[108] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2017, pp. 665–674, doi: 10.1145/3097983.3098052.
[109] L. Beggel, M. Pfeiffer, and B. Bischl, “Robust anomaly detection
in images using adversarial autoencoders,” in Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases, U. Brefeld, E. Fromont, A. Hotho,
A. Knobbe, M. Maathuis, and C. Robardet Eds., Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2020, pp. 206–222.
[110] O. Atkinson, A. Bhardwaj, C. Englert, V. S. Ngairangbam, and M.
Spannowsky, “Anomaly detection with convolutional graph neural networks,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2021, no. 8, 2021, Art. no. 80,
doi: 10.1007/JHEP08(2021)080.
[111] S. Bandyopadhyay, S. V. Vivek, and M. Murty, “Outlier resistant unsupervised deep architectures for attributed network embedding,” in Proc.
13th Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2020, pp. 25–33.
[112] X. Teng, M. Yan, A. M. Ertugrul, and Y.-R. Lin, “Deep into hypersphere:
Robust and unsupervised anomaly discovery in dynamic networks,” in
Proc. 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018.
[113] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning of
social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2014, pp. 701–710, doi: 10.1145/2623330.2623732.
[114] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “Node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2016, pp. 855–864, doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939754.
[115] J. Tang, M. Qu, M. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Yan, and Q. Mei, “Line: Largescale information network embedding,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. World
Wide Web, 2015, pp. 1067–1077, doi: 10.1145/2736277.2741093.
[116] C. Yang, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, M. Sun, and E. Chang, “Network representation
learning with rich text information,” in Proc. 24th Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2015, pp. 2111–2117.
[117] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang,
“NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection
in dynamic networks,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2018, pp. 2672–2681, doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220024.
[118] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection
in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. 28th
Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4419–4425, doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/614.
[119] S. Feng, Z. Tan, R. Li, and M. Luo, “Heterogeneity-aware twitter bot
detection with relational graph transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2109.02927.
[120] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Nov. 2, 2021,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3124061.
[121] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions,” 2015, arXiv:1511.07122.
[122] H. E. Egilmez and A. Ortega, “Spectral anomaly detection using graphbased filtering for wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2014, pp. 1085–1089.
[123] B. Chen et al., “Gccad: Graph contrastive coding for anomaly detection,”
2021, arXiv:2108.07516.
[124] M. Aledhari, R. Razzak, R. M. Parizi, and F. Saeed, “Federated learning:
A survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 140 699–140 725, 2020.
[125] K. Bonawitz et al., “Towards federated learning at scale: System design,”
Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst., vol. 1, pp. 374–388, 2019.
[126] Y. Chen, Y. Ning, Z. Chai, and H. Rangwala, “Federated multi-task
hierarchical attention model for sensor analytics,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Neural Netw., 2020, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/IJCNN48605.2020.9207508.
[127] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtárik, A. T. Suresh, and
D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication
efficiency,” in Proc. NIPS Workshop Private Multi-Party Mach. Learn.,
2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05492
[128] H. Wang, M. Yurochkin, Y. Sun, D. Papailiopoulos, and Y. Khazaeni, “Federated learning with matched averaging,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=BkluqlSFDS
[129] K. Bonawitz et al., “Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving
machine learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
Secur., New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2017, pp. 1175–1191, doi: 10.1145/3133956.3133982.

19

[130] R. Chandra and S. Cripps, “Bayesian multi-task learning for dynamic
time series prediction,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2018,
pp. 1–8.
[131] S. Li, Y. Song, and G. Zhou, “Leak detection of water distribution
pipeline subject to failure of socket joint based on acoustic emission
and pattern recognition,” Measurement, vol. 115, pp. 39–44, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0263224117306498
[132] L.-J. Chen, Y.-H. Ho, H.-H. Hsieh, S.-T. Huang, H.-C. Lee, and S.
Mahajan, “ADF: An anomaly detection framework for large-scale PM2.5
sensing systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 559–570,
Apr. 2018.
[133] D. L. Goodhue and D. W. Straub, “Security concerns of system users: A
study of perceptions of the adequacy of security,” Inf. Manage., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 13–27, Jan. 1991, doi: 10.1016/0378–7206(91)90024-V.
[134] R. A. Sater and A. B. Hamza, “A federated learning approach to anomaly
detection in smart buildings,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 2, no. 4,
Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3467981.
[135] H. Zhang, T. Shen, F. Wu, M. Yin, H. Yang, and C. Wu, “Federated graph
learning–a position paper,”2021, arXiv:2105.11099.
[136] E. J. Candès, X. Li, Y. Ma, and J. Wright, “Robust principal component analysis?,” J. ACM, vol. 58, no. 3, Jun. 2011,
doi: 10.1145/1970392.1970395.
[137] D. L. Donoho, “For most large underdetermined systems of linear equations the minimal 1-norm solution is also the sparsest solution,” Commun.
Pure Appl. Math., vol. 59, pp. 797–829, 2006.
[138] R. Paffenroth, P. du Toit, R. Nong, L. Scharf, A. P. Jayasumana, and V.
Bandara, “Space-time signal processing for distributed pattern detection
in sensor networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 38–49, Feb. 2013.
[139] A. Makhzani, J. Shlens, N. Jaitly, and I. Goodfellow, “Adversarial autoencoders,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05644
[140] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
[141] S. Yun, M. Jeong, R. Kim, J. Kang, and H. J. Kim, “Graph transformer
networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, vol. 32.
[142] J. Klicpera, S. Weißenberger, and S. Günnemann, “Diffusion improves
graph learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019.
[143] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view representation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
pp. 4116–4126.
[144] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
gumbel-softmax,” 2016, arXiv:1611.01144.
[145] A. Ortega, P. Frossard, J. Kovačević, J. M. F. Moura, and P. Vandergheynst, “Graph signal processing: Overview, challenges, and applications,” in Proc. IEEE, vol. 106, no. 5, pp. 808–828, May 2018.
[146] A. Sandryhaila and J. M. F. Moura, “Discrete signal processing on
graphs: Frequency analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 12,
pp. 3042–3054, Jun. 2014.
[147] G. Shen and A. Ortega, “Joint routing and 2D transform optimization for
irregular sensor network grids using wavelet lifting,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Inf. Process. Sensor Netw., 2008, pp. 183–194.
[148] X. Zhu and M. Rabbat, “Graph spectral compressed sensing for sensor
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2012,
pp. 2865–2868.
[149] M. Zheng, C. Zhou, J. Wu, S. Pan, J. Shi, and L. Guo, “FraudNE: A joint
embedding approach for fraud detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural
Netw., 2018, pp. 1–8.
[150] Y. Dou, K. Shu, C. Xia, P. S. Yu, and L. Sun, “User preference-aware
fake news detection,” in Proc. 44th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop.
Inf. Retrieval, 2021, pp. 2051–2055.
[151] N. Liu, X. Huang, and X. Hu, “Accelerated local anomaly detection via
resolving attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017,
pp. 2337–2343.
[152] L. Zhang, J. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Pei, and L. Wang, “A robust embedding
method for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint
Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
[153] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019,
pp. 594–602.
[154] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph
neural networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural
Comput. Appl., vol. 33, no. 18, pp. 12 073–12 085, 2021.

20

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

[155] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multi-view
framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, Jun. 2022.
[156] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “SpecAE: Spectral autoencoder
for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int.
Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2019, pp. 2233–2236.
[157] T.-Y. Lin et al., “Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context,” in
Computer Vision–ECCV 2014, D. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, and T.
Tuytelaars Eds., Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 740–755.

Armin Danesh Pazho (Student Member, IEEE) is
currently working toward the PhD degree with the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, NC, USA.
With a focus on Artificial Intelligence, Computer
Vision, and Deep Learning, his research delves into
the realm of developing AI for practical, real-world
applications and addressing the challenges and requirements inherent in these fields. Specifically, his
research covers action recognition, anomaly detection, person re-identification, human pose estimation,
and path prediction.

Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre (Student Member, IEEE)
is currently working toward the PhD degree in electrical and computer engineering with the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte, NC, USA. Her research
interests include concentrates on artificial intelligence, machine learning, and computer vision. She is
particularly interested in the applications of anomaly
detection, action recognition, and path prediction in
real-world environments, and the challenges associated with these fields.

Arnab A Purkayastha received the PhD degree from
the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, in 2021.
He is an assistant professor with the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department, Western New
England University, Massachusetts. His research interests and activities lie in the recent advances in high
performance computing and machine learning fields,
including system level integration both at the cloud
and at the edge.

Jagannadh Vempati received the PhD degree in
computer science and engineering from the University of North Texas. He is a research scientist with
Siemens Technology in Princeton – NJ performing
research and development on designing cyber defense
solutions that incorporate domain know-how and the
semantic context of attack detection and response
solutions. His responsibilities include developing new
methods and techniques that improve the value of
security analytics in Cyber Defense by integrating
industrial domain expertise and semantics/context
and guiding Siemens Business Units to include research results into products,
solutions, and services. His research is focused on data-driven cyber security and
designing resilient networks. His research also focuses on designing, developing,
and optimizing anomaly detection models using artificial intelligence.

Martin Otto received the PhD degree in computer
science from Paderborn University, Paderborn, Germany, in 2005, working on fault attack side channels on smart cards. He is a researcher and research
manager with Siemens Technology, Siemens’ central
R&D organization, since 2005. He is currently the
head of the research group “Cybersecurity Service Innovation” at Siemens Corporation, Siemens Technology, in Princeton, NJ, USA. His mission is to provide
Siemens business units with technology solutions and
innovations that enable Siemens to provide state of the
security services to customers. A specific focus is on helping Siemens customers
that operate energy systems and other parts of national critical infrastructure to
detect, react to, mitigate, and otherwise defend against cyber attacks. He held
positions in the US, Canada, and Germany, among them as global Head of the
Siemens CERT (Computer Emergency Response Team).

Hamed Tabkhi (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in computer engineering from Northeastern
University, in 2014. He is the Associate Professor of
computer engineering with the University of North
Carolina Charlotte (UNCC). His research and scholarship activities focus on transformative computer
system solutions to bring recent advances in Artificial
Intelligence (AI) to address real-world problems. In
particular, he focuses on AI-based solutions to enhance our communities’ safety, health, and overall
well-being.