10466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

A Survey on Graph Neural Networks for Time Series:
Forecasting, Classification, Imputation, and
Anomaly Detection
Ming Jin , Huan Yee Koh , Qingsong Wen , Daniele Zambon , Cesare Alippi, Fellow, IEEE,
Geoffrey I. Webb , Fellow, IEEE, Irwin King , Fellow, IEEE, and Shirui Pan , Senior Member, IEEE
(Survey Paper)

Abstract—Time series are the primary data type used to record
dynamic system measurements and generated in great volume by
both physical sensors and online processes (virtual sensors). Time
series analytics is therefore crucial to unlocking the wealth of information implicit in available data. With the recent advancements
in graph neural networks (GNNs), there has been a surge in GNNbased approaches for time series analysis. These approaches can
explicitly model inter-temporal and inter-variable relationships,
which traditional and other deep neural network-based methods
struggle to do. In this survey, we provide a comprehensive review of graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS),
encompassing four fundamental dimensions: forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and imputation. Our aim is to guide
designers and practitioners to understand, build applications, and
advance research of GNN4TS. At first, we provide a comprehensive
task-oriented taxonomy of GNN4TS. Then, we present and discuss
representative research works and introduce mainstream applications of GNN4TS. A comprehensive discussion of potential future
research directions completes the survey. This survey, for the first
time, brings together a vast array of knowledge on GNN-based time
series research, highlighting foundations, practical applications,
and opportunities of graph neural networks for time series analysis.
Manuscript received 17 December 2023; revised 8 July 2024; accepted
8 August 2024. Date of publication 14 August 2024; date of current version
5 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the CSIRO– National Science Foundation (US) AI Research Collaboration Program and Swiss National
Science Foundation under Grant 204061. The work of Shirui Pan was supported
in part by the Australian Research Council (ARC) under Grant FT210100097
and Grant DP240101547. Recommended for acceptance by W. Liu. (Ming Jin
and Huan Yee Koh contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author:
Shirui Pan.)
Ming Jin and Shirui Pan are with the School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Nathan, QLD 4111, Australia (e-mail:
mingjinedu@gmail.com; s.pan@griffith.edu.au).
Huan Yee Koh and Geoffrey I. Webb are with the Department of Data
Science and AI, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia (e-mail:
huan.koh@monash.edu; geoff.webb@monash.edu).
Qingsong Wen is with Squirrel AI Learning, Bellevue, WA 98004 USA (email: qingsongedu@gmail.com).
Daniele Zambon is with the Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera
Italiana, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland (e-mail: daniele.zambon@usi.ch).
Cesare Alippi is with the Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera
Italiana, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland, and also with Politecnico di Milano, 20133
Milano, Italy (e-mail: cesare.alippi@usi.ch).
Irwin King is with the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Ma Liu Shui, Hong Kong (e-mail:
king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3443141, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3443141

Index Terms—Time series, graph neural networks, deep
learning, forecasting, classification, imputation, anomaly detection.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE advent of advanced sensing and data stream processing
technologies has led to an explosion of time series data [1],
[2], [3]. The analysis of time series not only provides insights
into past trends but also facilitates a multitude of tasks such
as forecasting [4], classification [5], anomaly detection [6],
and data imputation [7]. This lays the groundwork for time
series modeling paradigms that leverage on historical data to
understand current and future possibilities. Time series analytics
have become increasingly crucial in various fields, including but
not limited to cloud computing, transportation, energy, finance,
social networks, and the Internet-of-Things [8], [9], [10].
Many time series involve complex interactions across time
(such as lags in propagation of effects) and variables (such as
the relationship among the variables representing neighboring
traffic sensors). By treating time points or variables as nodes and
their relationships as edges, a model structured in the manner
of a network or graph can effectively solve the task at hand by
exploiting both data and relational information. Indeed, much
time series data is spatial-temporal in nature, with different
variables in the series capturing information about different
locations – space – too, meaning it encapsulates not only time information but also spatial relationships [11]. This is particularly
evident in scenarios such as urban traffic networks, population
migration, and global weather forecasting. In these instances, a
localized change, such as a traffic accident at an intersection, an
epidemic outbreak in a suburb, or extreme weather in a specific
area, can propagate and influence neighboring regions. This
spatial-temporal characteristic is a common feature of many
dynamic systems, including the wind farm in Fig. 1, where
the underlying time series displays a range of correlations and
heterogeneities [15], [18]. Traditional analytic tools, such as
support vector regression (SVR) [19], gradient boosting decision
tree (GBDT) [20], vector autoregressive (VAR) [21], and autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) [22], struggle
to handle complex time series relations (e.g., nonlinearities and
inter-variable relationships), resulting in less accurate prediction

T

0162-8828 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

Fig. 1. Graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS). In this
example of a wind farm, different analytical tasks can be categorized into time
series forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and imputation.

results [23]. The advent of deep learning technologies has led
to the development of different neural networks based on convolutional neural networks (CNN) [24], [25], recurrent neural
networks (RNN) [26], and transformers [27], which have shown
significant advantages in modeling real-world time series data.
However, one of the biggest limitations of the above methods
is that they do not explicitly model the spatial relations existing
between time series in non-euclidean space [15], which limits
their expressiveness [28].
In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged
as a powerful tool for learning non-euclidean data representations [29], [30], [31], [32], paving the way for modeling
real-world time series data. This enables the capture of diverse
and intricate relationships, both inter-variable (connections between different variables within a multivariate series) and intertemporal (dependencies between different points in time). Considering the complex spatial-temporal dependencies inherent in
real-world scenarios, a line of studies has integrated GNNs with
various temporal modeling frameworks to capture both spatial
and temporal dynamics and demonstrate promising results [12],
[13], [14], [15], [16]. While early research efforts were primarily
concentrated on various forecasting scenarios [13], [14], [15],
recent advancements in time series analysis utilizing GNNs have
demonstrated promising outcomes in other mainstream tasks.
These include classification [33], [34], anomaly detection [35],
[36], and imputation [37], [38]. In Fig. 1, we provide an overview
of graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS).
Related Surveys. Despite the growing body of research performing various time series analytic tasks with GNNs, existing
surveys tend to focus on specific perspectives within a restricted
scope. For instance, the survey by Wang et al. [11] offers a review
of deep learning techniques for spatial-temporal data mining, but
it does not specifically concentrate on GNN-based methods. The
survey by Ye et al. [12] zeroes in on graph-based deep learning
architectures in the traffic domain, primarily considering forecasting scenarios. A recent survey by Jin et al. [15] offers an

10467

overview of GNNs for predictive learning in urban computing,
but neither extends its coverage to other application domains nor
thoroughly discusses other tasks related to time series analysis.
Finally, we mention the work by Rahmani et al. [17], which
expands the survey of GNNs to many intelligent transportation
systems, but tasks other than forecasting remain overlooked. A
detailed comparison between our survey and others is presented
in Table I.
To fill the gap, this survey offers a comprehensive and up-todate review of graph neural networks for time series analysis,
encompassing the majority of tasks ranging from time series
forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and imputation.
Specifically, we first provide two broad views to classify and
discuss existing works from the task- and methodology-oriented
perspectives. Then, we delve into six popular application sectors
within the existing research of GNN4TS, and propose several
potential future research directions. The key contributions of our
survey are summarized as follows:
r First Comprehensive Survey: To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first comprehensive survey that reviews the recent
advances in mainstream time series analysis tasks with
graph neural networks. It covers a wide range of recent
research and provides a broad view of the development of
GNN4TS without restricting to specific tasks or domains.
r Unified and Structured Taxonomy: We present a unified
framework to structurally categorize existing works from
task- and methodology-oriented perspectives. In the first
classification, we offer an overview of tasks in time series
analysis, covering different problem settings prevalent in
GNN-based research; and in the second classification, we
dissect GNN4TS in terms of spatial and temporal dependencies modeling and the overall model architecture.
r Detailed and Current Overview: We conduct a comprehensive review that not only covers the breadth of the
field but also delves into the depth of individual studies
with fine-grained classification and detailed discussion,
providing readers with an up-to-date understanding of the
state-of-the-art in GNN4TS.
r Broadening Applications: We discuss the expanding applications of GNN4TS across various sectors, highlighting its
versatility and potential for future growth in diverse fields.
r Future Research Directions: We shed light on potential future research directions, offering insights and suggestions
that could guide and inspire future research in the field of
GNN4TS.
The remainder of this survey is organized as follows:
Section II provides notations used throughout the paper.
Section III presents the taxonomy of GNN4TS from different
perspectives. Sections IV, V, VI, and VII review the four major
tasks in the GNN4TS literature. Section VIII surveys popular
applications of GNN4TS across various fields, while Section IX
examines open questions and potential future directions.
II. DEFINITION AND NOTATION
Time series data comprises a sequence of observations gathered or recorded over a period of time. This data can be either

10468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR SURVEY AND OTHER RELATED SURVEYS

regularly or irregularly sampled, with the latter also referred to
as time series data with missing values. Within each of these
cases, the data can be further classified into two primary types:
univariate and multivariate time series. In the sequel, we employ
bold uppercase letters (e.g., X), bold lowercase letters (e.g., x),
and calligraphic letters (e.g., V) to denote matrices, vectors, and
sets, respectively.
Definition 1 (Univariate Time Series): A univariate time series is a sequence of scalar observations collected over time,
which can be regularly or irregularly sampled. A regularly sampled univariate time series is defined as X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xT } ∈
RT , where xt ∈ R. For an irregularly sampled univariate
time series, observations are collected at non-uniform time
intervals, such as X = {(t1 , x1 ), (t2 , x2 ), . . ., (tT , xT )} ∈ RT ,
where time points are non-uniformly spaced.
Definition 2 (Multivariate Time Series): A multivariate time
series is a sequence of N -dimensional vector observations collected over time, i.e., X ∈ RN ×T . A regularly sampled multivariate time series has vector observations collected at uniform time intervals, i.e., xt ∈ RN . In an irregularly sampled
multivariate time series, there are possibly N unaligned time
series with respect to time steps, which implies only 0 ≤ n ≤ N
observations available at each time step.
The majority of research based on GNNs focuses on modeling
multivariate time series, as they can be naturally abstracted into
spatial-temporal graphs. This abstraction allows for an accurate
characterization of dynamic inter-temporal and inter-variable
dependencies. The former describes the relations between different time steps within each time series (e.g., the temporal
dynamics of red nodes between t1 and t3 in Fig. 2), while the
latter captures dependencies between time series (e.g., the spatial
relations between four nodes at each time step in Fig. 2), such as
the geographical information of the sensors generating the data
for each variable. To illustrate this, we first define attributed
graphs.
Definition 3 (Attributed Graph): An attributed graph is a
static graph that associates each node with a set of attributes,
representing node features. Formally, an attributed graph is defined as G = (A, X), which consists of a (weighted) adjacency
matrix A ∈ RN ×N and a node-feature matrix X ∈ RN ×D . The
adjacency matrix represents the graph topology, which can be

Fig. 2. Examples of spatial-temporal graphs, where node colors represent
distinct features. The top and bottom panels demonstrate spatio-temporal graphs
with fixed and dynamic graph structures over time, respectively.

characterized by V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN }, the set of N nodes, and
E = {eij := (vi , vj ) ∈ V × V | Aij = 0}, the set of edges; Aij
is the (i, j)-th entry in the adjacency matrix A. The feature matrix X contains the node attributes, where the i-th row xi ∈ RD
represents the D-dimensional feature vector of node vi .
In attributed graphs, multi-dimensional edge features can be
considered too, however, this paper assumes only scalar weights
encoded in the adjacency matrix to avoid overwhelming notations.
In light of this, a spatial-temporal graph can be described as
a series of attributed graphs, which effectively represent (multivariate) time series data in conjunction with either evolving or
fixed structural information over time.
Definition 4 (Spatial-Temporal Graph): A spatial-temporal
graph can be interpreted as a discrete-time dynamic graph [31],
[39], i.e., G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, where Gt = (At , Xt ) denotes
an attributed graph at time t. At ∈ RN ×N and Xt ∈ RN ×D are
corresponding adjacency and feature matrices. At may either
evolve over time or remain fixed, depending on specific settings.
When abstracting time series data, we let Xt := xt ∈ RN .
We introduce graph neural networks as modern deep learning
models to process graph-structured data. The core operation in
typical GNNs, often referred to as graph convolution, involves
exchanging information across neighboring nodes. In the context
of time series analysis, this operation enables us to explicitly

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

rely on the inter-variable dependencies represented by the graph
edges. Aware of the different nuances, we define GNNs in the
spatial domain, which involves transforming the input signal
with learnable functions along the dimension of N .
Definition 5 (Graph Neural Network): Given an attributed
graph G = (A, X), we define xi = X[i, :] ∈ RD as the Ddimensional feature vector of node vi . A GNN learns node representations through two primary functions [40]: AGGREGATE(·)
and COMBINE(·). The AGGREGATE(·) function computes and
aggregates messages from neighboring nodes, while the
COMBINE(·) function merges the aggregated and previous states
to transform node embeddings. Formally, the k-th layer in a
GNN is defined by the extended


(k)
(k−1)
: vj ∈ N (vi ) ,
ai = AGGREGATE(k) hj


(k)
(k−1)
(k)
hi = COMBINE(k) hi
,
(1)
, ai
or, more generally, aggregating messages computed from both
(k)
sending and receiving nodes vj and vi , respectively. Here, ai
(k)
and hi represent the aggregated message from neighbors and
the transformed node embedding of node vi in the k-th layer,
(0)
respectively. The input and output of a GNN are hi := xi and
(K)
hi := hi .
The above formulation in (1) is referred to as spatial GNNs,
as opposed to spectral GNNs which defines convolution from
the lens of spectral graph theory. We refer the reader to recent
publication [28] for a deeper analysis of spectral versus spatial
GNNs, and [29] for a comprehensive review of GNNs.
To employ GNNs for time series analysis, it is implied that a
graph structure must be provided. However, not all time series
data have readily available graph structures and, in practice, two
types of strategies are utilized to generate the missing graph
structures from the data: heuristics or learned from data.
Heuristic-Based Graphs: This group of methods extracts
graph structures from data based on heuristics, such as:
r Spatial Proximity: This approach defines the graph structure by considering the proximity between pairs of nodes
based on, e.g., their geographical location. A typical example is the construction of the adjacency matrix A based on
the shortest travel distance between nodes when the time
series data have geospatial properties:
 1
, if dij = 0,
(2)
Ai,j = dij
0,
otherwise,
where dij denotes the shortest travel distance between
node i and node j. Some common kernel functions, e.g.,
Gaussian radial basis, can also be applied [15].
r Pairwise Connectivity: In this approach, the graph structure
is determined by the connectivity between pairs of nodes,
like that determined by transportation networks. The adjacency matrix A is defined as:

1, if vi and vj are directly linked,
(3)
Ai,j =
0, otherwise.
Typical scenarios include edges representing roads, railways, or adjacent regions [41], [42]. In such cases, the

10469

graph can be undirected or directed, resulting in symmetric
and asymmetric adjacency matrices.
r Pairwise Similarity: This method constructs the graph by
connecting nodes with similar attributes. A simple example
is the construction of adjacency matrix A based on the
cosine similarity between time series:
Ai,j =

x
i xj
,
xi xj 

(4)

where  ·  denotes the euclidean norm. There are also
several variants for creating similarity-based graphs, such
as Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) [43] and dynamic
time warping (DTW) [44].
r Functional Dependence: This approach defines the graph
structure based on known functional dependencies between pairs of nodes, such as direct causal relationships
or dependence from common hidden factors. For instance,
adjacency matrix A can be constructed based on Granger
causality [45] as
⎧
⎨1, if node j Granger-causes
node i at a significance level α, (5)
Ai,j =
⎩
0, otherwise.
Other examples involve transfer entropy (TE) [46] and
directed phase lag index (DPLI) [47]. While overlap with
previous heuristics exists, functional relations typically
represent or estimate actual node dependencies in the datagenerating process.
Learning-Based Graphs: In contrast to heuristic-based methods, learning-based approaches aim to learn the graph structure
directly from the data and end-to-end with the downstream task.
Accordingly, graph A can be defined as a function ρ( · ) of some
trainable model parameters Θ and, possibly, also of the time
series observations X, i.e., A = ρ(Θ, X). Embedding-based
approaches (e.g., [48], [49]) define the presence of each edge by
comparing learned embedding vectors of the associated nodes;
as an example, consider Ai,j = ReLU(Θ
i Θj ) with Θi , Θj
node embedding of nodes i, j, respectively. Another common
example involves defining A through attention scores computed
between node signals [50]. Sparsification methods – such as the
ReLU activation above or top-k selection – are often applied
to discard edges with null or low weights, thereby reducing the
computational load requested by dense GNN operations [51]. An
alternative strategy is modeling A as a discrete random variable
whose parametric distribution, say pΘ (A | X), is learned alongside the other model parameters [52], [53]. Learning-based approaches enable the data-driven discovery of less obvious graph
structures that are tailored to solve the given task, potentially
providing more effective relations than heuristic-based graphs.
III. FRAMEWORK AND CATEGORIZATION
In this section, we present a comprehensive task-oriented
taxonomy for GNNs within the context of time series analysis
(Section III-A). Subsequently, we investigate how to encode time
series across various tasks by introducing a unified methodological framework for GNN architectures (Section III-B). According

10470

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Task-oriented taxonomy of graph neural networks for time series analysis in the existing literature.

to the framework, all architectures are composed of a similar
graph-based processing module fθ and a second module pφ
specialized in downstream tasks.

A. Task-Oriented Taxonomy
In Fig. 3, we illustrate a task-oriented taxonomy of GNNs
encompassing the primary tasks and mainstream modeling for
time series analysis, and showcasing the potential of GNN4TS.
This survey focuses on four categories: time series forecasting,
anomaly detection, imputation, and classification. These tasks
are performed on top of the time series representations learned
by spatial-temporal graph neural networks (STGNNs), which
serve as the foundation for encoding time series data in existing
literature across various tasks. We detail this in Section III-B.
Time Series Forecasting: This task is centered around predicting future values of the time series based on historical
observations, as depicted in Fig. 4(a). Depending on application
needs, we categorize this task into two types: single-step-ahead
forecasting and multi-step-ahead forecasting. The former is
meant to predict single future observations of the time series
once at a time, i.e., the target at time t is Y := Xt+H for some
H ∈ N steps ahead, while the latter makes predictions for a time
interval, e.g., Y := Xt+1:t+H . Parameterized solutions to both

predictive cases can be derived by optimizing
θ∗ , φ∗ = arg min LF (pφ (fθ (Xt−T :t , At−T :t )) , Y) ,

(6)

θ,φ

where fθ (·) and pφ (·) represent a spatial-temporal GNN and the
predictor, respectively. Details regarding the fθ (·) architecture
are given in Section III-B while the predictor is, normally, a
multi-layer perceptron. In the sequel, we denote by Xt−T :t and
At−T :t a spatial-temporal graph G = {Gt−T , Gt−T +1 , . . . , Gt }
with length T . If the underlying graph structure is fixed, then
At := A. LF (·) denotes the forecasting loss, which is typically a squared or absolute loss function, e.g., STGCN [54]
and MTGNN [51]. Most existing works minimize the error
between the forecasting and the ground truth Y through (6);
this process is known as deterministic time series forecasting.
Besides, we have probabilistic time series forecasting methods,
such as DiffSTG [55], that share the same objective (6) function
though it is not directly optimized. Based on the size of the forecasting horizon H, we end up in either short-term or long-term
forecasting.
Time Series Anomaly Detection: This task focuses on detecting irregularities and unexpected events in time series data
(Fig. 4(b)). Detecting anomalies requires determining when
the anomalous event occurred, while diagnosing them requests
gaining insights about how and why the anomaly occurred. Due

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

10471

Fig. 4. Four categories of graph neural networks for time series analysis. For the sake of simplicity and illustrative purposes, we assume the graph structures are
fixed in all subplots.

to the general difficulty of acquiring anomaly events, current
research commonly treats anomaly detection as an unsupervised problem that involves the design of a model describing
normal, non-anomalous data. The learned model is then used
to detect anomalies by generating a high score whenever an
anomaly event occurs. This model learning process mirrors the
forecasting optimization, (6), with fθ (·) and pφ (·) denote the
spatial-temporal GNN and the predictor, respectively. In general,
the spatial-temporal GNN and the predictor are trained on normal, non-anomalous data using either forecasting [36], [56] or
reconstruction [35], [57] optimization approaches, with the aim
of minimizing the discrepancy between the normal input and the
forecast (or reconstructed) series. Nonetheless, when these models are put to use for detecting anomalies, they are expected to fail
in minimizing this discrepancy upon receiving anomalous input.
This inability to conform to the expected low-discrepancy model
behavior during anomaly periods creates a detectable difference,
facilitating the detection of anomalies. The threshold separating
normal and anomalous data is a sensitive hyperparameter that
should be set considering the rarity of anomalies and aligned
with a desired false alarm rate [58]. Lastly, to diagnose the
causes of anomalies, a common strategy involves calculating

discrepancies for each channel node and consolidating these
into a single anomaly score [59]. This approach allows for
the identification of the channel variables responsible for the
anomaly events by calculating their respective contributions to
the final score.
Time Series Imputation: This task is centered around estimating and filling in missing or incomplete data points within a time
series (Fig. 4(c)). Current research in this domain can be broadly
classified into two main approaches: in-sample imputation and
out-of-sample imputation. In-sample imputation involves filling
missing values in a given time series, while out-of-sample imputation pertains to inferring missing data not present in the
training dataset. We formulate the learning objective as follows:

 

θ∗ , φ∗ = arg min LI pφ fθ (X̃t−T :t , At−T :t ) , Xt−T :t ,
θ,φ

(7)
where fθ (·) and pφ (·) denote the spatial-temporal GNN and
imputation module to be learned, respectively. The imputation
module can e.g., be a multi-layer perceptron. In this task, X̃t−T :t
represents input time series data with missing values (reference
time series), while Xt−T :t denotes the same time series without

10472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

missing values. As it is impossible to access the reference
time series during training, a surrogate optimization objective is
considered, such as generating synthetic missing values [37]. In
(7), LI (·) refers to the imputation loss, which can be, for instance,
an absolute or a squared error, similar to forecasting tasks. For insample imputation, the model is trained and evaluated on X̃t−T :t
and Xt−T :t . Instead, for out-of-sample imputation, the model
is trained and evaluated on disjoint sequences, e.g., trained on
X̃t−T :t but evaluated on Xt:t+H , where the missing values in
X̃t:t+H will be estimated. Similar to time series forecasting
and anomaly detection, the imputation process can be either
deterministic or probabilistic. The former predicts the missing
values directly (e.g., GRIN [37]), while the latter estimates the
missing values from data distributions (e.g., PriSTI [38]).
Time Series Classification: This task aims to assign a categorical label to a given time series based on its underlying
patterns or characteristics. Rather than capturing patterns within
a time series data sample, the essence of time series classification
resides in discerning differentiating patterns that help separate
samples based on their class labels. The optimization problem
can be expressed as:
θ∗ , φ∗ = arg min LC (pφ (fθ (X, A)) , Y) ,

Fig. 5. Methodology-oriented taxonomy of graph neural networks for time
series analysis.

(8)

θ,φ

where fθ (·) and pφ (·) denote, e.g., a GNN and a classifier to
be learned, respectively. Using univariate time series classification as an example Fig. 4(d), the task can be formulated as
either a graph or node classification task. In the case of graph
classification (Series-as-Graph) [96], each series is transformed
into a graph, and the graph will be the input of a GNN to
generate a classification output. This can be achieved by dividing
a series into multiple subsequences with a window size, W ,
serving as graph nodes, X ∈ RN ×W , and an adjacency matrix,
A, describing the relationships between subsequences. A simple
GNN, fθ (·), then employs graph convolution and pooling to
obtain a condensed graph feature to be exploited by a classifier
pφ (·) which assigns a class label to the graph. Alternatively,
the node classification formulation (Series-as-Node), treats each
series as a node in a dataset graph. Series-as-Node constructs an
adjacency matrix representing the relationships between multiple distinct series in a given dataset [63]. With several series
of length T stacked into a matrix X ∈ RN ×T as node features
and A representing pairwise relationships, the GNN operation,
fθ (·) , aims at leveraging the relationships across different series
for accurate node series classification [97]. In all cases, Y is
typically a one-hot encoded vector representing the categorical
label of a univariate or multivariate time series.
B. Unified Methodological Framework
In Fig. 5, we present a unified methodological framework
of STGNNs mentioned in Section III-A for time series analysis.
Specifically, our framework serves as the basis for encoding time
series data in the existing literature across various downstream
tasks (Fig. 3). As an extension, STGNNs incorporate spatial
information by considering the relationships between nodes in
the graph and temporal information by taking into account the

evolution of node attributes over time. Similar to [15], we systematically categorize STGNNs from three perspectives: spatial
module, temporal module, and overall model architecture.
Spatial Module: To model dependencies between time series
over time, STGNNs employ the design principles of GNNs on
static graphs. These can be further categorized into three types:
spectral GNNs, spatial GNNs, and a combination of both (i.e.,
hybrid) [29]. Spectral GNNs are based on spectral graph theory
and use the graph shift operator (like the graph Laplacian) to
capture node relationships in the graph frequency domain [28],
[98], [99]. Differently, spatial GNNs simplify spectral GNNs
by directly designing filters that are localized to each node’s
neighborhood. The approaches in this category can be broadly
classified into two types: graph diffusion-based and message
passing-based. Notably, graph transformers [100] represent a
specialized extension of message passing neural networks [101],
further expanding the capabilities of this paradigm. Hybrid
approaches combine both spectral and spatial methodologies
to capitalize on the strengths of each method.
Temporal Module: To account for temporal dependencies
in time series, STGNNs incorporate temporal modules that
work in tandem with spatial modules to model intricate spatialtemporal patterns. Temporal dependencies can be represented
in either the time or frequency domains. The approaches in the
first category encompass recurrence-based (e.g., RNNs [26]),
convolution-based (e.g., TCNs [102]), attention-based (e.g.,
transformers [27]), and a combination of these (i.e., hybrid).
For the second category, analogous techniques are employed,
followed by orthogonal space projections [28], such as the
Fourier transform.
Model Architecture: To integrate the two modules, existing
STGNNs are either discrete or continuous in terms of their
overall neural architectures. Both types can be further subdivided
into two subcategories: factorized and coupled. With typical

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

10473

A. Modeling Inter-Variable Dependencies

Fig. 6.

General pipeline for time series analysis using graph neural networks.

factorized STGNN model architectures, the temporal processing
is performed either before or after the spatial processing, whether
in a discrete (e.g., STGCN [54]) or continuous manner (e.g.,
STGODE [74]). Conversely, the coupled model architecture
refers to instances where spatial and temporal modules are
interleaved, such as DCRNN [68] (discrete) and MTGODE [23]
(continuous). Other authors refer to very related categories as
time-then-space and time-and-space [103].
General Pipeline: In Fig. 6, we showcase a general pipeline
that shows how STGNNs can be integrated into time series
analysis. Given a time series dataset, we first process it using the
data processing module, which performs essential data cleaning
and normalization tasks, including the extraction of time series
topology (i.e., graph structures). Subsequently, STGNNs are
utilized to obtain time series representations, which can then
be passed to different handlers (i.e., downstream task prediction
module) to execute various analytical tasks, such as forecasting
and anomaly detection.
IV. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES FORECASTING
Time series forecasting aims to predict future time series
values based on historical observations. While deep learning
models have demonstrated considerable success in forecasting
time series by capturing nonlinear temporal and spatial patterns
more effectively than the linear counterpart [23], many of these
approaches, such as LSTNet [111] and TPA-LSTM [112], overlook and implicitly model the rich underlying dynamic spatial
correlations between time series. Recently, graph neural network
(GNN)-based methods have shown great potential in explicitly
and effectively modeling spatial and temporal dependencies in
multivariate time series data, leading to enhanced forecasting
performance.
GNN-based forecasting models can be categorized and examined from multiple perspectives. In terms of forecasting
tasks, while many models focus on multi-step forecasting (i.e.,
predicting multiple consecutive steps ahead based on historical
observations), a minority also discuss single-step forecasting
(i.e., predicting the next or one arbitrary step ahead). From
a methodological standpoint, these models can be dissected
from three aspects: (1) modeling spatial (i.e., inter-variable)
dependencies, (2) modeling inter-temporal dependencies, and
(3) the fusion of spatial and temporal modules for time series
forecasting. A summary of representative works is given in
Table II.

Spatial dependencies, or inter-variable relationships, play a
pivotal role in affecting a model’s forecasting capability [28].
When presented with time series data and corresponding graph
structures that delineate the strength of interconnections between time series, current studies typically employ (1) spectral
GNNs, (2) spatial GNNs, or (3) a hybrid of both to model
these spatial dependencies. At a high level, these methods all
draw upon the principles of graph signal processing (as detailed
in Definition 5 and subsequent discussion). Considering input
variables Xt and At at a given time t, the goal here is to devise
an effective GNN-based model SPATIAL(·) to adeptly capture
salient patterns from different time series. This can be expressed
as X̂t = SPATIAL(Xt , At ), where X̂t collects all time series
representations at time t with spatial dependencies embedded.
Spectral GNN-Based Approaches: Early GNN-based forecasting models predominantly utilized ChebConv [113] to approximate graph convolution with Chebyshev polynomials,
thereby modeling inter-variable dependencies. For instance,
STGCN [54] intersects temporal convolution [114] and ChebConv layers to capture both spatial and temporal patterns.
StemGNN [50] further proposes spectral-temporal graph neural networks to extract rich time series patterns by leveraging
ChebConv and frequency-domain convolution neural networks.
Other relevant research has largely followed suit, employing
ChebConv to model spatial time series dependencies, while
introducing novel modifications. These include attention mechanisms [86], [105], multi-graph construction [41], [72], and
combinations of the two [88].
Spatial GNN-Based Approaches: Inspired by the recent success of spatial GNNs [29], another line of research has been modeling inter-variable dependencies using message passing [115]
or graph diffusion [116]. From the graph perspective, these
methods are certain simplifications compared to those based
on spectral GNNs, where strong local homophilies are emphasised [28], [117]. Early methods such as DCRNN [68]
and Graph WaveNet [48] incorporated graph diffusion layers into GRU [118] or temporal convolution to model time
series data. In contrast, STGCN(1st ) (a second version of
STGCN [54]) and ST-MetaNet [76] modeled spatial dependencies with GCN [119] and GAT [120] to aggregate information
from adjacent time series. To enhance learning capabilities,
several improvements have been proposed. For example, STSGCN [92] proposed spatial-temporal synchronous graph convolution, extending GCN to model spatial and temporal dependencies on localized spatial-temporal graphs. MTGODE [23] and
TPGNN [60] proposed continuous graph propagation and graph
propagation based on temporal polynomial coefficients. Additionally, recent approaches based on graph transformer [100]
or hypergraphs [121], such as [122] and [110], can capture
longer-range spatial dependencies due to their global receptive
field, making them a separate branch of enhanced methods.
Hybrid Approaches: Some hybrid models also exist, integrating both spectral and spatial GNNs. For instance, SLCNN [95]
employs ChebConv and localized message passing as global
and local convolutions to capture spatial relations at multiple

10474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES FORECASTING

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

10475

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION

granularities. Conversely, Auto-STGNN [123] integrates neural
architecture search to identify high-performance GNN-based
forecasting models.
More details about modeling inter-variable dependencies in
GNNs for time series forecasting are in Appendix A.1, available
online.
B. Modeling Inter-Temporal Dependencies
The modeling of temporal dependencies within time series
represents another important element in various GNN-based
forecasting methods. These dependencies (i.e., temporal patterns) are capable of being modeled in the time or/and frequency
domains. A summary of representative methods, along with
their temporal module classifications, is presented in Table II.
Given a univariate time series Xn with length T , the primary
goal here is to learn an effective temporal model, referred to
as TEMPORAL(·). This model is expected to accurately capture
the dependencies between data points within Xn , such that
X̂n = TEMPORAL(Xn ), where X̂n symbolizes the representation of time series Xn . In the construction of TEMPORAL(·),
both the time and frequency domains can be exploited within
convolutional and attentive mechanisms. Recurrent models can
also be employed for modeling in the time domain specifically.
Additionally, hybrid models exist in both domains, integrating
different methodologies such as attention and convolution neural
networks.
Recurrent Models: Several early methodologies rely on recurrent models for understanding inter-temporal dependencies
in the time domain. For instance, DCRNN [68] integrates graph
diffusion with gated recurrent units (GRU) [118] to model the
spatial-temporal dependencies in traffic data. On a different
note, AGCRN [49] merges GRU with a factorized variant of
GCN [119] and a graph structure learning module. More recent
studies, such as GTS [52] and RGSL [72], share similar designs but primarily emphasize different graph structure learning
mechanisms.
Convolution Models: Convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
on the other hand, provide a more efficient perspective for
modeling inter-temporal dependencies, with the bulk of existing
studies in the time domain. An instance of this is STGCN [54],
which introduces temporal gated convolution that integrates
1-D convolution with gated linear units (GLU) to facilitate
tractable model training. Other representative examples include
MTGNN [51] and MTGODE [23]. An alternative strand of

methodologies, including StemGNN [50] and TGC [28], focuses
on modeling temporal clues in the frequency domain.
Attention Models: Recently, a growing number of methodologies is turning towards attention mechanisms, e.g., the selfattention in transformer [124], to embed temporal correlations.
For instance, GMAN [70] attentively aggregates historical information by considering both spatial and temporal features.
ST-GRAT [125] mirrors the transformer’s architecture to embed
historical observations in conjunction with its proposed spatial
attention mechanism. Recent strides such as STEP [61] similarly
employ transformer layers to model the temporal dependencies
within each univariate time series.
Hybrid Models: Hybrid models also find application in
modeling inter-temporal dependencies. For example, ASTGCN [86] and DSTAGNN [88] concurrently employ temporal
attention and convolution in learning temporal correlations.
STGNN* [87] amalgamates both GRU and transformer to capture local and global temporal dependencies. In the frequency
domain, the nonlinear variant of TGC [28] captures temporal
relations through the combination of spectral attention and convolution models.
Complete discussion of modeling inter-temporal dependencies is in Appendix A.2, available online.

C. Forecasting Architectural Fusion
Given the spatial and temporal modules discussed, denoted
as SPATIAL(·) and TEMPORAL(·), four categories of neural architectural fusion have been identified as effective means to
capture spatial-temporal dependencies within time series data:
(1) discrete factorized, (2) discrete coupled, (3) continuous
factorized, and (4) continuous coupled. In discrete factorized
models, spatial and temporal dependencies are usually learned
and processed independently. Discrete coupled models, on the
other hand, explicitly or implicitly incorporate spatial and temporal modules into a singular process when modeling spatialtemporal dependencies. Different from discrete models, some
methods abstract the underlying modeling processes with neural
differential equations, which we categorize as continuous models. Specifically, continuous factorized models involve distinct
processes, either partially or entirely continuous (e.g., [74]), to
model spatial and temporal dependencies. In contrast, continuous coupled models employ a single continuous process to
accomplish this task, such as [23] and [75].

10476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Discrete Architectures: Numerous existing GNN-based time
series forecasting methods are models processing discrete data.
For instance, factorized approaches like STGCN [54] employ
a sandwich structure of graph and temporal gated convolution
layers as its fundamental building block. Subsequent works,
such as DGCNN [126] and HGCN [127], retain this model
architecture while introducing enhancements such as dynamic
graph structure estimation and hierarchical graph generation.
In the realm of discrete coupled models, early works such as
DCRNN [68] and Cirstea et al. [94] straightforwardly incorporate graph diffusion or attention models into recurrent units.
Subsequent works, such as MRA-BGCN [69] and RGSL [72],
are based on similar concepts but with varying implementations.
There are also some studies integrating spatial and temporal
convolution or attention operations into a single module. An
example is GMAN [70], which proposes a building block that
integrates the spatial and temporal attention mechanisms in a
gated manner.
Continuous Architectures: To date, only a handful of methods
fall into this category. For factorized methods, STGODE [74]
proposes to depict the graph propagation as a continuous process
with a neural ordinary differential equation (NODE) [128].
This approach allows for the effective characterization of longrange spatial-temporal dependencies in conjunction with dilated
convolutions along the time axis. For coupled methods, MTGODE [23] generalizes both spatial and temporal modeling
processes found in most related works into a single unified
process that integrates two NODEs. STG-NCDE [75] shares
a similar idea but operates under the framework of neural controlled differential equations (NCDEs) [129].
Refer to Appendix A.3, available online, for more details about
the architecture fusion in GNNs for time series forecasting.
V. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION
Time series anomaly detection identifies data observations
that deviate from the nominal data-generating process [134].
Anomalies, defined as such deviations, contrast with normal
data. Terms like novelty and outlier are often used interchangeably with anomaly [135]. Deviations can be single observations (points) or a series of observations (subsequences) [136].
However, unlike normal time series data, anomalies are hard
to characterize because they are rare, making them difficult to
collect and label, and it is usually impossible to establish all
potential anomalies, limiting supervised learning. Therefore, unsupervised detection techniques are widely explored as practical
solutions.
Traditionally, distance-based [137] and distributional techniques [138] have been widely used for detecting irregularities in time series data. Recently, deep learning has driven
significant advancements, particularly with recurrent models
employing reconstruction [139] and forecasting [140] strategies.
These models use forecast and reconstruction errors to measure
discrepancies between expected and actual signals, as a model
trained on normal data is more likely to fail with anomalous
data. However, recurrent models [141] often lack explicit modeling of pairwise interdependence among variables, limiting
their effectiveness in detecting complex anomalies [35], [142].

Recently, GNNs have shown promise in capturing temporal and
spatial dependencies among variables, addressing this gap [36],
[56].
A. General Approach to Anomaly Detection
Treating anomaly detection as an unsupervised task relies on
models to learn a general concept of what normality is for a
given dataset [143], [144]. To achieve this, deep learning architectures deploy a bifurcated modular framework, constituted
by a backbone module and a scoring module [145]. First, a
backbone model, BACKBONE(·), is trained to fit given training
data, assumed to be nominal, or to contain very few anomalies.
Then, a scoring module, SCORER(X, X̂), produces a score used
to identify the presence of anomalies by comparing the output
X̂ = BACKBONE(X) of the backbone module with the observed
time series data X. The score is intended as a measure of
the discrepancy between the expected signals under normal
and anomalous circumstances. Furthermore, it is also important
for a model to diagnose anomaly events by pinpointing the
responsible variables. Consequently, a scoring function typically
computes the discrepancy for each individual channel first,
before consolidating these discrepancies across all channels into
a single anomaly value.
To provide a simple illustration of the entire process, the
backbone can be a GNN forecaster that makes a one-step-ahead
forecast for the scorer. The scorer then computes the anomaly
score as the sum of the absolute forecast error for each channel
i
i
variable, represented as N
i |xt − x̂t | across N channel variables. Since the final score is computed based on the summation
of channel errors, an operator can determine the root cause
variables by computing the contribution of each variable to the
summed error.
Advancements in the anomaly detection and diagnosis field
have led to the proposal of more comprehensive backbone and
scoring modules [136], [145], primarily driven by the adoption
of GNN methodologies [35], [36], [56].
B. Discrepancy Frameworks for Anomaly Detection
Most of anomaly detection models follow the same backbonescorer architecture. However, the way the backbone module is
trained to learn data structure from nominal data and the implementation of the scoring module differentiate these methods
into three categories: (1) reconstruction, (2) forecast, and (3) relational discrepancy frameworks. A summary of representative
works is provided in Table III.
Reconstruction Discrepancy: Reconstruction discrepancy
frameworks operate on the assumption that reconstruction error is low during normal periods and high during anomalies.
They are designed to replicate their inputs as outputs, similar to autoencoders [146]. The backbone is expected to effectively model and reconstruct the training data distribution
but not out-of-sample data. To achieve this, these frameworks
often include constraints and regularization, such as enforcing
a low-dimensional embedded code [147] or using variational
objectives [148]. Once the data structure is learned, the model
should approximate the input well during normal periods but

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

struggle during anomalies. The SCORER(·) then computes a
discrepancy score from the reconstructed outputs to identify
anomalous events. Although deep reconstruction models generally follow these principles for detecting anomalies, a key distinction between GNNs and other architectural types rests in the
backbone reconstructor, BACKBONE(·), which is characterized
by its STGNN implementation. For example, MTAD-GAT [35]
and LSTM-VAE [139] both use a variational objective [148],
but MTAD-GAT employs a graph attention network as a spatialtemporal encoder to learn inter-variable and inter-temporal dependencies. Other similar works include VGCRN [79] and
FuSAGNet [56]. Another research direction in this category
of methods focused on graph-level embeddings to represent
the input graph data as vectors to enable the application of
well-established and sophisticated detection methods designed
for multivariate time series [58], [149].
Forecast Discrepancy: Forecast discrepancy frameworks rely
on the assumption that forecast error should be low during
normal periods, but high during anomalous periods. Here, the
backbone module is substituted with a GNN forecaster that is
trained to predict a one-step-ahead forecast. During deployment,
the forecaster makes a one-step-ahead prediction, and the forecasts are given to the scorer. The scorer compares the forecasts
against the real observed signals to compute discrepancies such
as absolute error [36] or mean-squared error [89]. Importantly, it
is generally assumed that a forecasting-based model will exhibit
erratic behavior during anomaly periods when the input data
deviates from the normal patterns, resulting in a significant
forecasting discrepancy. GDN [36] is a representative work,
consisting of a graph structure module that learns the underlying
topology and a graph attention network that encodes input series
representations for one-step-ahead forecasts. Then, its scorer
computes the forecast discrepancy as the maximum absolute
forecast error among the channel variables to indicate whether an
anomaly event has occurred. Other similar approaches include
GTA [89] and CST-GL [62].
While forecast discrepancy frameworks can be similar to
reconstruction discrepancy frameworks, they rely on fundamentally different principles and implementation strategies.
Reconstruction discrepancy frameworks project current input
onto a latent space, attempting to reconstruct it and identifying
anomalies when reconstruction fails. This method uses current
input data during both training and inference, focusing on the
model’s ability to reconstruct training data but not out-of-sample
data. Conversely, forecast discrepancy frameworks use historical data to predict current values and identify anomalies by
comparing predictions with actual observations. Reconstruction
focuses on replicating current inputs, while forecasting emphasizes predicting future data points and detecting anomalies
through prediction errors. Advanced forecast discrepancy-based
methods, such as GST-Pro [150], can even predict anomalies
without using actual observations, allowing anomaly prediction
at future timestamps.
Relational Discrepancy: Relational discrepancy frameworks
rely on the assumption that the relationship between variables
should exhibit significant shifts from normal to anomalous periods. The logical evolution of using STGNN involves leveraging

10477

its capability to learn graph structures for both anomaly detection
and diagnosis. In this context, the backbone serves as a graph
learning module that constructs the hidden evolving relationship
between variables. The scorer, on the other hand, is a function that evaluates changes in these relationships and assigns
an anomaly or discrepancy score accordingly. GReLeN [90]
pioneered the use of learned dynamic graphs to detect anomalies
through relational discrepancies. Its reconstruction module dynamically constructs graph structures based on input time series
data at each time point. These structures are then used by a scorer
to compute changes in the in-degree and out-degree values of
channel nodes. In contrast, DyGraphAD employs a forecasting
approach [82]. It divides a multivariate series into subsequences,
converts these into dynamically evolving graphs, and trains the
network to predict one-step-ahead graph structures. The scorer
in DyGraphAD computes the forecast error in the graph structure
as the relational discrepancy for anomaly detection.
Hybrid and Other Discrepancies: Different discrepancybased frameworks offer unique advantages for detecting various types of anomalies. As demonstrated in GDN [36], the
relational discrepancy framework can uncover spatial anomalies that are concealed within the relational patterns between
different channels. In contrast, forecast discrepancy frameworks excel at identifying temporal anomalies like sudden
spikes or seasonal inconsistencies. A comprehensive solution
would leverage the strengths of STGNNs by combining multiple discrepancy measures for anomaly detection. For example, MTAD-GAT [35] uses both reconstruction and forecast
discrepancies, while DyGraphAD [82] combines forecast
and relational discrepancies. Additionally, incorporating prior
knowledge about anomalous behaviors can enhance detection.
For instance, GraphSAD [133] creates pseudo labels for six distinct anomaly types on training data, transforming unsupervised
anomaly detection into a standard classification task, with class
discrepancy as the anomaly indicator.
Our detailed discussion about the GNNs for time series
anomaly detection can be found in Appendix B, available online.
VI. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION
Time series classification seeks to assign a categorical label
to a given time series based on its underlying patterns or characteristics. As outlined in a recent survey [154], early literature
primarily focused on distance-based approaches [155], [156]
and ensembling methods [157], [158]. However, despite their
strong performance, both strategies struggle with scalability for
high-dimensional or large datasets [159], [160]. To address these
limitations, researchers are exploring deep learning techniques
to enhance the performance and scalability of time series classification. A comprehensive discussion can be found in the latest
survey by Foumani et al. [154], though it does not cover the
application of GNNs in this field. By transforming time series
data into graph representations, one can leverage the powerful
capabilities of GNNs to capture both local and global patterns.
Furthermore, GNNs are capable of mapping the intricate relationships among different time series data samples within a
particular dataset. In the following discussion, we provide a fresh

10478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

GNN perspective on the univariate and multivariate time series
classification problem. A compilation of representative works is
presented in Table IV
A. Univariate Time Series Classification
Time series classification inherently differs from other time
series analyses by focusing on discerning patterns that distinguish samples based on class labels, rather than capturing
patterns within the data. Unlike forecasting future points or detecting real-time anomalies, it aims to identify divergent patterns
across series. We explore two novel graph-based approaches
for univariate time series classification: Series-as-Graph and
Series-as-Node.
Series-as-Graph: This approach transforms a univariate time
series into a graph to identify unique patterns that enable accurate
classification using a GNN. First, each series is broken down into
subsequences as nodes, and the nodes are connected with edges
illustrating their relationships. Following this, a GNN is applied
to make graph classification. This procedure is represented in
the upper block of Fig. 4(d). Series-as-Graph was first presented in Time2Graph [161], which was later developed further
with the incorporation of GNN, as Time2Graph+ [96]. The
Time2Graph+ modeling process can be described as a two-step
process: first, a time series is transformed into a shapelet graph,
and second, a GNN is utilized to model the relations between
shapelets along with a graph pooling operation to derive the
global representation of the time series. This representation is
then fed into a classifier to assign class labels to the time series.
Similarly, EC-GCN [152] constructs graphs from encrypted
traffic for classification. The Series-as-Graph approach can also
be extended to multivariate time-series classification task [153].
While we use Series-as-Graph to describe the formulation of a
time series classification task as a graph classification task, this
should not be confused with Series2Graph [162], which is for
anomaly detection tasks.
Series-as-Node: As capturing differentiating class patterns
across different series data samples is important, leveraging
relationships across the different series data samples in a given
dataset can be beneficial for classifying a time series. To achieve
this, one can take the Series-as-Node approach, where each
series sample is seen as a separate node. These series nodes are
connected with edges that represent the relationships between
them, creating a large graph that provides a complete view
of the entire dataset. This procedure is depicted in the lower
block of Fig. 4(d), which essentially formulates a time series
classification task as a node classification task. Series-as-Node
was originally presented in SimTSC [63]. In this work, series
nodes are connected using edges, which are defined by their
pairwise DTW distance, to construct a graph. LB-SimTSC [97]
further extends on SimTSC to improve the DTW preprocessing efficiency by employing the widely-used lower bound for
DTW [163]. This allows for a time complexity of O(L) rather
than O(L2 ), dramatically reducing computation time.
More details about GNN-based univariate time series classification are in Appendix C.1, available online.

B. Multivariate Time Series Classification
In essence, multivariate time series classification maintains fundamental similarities with its univariate counterpart.
However, it introduces an additional layer of complexity: the
necessity to capture intricate inter-variable dependencies. For
example, given the interconnectedness of brain regions, analyzing a single node in isolation may not fully capture the comprehensive neural dynamics [164]. By modeling inter-variable
dependencies, we can understand the relationships between
different nodes, thereby offering a more holistic view of brain
activity. This facilitates the differentiation of intricate patterns
that can classify patients with and without specific neurological
conditions. Since the relationships between the variables, or
inter-variable dependencies, can be naturally thought of as a
network graph, GNNs are ideally suitable as illustrated before
in Section IV. The primary aim here is to effectively distill the
complexity of high-dimensional series data into a more comprehensible, yet equally expressive, representation that enables differentiation of time series into their representative classes [33],
[64], [151]. More discussion is in Appendix C.2, available online.
VII. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES IMPUTATION
Time series imputation, a crucial task in numerous real-world
applications, involves estimating missing values within one or
more data point sequences. Traditional time series imputation
approaches have relied on statistical methodologies, such as
mean imputation, spline interpolation [171], and regression
models [172]. However, these methods often struggle to capture
complex temporal dependencies and non-linear relationships
within the data. While some deep neural network-based works,
such as [173] and [174], have mitigated these limitations, they do
not explicitly consider inter-variable dependencies. The recent
emergence of GNNs offers new possibilities for time series
imputation by better capturing intricate spatial and temporal
dependencies. From a task perspective, GNN-based time series
imputation can be broadly categorized into two types: in-sample
imputation and out-of-sample imputation. The former involves
filling in missing values within the given time series data, while
the latter predicts missing values in disjoint sequences [37].
From a methodological perspective, GNNs for time series imputation can be categorized into deterministic and probabilistic
approaches. Deterministic imputation provides a single best estimate for missing values, while probabilistic imputation accounts
for uncertainty by offering a distribution of possible values. In
Table V, we summarize most of the related works on GNN
for time series imputation to date, offering a comprehensive
overview of the field and its current state of development.
A. In-Sample Imputation
The majority of existing GNN-based methods primarily focus on in-sample time series data imputation. For instance,
GACN [65] proposes to model spatial-temporal dependencies
in time series data by interleaving GAT [120] and temporal
convolution layers in its encoder. It then imputes the missing

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

10479

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES IMPUTATION

data by combining GAT and temporal deconvolution layers that
map latent states back to original feature spaces. GRIN [37]
introduces the graph recurrent imputation network, where each
unidirectional module consists of one spatial-temporal encoder
and two different imputation executors. The spatial-temporal
encoder adopted in this work combines MPNN [115] and
GRU [118]. After generating the latent time series representations, the first-stage imputation fills missing values with onestep-ahead predicted values, which are then refined by a final
one-layer MPNN before passing to the second-stage imputation for further processing. Similar works using bidirectional
recurrent architectures include AGRN [166], DGCRIN [167],
GARNN [168], and MDGCN [81], where the main differences
lie in intermediate processes. Recently, a few research studies
have explored probabilistic in-sample time series imputation,
such as PriSTI [38] and [170], where the imputation has been
regarded as a generation task. Refer to Appendix D.1 for more
details, available online.
B. Out-of-Sample Imputation
To date, only a few GNN-based methods fall into this category.
Among these works, IGNNK [73] proposes an inductive GNN
kriging model to recover signals for unobserved time series,
such as a new variable in a multivariate time series. In IGNNK,
the training process involves masked subgraph sampling and
signal reconstruction with the diffusion graph convolution network presented in [68]. Another similar work is SATCN [66],
and the primary difference between these two works lies in
the underlying GNN architectures. INCREASE [169], on the
other hand, further considers heterogeneous spatial and diverse
temporal relations among the locations, lifting the performance
of inductive spatio-temporal kriging. Notably, GRIN [37] can
handle both in-sample and out-of-sample imputations, as well
as [165]. More discussion is in Appendix D.2, available online.
VIII. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS AND RESOURCES
Graph neural networks have been applied to a broad range
of disciplines related to time series analysis. We categorize the
mainstream applications of GNN4TS into seven areas: smart
transportation, on-demand services, environment & sustainable
energy, internet-of-things, physical systems, healthcare, and

fraud detection. Three prominent areas in this section are discussed. A detailed expansion can be found in Appendix E, available online. In addition, we summarize the common benchmark
datasets and the open-sourced implementation of representative
models in Appendix F, available online.
Smart Transportation: The domain of transportation has been
significantly transformed with the advent of GNNs, with typical
applications spanning from traffic prediction to flight delay
prediction. For example, by leveraging advanced algorithms
and data analytics related to spatial-temporal GNNs, traffic
conditions can be accurately predicted [175], [176], thereby
facilitating efficient route planning and congestion management.
Another important application is traffic data imputation, which
is crucial for maintaining the integrity of traffic databases and
ensuring the accuracy of traffic analysis and prediction models [85], [167]. There is also related research on autonomous
driving [177] and flight delay prediction [178], [179]. The
use of advanced technologies like GNNs in these applications
underscores their transformative impact on smart transportation, emphasizing its critical role in evolving transportation
systems.
Environment & Sustainable Energy: In this sector, GNNs have
been instrumental in wind speed and power prediction, capturing
the complex spatial-temporal dynamics of wind patterns to
provide accurate predictions that aid in the efficient management
of wind energy resources [180], [181]. Similarly, in solar energy,
GNNs have been used for solar irradiance and photovoltaic (PV)
power prediction, modeling the intricate relationships between
various factors influencing solar energy generation to provide
accurate predictions [182], [183]. Furthermore, GNNs have been
employed for air pollution prediction [184] and weather forecasting [185] that are crucial for various services in agriculture,
energy, and transportation.
Physical Systems: Systems of interacting objects are found
in numerous scientific fields, including the simulation of nbody systems [186], particle physics [187], modeling of human
motion dynamics [188], and prediction of molecular dynamics [189]. In graph-based deep learning, the objects are represented as nodes of a graph and GNNs have proven effective
in modeling their complex interactions. Despite the challenges
posed by physical constraints, promising performance has been
achieved thanks to the incorporation of inductive biases from
known physical laws [190], [191] and architectures that maintain

10480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

the symmetries of the underlying system, such as equivariance
to rotations and translations [189], [192], [193].
Other Applications: The application of GNNs for time series analysis has also been extended to various other fields,
such as finance [194], [195], on-demand services [41], fraud
detection [196], manufacturing [197], and recommender systems [198]. As research in this area continues to evolve, it is
anticipated that the application of GNN4TS will continue to
expand, opening up new possibilities for data-driven decision
making and system optimization.
IX. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The future of GNNs for time series analysis holds immense
promise, driven by several key directions and challenges that
need to be addressed to unlock their full potential. More detailed
discussion is in Appendix G, available online.
Pre-Training, Transfer Learning, and Large Models: Pretraining, transfer learning, and large models are emerging as
potent strategies to bolster the performance of GNNs in time
series analysis [61], [199], especially when data is sparse or
diverse. These techniques hinge on utilizing learned representations from one or more domains to enhance performance in other
related domains [3]. Notable examples include Panagopoulos et
al.’s meta-learning for COVID-19 prediction in data-limited settings [200], and Shao et al.’s pre-training framework for spatialtemporal GNNs [61]. The exploration of GNN pre-training
and transferability for time series tasks is growing, especially
with the advent of generative AI and large models capable of
addressing diverse tasks [201]. Challenges include limited time
series data for large-scale pre-training, ensuring wide coverage
and transferability, and designing strategies to capture complex
spatial-temporal dependencies [202].
Robustness: Robustness of GNNs refers to their ability to
handle data perturbations and distribution shifts, especially those
engineered by adversaries [203]. This is crucial for time series
from dynamic systems, as operational failures can compromise
the entire system’s integrity [204]. For example, inadequate
handling of noise or data corruption in smart city applications
can disrupt traffic management, and in healthcare, it can cause
missed critical treatment periods. While GNNs perform well in
many applications, enhancing their robustness and developing
effective failure management strategies are essential.
Privacy Enhancing: As GNNs become integral to various
sectors, privacy protection is increasingly important. GNNs’
capability to learn and reconstruct relationships within complex
systems necessitates safeguarding the privacy of both individual
entities (nodes) and their relationships (edges) in time series
data. The interpretability of GNNs, while useful for identifying
vulnerabilities, can also expose sensitive information [205].
Therefore, maintaining robust privacy defenses while capitalizing on the benefits of GNNs for time series analysis requires
a delicate balance, one that calls for constant vigilance and
continual innovation.
Scalability: While GNNs are effective in analyzing complex
time series data, their adaptation to vast time-dependent data
volumes presents challenges like memory constraints during

computations. Traditional GNNs use sampling strategies such
as node-wise [206], layer-wise [207], and graph-wise [208] to
mitigate these issues, but preserving temporal dependencies is
complex. Enhancing scalability for real-time GNN applications,
especially on edge devices with limited computing power, is
crucial. This intersection of scalability and efficient inference is a
significant research area with potential for major advancements.
X. CONCLUSION
This comprehensive survey bridges the knowledge gap in
graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS) by
reviewing recent advancements and offering a unified taxonomy to categorize existing works. It covers a wide range of
analytical tasks, including forecasting, classification, anomaly
detection, and imputation, providing a detailed understanding
of current progress. We also delve into the intricacies of spatial and temporal dependencies modeling and overall model
architecture, offering a fine-grained classification of individual
studies. Highlighting the expanding applications of GNN4TS,
we demonstrate its versatility and potential for future growth.
This survey serves as a valuable resource for practitioners and
experts, proposing future research directions to guide and inspire
further work in GNN4TS.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Wen, L. Yang, T. Zhou, and L. Sun, “Robust time series analysis and
applications: An industrial perspective,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 4836–4837.
[2] P. Esling and C. Agon, “Time-series data mining,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2012.
[3] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” 2023, arXiv:2306.10125.
[4] B. Lim and S. Zohren, “Time-series forecasting with deep learning:
A survey,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 379, no. 2194, 2021,
Art. no. 20200209.
[5] H. I. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Muller,
“Deep learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining
Knowl. Discov., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 917–963, 2019.
[6] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
[7] C. Fang and C. Wang, “Time series data imputation: A survey on deep
learning approaches,” 2020, arXiv: 2011.11347.
[8] J. Zhang, F.-Y. Wang, K. Wang, W.-H. Lin, X. Xu, and C. Chen, “Datadriven intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1624–1639, Dec. 2011.
[9] Y. Zhou, Z. Ding, Q. Wen, and Y. Wang, “Robust load forecasting towards
adversarial attacks via Bayesian learning,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1445–1459, Mar. 2023.
[10] A. A. Cook, G. Mısırlı, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT
time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
pp. 6481–6494, Jul. 2020.
[11] S. Wang, J. Cao, and S. Y. Philip, “Deep learning for spatio-temporal
data mining: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 8,
pp. 3681–3700, Aug. 2022.
[12] J. Ye, J. Zhao, K. Ye, and C. Xu, “How to build a graph-based deep
learning architecture in traffic domain: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 3904–3924, May 2022.
[13] W. Jiang and J. Luo, “Graph neural network for traffic forecasting: A
survey,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 207, 2022, Art. no. 117921.
[14] K.-H. N. Bui, J. Cho, and H. Yi, “Spatial-temporal graph neural network
for traffic forecasting: An overview and open research issues,” Appl.
Intell., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 2763–2774, 2022.
[15] G. Jin, Y. Liang, Y. Fang, J. Huang, J. Zhang, and Y. Zheng, “Spatiotemporal graph neural networks for predictive learning in urban computing: A survey,” 2023, arXiv:2303.14483.

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

[16] Z. A. Sahili and M. Awad, “Spatio-temporal graph neural networks: A
survey,” 2023, arXiv:2301.10569.
[17] S. Rahmani, A. Baghbani, N. Bouguila, and Z. Patterson, “Graph neural
networks for intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8846–8885, Aug. 2023.
[18] A. Cini, I. Marisca, D. Zambon, and C. Alippi, “Taming local effects in
graph-based spatiotemporal forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2023, Art. no. 2417.
[19] L.-J. Cao and F. E. H. Tay, “Support vector machine with adaptive
parameters in financial time series forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1506–1518, Nov. 2003.
[20] Y. Xia and J. Chen, “Traffic flow forecasting method based on gradient boosting decision tree,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Front. Manuf. Sci.
Measuring Technol., Atlantis Press, 2017, pp. 413–416.
[21] B. Biller and B. L. Nelson, “Modeling and generating multivariate timeseries input processes using a vector autoregressive technique,” ACM
Trans. Model. Comput. Simul., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 211–237, 2003.
[22] G. E. Box and D. A. Pierce, “Distribution of residual autocorrelations in autoregressive-integrated moving average time series models,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., vol. 65, no. 332, pp. 1509–1526,
1970.
[23] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y.-F. Li, S. Chen, B. Yang, and S. Pan, “Multivariate
time series forecasting with dynamic graph neural ODEs,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 9168–9180, Sep. 2023.
[24] B. Zhao, H. Lu, S. Chen, J. Liu, and D. Wu, “Convolutional neural
networks for time series classification,” J. Syst. Eng. Electron., vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 162–169, 2017.
[25] A. Borovykh, S. Bohte, and C. W. Oosterlee, “Conditional time series forecasting with convolutional neural networks,” 2017, arXiv:
1703.04691.
[26] J. T. Connor, R. D. Martin, and L. E. Atlas, “Recurrent neural networks
and robust time series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 240–254, Mar. 1994.
[27] Q. Wen et al., “Transformers in time series: A survey,” in Proc. Int. Joint
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 6778–6786.
[28] M. Jin et al., “How expressive are spectral-temporal graph neural networks for time series forecasting?,” 2023, arXiv:2305.06587.
[29] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[30] M. Yang, M. Zhou, M. Kalander, Z. Huang, and I. King, “Discrete-time
temporal network embedding via implicit hierarchical learning in hyperbolic space,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2021, pp. 1975–1985.
[31] M. Yang, M. Zhou, H. Xiong, and I. King, “Hyperbolic temporal network embedding,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 11,
pp. 11489–11502, Nov. 2023.
[32] H. Y. Koh, A. T. N. Nguyen, S. Pan, L. T. May, and G. I. Webb,
“Physicochemical graph neural network for learning protein–ligand interaction fingerprints from sequence data,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 6,
pp. 673–687, 2024.
[33] X. Zhang, M. Zeman, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Zitnik, “Graph-guided
network for irregularly sampled multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022.
[34] Z. Wang, T. Jiang, Z. Xu, J. Gao, and J. Zhang, “Irregularly sampled
multivariate time series classification: A graph learning approach,” IEEE
Intell. Syst., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 3–11, May/Jun. 2023.
[35] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 841–850.
[36] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[37] A. Cini, I. Marisca, and C. Alippi, “Filling the G_ap_s: Multivariate time
series imputation by graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2022.
[38] M. Liu, H. Huang, H. Feng, L. Sun, B. Du, and Y. Fu, “PriSTI: A
conditional diffusion framework for spatiotemporal imputation,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 1927–1939.
[39] M. Jin, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Neural temporal walks: Motif-aware
representation learning on continuous-time dynamic graphs,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, Art. no. 1445.
[40] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023.

10481

[41] X. Geng et al., “Spatiotemporal multi-graph convolution network for
ride-hailing demand forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019,
pp. 3656–3663.
[42] S. He and K. G. Shin, “Towards fine-grained flow forecasting: A graph
attention approach for bike sharing systems,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020,
pp. 88–98.
[43] X. Zhang, R. Cao, Z. Zhang, and Y. Xia, “Crowd flow forecasting with
multi-graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
2020, pp. 1–7.
[44] M. Li and Z. Zhu, “Spatial-temporal fusion graph neural networks
for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4189–4196.
[45] S. Yi and V. Pavlovic, “Sparse Granger causality graphs for human
action classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2012,
pp. 3374–3377.
[46] Y. Wang, Z. Duan, Y. Huang, H. Xu, J. Feng, and A. Ren, “MTHetGNN: A
heterogeneous graph embedding framework for multivariate time series
forecasting,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 153, pp. 151–158, 2022.
[47] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Change detection
in graph streams by learning graph embeddings on constant-curvature
manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 6,
pp. 1856–1869, Jun. 2020.
[48] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph WaveNet for deep
spatial-temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2019, pp. 1907–1913.
[49] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, X. Wang, and C. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, Art. no. 1494.
[50] D. Cao et al., “Spectral temporal graph neural network for multivariate
time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, Art. no. 1491.
[51] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Connecting
the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 753–763.
[52] C. Shang, J. Chen, and J. Bi, “Discrete graph structure learning for forecasting multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2021.
[53] A. Cini, D. Zambon, and C. Alippi, “Sparse graph learning from spatiotemporal time series,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 24, no. 242, pp. 1–36,
2023.
[54] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
[55] H. Wen et al., “DiffSTG: Probabilistic spatio-temporal graph forecasting
with denoising diffusion models,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Adv.
Geographic Inf. Syst., 2023, Art. no. 60.
[56] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for
anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986.
[57] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022.
[58] D. Zambon, C. Alippi, and L. Livi, “Concept drift and anomaly detection
in graph streams,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 11,
pp. 5592–5605, Nov. 2018.
[59] D. Zambon and C. Alippi, “Where and how to improve graph-based
spatio-temporal predictors,” 2023, arXiv:2302.01701.
[60] Y. Liu et al., “Multivariate time-series forecasting with temporal polynomial graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2022, Art. no. 1411.
[61] Z. Shao, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Pre-training enhanced spatialtemporal graph neural network for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022,
pp. 1567–1577.
[62] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial-temporal graph learning
for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. 14, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.
2023.3325667.
[63] D. Zha, K.-H. Lai, K. Zhou, and X. Hu, “Towards similarity-aware
time-series classification,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2022,
pp. 199–207.
[64] H. Liu et al., “TodyNet: Temporal dynamic graph neural network for
multivariate time series classification,” 2023, arXiv:2304.05078.

10482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

[65] Y. Ye, S. Zhang, and J. J. Yu, “Spatial-temporal traffic data imputation via
graph attention convolutional network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural
Netw., 2021, pp. 241–252.
[66] Y. Wu, D. Zhuang, M. Lei, A. Labbe, and L. Sun, “Spatial aggregation and temporal convolution networks for real-time Kriging,”
2021, arXiv:2109.12144.
[67] I. Marisca, A. Cini, and C. Alippi, “Learning to reconstruct missing data
from spatiotemporal graphs with sparse observations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, Art. no. 2324.
[68] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2018.
[69] W. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Xie, W. Cao, Y. Gao, and X. Feng, “Multi-range attentive bicomponent graph convolutional network for traffic forecasting,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 3529–3536.
[70] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, and J. Qi, “GMAN: A graph multi-attention
network for traffic prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
pp. 1234–1241.
[71] Y. Chen, I. Segovia-Dominguez, and Y. R. Gel, “Z-GCNETs: Time
zigzags at graph convolutional networks for time series forecasting,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 1684–1694.
[72] H. Yu et al., “Regularized graph structure learning with semantic knowledge for multi-variates time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2362–2368.
[73] Y. Wu, D. Zhuang, A. Labbe, and L. Sun, “Inductive graph neural
networks for spatiotemporal Kriging,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2021, pp. 4478–4485.
[74] Z. Fang, Q. Long, G. Song, and K. Xie, “Spatial-temporal graph ODE
networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 364–373.
[75] J. Choi, H. Choi, J. Hwang, and N. Park, “Graph neural controlled
differential equations for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, pp. 6367–6374.
[76] Z. Pan, Y. Liang, W. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Zheng, and J. Zhang, “Urban traffic
prediction from spatio-temporal data using deep meta learning,” in Proc.
ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1720–1730.
[77] A. Cini, I. Marisca, F. Bianchi, and C. Alippi, “Scalable spatiotemporal graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
pp. 7218–7226.
[78] W. Hu, Y. Yang, Z. Cheng, C. Yang, and X. Ren, “Time-series event
prediction with evolutionary state graph,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web
Search Data Mining, 2021, pp. 580–588.
[79] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
pp. 3621–3633.
[80] L. Zhou, Q. Zeng, and B. Li, “Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead
dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 40 967–40 978, 2022.
[81] Y. Liang, Z. Zhao, and L. Sun, “Memory-augmented dynamic graph
convolution networks for traffic data imputation with diverse missing
patterns,” Transp. Res. Part C Emerg., vol. 143, 2022, Art. no. 103826.
[82] K. Chen, M. Feng, and T. S. Wirjanto, “Multivariate time series anomaly
detection via dynamic graph forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2302.02051.
[83] C. Yu, X. Ma, J. Ren, H. Zhao, and S. Yi, “Spatio-temporal graph
transformer networks for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in Proc. Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis., Springer, 2020, pp. 507–523.
[84] Y. Wu, M. Gu, L. Wang, Y. Lin, F. Wang, and H. Yang, “Event2Graph:
Event-driven bipartite graph for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2108.06783.
[85] X. Wu, M. Xu, J. Fang, and X. Wu, “A multi-attention tensor completion
network for spatiotemporal traffic data imputation,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 20, pp. 20 203–20 213, Oct. 2022.
[86] S. Guo, Y. Lin, N. Feng, C. Song, and H. Wan, “Attention based spatialtemporal graph convolutional networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 922–929.
[87] X. Wang et al., “Traffic flow prediction via spatial temporal graph neural
network,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 1082–1092.
[88] S. Lan, Y. Ma, W. Huang, W. Wang, H. Yang, and P. Li, “DSTAGNN:
Dynamic spatial-temporal aware graph neural network for traffic flow
forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 11 906–11 917.
[89] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.

[90] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[91] Y. Xia et al., “Deciphering spatio-temporal graph forecasting: A causal
lens and treatment,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
Art. no. 1611.
[92] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial-temporal synchronous
graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial-temporal
network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
pp. 914–921.
[93] Y. Cui et al., “METRO: A generic graph neural network framework for
multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 224–236, 2021.
[94] R.-G. Cirstea, B. Yang, and C. Guo, “Graph attention recurrent neural
networks for correlated time series forecasting,” in Proc. 5th SIGKDD
Workshop Mining Learn. Time Ser., 2019, pp. 1–6.
[95] Q. Zhang, J. Chang, G. Meng, S. Xiang, and C. Pan, “Spatio-temporal
graph structure learning for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2020, pp. 1177–1185.
[96] Z. Cheng et al., “Time2Graph+: Bridging time series and graph representation learning via multiple attentions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2078–2090, Feb. 2023.
[97] W. Xi, A. Jain, L. Zhang, and J. Lin, “LB-SimTSC: An efficient
similarity-aware graph neural network for semi-supervised time series
classification,” 2023, arXiv:2301.04838.
[98] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst,
“The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending highdimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular domains,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, May 2013.
[99] A. Sandryhaila and J. M. Moura, “Discrete signal processing on graphs,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 1644–1656, Apr.
2013.
[100] C. Ying et al., “Do transformers really perform badly for graph representation?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 28
877–28 888.
[101] C. Cai, T. S. Hy, R. Yu, and Y. Wang, “On the connection between
MPNN and graph transformer,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023,
pp. 3408–3430.
[102] R. Wan, S. Mei, J. Wang, M. Liu, and F. Yang, “Multivariate temporal
convolutional network: A deep neural networks approach for multivariate
time series forecasting,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 8, 2019, Art. no. 876.
[103] J. Gao and B. Ribeiro, “On the equivalence between temporal and static
equivariant graph representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2022, pp. 7052–7076.
[104] D. Zambon, D. Grattarola, C. Alippi, and L. Livi, “Autoregressive models
for sequences of graphs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019,
pp. 1–8.
[105] R. Huang, C. Huang, Y. Liu, G. Dai, and W. Kong, “LSGCN: Long
short-term traffic prediction with graph convolutional networks,” in Proc.
Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 2355–2361.
[106] B. Paassen, D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, C. Alippi, and B. E. Hammer,
“Graph edit networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
[107] J. Chauhan, A. Raghuveer, R. Saket, J. Nandy, and B. Ravindran,
“Multi-variate time series forecasting on variable subsets,” in Proc. ACM
SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 76–86.
[108] X. Rao, H. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Li, S. Shang, and P. Han, “FOGS:
First-order gradient supervision with learning-based graph for traffic flow
forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 3926–3932.
[109] A. Cini, D. Mandic, and C. Alippi, “Graph-based time series clustering
for end-to-end hierarchical forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2305.19183.
[110] Z. Li, L. Xia, Y. Xu, and C. Huang, “GPT-ST: Generative pre-training of
spatio-temporal graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2024, Art. no. 3077.
[111] G. Lai, W. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long- and short-term
temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. 41st Int. ACM
SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2018, pp. 95–104.
[112] S.-Y. Shih, F.-K. Sun, and H.-Y. Lee, “Temporal pattern attention
for multivariate time series forecasting,” Mach. Learn., vol. 108,
pp. 1421–1441, 2019.
[113] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 3837–3845.
[114] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal
convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 1003–1012.

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

[115] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
“Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
[116] J. Klicpera, S. Weißenberger, and S. Günnemann, “Diffusion improves
graph learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 13
333–13 345.
[117] Y. Zheng, H. Zhang, V. Lee, Y. Zheng, X. Wang, and S. Pan, “Finding
the missing-half: Graph complementary learning for homophily-prone
and heterophily-prone graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023,
Art. no. 1788.
[118] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” in Proc. NeurIPS
Workshop Deep Learn., 2014.
[119] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2017.
[120] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y.
Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2018.
[121] Y. Feng, H. You, Z. Zhang, R. Ji, and Y. Gao, “Hypergraph neural
networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 3558–3565.
[122] A. Feng and L. Tassiulas, “Adaptive graph spatial-temporal transformer
network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2022, pp. 3933–3937.
[123] C. Wang, K. Zhang, H. Wang, and B. Chen, “Auto-STGCN: Autonomous spatial-temporal graph convolutional network search,” ACM
Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1–21, 2023.
[124] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[125] C. Park et al., “ST-GRAT: A novel spatio-temporal graph attention
networks for accurately forecasting dynamically changing road speed,”
in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 1215–1224.
[126] Z. Diao, X. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Liu, K. Xie, and S. He, “Dynamic spatialtemporal graph convolutional neural networks for traffic forecasting,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 890–897.
[127] K. Guo, Y. Hu, Y. Sun, S. Qian, J. Gao, and B. Yin, “Hierarchical graph
convolution network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2021, pp. 151–159.
[128] T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud, “Neural
ordinary differential equations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2018, pp. 6572–6583.
[129] P. Kidger, J. Morrill, J. Foster, and T. J. Lyons, “Neural controlled
differential equations for irregular time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, Art. no. 562.
[130] S. Guan, B. Zhao, Z. Dong, M. Gao, and Z. He, “GTAD: Graph and
temporal neural network for multivariate time series anomaly detection,”
Entropy, vol. 24, no. 6, 2022, Art. no. 759.
[131] S. S. Srinivas, R. K. Sarkar, and V. Runkana, “Hypergraph learning based
recommender system for anomaly detection, control and optimization,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2022, pp. 1922–1929.
[132] D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Graph iForest: Isolation of anomalous
and outlier graphs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2022, pp. 1–8.
[133] W. Chen, Z. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “Time series subsequence
anomaly detection via graph neural networks,” 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=73U_NlKaNx
[134] D. M. Hawkins, Identification of Outliers, vol. 11. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 1980.
[135] M. A. Pimentel, D. A. Clifton, L. Clifton, and L. Tarassenko, “A review
of novelty detection,” Signal Process., vol. 99, pp. 215–249, 2014.
[136] Z. Z. Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and M.
Salehi, “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,”
2022, arXiv:2211.05244.
[137] E. Keogh, J. Lin, and A. Fu, “HOT SAX: Efficiently finding the most
unusual time series subsequence,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Conf. Data
Mining, 2005, Art. no. 8.
[138] K. M. Ting, B.-C. Xu, T. Washio, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation distributional
kernel a new tool for point & group anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2697–2710, Mar. 2023.
[139] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[140] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söderström,
“Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.

10483

[141] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[142] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2022.
[143] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[144] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, “Generative
and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
Dec. 2023.
[145] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An evaluation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
Jun. 2022.
[146] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
[147] M. Ranzato, Y. Boureau, and Y. LeCun, “Sparse feature learning for deep
belief networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2007,
pp. 1185–1192.
[148] D. P. Kingma et al., “An introduction to variational autoencoders,” Found.
Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 307–392, 2019.
[149] D. Zambon, C. Alippi, and L. Livi, “Change-point methods on a sequence
of graphs,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 24, pp. 6327–6341,
Dec. 2019.
[150] Y. Zheng et al., “Graph spatiotemporal process for multivariate time series
anomaly detection with missing values,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 106, 2024,
Art. no. 102255.
[151] Z. Duan et al., “Multivariate time-series classification with hierarchical
variational graph pooling,” Neural Netw., vol. 154, pp. 481–490, 2022.
[152] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification framework based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 224, 2023, Art. no. 109614.
[153] R. Younis, A. Hakmeh, and Z. Ahmadi, “MTS2Graph: Interpretable
multivariate time series classification with temporal evolving graphs,”
Pattern Recognit., vol. 152, 2024, Art. no. 110486.
[154] N. M. Foumani, L. Miller, C. W. Tan, G. I. Webb, G. Forestier, and
M. Salehi, “Deep learning for time series classification and extrinsic
regression: A current survey,” 2023, arXiv:2302.02515.
[155] J. Lines and A. Bagnall, “Time series classification with ensembles
of elastic distance measures,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29,
pp. 565–592, 2015.
[156] M. Herrmann and G. I. Webb, “Amercing: An intuitive, elegant and
effective constraint for dynamic time warping,” 2021, arXiv:2111.13314.
[157] J. Lines, S. Taylor, and A. Bagnall, “Time series classification with
HIVE-COTE: The hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based
ensembles,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 12, no. 5, 2018,
Art. no. 52.
[158] M. Middlehurst, J. Large, M. Flynn, J. Lines, A. Bostrom, and A. Bagnall,
“HIVE-COTE 2.0: A new meta ensemble for time series classification,”
Mach. Learn., vol. 110, no. 11/12, pp. 3211–3243, 2021.
[159] A. Dempster, F. Petitjean, and G. I. Webb, “ROCKET: Exceptionally
fast and accurate time series classification using random convolutional
kernels,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1454–1495,
2020.
[160] C. W. Tan, A. Dempster, C. Bergmeir, and G. I. Webb, “MultiRocket:
Multiple pooling operators and transformations for fast and effective
time series classification,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 36, no. 5,
pp. 1623–1646, 2022.
[161] Z. Cheng, Y. Yang, W. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Zhuang, and G. Song,
“Time2Graph: Revisiting time series modeling with dynamic shapelets,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 3617–3624.
[162] P. Boniol and T. Palpanas, “Series2Graph: Graph-based subsequence
anomaly detection for time series,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 13,
no. 12, pp. 1821–1834, 2022.
[163] E. Keogh and C. A. Ratanamahatana, “Exact indexing of dynamic time
warping,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 7, pp. 358–386, 2005.
[164] S. Tang et al., “Self-supervised graph neural networks for improved
electroencephalographic seizure analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2022.
[165] A. Roth and T. Liebig, “Forecasting unobserved node states with spatiotemporal graph neural networks,” 2022, arXiv:2211.11596.

10484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

[166] Y. Chen, Z. Li, C. Yang, X. Wang, G. Long, and G. Xu, “Adaptive graph
recurrent network for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process., 2023, pp. 64–73.
[167] X. Kong, W. Zhou, G. Shen, W. Zhang, N. Liu, and Y. Yang, “Dynamic
graph convolutional recurrent imputation network for spatiotemporal
traffic missing data,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 261, 2023, Art. no. 110188.
[168] G. Shen, W. Zhou, W. Zhang, N. Liu, Z. Liu, and X. Kong, “Bidirectional
spatial-temporal traffic data imputation via graph attention recurrent
neural network,” Neurocomputing, vol. 531, pp. 151–162, 2023.
[169] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, J. Qi, C. Chen, and L. Chen, “INCREASE:
Inductive graph representation learning for spatio-temporal Kriging,” in
Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 673–683.
[170] T. Yun, H. Jung, and J. Son, “Imputation as inpainting: Diffusion models
for spatiotemporal data imputation,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=QUANtQnx30l
[171] S. Moritz and T. Bartz-Beielstein, “imputeTS: Time series missing value
imputation in R,” R J., vol. 9, no. 1, 2017, Art. no. 207.
[172] M. Saad, M. Chaudhary, F. Karray, and V. Gaudet, “Machine learning
based approaches for imputation in time series data and their impact
on forecasting,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., 2020,
pp. 2621–2627.
[173] Z. Che, S. Purushotham, K. Cho, D. Sontag, and Y. Liu, “Recurrent
neural networks for multivariate time series with missing values,” Sci.
Rep., vol. 8, no. 1, 2018, Art. no. 6085.
[174] X. Miao, Y. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Mao, and J. Yin, “Generative semisupervised learning for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8983–8991.
[175] Y. Tang, A. Qu, A. H. Chow, W. H. Lam, S. Wong, and W. Ma, “Domain
adversarial spatial-temporal network: A transferable framework for shortterm traffic forecasting across cities,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2022, pp. 1905–1915.
[176] H. Li et al., “Traffic flow forecasting in the COVID-19: A deep spatialtemporal model based on discrete wavelet transformation,” ACM Trans.
Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1–28, 2023.
[177] L. Tang, F. Yan, B. Zou, W. Li, C. Lv, and K. Wang, “Trajectory prediction
for autonomous driving based on multiscale spatial-temporal graph,” IET
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 386–399, 2023.
[178] K. Cai, Y. Li, Y.-P. Fang, and Y. Zhu, “A deep learning approach for
flight delay prediction through time-evolving graphs,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11 397–11 407, Aug. 2022.
[179] Z. Guo et al., “SGDAN—A spatio-temporal graph dual-attention neural
network for quantified flight delay prediction,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 22,
2020, Art. no. 6433.
[180] Q. Wu, H. Zheng, X. Guo, and G. Liu, “Promoting wind energy for
sustainable development by precise wind speed prediction based on graph
neural networks,” Renewable Energy, vol. 199, pp. 977–992, 2022.
[181] Y. He, S. Chai, J. Zhao, Y. Sun, and X. Zhang, “A robust spatio-temporal
prediction approach for wind power generation based on spectral temporal graph neural network,” IET Renewable Power Gener., vol. 16, no. 12,
pp. 2556–2565, 2022.
[182] X. Jiao, X. Li, D. Lin, and W. Xiao, “A graph neural network based deep
learning predictor for spatio-temporal group solar irradiance forecasting,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 6142–6149, Sep. 2022.
[183] M. Zhang et al., “Optimal graph structure based short-term solar
PV power forecasting method considering surrounding spatio-temporal
correlations,” IEEE Trans. Ind Appl., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 345–357,
Jan./Feb. 2023.
[184] V. O. Santos, P. A. C. Rocha, J. Scott, J. Van Griensven Thé, and B.
Gharabaghi, “Spatiotemporal air pollution forecasting in Houston-TX:
A case study for ozone using deep graph neural networks,” Atmosphere,
vol. 14, no. 2, 2023, Art. no. 308.
[185] R. Keisler, “Forecasting global weather with graph neural networks,”
2022, arXiv:2202.07575.
[186] P. Battaglia, R. Pascanu, M. Lai, D. J. Rezende, and K. Kavukcuoglu,
“Interaction networks for learning about objects, relations and physics,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 4502–4510.
[187] G. Shi, D. Zhang, M. Jin, and S. Pan, “Towards complex dynamic physics
system simulation with graph neural ODEs,” 2023, arXiv:2305.12334.
[188] Y. Liu, S. Magliacane, M. Kofinas, and E. Gavves, “Graph switching dynamical systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023,
pp. 21867–21883.
[189] L. Wu, Z. Hou, J. Yuan, Y. Rong, and W. Huang, “Equivariant spatiotemporal attentive graph networks to simulate physical dynamics,” in
Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, Art. no. 1965.

[190] A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Bapst, K. Cranmer, and P. Battaglia, “Hamiltonian graph networks with ODE integrators,” 2019, arXiv: 1909.12790.
[191] Y. Liu et al., “SEGNO: Generalizing equivariant graph neural networks
with physical inductive biases,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
[192] V. G. Satorras, E. Hoogeboom, and M. Welling, “E(n) equivariant graph
neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 9323–9332.
[193] J. Brandstetter, R. Hesselink, E. van der Pol, E. J. Bekkers, and M.
Welling, “Geometric and physical quantities improve E(3) equivariant
message passing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
[194] J. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Xiao, and R. Song, “A review on graph neural
network methods in financial applications,” J. Data Sci., vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 111–134, 2022.
[195] Z. Song, Y. Zhang, and I. King, “Towards fair financial services for all: A
temporal GNN approach for individual fairness on transaction networks,”
in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 2331–2341.
[196] N. Noorshams, S. Verma, and A. Hofleitner, “TIES: Temporal interaction embeddings for enhancing social media integrity at Facebook,”
in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 3128–3135.
[197] X.-Y. Yao, G. Chen, M. Pecht, and B. Chen, “A novel graph-based
framework for state of health prediction of lithium-ion battery,” J. Energy
Storage, vol. 58, 2023, Art. no. 106437.
[198] S. Wu, Y. Tang, Y. Zhu, L. Wang, X. Xie, and T. Tan, “Session-based
recommendation with graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2019, pp. 346–353.
[199] X. Wang, D. Wang, L. Chen, and Y. Lin, “Building transportation foundation model via generative graph transformer,” 2023, arXiv:2305.14826.
[200] G. Panagopoulos, G. Nikolentzos, and M. Vazirgiannis, “Transfer graph
neural networks for pandemic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2021, pp. 4838–4845.
[201] M. Jin et al., “Large models for time series and spatio-temporal data: A
survey and outlook,” 2023, arXiv:2310.10196.
[202] W. X. Zhao et al., “A survey of large language models,”
2023, arXiv:2303.18223.
[203] H. Zhang, B. Wu, X. Yuan, S. Pan, H. Tong, and J. Pei, “Trustworthy
graph neural networks: Aspects, methods and trends,” in Proc. IEEE,
vol. 112, no. 2, pp. 97–139, Feb. 2024.
[204] G. Dong et al., “Graph neural networks in IoT: A survey,” ACM Trans.
Sensor Netw., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1–50, 2023.
[205] J. Xu, M. Xue, and S. Picek, “Explainability-based backdoor attacks
against graph neural networks,” in Proc. 3rd ACM Workshop Wireless
Secur. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 31–36.
[206] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[207] J. Chen, T. Ma, and C. Xiao, “FastGCN: Fast learning with graph
convolutional networks via importance sampling,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2018.
[208] W. Chiang, X. Liu, S. Si, Y. Li, S. Bengio, and C. Hsieh, “Cluster-GCN:
An efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional
networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 257–266.

Ming Jin received the PhD degree from Monash
University, Australia, in 2024. He is currently an
assistant professor with the School of Information and
Communication Technology, Griffith University. He
has published more than twenty peer-reviewed papers
in top-ranked journals and conferences, including
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, NeurIPS, ICLR, ICML, etc. He
serves as an associate editor of the Journal of Neurocomputing and regularly contributes as area chair/PC
member for major AI conferences. His research interests include time series
analysis, graph neural networks, and multi-modal learning.

JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION,

Huan Yee Koh received the master of data science
and bachelors of commerce degrees from Monash
University, Melbourne, Australia, in 2021 and 2018,
respectively. He is currently working toward the PhD
degree in machine learning with Monash University.
His research focuses on graph neural networks, time
series analysis, drug discovery, data mining, and machine learning.

Qingsong Wen received the PhD degree in electrical
and computer engineering from the Georgia Institute
of Technology. He is the head of AI Research &
Chief Scientist, Squirrel Ai Learning. He has published more than 100 top-ranked AI conference and
journal papers, had multiple Oral/Spotlight Papers
at NeurIPS, ICML, and ICLR, had multiple Most
Influential Papers at IJCAI, received multiple IAAI
Deployed Application Awards at AAAI, and won
First Place of SP Grand Challenge at ICASSP. He
organizes workshops on AI for Time Series and AI
for education and serves as an associate editor of the Neurocomputing and IEEE
Signal Processing Letters, and guest editor of the Applied Energy and IEEE
Internet of Things Journal. His research focuses on AI for time series, AI for
education, and general machine learning.

Daniele Zambon received the PhD degree from the
Università della Svizzera italiana. He is a postdoctoral
researcher with the Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università
della Svizzera Italiana (Switzerland). He has been
a visiting researcher/intern with the University of
Florida (US), the University of Exeter (U.K.), and
STMicroelectronics (Italy). He is a member of the
IEEE CIS Task Force on Learning for Graphs and
has co-organized special sessions and tutorials on
deep learning and graph data. His main research
interests include graph representation learning, time
series analysis, and learning in non-stationary environments.

Cesare Alippi (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor with
the Università della Svizzera italiana and Politecnico di Milano, a visiting professor with the University of Guangzhou, and an advisory professor with Northwestern Polytechnic, Xi’an. He has
authored/coauthored one monograph, seven edited
books, and around 200 papers, and holds eight
patents. His research focuses on adaptation and learning in non-stationary environments, graph learning,
intelligence for embedded systems, IoT, and cyberphysical systems. He is a fellow of the European
Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems, serves on the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society (CIS) Administrative Committee, and is a board
of governors member of the International Neural Network Society. He has
held various roles within IEEE CIS, including vice-president for education
and awards committee chair, and has received several awards, including the
International Neural Networks Society Gabor Award.

10485

Geoffrey I. Webb (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor with
the Monash University Department of Data Science
and AI, Australia. He was editor in chief of the
Leading Data Mining Journal, Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, from 2005 to 2014. He has
been program committee chair of both the leading
data mining conferences, ACM SIGKDD and IEEE
ICDM, as well as general chair of ICDM. He is
a technical advisor to the startups BigML Inc and
FROOMLE. He developed many of the key mechanisms of support-confidence association discovery in
the 1980s. He pioneered multiple research areas as diverse as black-box user
modelling, interactive data analytics, and statistically-sound pattern discovery.
His many awards include IEEE ICDM Ten-Year Impact Award (2023) and the
inaugural Eureka Prize for Excellence in Data Science.

Irwin King (Fellow, IEEE) received the BS degree in
computer science from Caltech, and the PhD degree
in computer science from the University of Southern
California. He is professor with the Department of
Computer Science & Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong. His research interests include
machine learning, social computing, AI, web intelligence, data mining, and multimedia information
processing, with more than 300 technical publications in these areas. He is an associate editor of the
Journal of Neural Networks, an ACM distinguished
member, and a fellow of the International Neural Network Society (INNS),
and Hong Kong Institute of Engineers (HKIE). He has served as president of
the International Neural Network Society (INNS) and as general co-chair of
several major conferences. Currently, he is the vice-chair of ACM SIGWEB and
WebConf Steering Committee. He has received the ACM CIKM 2019 Test of
Time Award, the ACM SIGIR 2020 Test of Time Award, and the 2020 APNNS
Outstanding Achievement Award for contributions to social computing with
machine learning.

Shirui Pan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in computer science from the University of
Technology Sydney (UTS), Ultimo, NSW, Australia.
He is a professor with the School of Information
and Communication Technology, Griffith University,
Australia. Prior to this, he was a senior lecturer with
the Faculty of IT, Monash University. His research
interests include data mining and machine learning.
To date, he has published more than 100 research
papers in top-tier journals and conferences, including
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, ICML, NeurIPS, and
KDD. His research received the 2024 CIS IEEE TNNLS Oustanding Paper
Award and the 2020 IEEE ICDM Best Student Paper Award. He is recognized
as one of the AI 2000 AAAI/IJCAI Most Influential Scholars in Australia. He is
an ARC future fellow and a fellow of Queensland Academy of Arts and Sciences
(FQA).