IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

5004515

Adaptive Context-Aware Distillation for
Industrial Image Anomaly Detection
Yuan He , Hua Yang , Member, IEEE, and Zhouping Yin , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Image anomaly detection is extremely challenging
in industrial manufacturing processes due to unforeseen and
diversified anomalies. Recently, unsupervised anomaly detection
methods based on knowledge distillation have been developed
and have shown remarkable potential. While most existing
methods are devoted to knowledge generalization, they are inadequate for the fine-grained detection task. To address this issue,
we propose a novel adaptive context-aware distillation (ACAD)
paradigm that gives due consideration to distillation component
dependencies and knowledge transfer optimization. Technically,
a novel adaptive distillation module (ADM) is proposed for
optimal context-aware knowledge transfer, which consists of
contrastive decoupling distillation (CDD) and masked perceiving
distillation (MPD). The proposed CDD helps to constrain the
distribution of different semantic patterns and strengthen the
discriminative capability. Vanilla methods treat every pixel as
an equal contribution and fail to focus on critical information.
To this end, the MPD is proposed to weigh different contextual
knowledge adaptively. Extensive experiments with mainstream
anomaly detection datasets show that ACAD outperforms the
state-of-the-art competitors in accuracy and efficiency. In addition, the experimental results with a real-world inkjet printing
organic electroluminescence display (OLED) panel dataset further demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, context-aware optimization,
contrastive learning, knowledge distillation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

NOMALY detection is vital to guarantee product quality in complex industrial manufacturing processes. The
primary goal of anomaly detection is to detect outliers and
locate anomalies that deviate from normal instances. These
anomalies generally manifest as local structure damages such
as scratches, dents, contaminations, or logical violations such
as permissible objects occurring in invalid locations [1]. Currently, efficient and reliable visual inspection technology has
been widely applied to product quality control instead of traditional manual inspection approaches. However, considering the
Manuscript received 20 July 2023; revised 8 November 2023; accepted
9 November 2023. Date of publication 28 November 2023; date of current
version 3 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the Joint Funds
of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U22A20208,
in part by the Key Research and Development Program of Guangdong
Province under Grant 2022B0202010001-2, and in part by the Project of
Foshan Science and Technology Bureau under Grant 2020001006509. The
Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Shovan Barma.
(Corresponding author: Hua Yang.)
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing
Equipment and Technology, School of Mechanical Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
(e-mail: huayang@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2023.3336758

tremendous and unforeseeable variations of surface anomalies,
accurate anomaly detection is still a challenging but integral
part of real-world industrial applications.
In the past decade, the rapid development of deep neural
networks has significantly advanced the anomaly detection
task with powerful representation capabilities [2]. Particularly,
unsupervised methods can be applied to cases where it is
difficult to collect sufficient abnormal samples. Most early
methods used reconstruction-based architectures [3], [4], [5],
[6], [7], [8], [9], [10] that detect outliers under the assumption
that inliers are significantly more frequent and share a common
concept of normalcy [11]. These methods can produce images
with per-pixel generation, such as typical autoencoders (AEs)
and generative adversarial networks (GANs). The reconstruction residuals, derived from the disparity between an original
image and its reconstructed counterpart, are used to distinguish
anomalies. However, these methods are prone to bias toward
reconstructing abnormal regions well and obtaining incorrect
per-pixel estimation.
Recently, increasing studies based on embedding similarity
have been devoted to anomaly detection by exploring the
potential of rich feature manifolds [12], [13], [14], [15],
[16], [17]. These methods perform well in extracting meaningful embedding features and project raw images into a
high-dimensional feature space, where anomalies are much
more distinguishable. Typically, [14] and [15] use the Gaussian
distribution to construct a correlation model of normal training samples. Roth et al. [17] adopted an extensive memory
bank to store and leverage available normal patch features
optimally. Since the normal distribution in the feature space
is constrained in fixed regions, the features distributed in the
remaining regions are identified as anomalies. Thus, anomaly
scores can be derived by calculating the distances between
embedding vectors of test and train samples. However, these
methods cannot meet the real-time requirement in practical
applications due to the massive computations of vector-level
similarity distances and considerable memory consumption for
storing patch embeddings.
In addition to the methods mentioned above, unsupervised
methods based on knowledge distillation [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23], [24], [25], [26] have recently been developed. These
methods attempt to transfer meaningful knowledge from other
well-studied computer vision tasks pretrained with natural
datasets. Generally, these methods train a student network that
learns to mimic the output of a pretrained teacher network
and detect anomalies through their output disparities. Inchoate

1557-9662 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5004515

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

methods tended to adopt identical or similar architectures for
both student and teacher networks to improve the efficiency
of knowledge transfer. Then, the student attempts to learn
the normal pattern distribution during training and tries to
generalize on previously unseen data [27]. Therefore, during testing, the student’s output for the learned distribution
closely resembles that of the teacher. For test data outside the
normal distribution, the output from the student significantly
differs from that of the teacher, resulting in different anomaly
scores. The pixel with a more significant anomaly score
indicates a higher likelihood of being abnormal. However,
existing methods utilize a homogeneous distillation paradigm,
which cannot fully exploit the context-aware information,
leading to weak discriminative capabilities in the inference
process.
To address the abovementioned issues, we propose a novel
adaptive context-aware distillation (ACAD) paradigm in this
study. Compared to previous work, ACAD transfers optimal knowledge with distinct architectures and data flows to
enhance the diversity of pattern representations. It is difficult for convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to learn a
precise decision boundary from only normal samples. Generally, CNNs tend to overgeneralize on normal samples and
perform anomaly localization poorly. Thus, we introduce artificial anomalies to mitigate the offset inconsistency between
the training and testing data distributions. Based on the
assumption that normal and abnormal patterns can be decoupled from abnormal samples, ACAD leverages the semantic
class-separability for normality reconversion and anomaly segmentation. To achieve superior performance, a novel adaptive
distillation module (ADM) is proposed for knowledge transfer
optimization. This module encourages the network to focus
more on valuable knowledge while considering contextual
information dependencies. At the inference stage, our method
has the potential to detect and localize various anomalies
precisely through the joint detection of the teacher and student
networks. Extensive experiments and analyses conducted with
the mainstream anomaly detection dataset MVTec AD [28]
and a real-world inkjet printing OLED panel dataset demonstrate that ACAD achieves the state-of-the-art performance
without using real-world abnormal samples. The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows.
1) A novel ACAD paradigm is proposed for anomaly detection and achieves the new state-of-the-art performance.
ACAD adopts heterogeneous distillation architectures
and considers dependencies of different distillation components with vital context-aware optimization.
2) A novel contrastive decoupling distillation (CDD) loss is
proposed to facilitate the network to learn discriminative
representations of different semantic patterns. CDD utilizes the embeddings projected into the latent space by
the teacher network as prior knowledge to explicitly pull
normal features closer together while pushing outliers
further apart to boost superior performance.
3) A novel masked perceiving distillation (MPD) approach
is proposed to weigh different contextual knowledge
for normal pattern reconversion adaptively. This innovation introduces a set of trainable tokens to customize

weighted masks, which help to focus on critical information and refine the perception capacity.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows:
In Section II, previous works related to our method are
briefly reviewed. In Section III, the proposed ACAD is illustrated in detail. In Section IV, the extensive experiments and
analyses conducted to evaluate our method are presented.
Finally, we conclude this article and discuss future studies
in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
In this section, for a more intuitive comparison, we summarize previous representative works along with their advantages
and limitations in a tabular format according to categories,
as shown in Table I. In addition to the reconstruction-based
methods and embedding similarity-based methods introduced
in Section I, we briefly review previous research contributions
related to our work in Sections II-A–II-C.
A. Anomaly Simulation-Based Methods
Since it is impracticable to collect and annotate sufficient
abnormal samples, it is expected that models can generalize
to deal with unforeseen and diversified types of anomalies
while only having access to normal samples during training.
Anomaly simulation-based methods attempt to generate abundant pseudo-abnormal samples with pixel-level annotations to
alleviate the sample imbalance problem. Schlüter et al. [37]
proposed an intuitive self-supervision method named natural
synthetic anomalies (NSAs). NSA integrates Poisson image
editing to blend scaled patches of various sizes from separate
images seamlessly and creates abundant synthetic anomalies
that are more similar to natural irregularities. Li et al. [38]
proposed a simple data augmentation strategy named CutPaste
that cuts a rectangular region of a certain image and pastes
it at a random location in another image. CutPaste performs well in image-level anomaly detection, but its anomaly
localization precision is limited. For increased diversity,
Zavrtanik et al. [29] proposed a discriminatively trained
reconstruction anomaly embedding model (DRAEM) to generate anomalies based on Perlin noise and auxiliary datasets.
In addition, a pair of reconstructive and discriminative subnetworks was utilized to produce high-fidelity per-pixel anomaly
detection maps. Liu et al. [32] proposed a simple and
application-friendly network called SimpleNet that generates
anomaly features by adding Gaussian noise to the adapted
normal features. Then, a simple discriminator consisting of a
few multi-layer perceptron (MLP) layers was trained on these
features to discriminate anomalies. Yang et al. [31] proposed
a multicategory decomposition editing network (MCDEN)
that adopts a simulative defect generation strategy similar
to CutMix to make the model more sensitive to matching
normal and abnormal areas. MCDEN uses a defect library
with abnormal data to recognize and decompose defect regions
into assumed fundamental conversions. Similarly, Song et al.
[30] proposed an anomaly composition and decomposition
network (ACDN). ACDN introduces a Gaussian-samplingbased anomaly composition (GSAC) method to composite
a large number of images that are similar to real defective

HE et al.: ACAD FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5004515

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF THE A DVANTAGES AND L IMITATIONS OF P REVIOUS R EPRESENTATIVE A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS

images for training. Due to the adoption of the GAN structure,
GSAC is prone to mode collapse during training.
B. Semantic Segmentation-Based Methods
The semantic segmentation task is an important processing
step for scene understanding or better explaining the global
context of an image [39]. Previously, U-Net [40], a typical semantic segmentation-based network with a U-shape
structure to obtain contextual and positional information,
was proposed to solve the problem of medical image segmentation and achieved outstanding performance. Due to
the excellent pixel-level classification performance, increasing segmentation models have been proposed to address
anomaly detection tasks. Xing et al. [34] proposed a novel
self-supervised guided segmentation framework (SGSF) for
anomaly detection by jointly exploring the effective generation method of forged anomalous samples and the normal
sample features as the guidance information of segmentation. Zhang et al. [36] proposed a segmentation network
with joint representation and contrast clustering (JRCC-Net),
which is able to locate anomalies directly in an end-to-end
manner. Song et al. [33] proposed an anomaly segmentation network called AnoSeg that generates detailed anomaly
maps using holistic approaches to maximize segmentation
performance while requiring generative reconstruction for
the entire input image. Without involving reconstruction,
Yang et al. [35] proposed a semantic information decomposition network (SIDN) for efficient texture defect segmentation
by combining texture and defect segmentation results. However, SIDN cannot guarantee optimal performance for textures
with irregular patterns, such as tile and wood in [28].
C. Knowledge Distillation-Based Methods
Knowledge distillation was originally generalized by Hinton
et al. [41] as a means of model compression and knowledge transfer. The core idea of knowledge distillation is to
transfer meaningful knowledge from a cumbersome teacher

to a smaller and faster student. It is widely acknowledged
that the teacher model’s dark knowledge provides privileged
information on the similarity of class categories to enhance
student learning [42]. Recently, some methods based on
knowledge distilled from pretrained networks have become
potential solutions to anomaly detection. Bergmann et al. [18]
proposed an uninformed students (US) framework to train
an ensemble of student networks with anomaly-free training
data to mimic the output of a pretrained teacher network.
During testing, the output disparity between the teacher and
student networks is coupled with the uncertainty among student predictions to localize anomalies. In contrast to US,
Wang et al. [20] proposed a student–teacher feature pyramid
matching (STPM) network to enable a student network to
receive a mixture of multilevel knowledge from a feature
pyramid. STPM and US share a similar method of knowledge
transfer, but STPM distills the knowledge of hierarchical
matching features into a single student network with an identical architecture. Following STPM, Cao et al. [22] proposed
an information knowledge distillation (IKD) method, which
transfers informative knowledge to alleviate the overfitting
problem with a strong supervisory signal. IKD has achieved
promising performance on object category anomaly detection
but failed on texture categories. These methods adopt similar
or identical architectures to construct the teacher–student (T-S)
framework, inhibiting anomalous representation diversities.
To further enhance the discriminating capability on various
anomalies, Deng and Li [24] proposed a framework named
anomaly detection via reserve distillation (RD4AD) to use
an encoder and a decoder to construct a reverse distillation
paradigm. Nevertheless, the student network in RD4AD still
receives inputs from the teacher network, which might readily
leak abnormal information to the student network during
testing, failing to generate discrepant features on anomalies.
III. M ETHOD
In this section, the proposed method is introduced in detail.
First, the overall architecture is briefly depicted. Then, the

5004515

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Illustration of the proposed ACAD. ACAD consists of four components: an AGM, a FEPM, an ADM, and a DBDM.

main components of ACAD are presented in detail. Finally,
the training and testing procedures are described.
A. Architecture of ACAD
The overall architecture of ACAD is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Specifically, an anomaly generation module (AGM) is first
employed to generate artificially pseudo-abnormal samples.
As a result, it provides an explicit mechanism to enable
the model to distinguish the potential deviations between
normal and abnormal samples. Then, both samples are fed
into a feature encoding projection module (FEPM), where the
two kinds of raw data are encoded by a pretrained teacher
network and a randomly initialized student network, respectively. During training, the weight parameters of the teacher
network are frozen. To further facilitate the discriminative
representations, a novel CDD loss is proposed to constrain
normal features to cluster and move away from anomalies.
Subsequently, different semantic elements are utilized by a
dual branch decoding module (DBDM) for normal pattern
reconversion and abnormal region segmentation. The former
receives multilevel knowledge and aims to mimic the intermediate embedding features of the teacher network for restoring
pseudo-normal patterns with dense descriptive features. The
latter understands global semantic information and aims to
generate fine-grained anomaly segmentation results. A novel
MPD approach is proposed to fully exploit context-aware
optimization and valuable knowledge transfer. At the inference
stage, the output disparities derived from the T-S and anomaly
segmentation results are aggregated together for detection.
Extensive experimental results presented in Section IV further
demonstrate the significance of each individual component.
B. Anomaly Generation Module
Most existing unsupervised methods only use anomaly-free
samples for training, restricting the discriminative capability

Fig. 2. Illustration of the anomaly generation process for foreground objects.

of the model. To alleviate this problem, we design a simple but
effective strategy to generate pseudo-abnormal samples. First,
a noise image I p is generated by a Perlin noise generator, and
I p is binarized by a threshold operation to obtain a binary
image that contains diversely irregular shapes. The largest one
among them is reserved for generating the mask image I m .
It is worth noting that mask images are generated slightly
differently for datasets involving foreground objects. Since
random anomaly masks tend to appear in the background and
cause unnecessary interference, the foreground mask of an
object is obtained in advance through threshold binarization
and morphological operations, as shown in Fig. 2. Then,
anomaly-free images I t and I n are randomly sampled from

HE et al.: ACAD FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5004515

the original training dataset using non-replacement random
sampling, accompanied by the flipping or rotating operation.
Inspired by DRAEM [29] and RandAugment [43], three kinds
of augmented transformations randomly selected from the set
{gamma-contrast, brightness change, hue change, solarize,
invert, GaussianBlur, elastic transformation} are successively
applied to I t to generate the augmented image I u . The
augmented transformations in the set belong to an image
augmentation package (called imgaug) in Python. Finally, the
pseudo-abnormal image I d is composited by fusing I n with
I u and I m
I d = I n ⊙ (1 − I m ) + I u ⊙ I m

(1)

where I d , I n , I u ∈ R3×H ×W , and I m ∈ R1×H ×W . Here, 3 or 1,
H and W denote the channel, height, and width of the images,
respectively. ⊙ denotes the element-wise multiplication operation, namely, the Hadamard product.
C. Feature Encoding Projection Module
To fully exploit the semantic and structural information of
the input data, the FEPM is introduced to perform feature
extraction and projection procedures. In this study, the first two
residual blocks of ResNet [44] are chosen as teacher feature
extractors, which are frozen during training. The normal
sample I n is forwarded into a powerful teacher pretrained with
the ImageNet [45] classification dataset to extract hierarchical
features. Then, the corresponding pseudo-abnormal sample
I d is handled by a designed student encoder, which consists
of three basic convolution blocks. Each block contains two
convolution layers with kernel sizes of 3 and 3 and strides
of 2 and 1. The number of channels in the first block is 32, and
the number of channels in the subsequent two blocks gradually
increases by a multiple of 2. Unless otherwise specified, all
convolution or transposed convolution layers are followed by
ReLU and BatchNorm layers in the remainder of this article.
Only the last output feature of the student encoder layer is used
for subsequent tasks. Thus, the feature extraction procedure
can be formulated as follows:
 k 2
F n k=1 = f Te (I n ; θ Te )
(2)
 k 3
F d k=1 = f Se (I d ; θ Se )
(3)
where F kn , F kd ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk denote hierarchical feature maps.

f Te (·) and θ Te denote the function and parameters of the
teacher encoder, respectively. f Se (·) and θ Se denote the function and parameters of the student encoder, respectively.
Furthermore, considering that the teacher network is derived
by training with the natural dataset ImageNet, there is generally a data domain gap between the source and target datasets.
Hence, a set of projectors is introduced to fine-tune the feature
F 2n and map its vector representation of each spatial position
Hl ,Wl
into a new latent space {z n (x, y)}x=0,y=0
, which constitutes
the embedding Z n

Z n = f pt F 2n ; θ pt
(4)
where Z n ∈ R
. f pt (·) and θ pt denote the function
and parameters of the projectors, respectively. To preserve the
Cl ×Hl ×Wl

original space dimension while projecting each embedding
position to an independently distributed vector, two stacked
1 × 1 convolution layers are employed to form the projectors.
Note that these layers will be discarded at the inference stage
without introducing extra costs.
D. Contrastive Decoupling Distillation
Due to the tremendous variations in surface anomalies,
previous works have been unable to sufficiently distinguish the
differences in the aspect of feature representations, especially
for subtle and low-contrast anomalies. Contrastive learning [46], a technique typically employed in self-supervised
representation learning, has shown its efficacy in learning
discriminative representations by comparing positive and negative pairs. Inspired by this, a novel CDD loss is proposed to
maximize the divergence among different semantic features.
As mentioned in Section III-C, the embeddings of the
teacher network are projected into the latent space as prior
knowledge to guide the student network. Similarly, F 3d can
Hl ,Wl
be viewed as a set of local feature vectors {z d (x, y)}x=0,y=0
,
which constitutes the embedding Z d in the spatial dimension to
align with Z n . To construct positive and negative pairs for the
contrastive decoupling procedure, the pixel-level class label
map I l ∈ R1×Hl ×Wl is obtained by downsampling from the
ground truth to classify different semantic vectors. Because
anomaly detection can be simplified as a binary classification
task in which normalities are unified and other outliers are
regarded as anomalies, we define the sets of normal and
P
abnormal semantic embedding vectors as { pi }i=1
and {n j } Nj=1 ,
respectively,
P
{ pi }i=1
= {z d (x, y)|I l (x, y) = 0}

(5)

{n j } Nj=1 = {z d (x, y)|1 − I l (x, y) = 0}

(6)

where i = 1, . . . , P, and j = 1, . . . , N . P and N denote
the numbers of elements in the respective sets. In addition,
x = 1, . . . , Hl , and y = 1, . . . , Wl . For ease of notation, the
cosine similarity function between two vectors, such as v i and
v j , is defined as sim(v i , v j ) that is formulated as follows:
sim(v i , v j ) =

(v i )T · v j
vi 2 v j 2

(7)

where ∥·∥2 denotes the L2 -norm.
In this study, the proposed CDD loss is executed in two
parts. A similarity comparison of embedding vectors in the
same spatial position is first developed between Z d and Z n
without other interferences. In this case, Z d and Z n are strictly
aligned in the batch dimension, that is, the normal pixel
information of Z d and Z n is derived from the same image.
Consequently, referring to the popular InfoNCE [47] loss,
a pixel-level contrastive loss L intra is devised to pull the normal
inliers close and push abnormal outliers apart
!
PN
P
1 X
j=1 exp sim(n j , z n )/τ

log 1 +
(8)
L intra =
P i=1
exp sim( pi , z n )/τ
Hl ,Wl
where z n denotes the vector belonging to {z n (x, y)}x=0,y=0
and has the same spatial position as pi or n j . τ > 0 denotes
a temperature hyperparameter.

5004515

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 4.

Implementation details of the reverse residual structure.

Considering the high similarity of normalities among a
batch of training samples, the distribution of normalities from
different samples should also be homogeneous. To further
promote learning robust representations, we introduce a perturbation to Z n through random batch shuffling and obtain a
Hl ,Wl
, which constitutes the
batch non-aligned set {ẑ n (x, y)}x=0,y=0
embedding Ẑ n . With the same form as L intra , a cross-image
contrastive loss L inter is then devised to constrain the feature
distribution across global samples
!
PN
P
1 X
j=1 exp sim(n j , ẑ n )/τ

. (9)
L inter =
log 1 +
P i=1
exp sim( pi , ẑ n )/τ
Finally, the proposed novel CDD loss, denoted as L cdd , can
be formulated as follows:
L cdd =

1
(L intra + L inter ).
2

(10)

Through the CDD, the class-separability of pixel-level features
between normalities and anomalies is significantly enhanced,
which boosts the discriminative capability of the model.

E. Dual Branch Decoding Module
As shown in Fig. 1, given the embedding features preliminarily decoupled to involve respective category-specific
information, the DBDM is introduced to further decode and
retain favorable information in each task branch.
1) Normality Reconversion: Following [24], the normality
reconversion branch is designed to be symmetrical but reverse
compared to the teacher and produces matching hierarchical
features. It is worth noting that the inputs of the branch are not
derived from the teacher network, which clearly distinguishes
our approach from previous methods. Specifically, corresponding to the first two residual blocks of ResNet, there are two
reverse residual blocks designed for decoding. The detailed
decoding structure is depicted in Fig. 3. The outputs of the
branch are formally denoted as follows:
{F rk }2k=1 = f Sr (Z d ; θ Sr )

(11)

where F rk ∈ RCk ×Hk ×Wk denotes the recovered feature. f Sr (·)
and θ Sr denote the function and parameters of the branch,
respectively. Note that F rk has the same shape as F kn .

Implementation details of the perceptual mask.

2) Anomaly Segmentation: Knowledge distillation-based
methods are generally insufficient in terms to guarantee
fine-grained detection results with clear boundaries when
inspecting subtle anomalies, and our normality reconversion
branch is no exception. Therefore, an anomaly segmentation
branch is introduced in our method to produce auxiliary segmentation results for joint detection. The decoding structure of
the segmentation branch is symmetrical to that of the student
encoder, as shown in Fig. 1. This structure consists of three
basic transposed convolution blocks and an output layer. Every
basic transposed convolution block is designed by replacing
the first convolution layer with a pair of 2 × 2 transposed
convolution layer and skip connection. The final output layer
of the branch is a 2 × 2 transposed convolution followed by a
sigmoid activation layer. The anomaly segmentation procedure
for obtaining the image I s is formulated as follows:
I s = f Ss (Z d ; θ Ss )

(12)

where I s ∈ R1×H ×W denotes the anomaly segmentation image.
f Ss (·) and θ Ss denote the function and parameters of the
branch, respectively. Then, the per-pixel cross-entropy loss is
used as the anomaly segmentation loss


L seg = E I d −∥I m ⊙ log I s + (1 − I m ) ⊙ log(1 − I s )∥1
(13)
where E[·], ⊙, and ∥·∥1 denote the expectation calculation,
Hadamard product, and L1 -norm, respectively.
F. Masked Perceiving Distillation
Existing knowledge distillation-based methods are generally
dedicated to generalizing the expert knowledge and treating
every pixel as an equal contribution to knowledge transfer.
This motivation neglects different knowledge properties and
restricts performance. Inspired by [48] and [49], to adaptively
emphasize or suppress contextual knowledge transfer, a novel
MPD approach is proposed to focus on critical information
and refine the perception capacity.
As shown in Fig. 4, the trainable embedding tokens E are
introduced to generate masks containing pixels of interest

M kn = f mg F kn , E k ; θ mg
(14)

k
k
k
M r = f mg F r , E ; θ mg
(15)
M k (x, y) = M kn (x, y) ⊙ M rk (x, y)

(16)

HE et al.: ACAD FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5004515

where M kn , M rk , M k ∈ R Hk ×Wk , and M k denotes the learned
holistic pixel-level mask. E k ∈ RT ×Ck , and T denotes the
number of underlying semantic primaries that deserve to be
captured. f mg (·) and θ mg denote the function and parameters
of the mask generation procedure, respectively. Then, F rk (x, y)
and F kn (x, y) ∈ R1×Hk ×Wk are used to represent feature
vectors at position (x, y) in each feature map, respectively.
Dense pixel-level supervision is adopted to make the normality
reconversion branch mimic the outputs of the teacher network,
similar to conventional [20]. First, the L2 -distance along the
channel dimension between the normalized feature vectors is
formulated as follows:
Dk (x, y) =

F kn (x, y)
F rk (x, y)
−
k
F r (x, y) 2
F kn (x, y) 2

2

(17)
2

where Dk ∈ R Hk ×Wk , and x = 1, . . . , Hk , y = 1, . . . , Wk .
Then, the kth hierarchy distillation loss for pixel-level knowledge transfer can be formulated as follows:
Lk =

Hk X
Wk
X

1
(1 + M k (x, y)) ⊙ Dk (x, y) (18)
2Hk Wk x=1 y=1

where the learned mask is given equal confidence to superimpose on the conventional pixel-level regression. Finally, the
loss for the entire MPD process can be formulated as follows:
L mpd =

K
X

Lk

(19)

k=1

where K denotes the number of feature hierarchies used for
the experiment in this study.
G. Adaptive Distillation Module
Considering the dependencies between distillation components, the ADM is proposed for optimal context-aware
knowledge transfer, which essentially introduces CDD and
MPD separately during the encoding and decoding phases
to facilitate the learning of optimal representations. During
training, the final outputs of CDD and MPD are composed of
corresponding distillation loss. Hence, ADM can be summarized and formulated as follows:

L adm = λ1 f cdd Z d , Z n , Ẑ n ; θ cdd

+ λ2 f mpd {F rk , F kn , E k }K
k=1 ; θ mpd
= λ1 L cdd + λ2 L mpd
(20)
where λ1 and λ2 are tunable hyperparameters to balance loss
terms. f cdd (·) and θ cdd denote the function and parameters of
CDD, respectively. f mpd (·) and θ mpd denote the function and
parameters of MPD, respectively.
H. Training and Inference Procedure
During training, the overall architecture of ACAD is optimized by the joint loss function
L = αL adm + β L seg

(21)

where α and β are tunable hyperparameters to balance loss
terms. Using (21), repeating optimization steps to continuously

Fig. 5. Inference procedure of our method. The abbreviations T and S
represent the feature data extracted by the teacher and student networks,
respectively. The abbreviations Seg and Rec represent the anomaly segmentation and the normality reconversion, respectively.

update the parameters ensures that the network converges after
reaching the specified number of epochs.
In the inference procedure as shown in Fig. 5, given a
test image I d ∈ R3×H ×W , multiscale anomaly maps are first
derived from the output disparities between the normality
reconversion branch (F rk ) and the pretrained teacher (F kn ).
Referring to (7), we use the cosine similarity to calculate
hierarchical anomaly maps

I ak (x, y) = 1 − sim F rk (x, y), F kn (x, y)
(22)
where I ak ∈ R1×Hk ×Wk . Moreover, the anomaly maps first need
to be upsampled to the same size as I d by bilinear interpolation. Then, taking the contributions of hierarchical upsampled
anomaly maps into equal consideration, the element-wise multiplication operation is adopted to obtain the holistic anomaly
map
Ia =

K
Y

U I ak



(23)

k=1

where I a ∈ R1×H ×W , and U denotes the upsampling operation. Finally, I a is aggregated together with the anomaly
segmentation image I s to obtain the detection result I r
I r = λ f I a + (1 − λ f )I s · max(I a )

(24)

where 0 ≤ λ f ≤ 1 is used to adjust the weights of two terms
and max(I a ) denotes the maximum value in I a .
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, a series of experiments are conducted to
qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate the performance of
ACAD and its individual components. Additionally, ACAD is
applied to inspect inkjet printing OLED panels to verify its
effectiveness in practical applications.

5004515

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 6. Visualization of some qualitative detection results on the MVTec AD dataset [28]. Rows from top to bottom correspond to test images, ground truth
images, detection results after Gaussian filtering, and images obtained through a threshold operation.

A. Dataset and Evaluation Criteria
1) MVTec AD Dataset: The MVTec anomaly detection
(MVTec AD) [28] is a challenging dataset to benchmark surface anomaly detection and localization algorithms. It contains
a series of industrial abnormal and normal images, including
five categories of textures and ten categories of objects. There
are a total of 3629 normal images for training and a mixture of
1725 normal and abnormal images for testing. All images are
high-resolution images of real-world industrial products, most
of which are well center-aligned. Moreover, abnormal images
of each category contain diverse anomalies with pixel-level
ground truth annotations for evaluation.
2) DAGM Dataset: The DAGM dataset [50] contains
ten categories of various textures with artificially generated
anomalies, which are extremely subtle and closely resemble
the texture background, making it particularly challenging for
unsupervised anomaly detection. The dataset comprises a total
of 8050 training images and 8050 testing images, some of
which contain anomalies and have been roughly labeled.
3) Evaluation Criteria: The pixel-level area under the
receiver operating characteristic (AuROC) [28] and the normalized area under the per-region-overlap (AuPRO) [18] are
adopted for evaluation on the MVTec AD dataset. For the
AuROC and AuPRO metrics, a higher evaluation score indicates better detection performance. The AuROC is a standard
anomaly detection metric computed from the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, which is a curve of the
true-positive rate (TPR) with respect to the false-positive rate
(FPR) under different thresholds. In contrast to the AuROC,
the AuPRO weights ground-truth regions of different sizes
equally. To calculate the AuPRO metric, the anomaly score
map needs to be processed by a threshold operation. Then,
the overlap percentage of each connected region within the
ground truth image with the corresponding region within the
anomaly score map is calculated to evaluate performance.
Consistent with [18], the AuPRO is calculated with an average
per-pixel FPR threshold of 0.3. For evaluation on the DAGM
dataset, due to the coarse ground truth labels, it is challenging
to measure the anomaly localization performance accurately.
Thus, three different evaluation criteria, image-level AuROC,
TPR, and true-negative rate (TNR), are used.
B. Implementation Details
During the experiments, the first two residual blocks
(i.e., conv2_x and conv3_x) of the ResNet18 [44]

pretrained with ImageNet [45] are selected as the teacher,
and its parameters are frozen. The data augmentation strategy
in III-B is employed to generate 1280 pseudo-abnormal
samples for training, and all samples are resized to the
resolution of 256 × 256. Specifically, the augmentation
operations are set as follows: {gamma-contrast(0.5, 1.5),
brightness change(0.8, 1.2), hue change(−60, 60), solarize
(32, 128), invert(de f ault), GaussianBlur(de f ault), elastic
transformation(2, 9)}.
For the hyperparameters in (20) and (21), λ1 , λ2 , α, and
β are set to 0.1, 100, 1, and 10, respectively. In addition,
the distillation temperature hyperparameter τ in (8) and (9)
is experientially set to 0.1. Because underlying semantic
primaries in the anomaly detection task can be roughly
abstracted into normalities and anomalies, the T dimension
in the trainable embedding tokens E is set to 2. The Adam
optimizer [51] is used to train our model with a learning rate
of 0.01, and the β is the default value of (0.5, 0.999). The
entire training procedure is carried out with a batch size of
32 and 200 iterations. Furthermore, the CosineAnnealingLR
strategy [52] is adopted to adjust the learning rate at the end of
each epoch, with a minimum value of 0.0001 in the last epoch.
At the inference stage, the hyperparameter λ f in (24) is set to
0.5, which indicates that the final detection result gives equal
confidence to the dual decoding branches. After obtaining the
detection result using (24), a Gaussian filter with σ = 4 is
used to perform the postprocessing. All the experiments are
conducted on a device with an Intel Xeon1 @2.20 GHz CPU
and an NVIDIA Titan Xp GPU, using PyTorch 1.9.0.
C. Comparison With Existing Methods
1) Experiment on MVTec AD: In this section, we compare
our ACAD with other state-of-the-art methods on the MVTec
AD dataset [28] to holistically evaluate the detection performance. Some qualitative detection results of our method are
visualized in Fig. 6. Table II reports the quantitative pixel-level
AuROC and AuPRO results of our method for anomaly
localization compared to those of existing methods: SPADE
[12], PaDiM-WResNet50 [15], DRAEM [29], PatchCore [17],
STPM [20], IKD [22], RD4AD [24], and MMR [10]. For
the sake of fairness and impartiality, the AuROC and AuPRO
results of other methods compared in the experiment are taken
from the corresponding official papers [10], [12], [15], [17],
1 Registered trademark.

HE et al.: ACAD FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5004515

TABLE II
AU ROC(%)/AU PRO(%) FOR A NOMALY L OCALIZATION ON THE MVT EC AD DATASET [28]. W E C OMPARE O UR M ETHOD W ITH E XISTING SOTA
M ETHODS TO H OLISTICALLY E VALUATE THE P ERFORMANCE . F OR B OTH AU ROC AND AU PRO, THE B OLD F ONT I NDICATES THE B EST R ESULT

[20], [22], [24], [29]. The AuROC and AuPRO metrics of our
method presented in Table II are obtained by calculating the
mean result of three repeated training experiments.
As Table II displays, our method significantly outperforms all existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of both
AuROC and AuPRO metrics on texture categories. Our method
achieves the best average outcome, with a 99.25% AuROC
score and a 97.28% AuPRO score. It is worth noting that
none of the existing methods can simultaneously reach high
accuracy on five texture categories except ours. Additionally,
our method achieves the maximum average AuPRO scores
of 94.96% and 95.73% on object categories and overall
15 categories, indicating the superiority of our method. With
a competitive average AuROC score of 97.88% across all
categories, our method is only 0.26% points lower than the
98.14% score of PatchCore. For the average AuROC score
on texture categories, our method surpasses the second-best
STPM by a large margin of 0.91% points. Furthermore,
our method surpasses the second-best RD4AD by a large
margin of 1.83% points for the overall AuPRO average score.
Most existing methods perform poorly in particular categories
(i.e., wood and toothbrush) due to their relatively irregular
and subtle anomalies. In contrast, our method makes notable
improvements on these categories.
In particular, although STPM and IKD also employ the
knowledge distillation strategy and the T-S framework, they
still fail to achieve satisfactory results. The main reason is that
the knowledge transfer in their student and teacher networks is
homogeneous, which hinders their discriminative capabilities
in the inference process. Besides, RD4AD adopts the reverse
design to facilitate activation discrepancies on anomalies,

but its performance declines substantially in some intricate
categories (i.e., tile and wood). Although RD4AD attempts to
avoid a similar structure and knowledge generalization during
distillation, its student network still receives inputs from the
teacher network, which readily leaks abnormal information
to the student network and leads to inferior prediction in
inference. Moreover, all these methods neglect to reinforce
the discrepant representations and context-aware knowledge
optimization in the feature space. They merely introduce the
output of one network into another network as usual.
However, although our method holistically achieves excellent performance across 15 categories, there are still some
shortcomings. Regarding texture categories, our method
achieves the second-best detection performance on the grid
category with only a slight gap from the best method. Regarding object categories, our method has significant advantages
in terms of the AuPRO metric but does not perform well
in evaluating the AuROC metric. Specifically, our method
achieves the best detection performance on the pill and toothbrush categories. Our method obtains competitive results on
the bottle and zipper categories and achieves the second-best
performance. Although the AuPRO score of our method on the
hazelnut category is the highest, the corresponding AuROC
score is slightly inferior to that of DRAEM [29], which is
sensitive to large-scale discriminative segmentation. Compared
to SPADE [12] and RD4AD [24], which use deep pretrained
network features and contain a large number of parameters,
our method achieves inferior performance on the capsule and
screw categories. The reason may be that our method uses only
shallow pretrained network features, prompting our method to
be lightweight and efficient but limiting the capability of the

5004515

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 8. Comparison of some visualized results on the DAGM dataset [50].
Compared to the best supervised method [55], our method achieves more
accurate anomaly localization without using labeled training samples.
Fig. 7.
Some examples of anomalies involving violations of logical
constraints in the categories of cable (missing cable), metal nut (flip), and
transistor (misplaced) [28]. Columns from left to right correspond to normal
images, abnormal images, ground-truth images and failed detection results.

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF PARAMETER S IZE AND I NFERENCE S PEED ON THE
MVT EC AD DATASET [28] W ITH 256 × 256 R ESOLUTION I NPUTS

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF THE D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON THE DAGM
DATASET [50]. T HE B OLD I NDICATES THE B EST R ESULTS OF THE
U NSUPERVISED (U NSUP ) AND S UPERVISED (S UP ) M ETHODS

network to capture deep semantic information. In addition,
our method fails to achieve satisfactory performance on the
cable, metal nut and transistor categories. Among these three
categories, there are some anomalies involving violations of
logical constraints, as shown in Fig. 7. PaDiM [15] and
PatchCore [17] achieve excellent results in detecting these
anomalies due to their use of the memory bank mechanism,
which may restrict the inference efficiency of the model. It can
be inferred that our method lacks an explicit mechanism to
constantly encourage the network to store and update normal
patterns during training.
2) Experiment on DAGM: In experiments on the DAGM
dataset [50], only anomaly-free samples from the training set
are utilized for training, following the methodology of the
previous experiment. Since the anomalies are only coarsely
labeled, the detection performance is evaluated by classifying
whether the test image contains anomalies rather than measuring the accuracy of anomaly localization.
The quantitative results of unsupervised methods shown in
Table III are obtained from [29] and [36], and the quantitative
results of supervised methods are obtained from the corresponding official papers [53], [54], [55]. As shown in Table III,
our method surpasses other state-of-the-art unsupervised methods and remains competitive compared to supervised methods.
Furthermore, although there is still a slight gap between our

method and the best supervised method [55], our method
achieves more accurate anomaly localization, as shown in
Fig. 8. Because the training labels of supervised methods
are roughly annotated with ellipses that approximately cover
the anomalies, their anomaly localization results are not sufficiently accurate. In contrast, our method achieves precise
anomaly localization without using labeled training samples.
3) Complexity Analysis: To further analyze the complexity
of ACAD, we compare it with other methods from two aspects:
parameter size and inference speed, and the quantitatively
specific results are shown in Table IV. Compared with the
embedding similarity-based methods, such as PaDiM [15]
(with the backbone of WResNet50) and PatchCore [17], our
method not only contains much fewer parameters but also
surpasses them in terms of inference speed by a large margin.
Since PaDiM and PatchCore need to store an enormous
number of features and calculate anomaly scores with a
complex feature search and matching process, they introduce
considerable extra memory and time costs. In particular, the
time consumption of PaDiM and PatchCore increases linearly
with the input size due to the patch-level computation during
inference. In contrast to knowledge distillation-based STPM
[20] and RD4AD [24], our method still has apparent advantages in terms of efficiency and storage resource consumption,
which benefit the potential for practical applications. With a
lightweight pretrained backbone, STPM achieves comparable
storage resource consumption to ours, whereas its detection
accuracy and inference speed are significantly worse.
D. Ablation Analysis of ACAD
A series of ablation experiments are analyzed in this section
to further investigate the effectiveness of individual components of the proposed ACAD. All ablation experiments are

HE et al.: ACAD FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5004515

Fig. 9. Some visualization examples of learned feature vectors from ACAD without (top row) or with (bottom row) CDD by using t-SNE [56]. Columns
from left to right correspond to the test samples selected from the tile, wood, and bottle categories.

TABLE V
A BLATION S TUDY FOR E FFECTS OF AGM, CDD, AND MPD. T HE
A BSENCE OF MPD I S R EPLACED BY THE VANILLA
M EANS I NTRODUCED IN [20]

conducted with the MVTec AD dataset [28] using the AuROC
and AuPRO criteria.
1) Effectiveness of AGM: Since it is impracticable to collect
and annotate sufficient abnormal samples in real-world industrial environments, AGM is introduced as a means of data
augmentation to generate artificial anomalies. To investigate
the effects of AGM, we conducted experiments both with
and without it. When AGM is not employed, the model is
unable to utilize CDD, MPD, and the segmentation branch of
DBDM, because it can only be trained with normal samples.
In particular, the absence of MPD is replaced by the vanilla
means introduced in [20]. The quantitative effects are reported
in Table V, where the performance of the model exhibits a
significant improvement with the influence of AGM. Comparing the first two rows of Table V, the average AuROC and
AuPRO scores increase by 0.87% and 1.98%, respectively. Our
method is based on the assumption that normal and abnormal
patterns can be decoupled from abnormal samples. Therefore,
without AGM, our method essentially degrades into training
the reconversion of normal patterns solely using normal samples. Furthermore, AGM can mitigate the offset inconsistency
between the training and testing data distributions.

2) Effectiveness of CDD: CDD is proposed to constrain
the distribution of different semantic patterns and enhance
the discriminative capability. Technically, CDD utilizes the
embeddings projected into the latent space by the teacher
network as prior knowledge to help the student network to
cluster normal features and push anomalies away explicitly.
To analyze the effects of CDD more intuitively, we visualize
the feature vectors encoded from abnormal samples of the
testing dataset by using t-SNE [56], as shown in Fig. 9. The
samples are selected from the tile, wood, and bottle categories
and forwarded into the network trained with or without CDD,
respectively. Obviously, although normal and abnormal feature
vectors can be roughly separated without CDD, they are highly
scattered with much overlap in the spatial distribution. In contrast, CDD makes the congeneric feature vectors more compact
and distinguishable in the feature space and presents a clear
boundary between normal and abnormal feature vectors, which
visually demonstrates the effectiveness of CDD for promoting
the class-separability of different semantic information.
As shown in Table V, in the case of investigating the
effects of CDD that consists of L intra and L inter , different
loss combinations are adopted in the experiments. The experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves similar
improvements in both AuROC and AuPRO when using only
L intra or L inter . With the integrated CDD, our method improves
the AuROC score by 0.26% and the AuPRO score by 0.34%
compared to the basic architecture, which is ACAD without
CDD and MPD. Obviously, L intra and L inter are consistent
and complementary in promoting the model to distinguish
anomalies during training.
The optimization of hyperparameters is a common topic in
many tasks [57], [58], [59], and it significantly impacts the
overall performance of the model. To explore the influence
of temperature parameter τ in (8) and (9), we attempted
to train and evaluate our method with different orders of
magnitude τ , as shown in Fig. 10. Under the influence of
different τ values, both the overall AuROC and AuPRO scores

5004515

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 10. Line chart of AuROC and AuPRO metrics evaluated with different
temperature hyperparameters τ .
Fig. 12. Detailed detection results of DBDM on the grid, tile, hazelnut, and
pill categories. Columns from left to right correspond to test images, ground
truth images, anomaly maps of two hierarchies, fused anomaly maps without
colormap operations, and anomaly segmentation images.
TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDY FOR E FFECTS OF THE H IERARCHICAL N ORMALITY
R ECONVERSION (R EC ) AND THE A NOMALY S EGMENTATION (REC)

Fig. 11. Histogram of the anomaly score distribution of the detection result
image derived without (left) or with (right) MPD. The statistics for anomaly
scores come from a portion of the image.

show a trend of first increasing and then decreasing. Due
to the properties of exponential functions, the temperature
parameter τ is mainly used to adjust the smoothness of the data
distribution after exponential operation. However, abnormal
feature data is usually much less abundant than normal feature
data, which may cause the model not to be fully optimized
during training. It can be inferred that when τ is equal to
0.1, the contributions of the two types of feature data can be
appropriately regulated.
3) Effectiveness of MPD: MPD is proposed to adaptively
optimize knowledge transfer and guide the student network
to focus more on valuable knowledge with consideration
of contextual information dependencies. The ablation experimental results are also presented in Table V, where it is
shown that the additional MPD further improves the performance. Obviously, the average AuROC and AuPRO scores
are improved by 0.53% and 0.28%, respectively, compared
to the basic architecture, which is ACAD without CDD and
MPD. In addition, an intuitive comparison example is shown
in Fig. 11, where the statistical histogram of the anomaly
score distribution is used to quantify the effectiveness of
MPD. A portion of the test sample is extracted to calculate
the histogram distributions to balance the gap between the
number of normal and abnormal pixels for an intelligible
visual perspective. Ideally, the anomaly scores of normal pixels
should be concentrated around 0, while the anomaly scores of

abnormal pixels should be concentrated around 1. Obviously,
without MPD, there is a significant overlap between the two
different distributions of anomaly scores. In contrast, the
overlap significantly decreases when using MPD, and less
overlap means less false detection. Thus, the nonoverlapping
distribution of normality and anomaly indicates the strong
discriminative capability of our model.
4) Effectiveness of DBDM: We compare the situations with
different decoding combinations to explore the influence of
dual task branches, namely the normality reconversion (Rec)
and the anomaly segmentation (Seg). Table VI reports the
comparison results of evaluation scores, and some detailed
visualization results are presented in Fig. 12. It can be
seen in Table VI that the performance drops dramatically
when either branch is used alone. Both the AuROC and
AuPRO average scores reach the highest values only when
the detection results of dual branches are used simultaneously.
As can be observed in the last two columns of Fig. 12,
the anomaly maps produced by the normality reconversion
branch are generally rougher but more robust than the anomaly
segmentation results, which have more precise boundaries
close to the ground truth regions but tend to miss some
inconspicuous anomalies or internal anomalies of large-scale
structural breakdown, such as bent (grid) and crack (hazelnut).
In addition, hierarchical color maps presented in the third and
fourth columns of Fig. 12 show different characteristics: lowlevel features produce high-resolution anomaly maps, which
capture small receptive fields; high-level features produce

HE et al.: ACAD FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

5004515

Fig. 13. Visualization of some qualitative detection results on the inkjet printing dataset. Rows from top to bottom correspond to test images, anomaly
maps after Gaussian filtering, and results obtained through a threshold operation. Columns from left to right correspond to the images in different detection
conditions. (a) Large ink volume. (b) Small ink volume. (c) Tight layout. (d) Low magnification.

TABLE VII
D ETAILED P RESENTATION OF N UMBER OF I MAGES IN E ACH
C ATEGORY OF THE I NKJET P RINTING DATASET

Fig. 14. Inkjet printing equipment (left) and vision inspection system (right).

low-resolution anomaly maps, which carry higher semantic
level information and are suitable for detecting large-scale
anomalies. Therefore, the aggregation of hierarchical anomaly
maps and the segmentation image reflects a trade-off between
robustness and fineness, achieving the best comprehensive
performance.

TABLE VIII
D ETECTION R ESULTS ON THE I NKJET P RINTING DATASET

E. Inkjet Printing Panels Inspection Application
In this section, experiments on a real-world inkjet printing
organic electroluminescence display (OLED) panel dataset are
conducted to further evaluate the practical performance of
our ACAD. Some visualized experimental results are shown
in Fig. 13. The inkjet printing equipment and its automated
optical inspection (AOI) system are shown in Fig. 14. Inkjet
printing technology dissolves organic molecular materials in
specific solvents to form printing ink. Then, it uses a printhead
to squeeze the ink into droplets to fill pixel pits. After vacuum
drying and curing, a series of substrate layers are formed.
The layers are repeatedly printed, cured, and finally packaged
to form the finished display device. Due to the complex
production processes, various defects are easily produced in
each link of inkjet printing manufacturing. These defects
seriously restrict the mass production application of inkjet
printing technology in large-scale display substrate manufacturing. Therefore, it is essential to monitor the quality of
display substrate products.

The inkjet printing dataset was collected from the vision
inspection system of the inkjet printing equipment. It contains
a total of 2100 defect-free images for training and a mixture of
2154 defect-free and defective images for testing. All images
have a resolution of 256 × 256. The dataset contains four
categories of images: images printed with a large ink volume,
images printed with a small ink volume, images printed in
a tight layout, and images collected by a low magnification
lens. The detailed presentation of number of images in each
category is displayed in Table VII. A number of qualitative
detection results are visualized in Fig. 13, where various
defects on the inkjet printing panels can be detected effectively.
To meet the requirements of practical production, we adopt
precision, recall, and F1 score as three criteria to evaluate
the performance of our method comprehensively. As shown
in Table VIII, our method achieves average scores of 99.43%,

5004515

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

99.49%, and 99.46% on the three criteria, respectively. Moreover, our method can achieve a detection speed of about
60 fps for a panel resolution of 256 × 256. The experimental
results with the inkjet printing dataset further demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we propose a novel ACAD paradigm for accurate industrial image anomaly detection. By fully considering
distillation component dependencies and significant knowledge transfer optimization, ACAD effectively improves the
discriminative capacity in the inference process. Technically,
a novel CDD is introduced to enhance the class-separability
between normalities and anomalies. Furthermore, a novel
MPD is proposed to help focus on critical information and
refine the perception capacity, boosting superior performance.
The experimental results with mainstream anomaly detection
datasets and the inkjet printing dataset demonstrate that ACAD
significantly surpasses the existing state-of-the-art methods
and achieves high-precision and real-time performance.
However, there remains some future work worth investigating. On the one hand, the proposed method is not good
at detecting some anomalies involving violations of logical
constraints, such as flipping in the metal nut category and
misplacement in the transistor category. We will consider
introducing a memory module to alleviate this problem.
On the other hand, the experimental images in this study are
mostly well center-aligned, so it is necessary to investigate
the robustness of our method on other non-aligned data.
In addition, we plan to deploy our algorithm on edge devices
for quantization acceleration in future work, making it more
convenient for practical applications.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger,
“Beyond dents and scratches: Logical constraints in unsupervised
anomaly detection and localization,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 4,
pp. 947–969, Apr. 2022.
[2] S. Wang, L. Wu, L. Cui, and Y. Shen, “Glancing at the patch:
Anomaly localization with global and local feature comparison,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 254–263.
[3] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection
using reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, pp. 1–18,
Dec. 2015.
[4] P. Bergmann, S. Löwe, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Improving unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity
to autoencoders,” in Proc. 14th Int. Joint Conf. Comput. Vis., Imag.
Comput. Graph. Theory Appl., 2019, pp. 372–380.
[5] P. Perera, R. Nallapati, and B. Xiang, “OCGAN: One-class novelty
detection using GANs with constrained latent representations,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 2893–2901.
[6] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. SchmidtErfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with
generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44,
May 2019.
[7] H. Yang, Q. Zhou, K. Song, and Z. Yin, “An anomaly feature-editingbased adversarial network for texture defect visual inspection,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 2220–2230, Mar. 2021.
[8] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.

[9] Y. Liang, J. Zhang, S. Zhao, R. Wu, Y. Liu, and S. Pan, “Omni-frequency
channel-selection representations for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
2022, arXiv:2203.00259.
[10] Z. Zhang, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Sun, and X. Chen, “Industrial anomaly
detection with domain shift: A real-world dataset and masked multi-scale
reconstruction,” 2023, arXiv:2304.02216.
[11] M. Salehi, H. Mirzaei, D. Hendrycks, Y. Li, M. Hossein Rohban, and
M. Sabokrou, “A unified survey on anomaly, novelty, open-set, and
out-of-distribution detection: Solutions and future challenges,” 2021,
arXiv:2110.14051.
[12] N. Cohen and Y. Hoshen, “Sub-image anomaly detection with deep
pyramid correspondences,” 2020, arXiv:2005.02357.
[13] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly
detection and segmentation,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020,
pp. 1–16.
[14] O. Rippel, P. Mertens, and D. Merhof, “Modeling the distribution
of normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021,
pp. 6726–6733.
[15] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PADIM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021,
pp. 475–489.
[16] C.-C. Tsai, T.-H. Wu, and S.-H. Lai, “Multi-scale patch-based representation learning for image anomaly detection and segmentation,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
pp. 3065–3073.
[17] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 14298–14308.
[18] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191.
[19] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14897–14907.
[20] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature
pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf.
(BMVC), 2021, pp. 1–14.
[21] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, T. Chen, and J. Chen, “Pull & push: Leveraging
differential knowledge distillation for efficient unsupervised anomaly
detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2176–2189, May 2023.
[22] Y. Cao, Q. Wan, W. Shen, and L. Gao, “Informative knowledge distillation for image anomaly segmentation,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 248,
Jul. 2022, Art. no. 108846.
[23] S. Yamada, S. Kamiya, and K. Hotta, “Reconstructed student-teacher
and discriminative networks for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2022, pp. 2725–2732.
[24] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
[25] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Asymmetric student-teacher networks for industrial anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023,
pp. 2591–2601.
[26] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
[27] X. Tao, X. Gong, X. Zhang, S. Yan, and C. Adak, “Deep learning for
unsupervised anomaly localization in industrial images: A survey,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–21, 2022.
[28] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[29] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 8330–8339.

HE et al.: ACAD FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE ANOMALY DETECTION

[30] K. Song, H. Yang, and Z. Yin, “Anomaly composition and decomposition network for accurate visual inspection of texture defects,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–14, 2022.
[31] H. Yang, H. Zhu, J. Li, J. Chen, and Z. Yin, “Multi-category decomposition editing network for the accurate visual inspection of texture
defects,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., early access, Aug. 21, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TASE.2023.3295872.
[32] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.
[33] J. Song, K. Kong, Y.-I. Park, S.-G. Kim, and S.-J. Kang, “Anomaly
segmentation network using self-supervised learning,” in Proc. AAAI
Workshop AI Design Manuf. (ADAM), 2021, pp. 1–5.
[34] P. Xing, Y. Sun, and Z. Li, “Self-supervised guided segmentation framework for unsupervised anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2209.12440.
[35] H. Yang, J. Hu, Z. Yin, and Z. Wang, “A semantic information
decomposition network for accurate segmentation of texture defects,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 8319–8327, Jul. 2023.
[36] R. Zhang, H. Wang, M. Feng, Y. Liu, and G. Yang, “JRCC-Net:
A segmentation network with joint representation and contrast clustering
for surface anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–14, 2023.
[37] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic
anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” 2021,
arXiv:2109.15222.
[38] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9659–9669.
[39] S. Asgari Taghanaki, K. Abhishek, J. P. Cohen, J. Cohen-Adad, and
G. Hamarneh, “Deep semantic segmentation of natural and medical
images: A review,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 137–178,
Jan. 2021.
[40] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2015, pp. 234–241.
[41] G. E. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[42] L. Wang and K.-J. Yoon, “Knowledge distillation and student-teacher
learning for visual intelligence: A review and new outlooks,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 3048–3068,
Jun. 2022.
[43] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Randaugment: Practical
automated data augmentation with a reduced search space,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW),
Jun. 2020, pp. 3008–3017.
[44] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[45] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
[46] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[47] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[48] W. Park, D. Kim, Y. Lu, and M. Cho, “Relational knowledge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 3962–3971.
[49] T. Huang et al., “Masked distillation with receptive tokens,” 2022,
arXiv:2205.14589.
[50] M. Wieler, T. Hahn, and F. A. Hamprecht, “Weakly supervised learning
for industrial optical inspection,” Zenodo, Jun. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8086136
[51] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[52] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
warm restarts,” 2016, arXiv:1608.03983.
[53] D. Racki, D. Tomazevic, and D. Skocaj, “A compact convolutional neural
network for textured surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter
Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2018, pp. 1331–1339.
[54] Z. Lin, H. Ye, B. Zhan, and X. Huang, “An efficient network for surface
defect detection,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 17, p. 6085, Sep. 2020.

5004515

[55] J. Božic, D. Tabernik, and D. Skocaj, “End-to-end training of a two-stage
neural network for defect detection,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern
Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 5619–5626.
[56] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[57] S. Chauhan, M. Singh, and A. K. Aggarwal, “Experimental analysis of
effect of tuning parameters on the performance of diversity-driven multiparent evolutionary algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Electr.
Power Energy Syst. (ICEPES), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[58] S. Chauhan, M. Singh, and A. K. Aggarwal, “Investigative analysis of different mutation on diversity-driven multi-parent evolutionary
algorithm and its application in area coverage optimization of WSN,”
Soft Comput., vol. 27, no. 14, pp. 9565–9591, Jul. 2023.
[59] S. Chauhan, M. Singh, and A. K. Aggarwal, “Designing of optimal
digital IIR filter in the multi-objective framework using an evolutionary algorithm,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, Mar. 2023,
Art. no. 105803.

Yuan He received the B.S. degree in mechanical
design, manufacturing, and automation from Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China, in 2021. He is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree with the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing Equipment and
Technology at the Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan.
His current research interests include deep learning, anomaly detection, and related applications in
real industrial scenarios.

Hua Yang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2006 and
2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from
Hiroshima University, Higashihiroshima, Japan,
in 2011.
He was with Hiroshima University as a Research
Associate from 2011 to 2012 and as an Assistant
Professor from 2012. He worked as an Associate
Professor from 2013 to 2019 and currently works as
a Professor with the School of Mechanical Science
and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His
current research interests include high-speed vision and its applications (object
recognition and detection, particle image velocity, and dynamic-based visual
inspection).

Zhouping Yin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.,
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering
from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1994, 1996, and 2000,
respectively.
He has published two monographs, three chapters
in English books and more than 30 papers in international journals such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS,
ASME Transaction and Computer-Aided Design. His
current research interests include machine vision,
flexible electronics, and electronic packaging.