IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

6909

Advancing Security and Trust in WSNs:
A Federated Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement
Learning Approach
Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE, Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE,
and Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) show significant
potential through their ability to collect and analyze real-time
data, notably enhancing various sectors. The new emerging
security threats present a severe risk to the security and
reliability of WSNs. Data-driven Artificial Intelligence (AI)
leverages WSNs data to deal with new emerging threats like
zero-day attacks. However, AI-based models suffer from poor
adoption due to the lack of realistic/up-to-date attack data.
Recently, Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
has gained significant attention for enhancing Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS) capabilities. MARL offers improved flexibility,
efficiency, and robustness. However, this requires data sharing, leading to network bandwidth consumption and slower
training. Additionally, the curse of dimensionality hampers its
benefits, given the exponential expansion of the state-action
space. Privacy-aware collaborative methods such as Federated
Learning (FL) emerge as a new approach, enabling decentralized
model training across a network of devices while preserving
the privacy of each participant. In this context, we introduce
a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that leverages FL and MARL
to efficiently detect WSN-based attacks. MAF-DRL enables
distributed learning across multiple agents with adaptive, flexible,
and robust attack detection. We also introduce a trust-based
scheduling mechanism that dynamically allocates resources based
on agent reliability. This trust-aware approach allows FL systems
to adapt to changing network conditions and device behaviors.
By prioritizing reliable devices, our method improves the energy
efficiency of WSNs and enhances the resilience and effectiveness
of the distributed FL paradigm. Finally, we assess the robustness of our framework by testing it against real-world WSN
attacks. This evaluation demonstrates its efficiency for secure and
communication-efficient federated edge learning across various
agents.
Index Terms—Wireless sensor networks (WSNs), E-commerce,
multi-agent federated learning, trust evaluation, energy
efficiency.

Manuscript received 31 January 2024; revised 24 March 2024 and 18 June
2024; accepted 1 August 2024. Date of publication 7 August 2024; date of
current version 31 December 2024. (Corresponding author: Hajar Moudoud.)
Hajar Moudoud is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Université du Quebec en Outaouis, Gatineau, QC J8X 3X7,
Canada (e-mail: hajar.moudoud@uqo.ca).
Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the Centre Énergie Matériaux
Télécommunications, Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique
(INRS-EMT), UMR INRS-UQO, Gatineau, QC J8X 3X7, Canada
(e-mail: zakaria.abouelhouda@inrs.ca).
Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of
Computing and Informatics, Sharjah University, Sharjah, UAE (e-mail:
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3440178

I. I NTRODUCTION
IRELESS Sensor Networks (WSNs) play a crucial
role in enhancing various aspects of e-commerce
operations. These networks consist of spatially distributed
autonomous sensors/nodes that monitor physical or environmental conditions and transmit data wirelessly [1], [2], [3].
These nodes collaborate to monitor and collect data from
their surrounding environments and transmit these data to a
central location or a sink node for further processing. WSNs
have demonstrated versatility in various applications, including
resource management and e-commerce [4]. However, they face
challenges related to resource limitations and security [5], [6].
Context-aware WSNs offer a promising solution by tailoring feedback and recommendations to user needs, thereby
streamlining daily activities. In this context, the integration of
complex object networks holds the potential to enrich user
experiences by adapting to dynamic contexts and preferences.
Despite these advances, the overarching challenge of resource
consumption persists, impacting operational efficiency and
scalability. As e-commerce systems evolve, security becomes a
paramount concern. Beyond usability and manageability challenges, ensuring robust security measures becomes critical to
safeguarding sensitive user data and maintaining trust in online
transactions. In this context, several Artificial Intelligence (AI)
based solutions have been proposed to detect and predict
attacks on these systems [7], [8]. Using the power of AI
algorithms, e-commerce platforms can proactively identify
anomalous behavior and mitigate potential threats.
Recently, Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) aims at enhancing Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)
capabilities by offering unparalleled flexibility, efficiency,
robustness, adaptability, and scalability. Its ability to train
multiple agents to collaborate or compete in complex environments enables rapid adaptation to evolving threats. By
learning directly from raw data, MARL-based IDS systems
automate feature extraction, enhancing detection accuracy
while demonstrating resilience against adversarial attacks.
The decentralized nature of MARL ensures fault tolerance
and redundancy, guaranteeing uninterrupted operation even in
dynamic network environments. Furthermore, MARL enables
continuous learning, allowing IDS to stay ahead of emerging
threats. Its scalability makes it suitable for large-scale network
environments, ensuring consistent performance as networks

W

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1558-4127 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

6910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

grow. Despite its advantages, MARL encounters challenges
that include data-sharing requirements leading to increased
network bandwidth consumption and slower training speeds.
Moreover, the curse of dimensionality poses a significant
obstacle, as the exponential growth of the state-action space
limits the effectiveness of MARL-based approaches.
Privacy-aware collaborative methods such as Federated
Learning (FL) emerge as a new approach, enabling decentralized model training across a network of devices while
preserving the privacy of each participant. The FL allows
for model training across a network of decentralized devices,
exemplified by drones operating at the network edge. Within
FL, each device autonomously refines its model using locally
collected data, focusing on features relevant to its distinct
operational context. Significantly, FL ensures data privacy by
transmitting only aggregated model updates. This approach
not only safeguards sensitive information, but also protects
the autonomy of individual devices/sensors [3], [9], [10], [11],
[12]. WSNs, characterized by their distributed nature and
resource constraints, require FL models that account for the
reliability of the device to ensure the integrity and efficiency
of the learning process [13]. Thus, it is important to consider
the trustworthiness of the sensors and to be context-aware to
address the unique challenges posed by WSNs. By incorporating trustworthiness metrics into FL frameworks, we can
mitigate the impact of unreliable devices on model accuracy
and overall system performance. This proactive approach not
only enhances the security and privacy of WSNs but also promotes energy efficiency and resource optimization. Therefore,
by prioritizing device reliability and context awareness, we
can unlock the full potential of FL in ensuring the integrity
and efficiency of machine learning processes within WSNs.
The continuous communication demands of FL also contribute
to increased network load, and bottlenecks may exacerbate
this situation, potentially leading to congestion and straining
the network infrastructure. While previous FL studies have
explored scheduling techniques aimed at optimizing resource
utilization, focusing on resources such as time and local
computing power, these approaches often overlooked crucial
learning-related factors, including device trustworthiness.
Sensors in WSNs exhibit various behaviors influenced by
various factors such as environmental conditions, user interactions, and network activity. In WSNs, sensors can demonstrate
different patterns based on their locations, sensing capabilities, and communication protocols. Similarly, in e-commerce
systems, sensors embedded in devices or infrastructure can
exhibit different behaviors depending on user preferences,
purchasing habits, and browsing activities. Understanding and
analyzing these behavioral patterns are crucial for detecting
anomalies, identifying potential security threats, and optimizing system performance. Therefore, it’s crucial to group
sensors with similar behaviors into clusters to improve security
and enhance overall system efficiency.
To address the challenges outlined above, this paper
introduces a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that leverages
FL and MARL to efficiently detect WSN-based attacks.
Our proposed framework enables distributed learning while
ensuring adaptive, flexible, and robust attack detection. Our

proposed framework involves clustering sensors based on their
behavior, which allows for more focused monitoring and
analysis. This method expedites the detection of suspicious
activities or deviations from normal behavior. Additionally, we
propose a trust-based scheduling mechanism, to dynamically
allocate resources based on agent reliability. This incorporation of trust-awareness enables FL systems to adapt to
evolving network conditions and device behaviors. By prioritizing devices with proven reliability, our approach not only
enhances the energy efficiency of WSNs but also strengthens
the resilience and effectiveness of distributed FL paradigms.
Finally, we evaluate the robustness of our framework using
real-world WSN attacks. This evaluation demonstrates its
efficiency for secure and communication-efficient federated
edge learning across various agents.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• We propose a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that leverages FL and MARL to efficiently detect WSN-based
attacks. MAF-DRL leverages MARL and FL for intrusion
detection within WSNs, empowering autonomous identification and response to potential security threats.
• We design a novel strategy of clustering sensors based on
behavior, enabling focused monitoring and analysis for
expedited detection of suspicious activities.
• We design a scheduling algorithm that meticulously
allocates necessary bandwidth to reliable sensors, emphasizing the reduction of communication expenses during
the learning process and prioritizing participants demonstrating superior model learning performance.
• We evaluate the effectiveness of our framework by testing
it against real-world WSN attacks.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
reviews the current state of the art of WSN-based attacks.
Section III outlines our system model. Section IV introduces
our MAF-DRL framework. Section V details the trust-based
recommendation system. Section VI presents the performance
evaluation. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
WSNs have demonstrated their adaptability in numerous
fields [14], [15]. WSN security has become crucial, with
several state-of-the-art schemes leveraging AI techniques to
mitigate attacks in the wireless networks. In this section, we
delve into some of the most prominent schemes leveraging
AI techniques to ensure WSN security, along with their
limitations.
Vu et al. [16] focused on the design and implementation
of a Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) routing protocol optimized for energy efficiency within 5G networks.
Khera et al. [17] evaluated existing clustering-based methodologies aimed at improving energy efficiency in sensor
networks. The authors introduced a novel method called
Hibernated Clustering Wireless Sensor Networks to address
these shortcomings. This methodology focused on extending
the operational duration of individual sensor nodes, thereby
enhancing the overall network lifespan. Liu et al. [18]

MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH

Fig. 1.

6911

Two-Tier System Architecture for Enhanced WSN Security and Efficiency.

proposed a routing protocol modification, termed the
Improved Energy-Efficient LEACH (IEE-LEACH) protocol.
The IEE-LEACH protocol takes into consideration both the
remaining energy levels of individual nodes and the average
energy status of the entire network. Wei et al. [19] introduced
a distributed clustering algorithm to adapt cluster sizes based
on the hop distance to the data sink.
The importance of trust spans across WSNs and
e-commerce platforms, where it ensures reliability and
integrity. In WSNs, trust guarantees accurate data exchange,
while in e-commerce, it fosters secure transactions.
Chen et al. [20] introduced IoTrust, a novel trust framework
that integrated Software Defined Network (SDN) with the
Internet of Things (IoT), alongside a cross-layer authorization
protocol rooted in IoTrust principles. This innovative approach
provided a unique angle on trust administration within IoT
systems. Kumar et al. [21] introduced a novel approach to
evaluate trust in WSNs by employing ML techniques. This
method involves identifying specific trust attributes using a
predefined model and then devising a unique algorithm that
utilizes machine learning to categorize and integrate these
attributes into a comprehensive trust value. Chen et al. in [20]
introduced a novel approach to assess user trust within social
e-commerce platforms, aimed at addressing the shortcomings
of conventional methods marked by inaccurate evaluations
and inefficiencies. This method leveraged AI techniques to
establish a novel framework grounded on diverse factors such
as business, environmental, and social elements, facilitating
user trust levels.
Security measures are indispensable for safeguarding data
integrity and confidentiality in WSNs. Kumar et al. [21] introduced an innovative approach termed Intelligent Clustering for
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ICITS), which employed
a unique selection method for Cluster Heads (CHs) called
GABAT, blending Genetic Algorithm (GA) and BAT

Algorithm. ICITS aimed to meet stringent security and reliability requirements while collecting data from sensor nodes
deployed in road transport scenarios. Yingzi and Zhaoji [22]
proposed a hierarchical trust management system, TSW, tailored for Secure and Dynamic Wireless Sensor Networks
(SDWSNs).
To address the issues of these existing solutions, we introduce a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that leverages FL and
MARL to efficiently detect WSN-based attacks. Our proposed
framework enables distributed learning while ensuring adaptive, flexible, and robust attack detection. Our proposed
framework involves clustering sensors based on their behavior,
which allows for more focused monitoring and analysis. This
method expedites the detection of suspicious activities or
deviations from normal behavior. Additionally, we propose a
trust-based scheduling mechanism, to allocate resources based
on agent reliability dynamically. This incorporation of trustawareness enables FL systems to adapt to evolving network
conditions and device behaviors. By prioritizing devices with
proven reliability, our approach not only enhances the energy
efficiency of WSNs but also strengthens the resilience and
effectiveness of distributed ML paradigms.
III. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE
Our system architecture (see Fig. 1) is structured into two
tiers: Tier-1 consists of Base Stations (BS A, BS B, BS C,
BS D) responsible for collecting and processing real-time data
at the edge layer. Tier 2 comprises controllers to manage and
process data from Tier 1. These controllers handle various
critical functions, including the aggregation of secure FL data,
reputation calculation, agent selection, and implementation of
security actions and policies. The controllers communicate
using Southbound APIs, such as OpenFlow, to ensure realtime data exchange and immediate response actions, such as

6912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

blocking jamming attacks. This architecture facilitates distributed learning across multiple agents with adaptive, flexible,
and robust attack detection, leveraging both FL and MARL to
improve the security and efficiency of WSNs. Table I shows
the notations used to present our system model. Also, our
proposed system model allows:
1) Agent Representation: Each node in the network acts
as an agent, representing either an individual device or
a cluster of devices. Agents maintain localized datasets
containing pertinent information about network activities, system logs, and relevant features.
2) Local Attack Detection Models: Agents independently
maintain their local attack detection models. Deep
Q-Learning (DQL) is employed as the primary method
for attack detection in this decentralized setup. DQL
enables agents to continuously refine their models by
dynamically interacting with the environment, resulting
in a robust and adaptive defense mechanism against
potential threats. The iterative improvement of local
attack detection capabilities enhances the collective
intelligence of the system, fostering a comprehensive
and resilient security posture.
3) Collaborative Learning: Agents participate in collaborative learning via our FL training process, collectively
contributing to the refinement of the global attack detection model. Through this collaborative effort, agents
leverage their diverse datasets to enhance the effectiveness and robustness of the global attack detection model.
4) Recommendation System based on Reputation: Each
agent has a reputation score that reflects the trustworthiness and reliability of individual devices within the
network. By considering reputation scores, the recommendation system can offer personalized and reliable
recommendations tailored to the specific needs and
preferences of users. This enhances the overall user
experience and fosters a collaborative and trustworthy
environment within the WSN ecosystem.
5) Resource Usage Personalization: We introduce an innovative scheduling algorithm that prioritizes participants
with higher reputation scores, ensuring efficient utilization of resources. By strategically allocating bandwidth
to trusted devices, we aim to enhance the overall
efficiency of the federated learning system, reducing
overhead while accelerating model convergence.
IV. S ECURE AND E FFICIENT M ULTI -AGENT F EDERATED
L EARNING
The traditional update rule in Q-learning for a single-agent
DQL is given by:


  
Q(s, a) ← Q(s, a) + α r + γ max Q s , a − Q(s, a) (1)
a

We then adapt the update rule for multiple agents, where i
represents the agent’s index:


  
Qi (s, ai ) ← Qi (s, ai ) + α ri + γ max Qi s , ai − Qi (s, ai )
ai

(2)

TABLE I
N OTATIONS

Then, we introduce the federated joint value function, which
quantifies the expected cumulative return when a group of
agents collaborates to detect and mitigate attacks within a
shared network:
∞
N
VFJ (s) = E

γt
t=0

rit s0 = s

(3)

i=1

where, VFJ (s) represents the federated joint value function for
the state s, while N is the number of agents dedicated to attack
detection and mitigation. In this setting, s0 = s denotes the
initial state, t denotes the time step, and rit denotes the reward
received by agent i at time step t.
Furthermore, we define the federated joint action-value
function for attack detection and mitigation as the cumulative
return when all agents collaboratively take a set of joint actions
to detect and mitigate attacks in a shared environment using
federated learning.
∞
N
γt

QFJ (s, a) = E
t=0

rit s0 = s, a0 = a

(4)

i=1

where, QFJ (s, a) signifies the federated joint action-value
function for the state s and joint actions a, with N as the
number of agents engaged in the detection and mitigation of
attacks using FL (see Algorithm 1).
A. Cluster-Based Anomaly Detection and Reward
Optimization
In the pursuit of enhancing anomaly detection within the
Multi-Agent Framework for Deep Reinforcement Learning
(MAF-DRL), we introduce an innovative approach that leverages clustering techniques to group agents exhibiting similar
behaviors. This method significantly improves anomaly detection by focusing on deviations or unusual patterns within these
clusters. By isolating and analyzing specific cluster behaviors,
the detection and response to security attacks become more
effective. We formulated this problem as an optimization

MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH

Algorithm 1 Multi-Agent Federated Deep Reinforcement
Learning (MAF-DRL)
Input:
Network environment, sensor agents, federated
learning parameters
Output: Collaborative reinforcement learning model
1: Initialize federated learning environment
2: Initialize sensor agents with DQL models θi
3: Initialize federated learning parameters: learning rate α,
discount factor γ , exploration rate 
4: for each iteration t do
5:
for each sensor agent i do
6:
Receive state observation si from environment
7:
Select action ai using DQL model: ai =
argmaxa Q(si , a; θi )
8:
Execute action ai in environment
9:
Receive reward ri from environment
10:
Update DQL model using Eq. (3)
11:
end for
12:
Share updated DQL models with other agents
13:
Aggregate models to form global model: θ̄ ←
N
1
i=1 θi
N
14: end for
15: return Collaborative reinforcement learning model θ̄

problem in which the objective is to maximize the cumulative
reward attained by the selected agents during training. The
reward for attack detection (Rdetection (St )) incentivizes agents
to accurately identify security threats based on the current
state. It is determined by a weight factor wdetection and can be
expressed as:
1 if an attack is detected
0 otherwise

Rdetection (St ) =

(5)

Each agent’s participation in the training process is
represented by a binary variable (xk,j ), where 0 denotes nonselection and 1 denotes selection. This problem is formulated
as:
∞

R(st , at )xk,j

maximize
x

(6a)

t=0

subject to
xk,j ≤ 1,

∀k ∈ [1, K],

(6b)

xk,j ≥ 1,

∀k ∈ [1, K],

(6c)

xk ∈ {0, 1},

∀k ∈ [1, K].

(6d)

j

k

where, xk,j represents the binary variable indicating agent
selection for training, subject to constraints ensuring each
cluster has at least one agent (6b) and each agent belongs
to only one cluster (6c). The binary nature of the decision
variable is enforced by constraint (6d). Notably, Problem (6a)
is NP-hard due to its mixed-integer non-linear nature.
To tackle this complexity, we propose employing stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), where devices are assigned to clusters
satisfying the constraints. The problem is then converted

6913

into a differentiable form suitable for SGD, allowing for
gradient-based optimization. This transformation enables efficient solution space exploration, facilitating the maximization
of total reward values for the selected agents during training.
Subsequently, we employ SGD to iteratively update the
values of xk,j to maximize the objective function. The update
rule for each iteration i can be defined as follows:


∞
(i+1)
(i)
= clip xk,j
+ α∇xk,j
xk,j

(i)
R(st , at )xk,j
, 0, 1

(7)

t=0

where, α denotes the learning rate, ∇xk,j represents the gradient
concerning xk,j , and clip(·) is a function that restricts the values
to fall within the range [0, 1].
V. R ECOMMENDATION S YSTEM BASED ON T RUST
In our proposed MAF-DRL, we utilize Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) to enhance the evaluation of participants’
trust in the FL process. Our proposed approach leverages a
graph structure to model the relationships and interactions
among participants. Also, we introduce a consensus-based
trust algorithm to capture the variance or disagreement among
the FL participants. In this context, we use a distributed linear
iterative algorithm to achieve consensus in the network.
Let G = (P, E) be a network of FL participants, where P
represents the set of FL participants and E represents the set
of directed edges (connections between participants).
Each FL participant p ∈ P has an initial state x(0)v , which
is a real number representing its current value or opinion.
The objective is to achieve consensus among the participants,
where all participants eventually converge to a common value.
The distributed linear iterative algorithm can be described by
the following dynamics:
x(t + 1)p =

w(p, q)x(t)q

(8)

where, x(t + 1)p denotes the state or feedback of participant
p at time t + 1, and x(t)q denotes the state or feedback of
participant q at time t. The term w(p, q) represents the weight
of the participant directly connected to p.
The algorithm then updates the state of each participant at
each time step by taking a weighted average of the states of its
neighboring agents. The weights w(p, q) determine the influence or importance of each neighbor in the update process.
In cases where participants p and q do not communicate with
each other, the weights are w(p, q) = 0. In such instances, the
FL participants converge i.e., limt→∞ x(p) = x(∞).
Based on the feedback of other FL participants, we evaluated each participant’s trust score. We averaging the feedback
ratings T(p) for participant p as follows:
T(p) =

N
q=0 x(t + 1)q

(9)
N
where, x(t + 1)q represents the FL participants providing
feedback about participant p, and N is the total number of
participants providing feedback.
We then assign weights as follows:
T(p) =

q w(q, p)x(t + 1)q
q w(q, p)

(10)

6914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

where, q represents the FL participants providing feedback
about p.
A. Behavioral Clustering for Enhanced Anomaly Detection
The level of agreement or convergence achieved by participants within the network is assessed using a consensus error
metric, which quantifies the disparity between the actual states
of participants and the desired consensus value. Typically,
the consensus value is determined as the average state of
all participants within the network. The difference between a
participant’s actual state and the consensus value is termed as
the consensus error, reflecting the reliability of FL participants.
We
define
the
reliability
vector
x(t)
=
[x1 (t), x2 (t), . . . , xn (t)] at time t, where x(t)p denotes the
reliability state of participant p at time t. Here, the reliability
state is binary, with x(t)p = 1 indicating a reliable agent and
x(t)p = 0 indicating an unreliable agent.
The consensus error at time t quantifies the discrepancy or
deviation of each participant’s state from the average state. To
represent the consensus error at time t, we use the root mean
square error, defined as:


1 N 
2
x(t)p − x̄(t)p
(11)
ConsensusErr(t) = 
N
p=1

where, x̄(t)p is the average state of all participants at time t.
The trust score is calculated based on the consensus error,
where participants with smaller error values are considered
more trustworthy. To provide a thorough assessment of a
participant’s trust, we accumulate the trust scores over multiple
time steps. Formally, the trust of a participant p can be
expressed as:
T  (p) =

1
T

T(p, t)

(12)

where T(p, t) represents the trust of participant p from time
t = 1 to t = T.
Incorporating feedback alongside the consensus error allows
for a more nuanced evaluation. While the consensus error
measures the level of agreement within the network, the
feedback score captures the direct feedback received by
participants. The global trust of a participant is then computed
as a combination of these factors:


1
(13)
Tp = αx(p) + β
ConsensusErr(p)
where (x(p)) denotes the feedback-based trust received for
participant p, ConsensusErr(p) is the consensus error of
participant p, and α and β are weighting variables that regulate
the influence of feedback and consensus in trust calculation.
These components can be weighted based on their perceived
relevance or trustworthiness, similar to the feedback-based
trust formulation.
We then define the global trust of an FL participant as:
T  (p) = (Wfeedback × x(p))


1
+ Wconsensus ×
ConsensusErr(p)

(14)

Algorithm 2 Consensus Trust Algorithm
1: Input: Feedback from participants
2: Output: Consensus trust score for the target participant
3: Initialization:
4: Initialize trust scores for all participants to neutral values
5: Specify the number of iterations and consensus threshold
6: Feedback Collection:
7: Gather feedback about the target participant’s behavior
from multiple sources
8: Consensus Error Trust Calculation:
9: for i = 1 to N do
10:
Compute the consensus error trust using Equation (8)
11:
Update the trust scores of all participants using
Equation (11)
12: end for
13: Consensus Verification:
N
T  (i)
14: if T  (p) ≤ i=0N
then
15:
return Consensus Reached
16: else
17:
return Consensus Unreached

where Wfeedback and Wconsensus represent the weights
assigned to feedback-based trust and consensus-based trust,
respectively.
To verify the trustworthiness of a participant, we propose a
consensus algorithm among all participants. Algorithm 2 calculates the consensus trust score for the target participant using
inputs from various participants. Initially, it sets the number
of iterations and the consensus threshold, then initializes a
neutral trust value for each participant. The algorithm collects
information on the behavior of the target participant from
multiple sources and computes the difference between each
participant’s trust score and the overall average trust score. It
updates all participants’ trust scores using the consensus error
values. Finally, consensus is determined by checking if the
average trust score of each participant differs from the target
participant’s trust score by less than the consensus threshold.
B. Agent Selection
Agent selection is crucial in dynamic environments where
diverse skills are required for each agent to perform effectively.
Optimal agent selection improves overall system performance
and reduces computational complexities, thus improving the
efficiency of the learning process. Given the resource-intensive
nature of large-scale models, efficient scheduling is necessary
to evenly distribute the workload and optimize learning efficiency. We propose an agent scheduling approach focused on
resource optimization to prevent delays or interruptions during
model transmission. This study utilizes Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA), which allows simultaneous data transmission from multiple agents by assigning
distinct subcarrier subsets to individual users, ensuring concurrent and interference-free communication.
The transmission rate (rk ) of a device to the Mobile Edge
Computing (MEC) server is calculated as follows:


Pk gk
, ∀k ∈ [1, K],
(15)
rk = αk B log2 1 +
αk BN0

MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH

Algorithm 3 Greedy Bandwidth Allocation Algorithm
1: Input: Total_Bandwidth, T, ttrain , and tup
2: Output: xk and bk
3: N ← length(T)
4: remaining_bandwidth ← Total_Bandwidth
5: selected_agents ← empty_list()
6: sorted_agents ← S ORTAGENTS B Y T RUST (T)
7: for each agent in sorted_agents do
8:
k ← agent.index
9:
if isCandidate(k) ∧ has Sufficient Bandwidth(k) then
10:
select Agent(k)
11:
allocate Bandwidth(k)
12:
update Remaining Bandwidth(k)
13:
add To Selected Agents(k)
14:
end if
15: end for
16: return xk , bk = 0

where rk represents the transmission rate of device k to the
MEC server, αk denotes the allocated bandwidth for device
k, B signifies the total available bandwidth, Pk denotes the
transmission power of device k, gk represents the channel gain
of device k, and N0 stands for the power spectral density of
Gaussian noise.
We then propose a device scheduling algorithm that optimizes not only the overall trust scores but also additional
factors related to agents’ interactions and the learning process.
up
The training time (tktrain ) and upload time (tk ) are calculated
as follows:
We estimate the training time as:
tktrain =  Dtk

ζk
fk

(16)

where  serves as a scaling factor, Dtk represents the dataset
of agent k, ζk denotes the number of CPU cycles required to
process a single data sample, and fk represents the processing
power of the CPU.
The upload time for transmitting a model from agent k to
the central server can be expressed as:
s
up
tk =
(17)
rk
where s denotes the size of the model to be uploaded, and rk
signifies the achievable data rate of agent k.
We formulate an optimization problem for device
scheduling that incorporates bandwidth constraints into the
decision-making process. The objective is to maximize the
cumulative reward, denoted by k Rk xk , where xk is a binary
variable indicating the selection of agent k. The optimization
problem is expressed as:
maximize
x,b

Rk xk

(18a)

bk ≤ 1

(18b)

k

subject to
k


up 
xk tktrain + tk ≤ T, ∀k ∈ [1, K]

(18c)

6915

xk ∈ {0, 1}, ∀k ∈ [1, K]
0 ≤ bk ≤ 1, ∀k ∈ [1, K]

(18d)
(18e)

where, bk denotes the bandwidth fraction allocated to agent k.
The constraint (18b) ensures that the total bandwidth allocations among all agents do not exceed the available bandwidth.
In our formulation, where timely responses are critical and
operations must align with specific temporal requirements
dictated by the dynamic WSN environment, we assert in
constraint (18c) that the selected agents must complete their
model training and upload within a predefined time frame.
Constraint (18d) denotes the binary nature of xk , designating
device k as either selected or not. Bandwidth allocation ratios
are bounded by constraint (18e). In particular, considering
constraints (18b), (18c), (18d), and (18e) solely mirrors the
complexity of a knapsack problem, making it NP-hard. To
tackle this challenge, we employ a greedy method, as detailed
in Algorithm 3, effectively navigating the constraints while
optimizing agent selection and bandwidth allocation, recognizing the intricate interplay between bandwidth considerations
and model training deadlines.
VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
We implemented our proposed framework (MAF-DRL)
using PySyft, a privacy-aware deep learning framework built
on the PyTorch platform. We have considered a test environment, where multiple agents were deployed to conduct
local training and then through the FL process conduct
collaborative learning in a fully distributed manner. This capability empowers every agent to effectively attain an optimal
policy, maximizing the cumulative expected reward, while
simultaneously upholding the privacy of each agent’s data. Our
exploration encompasses two distinct scenarios (see Table II
and Table III). The initial scenario involves binary classification, where the focus is on binary classification for jamming
events. The trained model is specialized in distinguishing
between two possible outcomes: the presence or absence
of jamming interference. This approach proves valuable in
scenarios where a simple binary decision is sufficient, such
as determining whether a communication channel is under
intentional disruption. In the second scenario, we extend
our approach to multiclass classification for jamming attack
detection. This involves configuring the model to handle more
than two classes, allowing it to categorize different types
of jamming attacks. This classification is particularly useful
in sophisticated environments where various jamming techniques may be employed, each requiring a specific response.
Throughout both scenarios, the training process involves optimizing the model’s parameters to discern patterns and features
indicative of jamming activities. The objective is to enhance
the model’s accuracy in detecting and classifying jamming
events, contributing to the overall resilience of the Wireless
Sensor Network.
To feed the initial environment with attack data, we used the
WSN-DS dataset, which includes four distinct jamming attacks
that were simulated using the LEACH protocol. These attacks
comprise black hole, gray hole, flood, and scheduling attacks.
In the black hole attack, a malicious node masquerades

6916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 2.

Agent rewards for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 3.

Model Accuracies for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 4.

Confusion matrices for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 5.

ROC Curves for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

as a Cluster Head (CH) and intentionally discards all data
packets relayed through it. The Grayhole attack involves
a deceptive CH selectively dropping packets, introducing a
random or targeted element. Flooding attacks disrupt the
LEACH protocol by flooding it with numerous advertising
CH messages, leading to increased energy consumption and
delayed decision-making by nodes. Scheduling attacks take
place during the setup phase, causing data loss by assigning
the same time slot to all cluster members to transmit data.
The attacks were simulated with varying intensities (10%,
30%, and 50%) to thoroughly assess their impact on the

lifetime of the WSN, energy consumption, and overall network
services.
In this simulated environment, various scenarios were
explored from 10 to 50 rounds of training. The evaluation of
our proposed framework involved an extensive examination
using key metrics, including accuracy, F1 score, receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves, and confusion matrices.
These metrics serve as crucial indicators for quantifying the
model’s performance across different dimensions.
Figs. 2(a), 2(b), and 2(c) show the convergence (i.e., cumulative average rewards) of our framework over 10, 25, and

MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH

TABLE II
WSN-DS L ABELS

6917

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF MAF-DRL AND C URRENT AI-BASED
M ETHODS

TABLE III
C LASSIFICATION S CENARIOS

50 training rounds, respectively. We observe a continuous
improvement in the average reward with increasing training
rounds, reaching its maximum after only three rounds of training. Figs. 3(a), 3(b), and 3(c) show the obtained accuracy in
both scenarios for 10, 25, and 50 training rounds, respectively.
We observe that the accuracy of our proposed framework
increases, reaching a maximum of 99. This shows that the
agents learn from each other while preserving privacy, leading
to a high accuracy score in the global model. Figs. 4(a),
4(b), and 4(c) show the confusion matrix curves of our
framework, highlighting its performance over 10, 25, and 50
training rounds, respectively. Figs. 5(a), 5(b), and 5(c) show
the confusion matrix curves of our framework, highlighting its
performance over 10, 25, and 50 training rounds, respectively.
Our framework achieves an accuracy of 99% and an F1 score
of 99%. These curves offer a detailed visual breakdown of the
model’s classification outcomes, emphasizing the distribution
of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative
instances. These obtained results emphasize the robustness and
reliability of our framework, showcasing its ability to produce
consistently accurate and precise predictions across varying
training rounds. The visual representation through confusion
matrix curves provides a general understanding of the model’s
performance, further reinforcing its effectiveness in the context
of the implemented jamming attack detection system.
Table. IV shows the performance metrics of our proposed
framework and current AI-based methods using the WSN-DS
dataset. We have compared the performance of our proposed
framework with some recent AI-based solutions (i.e., Naive
Bayes (NB) [23], Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [24], Adaptive
boosting [25], and Boosting [25]) using the same WSNDS dataset. The remarkable performance metrics, including
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score all reaching 99%,
signify the robustness and reliability of our proposed solution.
One of the key highlights of our framework is its ability
to achieve such exceptional results with a minimal training
time of only 52.12 seconds. This aspect underscores the
efficiency and time-saving benefits that our solution brings to
the table. The rapid convergence of our model during training
further emphasizes its suitability for real-time applications and

resource-constrained environments, such as wireless sensor
networks. These promising results not only showcase the
prowess of our proposed framework but also position it
as a leading solution for WSN-DS applications. The high
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score collectively validate
the framework’s ability to accurately classify and detect attacks
in the WSN-DS dataset.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have introduced a novel framework that
uses a Multi-Agent federated learning and deep reinforcement
learning Approach to secure WSNs against new emerging
threats while preserving privacy. Our proposed framework
facilitates collaborative learning among multiple agents. This
enables each agent to efficiently acquire an optimal policy that
maximizes the cumulative expected reward while maintaining
the privacy of individual agent data. The obtained results
showed that our proposed framework improves WSN security
while ensuring privacy and resilient defense against potential
threats in the WSNs ecosystem. For future directions, we
intend to enhance the framework’s robustness against adversarial attacks by incorporating adversarial training approaches
and developing mechanisms to detect and mitigate adversarial
manipulation attempts targeting the federated learning process.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Taneja and S. Rani, “A novel energy conservation scheme for
IoT-based wireless networks: A use case of E-commerce systems for
consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 1648–1655, Feb. 2024.
[2] N. A. Pantazis, S. A. Nikolidakis, and D. D. Vergados, “Energy-efficient
routing protocols in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 551–591, 2nd Quart., 2012.
[3] P. Chanak and I. Banerjee, “Congestion free routing mechanism for
IoT-enabled wireless sensor networks for smart healthcare applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 223–232,
Aug. 2020.
[4] L. Yang, Y. Li, J. Wang, and R. S. Sherratt, “Sentiment analysis for
E-commerce product reviews in Chinese based on sentiment lexicon and
deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 23522–23530, 2020.
[5] Z. A. El Houda, L. Khoukhi, and B. Brik, “A low-latency fog-based
framework to secure IoT applications using collaborative federated
learning,” in Proc. IEEE 47th Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN), 2022,
pp. 343–346.
[6] W. Mao, Z. Zhao, Z. Chang, G. Min, and W. Gao, “Energy-efficient
Industrial Internet of Things: Overview and open issues,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7225–7237, Nov. 2021.
[7] B. Kumar et al., “A static machine learning based evaluation method for
usability and security analysis in E-commerce website,” IEEE Access,
vol. 11, pp. 40488–40510, 2023.

6918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

[8] R. Ketipov, V. Angelova, L. Doukovska, and R. Schnalle, “Predicting
user Behavior in e-commerce using machine learning,” Cybern. Inf.
Technol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 89–101, 2023.
[9] C. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Tu, G. Xu, and H. Wang, “Understanding
node capture attacks in user authentication schemes for wireless sensor
networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 507–523, Jan./Feb. 2020.
[10] J.-Y. Yu, E. Lee, S.-R. Oh, Y.-D. Seo, and Y.-G. Kim, “A survey on
security requirements for WSNs: Focusing on the characteristics related
to security,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 45304–45324, 2020.
[11] Z. A. E. Houda, D. Naboulsi, and G. Kaddoum, “A privacy-preserving
collaborative jamming attacks detection framework using federated
learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12153–12164,
Apr. 2024.
[12] Z. A. E. Houda, H. Moudoud, and B. Brik, “Federated deep reinforcement learning for efficient jamming attack mitigation in O-RAN,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12153–12164, Apr. 2024.
[13] F. Ding, G. Zhu, M. Alazab, X. Li, and K. Yu, “Deep-learningempowered digital forensics for edge consumer electronics in 5G
HetNets,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 42–50,
Mar. 2022.
[14] J. Amutha, S. Sharma, and J. Nagar, “WSN strategies based on
sensors, deployment, sensing models, coverage and energy efficiency:
Review, approaches and open issues,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 111,
pp. 1089–1115, Mar. 2020.
[15] M. Shafiq, H. Ashraf, A. Ullah, and S. Tahira, “Systematic literature
review on energy efficient routing schemes in WSN—A survey,” Mobile
Netw. Appl., vol. 25, pp. 882–895, Jun. 2020.
[16] K. Q. Vu, V. K. Solanki, and A. N. Le, “A saving energy MANET routing
protocol in 5G,” in Secure Communication for 5G and IoT Networks.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 213–220.
[17] S. Khera, N. Turk, and N. Kaur, “HC-WSN: A hibernated clustering
based framework for improving energy efficiency of wireless sensor
networks,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 82, no. 3, pp. 3879–3894,
Jan. 2023.
[18] Y. Liu, Q. Wu, T. Zhao, Y. Tie, F. Bai, and M. Jin, “An improved energyefficient routing protocol for wireless sensor networks,” Sensors, vol. 19,
no. 20, p. 4579, 2019.
[19] D. Wei, Y. Jin, S. Vural, K. Moessner, and R. Tafazolli, “An energyefficient clustering solution for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 3973–3983, Nov. 2011.
[20] J. Chen, Z. Tian, X. Cui, L. Yin, and X. Wang, “Trust architecture and
reputation evaluation for Internet of Things,” J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz.
Comput., vol. 10, pp. 3099–3107, Aug. 2019.
[21] A. Kumar, K. Singh, and S. Vats, “Trust evaluation-based machine
learning for WSNs,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Comput. Sustain. Global
Develop. (INDIACom), 2023, pp. 1430–1436.
[22] Z. Yingzi and Y. Zhaoji, “Research on user trust evaluation of social ecommerce platform based on artificial neural network,” Optik, vol. 271,
Dec. 2022, Art. no. 170193.
[23] S. Ismail, Z. El Mrabet, and H. Reza, “An ensemble-based machine
learning approach for cyber-attacks detection in wireless sensor
networks,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 30, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/1/30
[24] I. Almomani, B. Al-Kasasbeh, and M. AL-Akhras, “WSN-DS: A Dataset
for intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor networks,” J. Sens.,
vol. 2016, no. 1, Aug. 2016, Art. no. 4731953.
[25] M. Nouman, U. Qasim, H. Nasir, A. Almasoud, M. Imran, and
N. Javaid, “Malicious node detection using machine learning and
distributed data storage using blockchain in WSNs,” IEEE Access,
vol. 11, pp. 6106–6121, 2023.

Hajar Moudoud (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. degree in software engineering from the
Mohammadia School of Engineers, Rabat, Morocco,
in 2018, the first Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of Sherbrooke, Canada,
in 2022, and the second Ph.D. degree in computer
engineering from the University of Technology of
Troyes, France, in 2022. Her research interests
include the security of the Internet of Things,
applied machine/deep learning for intrusion detection systems, and leveraging blockchain to enhance
the security of next-generation networks.

Zakaria Abou El Houda (Member, IEEE) received
the first Ph.D. degree in computer science from
the University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada,
in 2021, and the second Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of Technology
of Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2021. He is currently a Professor with the Energy, Materials, and
Telecommunications Center of the National Institute
of Scientific Research (INRS), Canada. He is also a
member of the INRS-UQO Joint Research Unit in
Cybersecurity. Prior to joining INRS, he served as
a research scientist in various institutions, contributing to significant research
projects on the application of machine learning for intrusion detection systems,
and studying the expansibility and robustness of these systems. His current
research interests include applied AI for intrusion detection systems, security
in distributed machine learning, and blockchain for network security.

Bouziane Brik (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the engineering degree (Ranked First) in computer science and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
from Laghouat University, Algeria, in 2010, 2013,
and 2017, respectively. He is currently working as
an Assistant Professor with the Computer Science
Department of Computing and Informatics College,
Sharjah University, UAE. Before joining Sharjah
University, he worked as an Assistant Professor
with the DRIVE Department, Bourgogne University,
France. He has been (still) working on resources
management and security challenges of 5G network slicing in the context
of H2020 European projects including MonB5G, 5GDrones, InDiD, and
5G-INSIGHT. His research interests also include 5G and beyond networks,
explainable AI, and machine/deep learning for wireless networks.