7612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Adversarial Graph Neural Network for Multivariate
Time Series Anomaly Detection
Bolong Zheng , Member, IEEE, Lingfeng Ming, Kai Zeng, Mengtao Zhou, Xinyong Zhang, Tao Ye, Bin Yang ,
Xiaofang Zhou , Fellow, IEEE, and Christian S. Jensen , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Anomaly detection is one of the most significant tasks
in multivariate time series analysis, while it remains challenging
to model complex patterns for improving detection accuracy and
to interpret the root causes of anomalies. However, existing studies
either consider only the temporal dependencies, or simply reconstruct the original input for detection, both neglecting the hidden relationships among multivariate. We propose an adversarial graph
neural network based anomaly detection model, called SGAT-AE,
which consists of a Self-learning Graph ATtention network (SGAT),
an Auto-Encoder (AE), and an adversarial training component.
Specifically, SGAT is a prediction model that discovers the graph
dependency relationships among multivariate and acts as a sample
generator to confuse AE, while AE reconstructs the samples and
acts as a discriminator that distinguishes a real sample from a
generated one. A novel adversarial training between SGAT and
AE is applied to amplify the errors of anomalies such that the
prediction performance of SGAT is improved and the overfitting
of AE is avoided. In addition, we aggregate the prediction error,
the reconstruction error, and the adversarial error for anomaly detection, and develop a graph based anomaly interpretation method
that locates the root causes from both local and global perspectives.
Extensive experiments with five real-world data offer evidence
that the proposed solution SGAT-AE is capable of achieving better
performance when compared with the state-of-the-art proposals.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, anomaly interpretation,
graph neural network, time series.

I. INTRODUCTION
N real-world applications, sensing technologies are being
deployed that produce increasing volumes of multivariate
time series data, which enables the monitoring capabilities with
the objective of supporting a variety of applications [1], [2],
[3]. The anomaly detection in time series is one of the most
significant tasks, refers to identifying abnormal states within
a specific time period. For instance, database administrators
(DBAs) monitor thousands of key performance indicators (KPIs)

I

Manuscript received 24 November 2022; revised 22 April 2024; accepted 23
June 2024. Date of publication 2 July 2024; date of current version 13 November
2024. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 62372194 and
Grant 62322205 and has already been applied in Huawei’s GaussDB (DWS)
system." Recommended for acceptance by P. Tsaparas. (Corresponding author:
Bolong Zheng.)
Bolong Zheng and Lingfeng Ming are with the Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zblchris@gmail.com).
Kai Zeng, Mengtao Zhou, Xinyong Zhang, and Tao Ye are with Huawei,
Shenzhen 518129, China.
Bin Yang is with East China Normal University, Shanghai 200050, China.
Xiaofang Zhou is with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Hong Kong, SAR, China.
Christian S. Jensen is with Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3419891

to determine whether performance failures happen in online
transaction processing (OLTP) workloads [4]. In industrial infrastructures, operators monitor equipments through sensors to
ensure the safety from attack [5].
As labeling anomalies by human experts is time consuming
and labor intensive, time series often come without anomaly
labels, so the anomaly detection is usually considered as an
unsupervised learning problem. In the past few years, classical unsupervised statistical learning methods [6], [7], [8] are
proposed to deal with the dependencies among multivariate in a
linear manner.
In order to extract more complex features of multivariate time
series data, deep learning based methods have been proposed for
anomaly detection, which can be mainly divided into predictionbased [1], [9] and reconstruction-based methods [10], [11],
[12]. In particular, prediction-based methods model the normal
patterns of historical time series and predict the future trend,
but they are easily affected by noise. The reconstruction-based
methods learn latent representations of normal patterns and use it
to reconstruct the original input, and then use the reconstruction
error to detect anomalies. Although these methods can reduce
the influence of noise, they are prone to overfitting. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13], [14] and variational
autoencoders (VAEs) [12] are generative models that learn the
distributions of normal data, and detect anomalies with reconstruction probabilities. More recently, ensemble models [15],
[16] are proposed to improve the performance by combining the
advantages of multiple base models. In addition, transformerbased methods [17], [18] are proposed that use attention-based
autoencoders for reconstruction.
However, anomaly detection in multivariate time series remains challenging due to the following reasons:
(1) Hidden Spatial Dependency: In addition to the inherent
temporal dependencies in time series, the spatial dependencies
(hidden complex relationships) among multivariate exist and are
unknown to operators. Consider an example in a water treatment
plant where sensor 1 records the state of a valve and sensor 2
records the flow rate. The change of sensor 1 leads to the change
of sensor 2, and this affection may also be delayed. Although
principal component analysis (PCA) [19], [20] and auto-encoder
(AE) [21], [22] can model the correlations of latent representations among multivariate, they do not explicitly present these
dependency relationships to operators. The ambiguous spatial
dependencies make it difficult to detect and interpret anomalies
correctly.

1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

(2) Indistinguishably Small Anomaly Score: Existing models
learn the normal patterns during training and take the error
between the model output and the ground truth as the anomaly
score, so a sample with a high score is labeled as an anomaly.
However, if the anomaly is relatively close to the normal data,
the error might be too small to detect correctly. Therefore, the
core of improving the performance of anomaly detection is
to amplify the errors, especially for the anomalies with low
scores. Although USAD [5] proposes two AEs sharing a same
encoder for adversarial training to amplify the errors, it dose not
model the spatial and temporal dependencies, which limits the
performance.
(3) Accurate Anomaly Interpretation: Most existing studies
only focus on detecting the anomaly, but neglect the anomaly
interpretation that analyzes which main variables cause the
anomaly that can help speed up troubleshooting. Both DAEMON [23] and OmniAnomaly [2] simply identify the top-k
variables with the largest errors or with the lowest reconstruction
probabilities as the interpretation of the anomaly. However, they
fail to consider the dependency relationships among multivariate
and may miss the true root cause variables.
To address the challenges above, we propose a novel adversarial graph neural network, called SGAT-AE, which consists
of a Self-learning Graph-structured ATtention network (SGAT),
an Auto-Encoder (AE), and an adversarial training component.
SGAT is a prediction-based model that combines a self-learning
graph and an attention network to discover the hidden spatial
dependencies among multivariate (Challenge 1). Specifically,
different from most graph learning methods [24], [25], SGAT
learns a directed graph structure since the dependence patterns
among multivariate time series are asymmetric. SGAT uses
the multiscale 1D convolution to extract the nonlinear temporal dependencies of multivariate time series. Different from
GDN [26] that only captures the spatial dependencies, SGAT
enables to learn both the spatial and temporal dependencies
simultaneously. AE is a reconstruction-based model that learns
the latent representations of normal patterns and reconstructs the
original input.
As mentioned previously, the reconstruction-based methods
enable to learn the normal patterns but are easy to get overfitting,
while the prediction-based methods are susceptible to noise.
Therefore, to take the best of the both worlds, an adversarial
training process between SGAT and AE is adopted. The input
data is first processed by SGAT whose role is to reconstruct
the input as close as possible. Then AE tries to distinguish the
data generated by SGAT from the original input. It is worth
noting that AE is able to identify whether an input sample
is normal or not before reconstruction. So we introduce an
adversarial training that allows to amplify the reconstruction
errors from data generated by SGAT to avoid over-parameterized
(Challenge 2). Different from GANs [13], the reason why we
use AE as the discriminator is to get rid of the mode collapse
and non-convergence owing to the stability of AE [5].
We compute the anomaly score by aggregating the prediction error, the reconstruction error, and the adversarial error
together. In addition, we use the self-learning graph to clarify the

7613

relationships among multivariate, and interpret effectively the
anomaly from both local and global perspectives (Challenge 3).
Overall, the contributions are summarized as follows:
1) We propose a novel adversarial graph neural network
SGAT-AE for anomaly detection in multivariate time series. SGAT learns graph dependency relationships among
multivariate to better extract the spatial dependencies and
temporal dependencies. The idea of SGAT-AE is to employ an adversarial training between SGAT and AE to
amplify the errors of anomalies.
2) We develop a novel anomaly interpretation method that
effectively locates the root cause variables of the anomalies by considering the dependency relationships among
multivariate, which are obtained from the self-learning
graph in SGAT.
3) We conduct extensive experiments in five real-world
datasets, and the experimental results show that SGATAE outperforms state-of-the-art baseline methods. A case
study also shows that the anomaly interpretation method
effectively locates the root causes of anomalies.
II. PRELIMINARIES
We proceed to introduce the settings and formally define the
problem of anomaly detection in multivariate time series.
A. Settings
Definition 1 (Time Series): A multivariate time series sequence is denoted as X = {X1 , . . . , Xt , . . . , XT }, where Xt ∈
RN ×d is an observation at time t that contains N variables with
d-dimensional features, and T is the length of the time series.
To model the strong temporal dependencies of time series,
we pre-process the original sequences into time windowed sequences.
Definition 2 (Time Windowed Sequence): We denote a
windowed sample at time t with length w as Wt =
{Xt−w+1 , . . . , Xt }, which contains the historical observations
from time t − w + 1 to t in X . Therefore, X is transformed
into a time windowed sequence W = {W1 , . . . , Wt , . . . , WT  },
where T  = T − w + 1.
In order to extract temporal patterns and reduce the impact
of noise, we adopt a feature enrichment method [27], [28]
that uses the moving average to smooth short-term fluctuations and to highlight long-term trends. We denote Xtm as the
moving average value of the latest m times at time t. Note
that, a large m indicates an emphasis on long-term trends.
Based on practitioner’s experiences, we adopt the moving average features of Xt3 , Xt5 for short-term patterns, and those
of Xt10 , Xt20 for long-term patterns, respectively, in order to
obtain abundant temporal features and to reduce the impacts
of noises by both the short and long-term patterns. For ease
of presentation, we use Xt to represent all these moving average features, i.e., Xt = [Xt3 ; Xt5 ; Xt10 ;Xt20 ], where [; ] represents the concatenation operation. Then, we transform Xt
to Wt .

7614

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

The SGAT-AE model.

B. Problem Statement
We study two problems as follows.
1) Anomaly Detection: Given a windowed sample Wt and
the corresponding moving average feature Wt at time
t, SGAT-AE aims to label the observation Xt with yt ∈
{0, 1} by computing an anomaly score St based on the
error between the original input and the model output. If
St is larger than a threshold τ , we label Xt as an anomaly
(yt = 1); otherwise, Xt is labeled as normal (yt = 0).
2) Anomaly Interpretation: The anomaly interpretation is to
answer the question of why an observation is detected
as an anomaly. Given a labeled anomaly Xt , we need to
clarify the dependency relationships among multivariate
and diagnose the root variables that cause the anomaly.
III. SGAT-AE
We proceed to introduce the details of SGAT-AE that consists
of a Self-learning Graph-structured ATtention network (SGAT),
an Auto-Encoder (AE), and an adversarial training component
between SGAT and AE. SGAT models the historical patterns of
multivariate time series to predict the future trends, while AE
learns to reconstruct the original input. The idea of SGAT-AE is
to employ SGAT and AE for adversarial training to amplify the
anomaly error so that the performance of the multivariate time
series anomaly detection is improved.
A. Network Architecture
The model architecture of SGAT-AE is illustrated in Fig. 1.
For the current input Wt :
1) SGAT: To extract the spatial and temporal dependencies
of multivariate time series, we propose a graph neural
network-based multivariate time series forecasting model
SGAT that employs the first (w − p)-step historical observations to predict the following p-step values in Wt .
When p = 1, it is a single-step prediction. When p > 1, it
is a multi-step prediction.
2) AE: To reduce the dimension of multivariate time series,
AE is to learn the latent representations for normal patterns
and then back them into the original input space.
3) Adversarial Training: To improve the prediction accuracy
of SGAT and to avoid overfitting of AE, SGAT is trained
adversarially with AE (shown by the orange dashed arrow
in Fig. 1). Specifically, SGAT works as a generator by

Fig. 2.

The architecture of SGAT.

merging its input and prediction output to obtain a generated sample W̃t , while AE discriminates whether the
input is an original input Wt or a generated input W̃t .
As a result, SGAT-AE enables to amplify the errors of
anomalies through the adversarial training between the
two networks.
B. Multivariate Time Series Forecasting
We propose a graph neural network-based multivariate time
series forecasting model SGAT that aims to model the historical
variable patterns to predict the future trends. Specifically, we
employ a self-learning graph and a graph attention network
to discover spatial relationships among multivariate, while we
utilize multiscale 1D CNNs to extract nonlinear temporal dependencies.
Forecasting Problem: At current time t, we slice Wt to obtain
Xt−w+1:t−p and Xt−p+1:t , which are used as the input and
the target of SGAT, respectively. Similarly, Wt is sliced to

. The goal of SGAT is to learn a mapping
obtain Xt−w+1:t−p
function f that is able to predict X̃t−p+1:t given Xt−w+1:t−p

and Xt−w+1:t−p
.
f


] −→ X̃t−p+1:t ,
[Xt−w+1:t−p , Xt−w+1:t−p

(1)

As illustrated in Fig. 2, SGAT consists of an input layer, q temporal learning modules (TLMs) and spatial-temporal learning
modules (STLMs), and an output layer. The value of q depends
on the problem complexity and we set q to 2. Both of the input
layer and the output layer are fully connected layers. The input
layer first projects the input Xt−w+1:t−p into a latent space.
Then, it is processed in parallel by the following chains.
1) In the upper chain, it is first concatenated with the moving

to enrich the temporal feaaverage feature Xt−w+1:t−p
tures, and is then processed by TLMs to extract nonlinear
temporal dependencies.
2) In the lower chain, it is processed by STLMs to mine
hidden spatial dependencies and to extract temporal dependencies simultaneously.
The results of the two chains are concatenated and then taken
into the output layer to return the following p-step result, i.e.,
X̃t−p+1:t ∈ Rp×N ×d . It is worth noting that residual and skip
operations [29] are employed to prevent network degradation.
The loss function of SGAT is:
Losspred = ||Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t ||22 ,

(2)

ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 3.

this problem. Graph WaveNet [33] builds an adaptive graph
structure through node similarity, and its adjacency matrix A
is symmetric and bidirectional. In fact, the relationships among
nodes (variables) may be directed. Consider an example in a
water treatment plant. A change in sensor 1 will cause a change
in sensor 2, but not vice versa. MTGNN [29] proposes a directed graph, which is more realistic in real-world applications.
However, the edge weights may be negative which results in
unnatural relationships. To solve the problem, we build directed
relationships among multivariate time series as follows:

Spatial-temporal learning module (STLM).

where || · ||2 represents L2-norm.
1) Temporal Learning Module (TLM): As different variables
have different trends, the temporal dependencies in multivariate
time series are diversified. To address this issue, we employ
1D convolution filters [30] with multiple sizes to extract richer
temporal features. Therefore, different convolution filters can
adapt to temporal patterns of different variables.
The temporal learning module (TLM) consists of 1D convolution filters with multiple sizes [29], i.e., Γ2×1 ∈ R2 , Γ3×1 ∈ R2 ,
and Γ5×1 ∈ R2 . The intuition is that these filters can be combined into multiple temporal lengths, such as 7, 9, 12, and so on.
It is worth noting that we can choose more convolution filters
according to the problem complexity. Consider the current input
Zin , the output of TLM is computed as follows:
Zout = Concat(Zin ∗ Γ2×1 , Zin ∗ Γ3×1 , Zin ∗ Γ5×1 ),

7615

(3)

where ∗ denotes the convolution operation and Concat(·) denotes the concatenation operation. Note that, a sequence with
time axis length h is reduced to h − k + 1 after passing through a
filter of Γk×1 with stride 1 and no padding. Therefore, the outputs
of the three filters are truncated to a same length according to
the filter Γ5×1 and then concatenated in the channel dimension.
2) Spatial-Temporal Learning Module (STLM): In addition,
it is also challenging to extract the complex spatial dependencies
in multivariate time series since the causal relationships among
multivariate are unknown. To address this issue, we transform
the multivariate time series forecasting problem to a graph node
prediction problem that aims to learn a graph with dependency
relationships among multivariate.
Fig. 3 shows the details of the spatial-temporal learning module (STLM) that consists of two identical structures. For each
structure, we consider variables as nodes in a graph and employ
a self-learning graph to build topological relationships via node
embedding technology [31]. Thereafter, a graph attention network is used to extract spatial dependencies among nodes. By
combing with a TLM, we extract the spatial dependencies and
temporal dependencies simultaneously. We use a gate linear unit
(GLU) [32] to model the complex nonlinearity. The one followed
by a sigmoid activation function works as a gate to control the
information output from the other one, where σ is the sigmoid
function and ⊗ denotes the Hadamard product.
Self-learning Graph: The self-learning graph aims to learn
an adjacency matrix A without any additional prior knowledge
through an end-to-end manner using the stochastic gradient
algorithm. However, there exist only few studies focusing on

f or i = 1, 2, . . . , N :
A[:, i] = Sof tM ax(tanh(ηE2 Θ2 E1T [i, :])),
A[i, :] = Sof tM ax(tanh(ηE1 [i, :]Θ1 E2T )),

(4)

where Θ1 , Θ2 are learnable parameters, E1 , E2 ∈ RN ×c are
node embeddings and c is the embedding dimension. These
parameters are optimized by the back-propagation algorithm
after random initialization during training. η is the zoom factor.
The in-degree weights A[:, i] and the out-degree weights A[i, :]
of each node are different, which ensures that A is asymmetric.
We use the tanh activation function to scale the weights of edges
to the same interval and then normalize through the Sof tM ax
function. Note that A is a fully-connected graph in (4). To
eliminate weak connections, for each node i (i = 1, 2, . . . , N ),
we only select k nodes with the largest edge weights as its
neighbors, and set the weights of the other nodes to 0.
Graph Attention Network: We employ a graph attention-based
approach to aggregate the node’s information with its neighbors
base on the self-learning graph A in terms of the correlation
weights among nodes. Different from the classic GAT [34] that
only considers the time series node features to obtain attention
scores, we take into account the node embeddings obtained
from the process of graph construction. The intuition is that
the information is transmitted among nodes through A, while
node embeddings represent the graph structure. Therefore, the
attention score αij between nodes i and j is computed as follows:
eij =

< [v i ; M Wti ], [v j ; M Wtj ] >
√
,
Dim

αij = 

exp(eij )
,
k∈N (i) exp(eik )

(5)
(6)

where v i and v j denote the embedings of nodes i and j, Wti and
Wtj represent the time series features of nodes i and j at time t,
respectively. M is a trainable weight matrix. M Wti represents
the transformed feature of node i. < ·, · > denotes the inner
product operation, and Dim is the dimension of [v i ; M Wti ].
Then, the attention score is normalized.
Thereafter, the aggregated representation Zti of node i at time
t is computed as follows:
⎞
⎛

Zti = σ ⎝M Wti +
(7)
αij M Wtj ⎠ ,
j∈N (i)

7616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

where N (i) = {j|Aji > 0} represents the neighbors of node i
obtained from the self-learning graph A. σ denotes the sigmoid
activation function.

Algorithm 1: SGAT-AE Training.

C. Auto-Encoder
The Auto-Encoder (AE) learns to reconstruct the original
input. It consists of an encoder E and a decoder D. The encoder
maps the origin input Wt into a latent representation Z and
then the decoder maps it back into the input space to obtain a
reconstruction AE(Wt ). The reconstruction error between the
original input Wt and the reconstruction AE(Wt ) is calculated
as follows:
Lossrec = ||Wt − AE(Wt )||22 ,

(8)

where AE(Wt ) = D(Z) and Z = E(Wt ). On the one hand, AE
is supposed to achieve accurate reconstruction by minimizing
the error Lossrec . On the other hand, if AE is too sensitive
to the input data, AE may only learn a mapping relationship
from the input to the reconstruction, resulting in overfitting.
To avoid this problem, AE is usually optimized by choosing
a reasonable dimension of the latent representation Z or adding
a regularization term. We train AE in an adversarial manner to
avoid overfitting.
D. Adversarial Training
SGAT and AE are two different anomaly detection methods.
The former is a prediction-based method that considers the
prediction error as the anomaly score, while the latter is a
reconstruction-based method that uses the reconstruction error as the anomaly score. They both regard observation samples with high scores as anomalies. However, they both have
shortcomings. SGAT models the historical patterns of multivariate time series, which is susceptible to noise. AE is overparameterized [15] and is easy to fit with anomalies, which
means that the reconstruction error of AE is small when the
anomaly is close to the normal data, making it difficult to detect
the anomaly correctly. Therefore, the core of improving anomaly
detection performance is how to amplify the error of anomalies.
This problem can be solved if AE is able to identify whether
an input sample is normal or not before reconstruction. The
generative adversarial network (GAN) technique [13] is a feasible solution that is based on a two-player minimax adversarial
game between two networks trained simultaneously. However,
the classic GAN neglects the spatial and temporal dependencies
in multivariate time series. Therefore, we employ the prediction
model SGAT and AE for adversarial training to combine their
advantages to break through the bottleneck and to improve the
performance of anomaly detection in multivariate time series.
Specifically, the input and the prediction result of SGAT are
merged to obtain a generated sample W̃t , which is reconstructed
by AE into AE(W̃t ). Therefore, the adversarial loss function
and the objective function of adversarial training are computed
as follows:
Lossadv = ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 ,

(9)

min max Lossadv ,

(10)

SGAT AE

On the one hand, SGAT acts as a generator with the goal
of minimizing adversarial error Lossadv , as it wishes to make
accurate predictions to generate sufficiently realistic sample W̃t
to confuse AE. Consider the prediction error of SGAT itself in
(2), the adversarial training objective of SGAT is computed as
follows:
Loss1 = Losspred + Lossadv
= ||Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t ||22 + ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 ,
(11)
On the other hand, AE acts as a discriminator with the goal
of maximizing the adversarial error Lossadv as it aims to distinguish whether the input is a real sample Wt or a generated
sample W̃t from SGAT. Consider the reconstruction error of AE
itself in (8), the adversarial training objective of AE is computed
as follows:
Loss2 = Lossrec − Lossadv
= ||Wt − AE(Wt )||22 − ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 ,

(12)

It is worth noting that SGAT and AE both have two optimization objectives, the weights of the two optimization objectives
should change with time [5]. So Loss1 and Loss2 are modified
as follows:
Loss1 =

1
||Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t ||22
n

ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION


+ 1−
Loss2 =

1
n

||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 ,

1
||Wt − AE(Wt )||22
n

1
− 1−
||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 ,
n

(13)

(14)

IV. ANOMALY DETECTION AND INTERPRETATION
We proceed to introduce the anomaly detection approach. In
addition to detecting the anomalies, we also aim to locate the root
causes of the anomalies based on the relationships in the selflearning graph. We first compute an anomaly score to determine
whether an observation is anomalous or not. Then, the anomaly
interpretation is applied.
A. Anomaly Score
The anomaly score is closely related to the anomaly detection
model since it is computed based on the error between the ground
truth and the model output. As SGAT-AE consists of SGAT,
AE, and an adversarial training component, the output brings
the prediction error, the reconstruction error, and the adversarial
error. Consider these three kinds of errors, we first compute
individual scores for each variable, and then aggregate them into
a single score. Specifically, the anomaly score St of observation
Xt is computed as follows:
(1) Time Dimension Aggregation Error: To pay more attention
to the moment with the largest gap between the ground truth and
the model output, we use the max function as the aggregation
function and compute the error of each variable over time as
follows:
Errpred = maxt |Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t |,
Errrec = maxt |Wt − AE(Wt )|,
Erradv = maxt |Wt − AE(W̃t )|,

(2) Variable Aggregation Error: Since the anomalies mainly
affect a small number of variables, or even a single variable, we
use the max function to aggregate the errors of N variables to
obtain signal anomaly scores as follows:
Scorepred =
Scorerec =

where n denotes a training epoch. According to the above
description, SGAT tries to minimize both the prediction error
and the reconstruction error of W̃t during the adversarial training
process. Besides, AE tries to minimize the reconstruction error
of Wt but to maximize that of W̃t to amplify the reconstruction
discrepancy of abnormal input samples. In order to speed up the
convergence of SGAT-AE, we adopt a strategy of combining
individual training and adversarial training for SGAT and AE,
which means that the parameters of each network are updated
twice for each mini-batch samples. The specific training process
is summarized in Algorithm 1.

(15)

where Errpred ∈ RN , Errrec ∈ RN , Erradv ∈ RN represent
the prediction error, the reconstruction error, and the adversarial
error, respectively. Since different variables may have different
properties, they may also have different variation ranges. It is
possible that the bias generated by one variable over-dominates
the other variables. To avoid this issue, we normalize the error
of each variable.

7617

Scoreadv =

max

Erripred ,

max

Errirec ,

max

Erriadv ,

i∈{1,2,...,N }
i∈{1,2,...,N }
i∈{1,2,...,N }

(16)

where i represents the ith variable, and Erri denotes the normalization error of the ith variable.
(3) Aggregation Anomaly Score of Three Components: By
combining the three kinds of errors, the final anomaly score St
is aggregated as follows:
St = β1 Scorepred + β2 Scorerec + β3 Scoreadv ,

(17)

where β1 , β2 , and β3 are the corresponding weights of the
three kinds of anomaly scores, and β1 + β2 + β3 = 1. Different
weights may result in different anomaly score St , and they are
used to trade off between false negatives and false positives.
A large β1 means that we pay more attention to the prediction
error, so as a large β2 to the reconstruction error and a large
β3 to the adversarial error. The regulation of β1 , β2 , and β3
allows parameterizing the sensitivity of SGAT-AE to meet the
requirements of a production environment. For example, in an
industry company, managers may prefer a low sensitivity level,
limiting the number of false positives but warning them only
in case of important incidents, while technicians may prefer a
high sensitivity level that limits the number of false negatives.
Therefore, we adopt 0.05, 0.05, 0.9 as the values of β1 , β2 , and
β3 since the adversarial error is amplified by SGAT-AE, in order
to achieve a high sensitivity from a technician view.
Finally, an observation Xt at time t is labeled as an anomaly
if St exceeds a threshold τ . Since the performance of anomaly
detection is sensitive to the threshold τ , it needs to be set
reasonably. On the one hand, if τ is too large, only a small
number of the observations are labeled as abnormal, while most
of the anomalies are not identified. For the false negatives, they
may cause major equipment problems and even heavy losses.
On the other hand, if the threshold τ is too small, most of the
observations including the normal data are labeled as abnormal.
For the false positives, the risk of excessive security warning
exists that may result in an unnecessary waste of resources.
Therefore, the threshold τ requires a trade-off between false
negatives and false positives. We employ the selection method
proposed in OmniAnomaly [2] to set the threshold τ .
B. Anomaly Interpretation
Different from anomaly detection, the anomaly interpretation is a more complex task. For a labeled anomaly Xt , the
anomaly interpretation is to analyze which main variables cause
the anomaly so that the operators can locate quickly the root
cause. DAEMON [23] identifies the top-k variables with the
largest errors as the interpretation of anomaly. It makes sense

7618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

to some extent, but it fails to take the dependency relationship
among multivariate into account. Consider an example in a water
treatment plant. The change of sensor 1 will cause the change
of sensor 2, but the value change of sensor 1 is smaller than that
of sensor 2. When an anomaly occurs, DAEMON treats sensor
2 as the root cause which is incorrect since sensor 1 is the true
root cause variable of the anomaly.
To avoid the issue, we propose a graph structure-based
anomaly interpretation method. Specifically, we clarify the
dependency relationships among variables before performing
anomaly interpretation and then locate the root variables from
both local and global perspectives. For a labeled anomaly Xt .
r Local Anomaly Interpretation: First, the node (variable)
with the largest prediction error determined by (16) is taken
as an anomaly node. Then, its neighbors are obtained according to the self-learning graph structure. Specifically, its
in-degree neighbors and itself are regarded as the candidate
nodes of the root cause variables of the anomaly, while
its out-degree neighbors help understand the direction of
anomaly error propagation. As in the above example, we
take sensor 2 as an anomaly node. The directed dependency
relationship between sensors 1 and 2 is learned by SGATAE and is reflected in the self-learning graph structure,
where sensor 1 is sensor 2’s in-degree neighbor. In a result,
both of the two nodes are regarded as candidate nodes that
cause the anomaly.
r Global Anomaly Interpretation: According to the selflearning graph, the nodes with only out-degree neighbors
and no in-degree neighbors are regarded as a main cause
node set, and the nodes with in-degree neighbors are dependent nodes. We select the largest top-k prediction errors
in the main cause node set as the root cause variable of
the anomaly, regardless of the dependent nodes. As in the
above example, we regard sensor 1 as the main cause node
and sensor 2 as the dependent node. Therefore, sensor 1 is
correctly regard as the root cause of the anomaly.
We take the candidate results from both local and global
perspectives as the final interpretation results, so that we can
diagnose the anomalies quickly and correctly. Section V-C2
demonstrates case studies.
V. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
A. Experimental Settings
The SGAT-AE model is implemented in Python3 with Pytorch. All experiments are run on a Linux (Ubuntu 18.04 LTS)
machine with a NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU card. We use five
publicly available datasets with labeled ground-truth anomalies
to evaluate our model. Table I summaries the dataset statistics.
r SWaT (Secure Water Treatment):1 The dataset originates
from a test bench for a real water treatment plant. It consists
of 11 days of continuous operation: the first 7 days collected
under normal operations are regarded as the training set and
the last 4 days collected with attack scenarios are regarded
as the testing set.

TABLE I
DATASET STATISTICS

r WADI (Water Distribution):2 The dataset is an extension of
SWaT dataset. It consists of 16 days of continuous operation: the first 14 days collected under normal operations
are regarded as the training set and the last 2 days with
attack scenarios are regarded as the testing set.
r SMD (Server Machine Dataset):3 The dataset is a new 5week-long dataset collected from a large Internet company.
It is collected from 28 different machines that form 28
subsets. Each subset is divided into two parts with equal
length for training and testing.
r SMAP (Soil Moisture Active Passive) and MSL (Mars
Science Laboratory):4 These two datasets are labeled by
experts from NASA and are anonymized w.r.t. time. The
testing set size of SMAP is more than 3 times of the training
set while the testing set size of MSL is roughly 1.2 times
of the training set.
Methods for Comparison: To study the performance of SGATAE for multivariate time series anomaly detection, we compare
it with the following methods:
r AE [10]: A encoder-decoder architecture with three fullyconnected layers that compresses the input into a latent
representation and then maps it back to the input space.
r LSTM-VAE [35]: A reconstruction-based model that replaces the feed-forward network of VAE with LSTM to
extract temporal dependencies.
r LSTM-NDT [1]: A prediction-based model with a nonparametric anomaly threshold, which employs LSTM to
predict future trend based on the historical observations.
r DAGMM [36]: A prediction-based model that utilizes a
deep AE to generate a low-dimensional representation and
reconstruction error for each input, which is further fed into
a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM).
r BeatGAN [14]: A reconstruction-based model that employs
an AE to work as a generator and uses an adversarial
generation network to guarantee the robustness.
r OmniAnomaly [2]: A reconstruction-based model that
adopts a stochastic recurrent neural network model that
glues GRU and VAE to learn the normal patterns of multivariate time series and uses the reconstruction probability
for anomaly judgement.
r USAD [5]: A reconstruction-based model that consists of
two AEs sharing the same encoder for adversarial training.
r GDN [26]: A prediction-based model that combines a
structure learning approach with graph neural networks,
2 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs_datasets/dataset_info/#wadi
3 https://github.com/smallcowbaby/OmniAnomaly

1 https://github.com/JulienAu/Anomaly_Detection_Tuto

4 https://github.com/khundman/telemanom

ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

7619

TABLE II
COMPARISON WITH BASELINE MODELS

and uses attention weights to provide the explainability for
the detected anomalies.
r TranAD [18]: A reconstruction-based model that employs
a encoder-decoder model structure utilizing Transformer.
TranAD leverages self-conditioning and adversarial training to amplify errors and gain training stability.
r GTA [17]: A prediction-based model. GTA involves automatically learning a graph structure, graph convolution,
and modeling temporal dependency using a Transformerbased architecture.
r RANSynCoders [37]: RANSynCoders utilizes AutoEncoder to extract features from the original asynchronous
time series, and then performs Fourier transform analysis
on the sequence features to learn phase differences. Thus
align asynchronous time series and obtain synchronous
time series representations.
Evaluation Metrics: We use Precision (Pre), Recall (Rec), and
F1-score (F1) to evaluate the performance.
P re =

TP
2 ∗ P re ∗ Rec
TP
, Rec =
, F1 =
TP + FP
TP + FN
P re + Rec

where TP, TN, FP, and FN are the numbers of true positives,
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively.
In practice, the anomalies often occur continuously so that
the contiguous anomaly segments are formed. Therefore, it is acceptable if an alert is triggered within any subset of a contiguous
anomaly segment. Thus, we adopt a commonly used point-adjust
approach [2] to measure the performance. That is, if at least one
observation in an anomalous segment is detected correctly, all
the other observations in the segment are also treated as detected
correctly, even if they are not.
Parameter Settings: We summarize the parameter settings of
SGAT-AE as follows.
r SGAT: For the self-learning graph, we embed node IDs with
length of 32, k with 10, hidden layers with 32 neurons, and
the zoom factor η is 3. We use two layers of TLM and
STLM. The number of channels in the first and second
layers are 32 and 64, respectively.
r AE: AE is composed of two symmetrical deep networks
with three fully-connected layers. The latent dimension of
Z is set by default to 5 in SWaT, 3 in WADI, 3 in SMD,
1 in SMAP, 1 in MSL, respectively.

r Data Preprocessing and Training: We set by default the
window size w to 15, and predict the future 3-step values
(p = 3) with d = 1 for all datasets. The random seed is
666, the batch size of the random gradient descent is 1024,
and the dropout rate is 0.1. After randomly initializing the
learnable parameters, we train SGAT-AE up to 80 epochs
by using the Adam optimizer with the default learning rate
0.001.
B. Results of Anomaly Detection
1) Comparison With Baseline Models: Table II shows the
performances of different methods for anomaly detection in
multivariate time series. We have the following observations:
1) In general, the prediction-based methods, such as LSTMNDT and DAGMM, show unsatisfactory performance. Although these methods can capture temporal dependencies
in multivariate time series, they ignore the hidden spatial
dependencies, thus restricting their performances. GTA
and GDN employ the graph structure to learn the hidden
correlations and improves the performance. Although they
use down-sampling strategy to reduce the noise impact,
true anomalies are still missed.
2) The reconstruction-based methods, including AE and
BeatGAN, exhibit poor performance since they are affected by overfitting. USAD employs the adversarial training to amplify the reconstruction error, and has achieved
better performance. But these methods all ignore temporal dependencies, which limits the performance improvement. LSTM-VAE, OmniAnomaly, and TranAD adopt
RNNs and Transformer to extract temporal dependencies
while doing a reconstruction, respectively. They all exhibit
good performance in SMD, SMAP, and MSL. However,
they all ignore the hidden complex dependencies between
multivariate. The deficiency is pronounced obviously in
WADI of which the node dimension is highest. It can be
observed that the graph learning based methods such as
GDN, GTA, and our SGAT-AE outperforms others significantly since the graph structure helps to mine the spatial
correlation among nodes. As for RANSynCoders, which
is a time series representation learning based method. It
exhibits significantly poor performance in WADI when
the variation of data dissatisfies periodicity.

7620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE III
COMPARISON WITH VARIANTS OF SGAT-AE

3) SGAT-AE achieves the best performance in most datasets
except slightly worse than USAD in MSL. Specifically, SGAT extracts temporal dependencies and hidden spatial dependencies simultaneously, and AE successfully reduces the impact of noise. Moreover, its
adversarial training combines the advantages of the
above two parts, and makes SGAT-AE more robust.
More specifically, SGAT-AE improves the F1 score by
12.8% in SWaT, 20.3% in WADI, 1.8% in SMD, and
0.7% in SMAP over the most competitive methods,
respectively, and the performance difference in WADI
is the most statistically significant. SGAT-AE outperforms the other methods in terms of both the Precision
and Recall, where it increases the Precision from 0.796
(GDN) to 0.827 and the Recall from 0.827 (TranAD)
to 0.999.
2) Ablation Study: To evaluate the effects of different components in our model, we compare different variants of SGATAE, including:
r Removing moving average (RemMA).
r Removing AE (RemAE).
r Removing SGAT (RemSGAT).
r Removing adversarial training (RemAT): We remove the
adversarial training process and the adjusted anomaly score
St∗ is aggregated as follows:
St∗ = β1 Scorepred + β2 Scorerec

(18)

where we adopt 0.5, 0.5 as the values of β1 and β2 .

r Replacing SGAT with LSTM (LSTM-AE).
r Replacing SGAT with CNN (CNN-AE).
r Replacing SGAT with AGCRN [38] (AGCRN-AE):
AGCRN is also a GNN-based prediction model with an
adaptive graph structure. Specifically, it designs a node
adaptive parameter learning module and an adaptive graph
generation module to capture the dynamic spatial-temporal
correlations in multivariate time series.
The results are shown in Table III. We have four observations.
1) Without moving average, the model has poor performance.
This is because moving average can reduce the effect of
noise and is beneficial to extract richer temporal patterns
for prediction.
2) No matter removing SGAT or AE from SGAT-AE,
the performance degrades. Specifically, RemSGAT is
a reconstruction-based model, while RemAE is a
prediction-based anomaly detection model. The performance of RemSGAT drops greatly, which indicates that

SGAT makes a great contribution to SGAT-AE. Moreover,
both models have limited performance without the adversarial training.
3) The performance decreases significantly without adversarial training. The reason is that the model degenerates
into two independent parts SGAT and AE. SGAT focuses
solely on minimizing prediction errors as its optimization
objective, while AE’s objective is restricted to minimizing
reconstruction errors.
4) The experimental results show an interesting phenomenon. The methods that adopt AE, such as RemSGAT,
LSTM-AE, and CNN-AE, perform worse than AE itself
in datasets SMAP and MSL. It means that the additional
network structures actually have a side effect. We believe
the reason for the poor performance of RemSGAT is that
the original AE is simplified in our model with fewer layers
and parameters. As for the reason for the performance of
LSTM-AE and CNN-AE, a probable explanation is that
they are not able to construct graph structures and model
the spatial relationship among node variables. Therefore,
they fail to generate high-quality prediction results and
adversarial samples.
5) The performance is improved by considering the hidden
relationships between variables. Replacing SGAT with
AGCRN has better performance than that with classical LSTM or CNN. The reason is that both LSTM and
CNN ignore the hidden relationships between multivariate, while AGCRN discovers the relationship through a
self-learning graph and a graph neural network and has
more accurate prediction results.
6) SGAT-AE achieves the best performance, followed by
AGCRN-AE. Since SGAT learns a directed graph structure while AGCRN learns an undirected one. In fact, the
dependence patterns between multivariate are asymmetric, thus a directed graph learned by SGAT-AE makes
more sense. Moreover, SGAT employs multiple convolution filters with different sizes to extract richer temporal
features. Unlike GRU in AGCRN, the CNNs in SGAT-AE
are computed in parallel. Therefore, SGAT-AE is more
efficient and suitable for real-time anomaly detection.
Overall, the results indicate that SGAT-AE is capable of
outperforming the competitors.
3) Parameter Study: We study the effects of different parameters on the performance of SGAT-AE. Note that, when we vary
the value of a parameter, the other parameters are set to the
default values.

ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 4.

7621

The effects of parameters.

Effect of the Window Size w: Since the time series has strong
nonlinear temporal dependencies, the current observation Xt
is checked whether it is abnormal by taking the sequence Wt
with window size w as the input of SGAT-AE. Only short-term
temporal dependencies are considered when w is small, while
long-term temporal dependencies can be extracted when w is
large. However, as w increases, the training speed slows down
and the prediction difficulty rises. Fig. 4(a) shows the F1 scores
when varying w in all datasets. We can see that when w is 15,
the method achieves the best performance. So it is the best trade
off between short-term and long-term temporal dependencies,
and it enables both fast training and anomaly detection.
Effect of the Prediction Step p: SGAT conducts p-step prediction. On the one hand, the prediction error of SGAT increases
as p increases. On the other hand, the predicted value X̃t−p+1:t
deviates more from the ground truth, resulting in a larger deviation of the generated data W̃t . It is equivalent to increasing
the effect of noise disturbance, which is beneficial to avoid the
overfitting in AE under the adversarial training. Fig. 4(b) shows
that the F1 scores when varying p in all datasets. Specifically,
F1 score first gradually increases with the increase of p, which
is beneficial to the improvement of AE. Then, F1 score gradually decreases as p increases to a certain extent, indicating
that the prediction error of SGAT is too large and weakens
the overall performance. Therefore, p is set to a medium-large
value 3.
Effect of the Dimension of Z: The dimension of the latent
representation Z of AE is assumed to be smaller than that of
the original data. On the one hand, if the dimension of Z is
large, AE may only learn a mapping relationship from input to
reconstruction, resulting in overfitting. On the other hand, the
dimension of Z is too small, which may lead to underfitting.
However, there is no standard strategy for choosing Z. Different
datasets have different values, which are all set by experience and
fine-tuned according to the experimental results. Fig. 4(c) shows
the F1 scores when varying the dimension of Z in all datasets.
We can see that the performance does not change significantly
as the dimension of Z increases. It is because that the adversarial
training employed in SGAT-AE improves the robustness of AE.
According to the results in Fig. 4(c), the dimension of Z is set
to 5, 3, 3, 1, and 1 in SWaT, WADI, SMD, SMAP, and MSL
datasets, respectively.

TABLE IV
COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT SCORING WEIGHTS

Effect of the anomaly scoring weights. Different weights of
β1 , β2 , and β3 will result in different anomaly score St , and
they are used to trade off between false negatives and false
positives. A larger β1 corresponds to giving more importance
to the prediction of SGAT-AE in St , while β2 corresponds to
the reconstruction of AE, and β3 corresponds to the adversarial
training. The changes of scoring weights can tune the detection
sensitivity.
We conduct multiple experiments of varying β1 , β2 , and β3 in
SWAT to evaluate the effect of the anomaly scoring weights. Due
to the space limitation, Table IV only reports some representative
experimental results of Precision, Recall, and F1-Score. It can
be observed that the anomaly scoring strategy adopted in our
method as β1 = 0.05, β2 = 0.05, and β3 = 0.9 attains the best
F1-score and Recall. It indicates that our strategy can not only
achieve the best anomaly detection performance but also the
highest sensitivity.
C. Results of Anomaly Interpretation
1) Comparison With Baseline Models: For a labeled
anomaly Xt , we locate the root variables that cause the anomaly
from both local and global perspectives based on the selflearning graph. We use ASt to represent the root variables suggested by SGAT-AE, which are ordered by the errors. To evaluate
the anomaly interpretation quality, we adopt the HitRate@P %
proposed in [2] as follows:
HitRate@P % =

Hit@P % × |GTt |
|GTt |

(19)

where |GTt | is the length of ground truth array containing the
variables indeed contributing to anomaly, and P is selected from

7622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF ANOMALY INTERPRETATION

Fig. 6. Attack example 1 on sensor 1_F IT _001_P V and the sensor
1_P _001_ST AT U S with the largest anomaly score.
Fig. 5. The self-learning graph in WADI (the red nodes: 1_P _001_ST AT U S
and 2_F Q_401_P V , the blue nodes: 1_F IT _001_P V
and
2_M CV _007_CO)

{100, 150, 200}. Hit@P % equals the number of overlapping
variables between GTt and the top P % × |GTt | contributing
variables in ASt over |GTt |. If the root variables we obtain is
fewer than P % × |GTt | , we choose the node with the second largest prediction error and its in-degree neighnors as root
variables and repeat this until obtaining at least P % × |GTt |
variables.
Since only SMD has the ground truth for anomaly interpretation, we compare SGAT-AE with OmniAnomaly and USAD
in SMD. Note that, OmniAnomaly identifies the top-k variables
with the lowest reconstruction probabilities as the interpretation
of anomalies, while USAD obtains the top-k variables with
the largest reconstruction errors. Table V shows the values of
HitRate@P % when varying P in SMD. SGAT-AE achieves
the best performance as we locate the root cause variables from
both local and global perspectives based on the self-learning
dependence graph.
2) Case Study: We proceed to discuss how to locate anomalies. The edges in the graph structure learned by SGAT represent
the dependency relationships among multivariate, thereby providing explanation for anomaly localization. Fig. 5 shows the
self-learning graph in WADI dataset, followed by case studies
to further demonstrate how to use this graph structure to locate
and explain an anomaly.
We study a case where the cause of an anomaly is already
known. As recorded in WADI dataset, at around 10:00 October
10, 2017, the sensor 1_F IT _001_P V that monitored the water
flow was attacked, resulting in abnormal value via false reading.
As shown in Fig. 6(a), the false reading results in a sharp rise in

the observation value, but it is within the normal variation range
for this sensor, so detecting this anomaly is nontrivial (The red
shaded area indicates the anomalous time period).
Fig. 6(b) shows the predictions and observations of sensor 1_P _001_ST AT U S with the highest anomaly score during this attack. Since the anomaly score is greater than the
threshold τ , the observations are determined to be abnormal
and sensor 1_P _001_ST AT U S is considered as an abnormal sensor with the highest score, which indicates that sensor
1_P _001_ST AT U S is the attacked object, or is closely related
to the attacked sensor.
The self-learning neighbor relationships indicate the dependencies among nodes (sensors). As shown in Fig. 5, the
red node on the right side represents the labeled abnormal
sensor 1_P _001_ST AT U S and its neighbors are connected
with red edges, while the blue node on the right side represents the real abnormal sensor 1_F IT _001_P V . From a local
perspective, 1_F IT _001_P V has the largest graph attention
weight among the in-degree neighbors of 1_P _001_ST AT U S,
so the abnormal pattern of 1_P _001_ST AT U S is likely
caused by its neighbor 1_F IT _001_P V . From a global
perspective, 1_P _001_ST AT U S is a dependent node,
and 1_F IT _001_P V is the main cause node. Then,
1_F IT _001_P V is considered to be the cause of the anomaly
because it has the highest abnormal score in all main cause
nodes. Overall, 1_F IT _001_P V is regarded as the main
cause of the anomaly from both local and global perspectives. In fact, 1_P _001_ST AT U S shows the valve status
of the flow measured by 1_F IT _001_P V . During the attack, the false reading of 1_F IT _001_P V leads its value to
arise, and thus 1_P _001_ST AT U S responds to this change.
SGAT-AE learns the dependence between 1_F IT _001_P V

ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

7623

VI. RELATED WORK
A. Anomaly Detection

Fig. 7. Attack example 2 on sensor 2_M CV _007_CO and sensor
2_F Q_401_P V with the largest anomaly score

and 1_P _001_ST AT U S. The learned historical change pattern of 1_P _001_ST AT U S fails to predict the mutation situation, resulting in a large prediction error. Then, the cause
of the anomaly can be located from the highest anomaly
score.
Another anomaly case in WADI is recorded at around 17:40,
October 10, 2017 that lasted for ten minutes. The sensor
2_M CV _007_CO was attacked, resulting in a continuous rise
in the observation value. Fig. 7 shows the predictions and observations of sensor 2_M CV _007_CO itself and 2_F Q_401_P V
with the largest prediction error during the attack. Since the
anomaly score of 2_F Q_401_P V is greater than the threshold, the observations of this time period are correctly determined to be abnormal even though the anomaly score of
2_M CV _007_CO is within the threshold.
We observe that the observation value of sensor
2_F Q_401_P V also shows a rise during the attack, which
indicates that it is affected by the attacked sensor. It is confirmed
in the self-learning graph. As shown in Fig. 5, the attacked
sensor 2_M CV _007_CO (the blue node on the left side) is the
in-degree neighbor of sensor 2_F Q_401_P V (the red node on
the left side). From the local perspective, the two sensors are
regarded as the candidate nodes of the root cause variables of
the anomaly with the largest prediction error. From the global
perspective, 2_M CV _007_CO is considered as the abnormal
node since it has the largest prediction error in all main cause
nodes. So we accurately identify sensor 2_M CV _007_CO
as the root cause node from the two perspectives. According
to the case studies, we can see that SGAT-AE is effective
for multivariate time series anomaly detection and anomaly
localization.

Anomaly detection aims to detect observations which
significantly deviate from the other observations. Classical unsupervised learning methods consist of distance-based methods [6], [39], [40], [41], [42], density-based methods [43],
cluster-based methods [44], and classification-based methods [8], [45]. Matrix Profile [41], [42], [46] is a series of
state-of-the-art distance-based methods. However, most of them
deal with dependencies in a linear manner.
Recently, many deep learning-based methods have been proposed to extract more complex nonlinear features. The mainstream methods can be divided into prediction-based methods [1], [9] and reconstruction-based methods [10], [11], [12],
[13]. Specifically, prediction-based anomaly detection methods
model the normal patterns of historical time series to predict
the future trends, and thereafter employ the prediction errors to
determine anomalies. These methods extract nonlinear temporal
dependencies in multivariate time series, but they are easily
affected by noise. Reconstruction-based methods learn latent
representations of normal data patterns and then reconstruct the
original input, and thereafter use the reconstruction errors to detect anomalies. Although these methods can reduce the influence
of noise, they are prone to be overfitting and ignore nonlinear
temporal dependencies. GANs [13], [14] and VAEs [12] are
generative models for learning normal data distributions and use
the reconstruction probabilities to determine anomalies. More
recently, ensemble models [15], [16] are proposed to improve
the performance by combining the advantages of multiple base
models. In addition, transformer-based methods [17], [18] are
proposed that use attention-based autoencoders for reconstruction. USAD [5] consists of two AEs sharing the same encoder
for adversarial training, which allows to amplify the anomaly
errors. RCA [15] employs collaborative AEs to jointly identify
normal observations from the data while learning its feature
representation. GAN ensemble [16] employs multiple GANs
and can better model the distribution of normal data.
However, those methods do not consider the hidden relationships among variables. GDN [26] employs a self-learning
structure approach with graph neural networks and then uses the
attention weights to provide explainability for detected anomalies. It misses many anomalies with down-sampling strategy,
which is not reasonable. Unlike above methods, we employ a
self-learning graph and an attention network to discover the
hidden relationships among multivariate and employ AE to
reconstruct the normal patterns. A novel adversarial training is
designed to amplify the anomaly error and improve robustness.
In addition, we propose a graph based anomaly diagnosis method
to explain anomalies.
B. Graph Based Multivariate Problems
As is known to all, many multivariate problems with spatial
correlation can be solved by constructing graph structures since
the edges of the graph more or less indicate the correlation of
nodes.

7624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Existing approaches generally model the behavior of multivariate time series based on graph neural network (GNN)
to extract spatial-temporal dependencies. They transform the
multivariate time series forecasting problem as the graph forecasting problem by employing graphs to represent the dependent
relationships between multivariate and employ GNNs to extract
spatial dependencies.
The traffic forecasting problem is one of the typical multivariate time series forecasting problems, which has been extensively
explored. STGCN [24] captures temporal and spatial dependencies by using 2D convolutional networks and graph convolutional networks, respectively. Graph WaveNet [33] learns a
self-adaptive adjacency matrix and combines graph convolution
with dilated casual convolution to capture spatial and temporal
dependencies. MTGNN [29] is a general GNN-based framework
designed specifically for multivariate time series data.
Moreover, in the process of building graph structures, selflearning (self-adaptive) graph structures can be used in such
scenario. AGCRN [38] designs a node adaptive parameter learning module and a data adaptive graph generation module to
capture the dynamic spatial-temporal correlations. [47] utilizes
the lifelong graph learning algorithm when dealing with out of
distribution detection problems by proposing a novel neighborhood aggregate method.
Last but not least, graph learning method could be combined
with AE or adversarial learning. DAGNN [48] employs the dual
generative adversarial networks and the graph neural networks
to learn modality-invariant and discriminative common representations for cross-modal retrieval. Similar to DAGNN, [49]
propose a method consisting of the dual generative adversarial
networks and GNNs. The difference is that [49] employs a novel
soft-multi-label contrastive loss for cross-modal retrieval.
C. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Interpretation
Anomaly interpretation is to answer the question why an
observation is detected as an anomaly, which can help analyze
the anomalies and speed up troubleshooting, and thus is often
required in practice. OmniAnomaly [2] identifies the top-k
variables with the lowest reconstruction probabilities as the
interpretation of anomalies, while DAEMON [23] identifies
the top-k variables with the largest errors as the root cause
variables. Anomaly interpretation is similar to the root cause
diagnosis [28], [50]. In fact, anomaly interpretation can be
regard as the upstream task of the root cause diagnosis, while
the anomaly features obtained from anomaly interpretation are
taken as the input of the root cause diagnosis model. Many
studies regard the root cause diagnosis as a classification task.
iSQUAD [4] is a root cause diagnosis framework designed
for DB system, which requires causal hypotheses or labels of
root causes. Exathlon [50] labels the ground truth root cause
by introducing instances of six different types of anomalous
events and then demonstrates explanation discovery tasks for
root cause diagnosis. The study [28] uses the explainability
scores to evaluate which autoencoder based anomaly detection
methods are more explainable, rather than explaining individual anomaly. Different from those approaches, we focus on

analyzing which main variables cause the anomaly from the
self-learning dependency relationships among multivariate.
VII. CONCLUSION
We propose a novel adversarial graph neural network SGATAE for anomaly detection in multivariate time series. Specifically, SGAT learns the graph dependences among multivariate
and models the historical patterns of multivariate time series to
predict the future trends, while AE learns the latent representations of normal patterns and reconstruct the original input. The
idea of SGAT-AE is to employ SGAT and AE for adversarial
training to amplify the anomaly error so that the performance
of the multivariate time series anomaly detection is improved.
Moreover, we provide an intuitive and effective way to analyze
the root cause of anomalies based on the self-learning graph. The
extensive experimental results demonstrate that SGAT-AE outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in four real-world datasets,
while the largest improvement of F1 score is 20.3% in dataset
WADI.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söderström,
“Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[2] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[3] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Crit.
Inf. Infrastructures Secur., vol. 10242, 2016, pp. 88–99.
[4] M. Ma et al., “Diagnosing root causes of intermittent slow queries in
large-scale cloud databases,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 13, no. 8,
pp. 1176–1189, 2020.
[5] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.
[6] M. M. Breunig, H. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[7] E. M. Knorr, R. T. Ng, and V. Tucakov, “Distance-based outliers: Algorithms and applications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases J.,
vol. 8, no. 3/4, pp. 237–253, 2000.
[8] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. J. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. C.
Platt, “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1999, pp. 582–588.
[9] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[10] A. Makhzani and B. J. Frey, “K-sparse autoencoders,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2014.
[11] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, and P. Manzagol, “Stacked
denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network with a local denoising criterion,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 11,
pp. 3371–3408, 2010.
[12] C. Doersch, “Tutorial on variational autoencoders,” 2016,
arXiv:1606.05908.
[13] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” 2014,
arXiv:1406.2661.
[14] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous
rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439.
[15] B. Liu, D. Wang, K. Lin, P. Tan, and J. Zhou, “RCA: A deep collaborative
autoencoder approach for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1505–1511.

ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

[16] X. Han, X. Chen, and L. Liu, “GAN ensemble for anomaly detection,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4090–4097.
[17] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.
[18] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “Tranad: Deep transformer networks
for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. VLDB
Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, 2022.
[19] E. J. Candès, X. Li, Y. Ma, and J. Wright, “Robust principal component
analysis?,” J. ACM, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 11:1–11:37, 2011.
[20] B. Schölkopf, A. J. Smola, and K. Müller, “Kernel principal component
analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 1997, pp. 583–588.
[21] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
autoencoders,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2017, pp. 665–674.
[22] A. Goodge, B. Hooi, S. Ng, and W. S. Ng, “Robustness of autoencoders
for anomaly detection under adversarial impact,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 1244–1250.
[23] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and interpretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2021,
pp. 2225–2230.
[24] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks:
A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
[25] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, and J. Qi, “GMAN: A graph multi-attention
network for traffic prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
pp. 1234–1241.
[26] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[27] H. Yu et al., “Taxi-based mobility demand formulation and prediction using conditional generative adversarial network-driven learning approaches,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 3888–3899,
Oct. 2019.
[28] T. Kieu et al., “Robust and explainable autoencoders for unsupervised
time series outlier detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2022,
pp. 3038–3050.
[29] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Connecting
the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural networks,”
in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 753–763.
[30] R. Johnson and T. Zhang, “Effective use of word order for text categorization with convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer.
Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2015, pp. 103–112.
[31] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2016, pp. 855–864.
[32] B. Zheng et al., “SOUP: Spatial-temporal demand forecasting and competitive supply in transportation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35,
no. 2, pp. 2034–2047, Feb. 2023.
[33] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph wavenet for deep
spatial-temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2019, pp. 1907–1913.
[34] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
“Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.10903.
[35] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
2017, arXiv: 1711.00614.
[36] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018.
[37] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
pp. 2485–2494.
[38] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, X. Wang, and C. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolutional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 17804–17815.
[39] D. Amagata, M. Onizuka, and T. Hara, “Fast and exact outlier detection
in metric spaces: A proximity graph-based approach,” in Proc. ACM
SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2021, pp. 36–48.
[40] L. Tran, M. Mun, and C. Shahabi, “Real-time distance-based outlier detection in data streams,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 141–153,
2020.

7625

[41] Y. Lu, R. Wu, A. Mueen, M. A. Zuluaga, and E. J. Keogh, “Matrix profile
XXIV: Scaling time series anomaly detection to trillions of datapoints and
ultra-fast arriving data streams,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1173–1182.
[42] C. M. Yeh et al., “Matrix profile I: All pairs similarity joins for time series:
A unifying view that includes motifs, discords and shapelets,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Des. Mater., 2016, pp. 1317–1322.
[43] X. Yang, L. J. Latecki, and D. Pokrajac, “Outlier detection with globally
optimal exemplar-based GMM,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining,
2009, pp. 145–154.
[44] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
spaces,” Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 2431, 2002, pp. 15–26.
[45] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach.
Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004.
[46] T. Nakamura, M. Imamura, R. Mercer, and E. J. Keogh, “MERLIN:
Parameter-free discovery of arbitrary length anomalies in massive time
series archives,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Des. Mater., 2020, pp. 1190–1195.
[47] M. Hoffmann, L. Galke, and A. Scherp, “Open-world lifelong graph
learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2023, pp. 1–9.
[48] S. Qian, D. Xue, H. Zhang, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Dual adversarial graph
neural networks for multi-label cross-modal retrieval,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 2440–2448.
[49] S. Qian, D. Xue, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Integrating multi-label contrastive learning with dual adversarial graph neural networks for crossmodal retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4,
pp. 4794–4811, Apr. 2023.
[50] V. Jacob, F. Song, A. Stiegler, B. Rad, Y. Diao, and N. Tatbul, “Exathlon:
A benchmark for explainable anomaly detection over time series,” Proc.
VLDB Endowment, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2613–2626, 2021.

Bolong Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree from the University of Queensland in 2017.
He is a professor in Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). His research interests
include spatial-temporal data management. He has
published more than 50 papers in prestigious journals
and conferences in data management field such as
SIGMOD, ICDE, VLDB, ACM Transactions, and
IEEE Transactions.

Lingfeng Ming received the master’s degree from
the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). His research interests include spatialtemporal data management, fleet management, and
reinforcement learning.

Kai Zeng received the bachelor’s degree in software
engineering from Zhejiang University and the PhD
degree in computer science from UCLA. He is the
Chief Architect of Huawei Cloud Data Warehouse
Service. His research interest lies in large scale data
intensive systems.

7626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Mengtao Zhou is a reliability architect of Huawei
Cloud Data Warehouse Service (DWS), and participating in the design and development of storage
engine in DWS. He has many years of experience in
cross domain operation and maintenance of network
systems and data warehouse. He has participated in
the research and development of large-scale network
equipment and published 10+ patents (the first author).

Xinyong Zhang received the PhD degree in applied
mathmatics from the Department of Mathematics,
Tsinghua University in 2018. He is currently a maintenance system engineer of Huawei Cloud Data Warehouse Service (DWS). His research interests include
massively parallel processing database and machine
learning.

Tao Ye received the PhD degree in computer science
from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). He is the research and development
director of Huawei Cloud Data Warehouse Service.
His research interest lies in large scale data intensive
systems.

Bin Yang received the PhD degree in computer science from Fudan University, China. He is a professor
with East China Normal University, China. He has
been a professor with Aalborg University, Denmark
and was previously with Aarhus University, Denmark
and the Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany. His research interests include machine learning
and data management.

Xiaofang Zhou (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in computer science from the University of
Queensland in 1994. He is the Otto Poon professor of
engineering and chair professor of computer science
and engineering with the Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology. He is Head of Department
of Computer Science and Engineering. His research
interests include spatial and multimedia databases,
high performance query processing, web information
systems, data mining, and data quality management.

Christian S. Jensen (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor of
computer science with Aalborg University, Denmark.
His research concerns data analytics and management
with focus on temporal and spatiotemporal data management. Christian is an ACM and an IEEE fellow,
and he is a member of the Academia Europaea, the
Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, and
the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences. He has
received several national and international awards for
his research, most recently the 2019 IEEE TCDE
Impact Award and the 2022 ACM SIGMOD Contributions Award. He was Editor-in-Chief of ACM TODS from 2014 to 2020
and an Editor-in-Chief of The VLDB Journal from 2008 to 2014.