IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

12125

An Anomaly-Free Representation Learning
Approach for Efficient Railway Foreign
Object Detection
Tiange Wang , Zijun Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Min Xie , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Applying machine vision to facilitate railway
anomaly detections faces a grand challenge in that anomalous samples for model training are insufficient due to their
infrequent occurrence and wide diversity. An anomaly-free
representation learning approach (ARLA) is developed in
this article to realize a machine vision-powered railway foreign object detection (RFOD) that does not rely on anomalous samples. The ARLA consists of two components, a
memory-suppress diffusion network module and a contrastive dissimilarity network. The former network module
well considers the diversity of normal patterns and reconstructs high-fidelity normal images. The latter network
module enables image-level and pixelwise foreign object
detections based on well-defined dissimilarity scores and
distance maps. The ARLA realizes an efficient RFOD, which
leverages only normal images in training and does not compromise the detection performance at the inference stage.
Improvements offered by ARLA in terms of pixelwise detection performance and model complexity against two groups
of benchmarks have been consistently observed based on
computational studies using the railway dataset.
Index Terms—Anomaly-free, contrastive learning, diffusion models, image analytics, railway scenes.

I. INTRODUCTION

I

N RAILWAY contexts, ensuring safety and operational
efficiency heavily relies on the detection of anomalies,

Manuscript received 29 June 2023; revised 27 September 2023,
10 February 2024, and 17 May 2024; accepted 4 June 2024. Date
of publication 4 July 2024; date of current version 7 October 2024.
This work was supported in part by Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Macau Science & Technology Category C Project (SGDX20220530111205037),
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (72371215
and 72032005), in part by the Research Grant Council of Hong Kong
(11200621 and 11201023), and in part by the Hong Kong Innovation
and Technology Commission (InnoHK Project CIMDA) and Hong Kong
Institute of Data Science under Project 9360163. Paper no. TII-23-2378.
(Corresponding authors: Zijun Zhang; Min Xie)
Tiange Wang is with the Institute of Rail Transit, National Maglev Transportation Engineering Research and Development Center,
Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail: wangtiange@tongji.
edu.cn).
Zijun Zhang is with the School of Data Science, City University of
Hong Kong Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail: zijzhang@cityu.edu.hk).
Min Xie is with the Department of Advanced Design and Systems Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China, and also with the City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen
Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: minxie@cityu.
edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3413965.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3413965

particularly foreign objects on rail tracks. Manual inspection
often falls short in meeting the demands of high precision and efficiency necessitated by advancements in industrial intelligence.
Recent attention has been directed toward anomaly detection in
computer vision using machine/deep learning models. Various
methodologies aim to classify normal and anomalous images
within railway settings. Despite these efforts, challenges persist
in achieving reliable and effective foreign object detection
due to the specific characteristics of railway anomalies. The
following discussion delves into these challenges in detail.
1) Limited accessibility of field data: The accumulation and
retention of extensive data hold the potential for enhancing analysis and facilitating immediate insights using
progressive data-driven methods. However, the lack of
publicly accessible field data presents a significant barrier.
Concerns on data privacy, intellectual property rights, and
logistical challenges of managing and sharing valuable
resources often lead to the nondisclosure of datasets.
Consequently, gaining access to authentic anomalous data
becomes a serious impediment, hindering the development of effective anomaly detection techniques.
2) Limited availability of anomalous images: Anomalies in
industrial environments are often sporadic and infrequent,
resulting in a scarcity of anomalous images for training
and evaluation purposes. Although a subset of defective
images can be obtained, the inherent imbalance between
anomalous and normal instances poses a significant challenge. Such scarcity underscores the importance of innovative approaches that can effectively utilize limited data
resources and address class imbalance issues.
3) Imprecise outcomes of anomaly detection: Precise
anomaly detection requires distinguishing between normal and anomalous instances at both image and pixel
levels. However, obtaining pixelwise annotations for
anomaly detection presents formidable challenges. The
manual annotation process is labor-intensive, timeconsuming, and prone to human errors, introducing biases
and inaccuracies in the labeling process. Such imprecision
undermines the reliability and effectiveness of anomaly
detection systems in real-world applications, where accurate anomaly localization is critical for timely intervention and decision-making.
This study focuses on the field of railway foreign object
detection (RFOD) and introduces a novel approach called

1551-3203 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

12126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

II. RELATED WORK

Fig. 1. Motivation of ARLA. (a) Normal rail image is well reconstructed by memory-suppress diffusion. (b) Anomalous rail image is
reconstructed with the normal patterns recorded in memory-suppress
diffusion.

In the field of RFOD, extensive research has been conducted
on the task of classifying and segmenting anomalous instances
within images. This section provides a comprehensive review of
the approaches developed specifically for image-level anomaly
detection in railway infrastructure. Additionally, we explore the
methods that have been generalized to handle pixelwise anomaly
detection on widely recognized public datasets. By examining
both specialized techniques for railway infrastructure and more
general methods, we gain valuable insights into ensuring the
safety and reliability of intricate railway systems.
A. Anomaly Detection in Railway Infrastructure

the anomaly-free representation learning approach (ARLA).
It addresses the aforementioned challenges by incorporating
anomaly rejection mechanisms into the learning process. One
of the key advantages of ARLA is that its training is free of
anomalous samples at the representation learning stage. The
anomaly rejection mechanism in ARLA ensures that the learned
representations predominantly capture normal or nonanomalous
patterns. This approach effectively minimizes the influence of
outliers or noises in the training data, resulting in more robust,
and reliable representations. Moreover, during the testing phase,
ARLA offers versatility by providing both image-level and
pixelwise detection results. Such a capability enables ARLA to
offer comprehensive insights into the presence and location of
anomalies contained in railway images. Image-level detection
results provide an overall assessment of anomaly presence,
whereas pixelwise detection results offer finer-grained information, pinpointing the exact locations of anomalies within
the image. This comprehensive detection capability enhances
the utility of ARLA in real-world applications, where precise
anomaly localization is crucial for effective decision-making and
intervention. Fig. 1 provides a visual depiction of our motivation
in the context of anomalous railway scenes.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
1) We present a pioneering attempt for formulating RFOD as
an anomaly-free representation learning process, which
aims to address the challenge of limited anomalous data
in railway contexts.
2) A novel memory-suppress diffusion process that captures
the prototypical patterns of normal data in ARLA is
introduced. By quantizing code memories, we enhance
the reconstruction of images and prevent excessive model
generalization, thereby improving the accuracy of RFOD.
3) A novel dissimilarity loss function is proposed to develop the contrastive dissimilarity network in ARLA. It
ensures the discriminative power between the input and its
reconstruction, enabling both image-level and pixelwise
detection results.
4) The ARLA offers a new state-of-the-art performance for
RFOD, which is verified via computational experiments
conducted on a collected real dataset. Ablation studies are
also conducted to justify the effectiveness and superiority
of each component in ARLA.

Due to the complexity and numerous subcomponents within
railway infrastructure, there exists a broad spectrum of research
areas dedicated to anomaly detection in this domain. Existing
methods primarily focus on identifying anomalous scenes related to rail tracks, rolling stock, and catenary systems [1].
Maintenance tasks for railway infrastructure can be broadly classified into two main categories, surface defect detection (such as
cracks and corrugations on rails [2], [3] and defects on fasteners
[4]) and anomaly inspection (such as broken/missing parts [5],
[6], foreign objects/obstacles [7], and anomalies in components
[8], [9]). The image data employed in these research endeavors
are often acquired through custom systems and meticulously
hand-labeled, thus limiting their public availability.
Considering the scale and availability of the image data, some
studies leverage the third-party data to pretrain the model and
adopt transfer learning approaches [2], [10]. Pretrained models
serve as the initial learning point, preserving computational
resources and enhancing overall detection performance.
During the inference stage, many studies focus on image-level
anomaly detection in railway infrastructure while neglecting the
localization of anomalies. To address this limitation, segmentation tasks aim to precisely assign pixels within input images
to anomalous regions [4], [11]. The output is a segmentation
map with the same size as the input image, which facilitates
subsequent diagnosis and maintenance. Nevertheless, the segmentation of anomalies is usually implemented in a supervised
manner, calling for more advanced data-driven solutions to
perform pixelwise anomaly detection when limited anomalous
image data is available.
B. Anomaly Detection via Deep Generative Models
As a typical type of method for anomaly detection, deep
generative models strive to compress and reconstruct the normal images and detect potential anomalies by evaluating the
pixel differences between the inputs and their reconstructions.
Autoencoder-based (AE-based) [12] methods and generative adversarial network-based (GAN-based) methods [13], [14] have
been widely employed in industrial image analysis, exhibiting
promising results in anomaly localization. Typically, the learning process of these methods follows a semisupervised manner,
assuming that only normal image representations are learned.
During testing, the models struggle to reconstruct anomalous

WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION

images as accurately as normal ones, providing an opportunity
for anomaly detection. In addition to commonly used distance
metrics [13], [15], reconstruction probability [12] and likelihood
score [16] are defined as supplementary anomaly measures.
AE-based methods possess a strong theoretical foundation,
but designing an effective loss function remains challenging,
resulting in suboptimal reconstructions. GAN-based methods
perform well in various applications, yet they face issues such
as training difficulties, vanishing gradients, model collapse, and
limited diversity in generated outputs. In summary, generating
high-quality images for comparisons is a daunting task, as reconstructing sharp edges and complex texture characteristics often
proves challenging, leading to a high number of false abnormal
alarms [17].
Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [18],
originating from probabilistic likelihood estimation methods,
have recently emerged as powerful tools in computer vision
tasks, particularly in generative modeling. DDPMs excel in generating high-quality and diverse samples through forward and
reverse diffusion stages [19]. They incorporate a vast amount of
images and utilize multiscale representations from the diffusion
decoder [20]. Compared with AE- and GAN-based methods,
DDPMs offer both tractability and flexibility in analytically
evaluating and fitting arbitrary data structures. They possess
advantages over alternative generative models when dealing
with smaller datasets, as they provide improved sample quality and a stable training scheme. Furthermore, the continuous
advancements in the sampling speed of DDPMs (requiring
significantly fewer sampling steps, up to hundreds of times
faster) demonstrate their potential in terms of time efficiency
and computational cost [21], [22].

C. Anomaly Detection via Contrastive Representation
Learning
The ability to learn latent representations of raw input data
establishes a connection to the broader domain of representation
learning. As one of the powerful approaches in self-supervised
learning, contrastive representation learning (CRL) has shown
promising results in capturing shared features among similar
images while distinguishing differences among dissimilar
images [23].
The main idea of CRL is to define a similarity distribution that
maps the similar pairs close and the dissimilar samples far apart
in the embedding space. Unlike the supervised approaches, CRL
defines similarity based on the data itself, thereby alleviating
the reliance on a labeled dataset with a substantial number of
anomalies. Nevertheless, if additional labels are available, CRL
can be flexibly integrated into a supervised detection framework
[24]. As a result, CRL offers a straightforward yet potent means
to learn representations in both supervised and self-supervised
settings.
Previous research has developed notable CRL-based methods,
including contrastive predictive coding (CPC) [25], augmented
multiscale deep infoMax (AMDIM) [26], and momentum contrast (MoCo) [27]. These methods aim to learn features for
effectively distinguishing training samples from other samples

12127

TABLE I
TABLE OF NOTATIONS

rather than focusing on capturing every detail of training samples, which is a major difference from the GAN-based methods.
Progressive methods enhance their robustness by relying less on
negative pairs through asymmetric structures [28], [29] or novel
objective functions [30].
So far, CRL-based methods continue to be an active area of
research, and we anticipate that these methods will pave the way
for future advancements in pixelwise anomaly detection.
III. ARLA FRAMEWORK
This section presents the ARLA, a novel framework designed
to generate detailed anomaly maps in anomalous railway scenes.
The overview of ARLA is illustrated in Fig. 2. Initially, we
explain the memory-suppress diffusion module and its role
in reconstructing input images. Subsequently, we introduce
the contrastive dissimilarity network, which measures anomaly
maps between input and reconstruction, providing image-level
and pixelwise detection results. Finally, we define the training
mechanism and illustrate the testing procedure, which handles
different anomalies in railway scenes.
Table I lists the main notations involved in Section III.
A. Memory-Suppress Diffusion Module
The proposed memory-suppress diffusion module comprises
three essential steps. First, the noise encoding step follows the
basic diffusion process in DDPM to generate a sequence of
noise-perturbed images [18]. Next, a set of code memories obtained from the previous step is integrated to establish consistent
representations of normality in the normality memorizing step.
Finally, the denoise memory-suppress sampling step continuously reconstructs the normal railway images from the Gaussian
noise input using memory-suppression techniques.
1) Noise Encoding: The goal of the noise encoding process in DDPM is to produce a sequence of noisy images
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } given an input image x0 from the real image
dataset with density distribution x0 ∼ q(x0 ). The noise level of
the image is steadily increased in T steps, which follows the
Markovian process
 

q (xt |xt−1 ) = N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , T }
(1)

12128

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 2.

Overall architecture of the proposed ARLA.

Fig. 3.

Architecture of the memory-suppress diffusion module.

q (x1:T |x0 ) =

T


q (xt |xt−1 )

(2)

t=1

where the step sizes are dominated by a variance scheduler
{βt ∈ (0, 1)}Tt = 1 . Usually, a larger update step is obtained when
the image becomes noisier and thereby β1 < β2 < · · · < βT .
I is the identity matrix with the
√ same dimension as x0 . The
normal distribution N of mean 1 − βt xt−1 and variance βt I
is operated to produce xt . In (1) and (2), x0 gradually loses the
distinguishable features as the noise level deepens. This recursion can be formulated explicitly using the reparameterization
trick as follows:
 

q (xt |x0 ) = N xt ; α̂t x0 , (1 − α̂t ) I


⇒ xt = α̂t x0 + 1 − α̂t zt
(3)

where α̂t = ti=1 (1 − βi ) and zt ∼ N (0, I). By (3), the latent
noise xt can be sampled at arbitrary time steps, which is further
used to calculate the tractable objective loss Lt .
2) Normality Memorizing: The process of normality memorizing involves specific mechanisms to effectively capture and
retain the normal patterns during the forward noise encoding
process. Fig. 3 shows the schematic illustration of the normality memorizing step. Denote the code memories as M :

{M1 , M2 , . . . , MT }, where the tth memory Mt ∈ R1×K×n
records prototypical patterns from the noise encoding in the
tth step. We denote each query Mtk ∈ R1×1×n , where k =
1, 2, . . . , K. The noise encoding result Xt ∈ RH×W ×n is output
from a batch of images, where H, W , and n are height, width,
and the size of training batches, respectively. The normality
memorizing step serves two purposes: 1) transform the feature
vector Xti of size 1 × 1 × n using the code memory Mt and
2) update the memory query Mtk of size 1 × 1 × n using the
feature map Xt .
As shown in Fig. 3, the cosine similarity between each encoded vector Xti and the code memory Mt is first calculated as
follows:

T 
exp Mtk Xti


wti,k =
(4)

K
k T X i
exp
M

t
t
k =1
where wti,k is the corresponding weights after the softmax
function. By integrating the memory queries with corresponding
weights, the transformed feature vector X̂ti taking into account
all normal patterns is obtained
K





wti,k Mtk .

X̂ti =
k =1

(5)

WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION

Applying (4) and (5) to all encoded vectors in Xt results in a
transformed feature map X̂t ∈ RH×W ×n , which is then added to
Xt and fed into the next denoise sampling step. Similar to (4),
we then compute the cosine similarity between each memory
query Mtk and the encoded feature map Xt as follows:

T 
exp Mtk Xti

vti,k =
(6)
T  
H×W
Mtk Xti
i =1 exp
and normalize vti,k considering the feature indices for the corresponding features of Mtk
vti,k



vti,k =



maxi ∈Dtk vti ,k

.

(7)

With the normalized weights in (7), the query in code memory
Mt is updated as follows:
⎞
⎛


vti,k Xti ⎠

Mtk ← f ⎝Mtk +

(8)

i∈Dtk

where f (·) denotes the L2 norm, and Dtk denotes the indices of
the multiple feature vectors nearest to Mtk according to (6).
In the normality memorizing step, a set of code memories
obtained from the noise encoding step is integrated to establish
consistent representations of normality for subsequent steps.
3) Denoise Memory-Suppress Sampling: The last denoise
sampling is a reverse process approximating q(xt−1 |xt ) as in
DDPM. When t = T , image samples with high fidelity should
be reconstructed from isotropic Gaussian noise. Unlike the first
step, the reconstruction requires the knowledge of all previous
gradients, which can only be obtained with a learning model.
Thus, this step aims to train a subnetwork with learned parameters θ, thereby estimating pθ (xt−1 |fu (xt )) based on the
normality memorizing function fu . It is formulated with mean
and variance as follows:
pθ (xt−1 |fu (xt ))
= N (xt−1 ; μθ (fu (xt ) , t) , Σθ (fu (xt ) , t))

(9)

where the mean function and the variance function are computed
as in [19]
1
1 − αt
μθ (fu (xt ) , t) = √
(fu (xt ) − √
zθ (fu (xt ) , t))
αt
1 − α̂t


Σθ (fu (xt ) , t) = exp v log βt + (1 − v) log β̃t
(10)
α̂t−1
where αt = 1 − βt , β̃t = 1−
1−α̂t βt , and v is a mixing vector
via model predicting. If we apply (9) in all T time steps, the
trajectory from xT to x0 is:
T


12129

the loss function defined as the variational lower bound loss
T

Lvlb =

Lt
t=0



= Eq(x0:T )

q (x1:T |x0 )
log
pθ (x̂T :0 )



= Eq [− log pθ (x0 |x̂1 ) → L0
+

DKL (q (xt−1 |xt , x0 )

pθ (xt−1 |x̂t )) → Lt>1

t>1

+DKL (q (xT |x0 )

pθ (xT ))] → LT

(12)

where DKL denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence between
two Gaussian distributions, which can be expressed in a closed
form. The first term L0 is modeled using a separate decoder,
which is derived from N (x0 ; μθ (x̂1 , 1), Σθ (x̂1 , 1)) as in [18].
The second term Lt>1 ensures that at each time step t, the estimation of pθ (xt−1 |x̂t ) is close to the true posterior of q(xt−1 |xt )
as much as possible when conditioned on the input image. The
last term LT is constant since the encoding function q has no
learnable parameters and xT is a Gaussian noise. We can find in
(12) that LT does not depend on θ, implying that it can be ignored
during training. Based on (12), an alternative loss function is
employed to offer better reconstruction quality over Lvlb


(13)
Ls = Et∼[1:T ], x0 ∼p(x0 ),zt ∼N (0,I) zt − zθ (x̂t , t) 2
where E is the expected value and zθ (x̂t , t) is the predicted noise
in the sampling step t.
B. Contrastive Dissimilarity Network
The contrastive dissimilarity network uses the input image
and the reconstructed image to calculate the correlation map and
further predict the anomaly map. Inspired by [30], three components are involved in the contrastive dissimilarity network,
including an encoder, a projector, and a fusion block as shown
in Fig. 2.
1) Architecture: We utilize a pretrained visual geometry
group (VGG) as the encoder to process both the original input
x0 and the reconstruction pθ (x0 ), resulting in two embedding
vectors. We then project the two vectors into a larger space with a
higher dimension d = 1024. It is simply a three-layer perceptron
with batch normalization and ReLU activation and learns the
invariance of the two images. The design of the vector projection
is common and crucial in CRL-based methods, since it is capable
of squeezing all invariant information and preventing model
collapse. The output of the projector is denoted as follows:
hA = fE,P (x0 ) ∈ Rd
hB = fE,P (pθ (x0 )) ∈ Rd .

(14)

(11)

t=1

The final fusion block aims to compute the correlation map
C(hA , hB ). Given the projector output, the correlation map
is expected to be as close to the identity matrix as possible.

Let the transformed features x̂t = fu (xt ). The objective of
this module is to train the sampling function pθ (xt−1 |x̂t ) with

For a batch size n, C = (h )n h ∈ Rd×d is the empirical
correlation map. The diagonal elements of the target C (i.e.,

pθ (xT :0 ) = p(xT )

pθ (xt−1 |fu (xt )) .

A T

B

12130

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Cii ) are equal to 1, forcing the embeddings invariant to the
reconstruction. The off-diagonal elements of the target C (i.e.,
Cij for i = j) are equal to 0, which decorrelates the different
components of embedding vectors and reduces the redundancy
between hA and hB . With the fusion block, the network is directed to pay attention to high-dissimilar areas in the correlation
map.
2) Objective Function: The objective function of the contrastive dissimilarity network encompasses multiple components aimed at achieving effective differentiation between the
input image and its corresponding reconstruction. Additionally,
it involves a pointwise correlation with the high-level embedding
vectors. The objective can be expressed through three distinct
terms, i.e., reconstruction loss Lrec , projection feature loss Lpro ,
and contrastive loss Lcon as follows:
Ld = Lrec + Lpro + Lcon
n

=

x0 − pθ (x0 ) 2
i
n

+λ

 A

 h − hB 

i,j

2

(16)

where Wij is the weight function defined as follows:
 
 

ij 
1 − exp −xij
0 − (pθ (x0 ) ) 
2 
 
Wij (x0 , pθ (x0 )) =
.
 ij
ij 
i,j 1 − exp −x0 − (pθ (x0 ) ) 
2
(17)
It determines the relative significance of each term and allows
the ARLA to focus more on the regions with high dissimilarity.
Meanwhile, a threshold ζ is empirically decided to minimize the
errors corresponding to false alarms and miss-detected anomalies. A small E(x) indicates a normal input while a large E(x)
exceeding ζ for an anomalous input.
Once the testing sample is determined as anomalous, a stacked
pixelwise anomaly map is generated by merging a score distance
map Ms and a feature distance map Md along the depth dimension. The two maps are defined as follows:



ij 
H×W
Ms = Wij (x0 , pθ (x0 ))xij
0 − (pθ (x0 ) )  ∈ R
Md = ω F (x0 ) − F (pθ (x0 ))

2

(1 − Cii ) + λcon
i




ij 
Wij (x0 , pθ (x0 )) xij
−
(p
(x
)
)

θ
0
0

ε (x) =

2

2

i

+

RFOD at the image level

2
Cij
i

(15)

i=j

where Lrec measures the L2 distance between the original images
and their reconstructions, ensuring a faithful representation. Lpro
calculates the L2 distance between the embedding vectors hA
and hB . Lcon plays a crucial role in balancing the tradeoff
between the invariance term and the redundancy reduction term.
It consists of two components: 1) the sum of squared differences
1 − Cii within the diagonal elements of the contrastive matrix C,
which emphasizes the preservation of invariance and 2) the sum
2
for all nondiagonal elements (i = j)
of squared differences Cij
of C, promoting redundancy reduction. Lcon is the tradeoff
parameter controlling the invariance term and the redundancy
reduction term.
C. Training and Testing
1) Semisupervised Training: During the training process, the
memory-suppress diffusion module and the contractive dissimilarity network are jointly optimized to minimize the sum of Ls
and Ld . The code memories are continuously updated to record
the prototypical patterns of normal images. To speed up the
sampling process, we adopt a multistep solution approximating
the high-order derivatives as recommended in [21].
The training of contrastive dissimilarity networks also adopts
a semisupervised manner that does not rely on negative pairs.
It incorporates a quantification mechanism to assess the degree
of abnormality, enabling the differentiation between normal and
anomalous images.
2) Image-Level and Pixelwise Detection: A key aspect of
ARLA lies in its ability to achieve high-fidelity reconstruction.
We define a weighted dissimilarity score E(x) to express the

2
2

(18)

where Ms is derived from the dissimilarity score. Md is derived
from the encoded feature maps in a contrastive dissimilarity
network. F denotes the last activation layer before feature flattening. ω is the mean squared error (MSE) weight to explore the
effect of Md .
3) Architecture Training Complexity: This section provides
an analysis of the complexity of the ARLA in training. As the
ARLA is composed of a memory-suppress diffusion module and
a contrastive dissimilarity network, its training complexity is described as follows. Let g1 (·) denote the complexity of memorysuppress operation, the complexity of the memory-suppress
diffusion with K code memories within T steps over N training
iterations is described as fMDM ∈ O(N · T · g1 (K)T ). Let g2 (·)
denote the complexity of convolution operation and Cl denote
the output channels of the lth layer, the complexity of contrastive
learning process of dissimilarities within D layers over N training iterations is described as fCDN ∈ O(N · D
l g2 (Cl−1 Cl )).
Combining these two parts involves considering the composition
and interactions of each part, such as the determination of
anomalous samples at the image level.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we first introduce the railway dataset and
setups employed during training and testing. Then we show
some properties of ARLA and compare it with state-of-the-art
methods on pixelwise RFOD. Finally, we present discussions on
the components of ARLA.
A. Implementation Details
1) Dataset: The railway dataset used in our experiments was
collected by the Hong Kong Metro Corporation via industrial
cameras. A selection of collected samples is presented in Fig. 4.

WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION

Fig. 4.

Collected samples from (a) Dtrain and (b) Dtest .

The dataset comprises two main subsets: Dtrain , consisting of
normal images intended for training, and Dtest , which includes
images with anomalies intended for testing.
All images are labeled at the image level. Dtrain consists of
6656 normal images. Dtest comprises 541 anomalous images
and 490 normal images. To select the optimal hyperparameters
during training, a small portion of Dtest is reserved as the
validation set Dval , which consists of 120 anomalous images and
100 normal images. Apart from the image-level labels, pixelwise
annotations as ground truths for training are not provided. The
anomalies manifest themselves in the form of over ten different
classes of foreign objects, such as phones, bags, and umbrellas.
Before being fed into the ARLA model for training and testing,
each image is resized to a resolution of 256 × 256 and normalized to values between 0 and 1. Furthermore, the images are
converted to grayscale.
Note: The dataset will be available for sharing upon request
via email after the expiration of the nondisclosure agreement,
strictly for scientific research purposes.
2) Training Settings: The training process for the memorysuppress diffusion module involves utilizing Dtrain to learn the
normal patterns and update the code memories. In this regard,
a setting T = 50 is applied to the noise encoding and sampling
steps based on experimental trials. Details will be disclosed in
Section IV-C. The variance scheduler βt is defined in the range
of [0.0001, 0.02] as recommended in [19]. In the contrastive dissimilarity network, the encoder and projector are initialized using Xavier initialization. The hidden dimension of the projector
output is set to 1024. Grid searches are conducted to determine
the optimal weights for the hyperparameters λ and ω, aiming to
achieve the best performance based on Dval . Additionally, the
value of λcon is set to 5 × 10−3 according to [30].
The entire pipeline of ARLA is trained end-to-end using
the hybrid loss objective composed of Ls and Ld , with an
AdamW optimizer ( β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99). We adopt the initial
learning rate of 5 × 10−4 and the weight decay of 10−4 . The
default training schedule is 300 k iterations, with the learning
rate divided by 10 at 200 k and 250 k iterations. All modules are
trained with a batch size of 24 on three NVIDIA GeForce RTX
2080 GPUs.

Fig. 5.

Sensitivity analysis of weight parameters λ and ω.

Fig. 6.

Losses of benchmarks during training.

12131

3) Inference Details: At the inference stage, the image is
noise encoded and denoised back within 50 steps. Following the
reconstruction, a dissimilarity score E and an anomaly map M
are calculated. We determine the threshold ζ based on Dval such
that any image with E larger than ζ is identified as anomalous.
The batch size at the inference stage is set to 1.
4) Evaluation Metrics: Two distinct sets of evaluation metrics are employed to assess the detection performance of ARLA
and benchmarking methods in our study. The first set encompasses commonly used metrics Precision, recall, and F1 score
for image-level RFOD. The second set of evaluation metrics
including dice coefficient and mean intersection over union
(mIoU) evaluates the pixelwise detection performance. Moreover, the model complexity in terms of parameters, floating point
operations per second (FLOPs), inference time, and FPS are also
considered.

B. Results
1) Sensitivity Analysis: In this section, we perform experiments to evaluate the sensitivity of two hyperparameters: λ
and ω, which govern the impact of projection feature loss and
feature distance map on image-level and pixelwise detections,
respectively. Fig. 5 describes the performance of the ARLA
model in terms of the F1 score and dice coefficient based on
different hyperparameter configurations. Results show that the
ARLA model achieves its peak F1 score with λ = 5 and ω = 1.
Intriguingly, a remarkable consistency is observed in the optimal
thresholds obtained across both groups of experiments, with
minimal variance. A threshold ζ = 0.4 is selected as a better
performance is achieved based on the validation dataset Dval .
These selected hyperparameters are subsequently employed for
evaluation on Dtest .
2) Comparison With Benchmarks: We compare our proposed ARLA against two groups of benchmarking methods.
The first group includes two GAN-based methods: f-AnoGAN
[13] and GANomaly [14]. The second group involves two
DDPM-based methods: Nichol and Dhariwal [19] and AnoDDPM [20]. Fig. 6 shows the training loss and validation loss
throughout the 300 k iterations. Default settings are adopted

12132

Fig. 7.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Validation performances of ARLA and benchmarking methods.

TABLE II
COMPARISON WITH TWO GROUPS OF BENCHMARKING METHODS

for all benchmarking methods. In Fig. 6, we first observe that
the training losses of GANomaly and f-AnoGAN exhibit significant fluctuations after 30 k iterations while still showing a
decreasing trend, whereas the training loss of the other three
methods remains relatively stable. This indicates the necessity
of continuing the training after the sudden drop in loss values.
Second, the validation loss values of these five methods also
show a gradual decline as the number of iterations increases,
especially for GANomaly and f-AnoGAN. After 100 k iterations, their validation loss values experience noticeable fluctuations and then level off. Fig. 7 further illustrates the validation
performance of ARLA and benchmarking methods. Results
demonstrate a clear trend that the training iterations higher than
30 k lead to discernible improvements in performance metrics
while the performance becomes stable after 300 k training iterations. Another finding is that most of the methods have reached
optimal performance before the end of training. Therefore,
during the inference stage, we exploit the model weights achieving the optimal validation performance to detect anomalies in
Dtest .
Quantitative comparisons based on Dtest with respect to
image-level and pixelwise metrics are represented in Table II.
Initially, we compare ARLA against the two GAN-based methods. Within this subgroup, ARLA outperforms the previous
methods, particularly in pixelwise detection, where the dice
coefficient and mIoU exhibit significant improvements. Subsequently, we compare ARLA against the DDPM-based methods,
which require pixelwise annotations during training. Given the
imbalance between normal and anomalous samples, Dtrain and
Dval are combined to form the training set for the DDPMbased methods. By simply evaluating the difference between
reconstructions and the ground-truths, the anomalous images
are identified with highlighted pixels via DDPM-based methods. Table II shows that our method achieves a noteworthy
2.6% improvement in F1 score while maintaining comparable

Fig. 8.

Visualization of activation maps in neural networks.

performance in terms of dice coefficient and mIoU. Notably,
our method involves fewer steps in the memory-suppress diffusion module than AnoDDPM, resulting in faster reconstruction
progress during the inference stage. Finally, we summarize their
FLOPs, total number of parameters, inference time, and FPS in
Table II to provide a more intuitive representation of their complexity. The results indicate that GAN-based methods require
significantly less time and computational resources compared
to DDPM-based methods. Among the DDPM-based methods,
our proposed ARLA demonstrates reasonable parameter volume
and testing time while showing a certain advantage in terms of
FLOPs.
3) Inference Visualization: We visualize the network weights
of the contrastive dissimilarity network in ARLA as well as those
of two GAN-based methods. Fig. 8 provides valuable insights
into the ability of each method to capture and localize anomalous
regions based on testing images. While ARLA predominantly
focuses on highly concentrated anomalous regions, the GANbased methods tend to highlight partially normal regions as
well. This divergence in focus is reflected in the corresponding
metrics, such as the dice coefficient and mIoU, as shown in
Table II. The visualization comparison underscores the efficacy
of ARLA in capturing dissimilarities between the input and its

WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION

Fig. 9.

12133

ROC curves and p-values via DeLong’s test.
TABLE III
ABLATION STUDIES ON EACH COMPONENT

Fig. 10. Data augmentation samples and their visualized detection
results from Daug .

reconstruction, thereby facilitating precise pixelwise localization of anomalies.
4) Statistical Significance Test: Statistical significance tests
are essential for confirming the effectiveness of the model. In
this section, we incorporate DeLong’s test [31] for comparing
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the area
under ROC curves (AUROC) of all benchmarking methods. As
shown in Fig. 9, the p-values of the four comparison groups
are all smaller than a significance level of 0.05, indicating that
the detection performance of benchmarking methods differs
significantly from the proposed ARLA. When comparing ARLA
with Nichol and Dhariwal, it shows a slightly higher p-value
than the other groups. Adjusting the significance level will affect
which groups are deemed significantly different. Nevertheless,
a significance level of 0.05 is commonly used for conservative
significance tests.
C. Discussions
1) Ablation Studies: We conduct comprehensive ablation
studies on Dtest to thoroughly analyze the individual contributions of the components in the proposed ARLA. The results are
summarized in Table III, where the default settings of ARLA are
marked in gray. First, we investigate the impact of sampling steps
in the memory-suppress diffusion module. Table III(a) demonstrates that a sampling step value of 50 achieves a comparable
F1 score, outperforming other groups by up to 40%. It is evident

that ARLA requires a sufficient number of sampling steps to
achieve the high-fidelity reconstruction of input images. However, excessive sampling steps result in minimal improvement in
fidelity while consuming more time and affecting mIoU during
the inference stage. As a result, we set the sampling step value as
T = 50 to strike a balance between speed and quality in RFOD.
Furthermore, we validate the effectiveness of the memorysuppression strategy, as shown in Table III(b). When evaluating
ARLA without the utilization of DDPM, normal images are
directly fed into the contrastive dissimilarity network to learn
the normal patterns between different images. Our findings
indicate that the performance of ARLA significantly degrades
in the absence of both DDPM and memory-suppression. Moreover, ARLA struggles to identify anomalous images when only
DDPM is employed without the memory-suppression strategy,
highlighting the necessity of incorporating memory-suppression
in ARLA for effective detection performance.
In addition, we investigate different distance maps in
Table III(c), including a score distance map Ms and a feature
distance map Md . The experimental results demonstrate that
combining these two maps yields the best performance for
pixelwise RFOD.
2) Data Augmentation: We also explore the promoting effect
of data augmentation techniques on the ARLA framework. One
set of experiments was based on traditional data augmentation,
including geometric transformations (flipping, cropping, rotation, and stretching) and color space transformations (brightness
change and saturation change), resulting in an enhanced version
ARLA-AUG. Another set of experiments utilizes advanced data
augmentation, Moment Exchange [32], leading to another model
version named ARLA-ME. Additionally, we construct a larger
dataset Daug using traditional data augmentation techniques to
examine the detection capabilities of these models when faced
with more complex samples. To offer a visual representation of
our findings, we present Fig. 10, which showcases samples from
Daug and elucidates their corresponding visualized detection
results.
The assessment based on Dtest and Daug with quantitative
insights are summarized in Table IV. We first find that even on
a larger dataset Daug , the detection prowess of the ARLA series

12134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

TABLE IV
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS BASED ON Dtest AND Daug

and >30%. The majority of samples exhibit anomaly sizes
ranging from 20-30%, indicating the prevalence of this size
range in the dataset. Anomalies below 10% and between 10%
and 20% occur less frequently, suggesting a lower incidence of
smaller anomaly sizes. Anomalies exceeding 30% are relatively
uncommon. Fig. 11(b) shows the discrimination ability of the
ARLA across different anomaly severity levels. Impressively,
ARLA demonstrates commendable detection performance even
for small anomaly sizes, showcasing its versatility and robustness in detecting anomalies of varying magnitudes.
4) Computational Efficiency Improvement: We explore the
data-free knowledge distillation method [33], [34], which derives lightweight model versions using the knowledge acquired
from the original ARLA, to enhance the computational efficiency. Fig. 11(c) shows the tradeoff between computational
efficiency (represented by FLOPs and total parameters) and
detection performance (measured by AUROC). The lightweight
versions, Versions 1–3, demanding fewer computational resources tend to exhibit lower AUROC. However, it is noteworthy that ARLA consistently maintains superior detection
performance across all lightweight versions, underscoring its
efficacy in anomaly detection tasks. Meanwhile, we notice that
Version 3 emerges as a promising solution that strikes a balance
between accuracy and efficiency for the RFOD problem. The
enhanced performance of Version 3 underscores the potential of
computational efficiency optimization strategies in advancing
anomaly detection systems.
V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 11 (a) Histogram of all anomalous images in Daug , where
anomaly severity is categorized into four levels: <10%, 10%–20%,
20%–30%, and >30%. (b) ROC curves and AUROC of four anomaly
severity levels. (c) Tradeoff between computational efficiency and detection performance based on Dtest .

models remains impressively robust. Furthermore, our comparative analysis between ARLA-AUG and ARLA-ME yields noteworthy insights. While ARLA-AUG fails to manifest substantial
improvements in both image-level and pixel-level detection,
ARLA-ME emerges as a compelling alternative. Notably, in
the context of Daug , ARLA-ME achieves a remarkable 2.1%
enhancement in both dice coefficient and mIoU. These results
discernments distinctly underscore the scalability advantages
inherent to the ARLA framework when faced with larger datasets
and the intricacies of more complex railway environments.
3) Severity Differentiation: Extensive experiments are conducted to validate the robustness of ARLA in detecting anomalies in different severity levels. In these experiments, the anomaly
severity is defined as the proportion of anomalous pixels in
the entire image. Fig. 11(a) shows the distribution of anomaly
sizes across 3138 anomalous images. The anomaly severity
is categorized into four levels, <10%, 10%–20%, 20%–30%,

This study presented a comprehensive investigation of imagelevel and pixelwise RFOD without requiring anomaly samples in
the context of anomalous railway scenes. We developed a novel
approach, the ARLA, for classical RFOD tasks, which, in reality,
was challenging to collect a sufficient amount of diverse anomaly
samples. The ARLA included two complementary modules, a
memory-suppress diffusion module, and a contrastive dissimilarity network. ARLA offered several advantageous features,
such as less reliance on extensive anomalous data, ensuring
a high-fidelity image reconstruction, and robustly performing
RFOD with precise dissimilarity measurement. Through extensive experiments on a railway dataset, ARLA demonstrated
superior performance compared to existing GAN-based and
DDPM-based methods, positioning it as a potential solution for
deployment in autonomous railway maintenance machines.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Morandi and S. Jüngling, “Anomaly detection in railway infrastructure,” in Proc. AAAI Spring Symp., Combining Mach. Learn. Knowl. Eng.,
2021.
[2] D. Zhang, K. Song, Q. Wang, Y. He, X. Wen, and Y. Yan, “Two deep
learning networks for rail surface defect inspection of limited samples with
line-level label,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 6731–6741,
Oct. 2021.
[3] X. Ni, Z. Ma, J. Liu, B. Shi, and H. Liu, “Attention network for rail
surface defect detection via consistency of intersection-over-union (IoU)guided center-point estimation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 1694–1705, Mar. 2022.

WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION

[4] X. Wei, Z. Yang, Y. Liu, D. Wei, L. Jia, and Y. Li, “Railway track fastener
defect detection based on image processing and deep learning techniques:
A comparative study,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 80, pp. 66–81, 2019.
[5] L. Zhuang, H. Qi, T. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “A deep-learning-powered
near-real-time detection of railway track major components: A two-stage
computer-vision-based method,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 19,
pp. 18806–18816, Oct. 2022.
[6] C. Chen, K. Li, C. Zhongyao, F. Piccialli, S. C. H. Hoi, and Z. Zeng,
“A hybrid deep learning based framework for component defect detection of moving trains,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 3268–3280, Apr. 2022.
[7] T. Wang, Z. Zhang, and K.-L. Tsui, “A deep generative approach for rail
foreign object detections via semisupervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Inform., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 459–468, Jan. 2023.
[8] Z. Liu, L. Wang, C. Li, and Z. Han, “A high-precision loose strands
diagnosis approach for isoelectric line in high-speed railway,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inform., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1067–1077, Mar. 2018.
[9] J. Zhong, Z. Liu, C. Yang, H. Wang, S. Gao, and A. Núñez, “Adversarial
reconstruction based on tighter oriented localization for catenary insulator
defect detection in high-speed railways,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1109–1120, Feb. 2022.
[10] Y. Zhang, M. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Guo, and H. Zhang, “A unified light
framework for real-time fault detection of freight train images,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7423–7432, Nov. 2021.
[11] Y. Wu, Y. Qin, Y. Qian, F. Guo, Z. Wang, and L. Jia, “Hybrid deep learning
architecture for rail surface segmentation and surface defect detection,”
Comput.-Aided Civil Infrastruct. Eng., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 227–244, 2022.
[12] P. Bergmann, S. Löwe, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Improving
unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity to
autoencoders,” in Proc. 14th Int. Joint Conf. Comput. Vis., Imag. Comput.
Graph. Theory Appl., 2019, pp. 372–380.
[13] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidt-Erfurth,
“f-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44, 2019.
[14] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Ganomaly: Semisupervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. Asian
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 622–637.
[15] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[16] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P.-A. Heng, “Learning semantic
context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intel., 2021, pp. 3110–3118.
[17] J. Yang, R. Xu, Z. Qi, and Y. Shi, “Visual anomaly detection for images: A
systematic survey,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 199, pp. 471–478, 2022.
[18] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
[19] A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8162–8171.
[20] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “Anoddpm:
Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using
simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops, 2022, pp. 649–655.
[21] C. Lu, Y. Zhou, F. Bao, J. Chen, C. Li, and J. Zhu, “DPM-Solver++:
Fast solver for guided sampling of diffusion probabilistic models,” 2022,
arXiv:2211.01095.
[22] C. Lu, Y. Zhou, F. Bao, J. Chen, C. Li, and J. Zhu, “DPM-solver: A fast
ODE solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps,”
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, pp. 5775–5787, 2022.
[23] P. de Haan and S. Löwe, “Contrastive predictive coding for anomaly
detection,” 2021, arXiv:2107.07820.
[24] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021,
pp. 8748–8763.
[25] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[26] P. Bachman, R. D. Hjelm, and W. Buchwalter, “Learning representations
by maximizing mutual information across views,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 32, 2019.
[27] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[28] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
pp. 15745–15753.

12135

[29] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent a new approach to
self-supervised learning,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
pp. 21271–21284, 2020.
[30] J. Zbontar, L. Jing, I. Misra, Y. LeCun, and S. Deny, “Barlow twins: Selfsupervised learning via redundancy reduction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2021, pp. 12310–12320.
[31] E. R. DeLong, D. M. DeLong, and D. L. Clarke-Pearson, “Comparing the
areas under two or more correlated receiver operating characteristic curves:
A nonparametric approach,” Biometrics, vol. 44, pp. 837–845, 1988.
[32] B. Li, F. Wu, S.-N. Lim, S. Belongie, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On feature
normalization and data augmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 12378–12387.
[33] G. Fang et al., “Up to 100x faster data-free knowledge distillation,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intel., 2022, pp. 6597–6604.
[34] G. Fang, J. Song, C. Shen, X. Wang, D. Chen, and M. Song, “Data-free
adversarial distillation,” 2019, arXiv:1912.11006.

Tiange Wang received the B.Eng. degree in
industrial engineering from Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree
in data science from the City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China, in 2022.
She is currently an Assistant Professor with
the Institute of Rail Transit and the National Maglev Transportation Engineering Research and
Development Center, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. Her research interests include railway/maglev health monitoring, intelligent transportation, time-series data analytics, and image processing.

Zijun Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.Eng. degree in systems engineering and
engineering management from The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China, in 2008, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in industrial engineering from the University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA, in 2009 and 2012,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor and an Associate
Dean with the School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China.
His research interests include machine learning and computational intelligence with applications in renewable energy, facility energy management, and intelligent transportation domains.
Prof. Zhang is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, IEEE POWER ENGINEERING LETTERS, and Journal
of Intelligent Manufacturing.

Min Xie (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in quality technology from Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden, in 1987.
He is currently the Chair Professor with the
Department of Systems Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
He authored or coauthored more than 300 peerreviewed journal articles and 8 books on quality
and reliability engineering. More than 50 Ph.D.
students have graduated under his supervision.
Prof. Xie was elected as a member of the
European Academy of Science and Arts in 2022. He is an Editor and
an Associate Editor and on the editorial board of many established
international journals. He has chaired many international conferences
and given keynote speeches. He was a recipient of the Prestigious Lee
Kuan Yew Research Fellowship in 1991.