2402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

An Autoencoder-Based Hybrid Detection Model for
Intrusion Detection With Small-Sample Problem
Nan Wei, Lihua Yin , Jingyi Tan, Chuhong Ruan, Chuang Yin, Zhe Sun , and Xi Luo

Abstract—Cyber-attacks have become more frequent, targeted,
and complex as the exponential growth in computer networks and
the development of Internet of Things (IoT). Network intrusion
detection system (NIDS) is an important and essential tool to
protect network environments. However, the low performance of
a NIDS against small malicious samples has seriously threatened
the security of networks, thus directly leading to the loss of
personal property and national interests. Given this, we propose
an auto encoder-based hybrid detection model, abbreviated as
AHDM, for the intrusion detection with small-sample problem.
AHDM has a dual classifier framework. It trains first neural
network based on the encoding features obtained from the
autoencoder feature enhancement algorithm to detect smallsample malicious traffic. It trains second neural network using
the original features to detect normal traffic and large-sample
malicious traffic. The final detection result of malicious traffic
is obtained by combining the detection results of the two neural
networks. In experiments, we use three classic datasets (KDD
CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23) and simulate the malicious
traffic detection targeting extremely small-sample malicious
traffic. The results show that AHDM has a higher detection
rate for small-sample malicious traffic compared to the advanced
detection models (DNN and ACID). In the IOT-23 dataset, the
AHDM model shows an absolute advantage in detecting DDoS
type of malicious traffic, with a detection rate of 0.71, which is
much higher than the DNN (0.14) and ACID (0.14) models.
Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, autoencoder, IOT-23,
network intrusion detection system, small-sample dataset.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE INCREASING adoption of Internet of Things (IoT)
technology presents businesses with new opportunities to
generate value and enhance integration in industries such as
transportation, energy, and power systems [1]. However, with

T

Manuscript received 20 May 2023; revised 2 September 2023; accepted
10 November 2023. Date of publication 17 November 2023; date of current
version 15 April 2024. This work was supported in part by the National
Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022YFB3104100), the Guangdong Basic
and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2021A1515012454), the Project
of Guangzhou Association for Science and Technology (No. 202201010609),
the Young Talent Support Project of Guangzhou Association for Science
and Technology (No. QT20220101122), and the Major Research Plan of the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 92167203). The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was M. Conti. (Corresponding author: Lihua Yin.)
Nan Wei, Lihua Yin, Chuhong Ruan, Chuang Yin, Zhe Sun, and Xi Luo
are with the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou
University, Guangzhou 510006, Guangdong, China (e-mail: joey_weinan@
126.com; yinlh@gzhu.edu.cn; RUAN1597438160@163.com; yinnchuang@
163.com; sunzhe@gzhu.edu.cn; luoxi0930@gzhu.edu.cn).
Jingyi Tan is with the Department of Information Resource Management,
Guangzhou Xinhua University, Guangzhou 510520, Guangdong, China
(e-mail: jytan1204@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3334028

Fig. 1.

Complaints and Losses from 2018 to 2022.

the continuous expansion of IoT devices and technology, there
is a heightened risk of compromising sensitive information
due to constant connectivity and data sharing [2]. These risks
are further compounded by the development of 5G technology, which enables faster and more efficient communication
between devices but also increases the potential for cyberattacks and security breaches [3]. Therefore, it is crucial for
enterprises to prioritize cybersecurity measures and implement
robust strategies to safeguard their data and networks against
potential threats. Fig. 1 shows the Complaints and Losses
over last five years, statistics from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation’s annual Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)
report. In 2022, cybercrime costed Americans $10.3 billion, a
significant increase from $6.9 billion in 2021, indicating a 49%
increase [4]. This highlights the urgent need for businesses to
take strong steps to protect themselves from cyberattacks and
financial losses. Given this, various studies have been actively
conducted to prevent potential netwo5rk threats.
Network intrusion detection systems (NIDSs) provide
protection through real-time monitoring and analysis of
the system communication behavior [5]. Traditional NIDSs
applied the misuse detection to identify network attacks. The
misuse detection compared the signature (e.g., a sequence
of bytes in the payload) of the network traffic with a preestablished threat dataset [6]. Such detection methods are then
proved to be ineffective in the complex environment of IoT
system due to it is computationally inefficient to collect the
signature of the target traffic and compare it with a largescale threat dataset, especially for the resource-constrained IoT
devices [7].
An alternative strategy is malicious traffic detection, which
monitors and analyzes the features of network traffic to identify normal or malicious traffic [8]. This strategy can dominate
the misuse detection as it can detect unknown attacks that have
distinct behaviors from the normal ones. Particularly, recent
advance in machine learning (ML) facilitates the development

c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION

of malicious traffic detection techniques, as state-of-the-art
ML models can distinguish normal and abnormal network
activities with higher accuracy and less restriction [9]. This
is mainly because the ML-based techniques have a strong
capability of extracting insights or useful knowledge from the
data in a timely and intelligent way, which allows themselves
discover hidden patterns in large amount of network traffic
boosting intrusion detection accuracy. However, these data
driven-based NIDSs require large samples. Constrained by the
high acquisition and labeling cost of traffic data, it is difficult
to integrate a large number of labeled traffic data from real
world network systems [10]. The training and updating of
ML-based NIDSs can only use small-sample malicious traffic
data, e.g., the amount of malicious traffic data is less than
100 or even less, which makes the ML-based NIDSs receiving
low detect rates. Thus, it is essential to design a ML-based
malicious traffic detection model using small-sample malicious
traffic to detect the network intrusion.
Recent studies have proposed a range of few-shot learning
methods for detecting malicious traffics with small-sample
dataset [11]. These methods train the ML-based detection
models with sufficient dataset from source network and fine
tune the models with few shots from target network. However,
it is often difficult to realize such an assumption in IoT
networks where threat type always varies with the nonstationary environment. In the situation, NIDS with small-sample
data can be described as a ML-based model which is treated
with the sensors network data and may be not applicable to
the network of actuators or appliances [12]. Furthermore, the
attack distribution usually varies with network scale, protocol,
and attack vector. The low performance of a NIDS against
small-sample data has seriously threatened the security of IoT
systems, thus directly leading to the loss of personal property
and national interests. Therefore, the NIDS needs to be trained
with the small-sample malicious traffic data of single network
and ensure high precision.
To address the above-mentioned problem, we propose an
autoencoder-based hybrid detection model for the intrusion
detection. Additionally, to validate the detection performance
of the proposed model, we design a craft case study with three
classic datasets (KDD CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23),
and compare the proposed system with advanced NIDSs in
detection accuracy and generalization ability. In a nutshell, the
contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
I. We develop an autoencoder-based feature enhancement
(AFE) algorithm that use autoencoders to enhance the feature
description of small-sample malicious traffic, thereby improving the detection accuracy of malicious traffic. This method
groups normal and malicious traffic features based on Gaussian
features, and uses autoencoders to encode the features in each
group, and the obtained encoding features are used as input
data for the model to detect small-sample malicious traffic.
II. We propose an autoencoder-based hybrid detection
model, abbreviated as AHDM, for network intrusion detection.
This model trains first neural network based on the encoding
features obtained from the AFE algorithm to detect smallsample malicious traffic. It trains second neural network using
the original features to detect normal traffic and large-sample

2403

malicious traffic. The final detection result of malicious traffic
is obtained by combining the detection results of the two
neural networks.
III. A case study with three classic datasets (KDD CUP
99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23) are designed delicately for
validating the performance of AHDM. Considering the effect
of small-sample malicious traffics, we simulate the intrusion
detection with small-sample dataset. Moreover, the proposed
solution is compared with advanced NIDSs, such as deep
learning neural networks (DNN) and adaptive clustering-based
intrusion detection (ACID), for revealing its detection accuracy
and generalization ability.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This section briefly reviews the recent published papers
relevant to the ML-based intrusion detection models for IoT
networks and the malicious traffic detection methods targeting
small-sample dataset, and highlights their shortcomings.
A. ML-Based Intrusion Detection Models for IoT Networks
Various ML-based models have been proposed to propound
intrusion detection mechanisms to efficiently detect and identify intruders in IoT systems [13]. Shukla [14] presented three
intrusion detection methods based on K-means clustering,
decision tree, and an ensemble of these two classical ML
algorithms. The proposed approach is lightweight and is
capable of accurately detecting wormhole attacks targeting
IoT. Anthi et al. [15] focused on the intrusion detection of
smart home IoT devices and proposed a three layers intrusion
detection system (IDS) that uses a supervised approach to
detect a range of popular network based cyber-attacks on IoT
networks. In their work, several popular classifiers, such as
naive Bayes, support vector machines, etc., were evaluated to
detect seven network attack categories on a realistic testbed.
Since DDoS attacks targeting IoT devices can cause severe
corruption to the IoT metasystems, Jia et al. [16] proposed an
LSTM-based IoT defense scheme termed FlowGuard for the
detection of IoT DDoS attacks. The results indicated that the
identification accuracy of the FlowGuard is as high as 98.9%.
Similarly, Injadat et al. [17] and Moubayed et al. [18] proposed
a decision tree (DT) based classification model and a genetic
algorithm optimized random forest model to detect Botnet for
protecting IoT networks against DDoS attacks.
Deep learning (DL) is considered an evolution of machine
learning consisting of deeper neural networks. Ge et al. [19]
and McDermott et al. [20] successively developed DL-based
intrusion detection models, e.g., a feedforward neural network
and a bidirectional long short term memory (LSTM) based
recurrent neural network, for IoT networks. Meidan et al. [21]
proposed a novel network-based anomaly detection method for
the IoT called N-BaIoT that extracts behavior snapshots of the
network and uses deep autoencoders (AE) to detect anomalous
network traffic from compromised IoT devices.
It is clear that intrusion detection models based on machine
learning techniques such as Bayesian networks and AE have
become effective means of detecting IoT network attacks.
However, these data-driven models require a large amount of

2404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

data to train the model. For IoT networks, it is difficult to
obtain a large amount of training data. At the same time, the
number of malicious traffic samples in IoT networks is much
less than that of normal traffic, often leading to insufficient
training of machine learning models and low detection rates.
B. Malicious Traffic Detection Targeting Small-Sample
Dataset
Many NIDSs have been designed by cybersecurity
researchers to protect networks from attacks based on smallsample datasets. However, these existing NIDSs have failed
to provide a high detection rate for small-sample datasets. To
address this issue, Xiao and Xiao [22] proposed a simplified
residual network consisting of several cascaded simplified
residual blocks. This method has shown higher accuracy,
recall, and F-score, especially for R2L and U2R attacks,
compared to conventional residual networks. Zhang et al. [23]
encoded network traffic data using P-Zigzag encoding scheme
and detected cyber-attacks with a hybrid model based on
convolutional neural network (CNN) and random forest to
reduce the false alarm rate of malicious traffic detection with
small-sample datasets. Maglaras et al. [24] built an intrusion
detection system using data from a small-sample SCADA
testbed, while Gao et al. [25] constructed an ensemble model
that combined decision tree, random forest, and deep learning neural network for intrusion detection. Their experiment
showed that optimizing the feature selection and preprocessing
of intrusion detection data can greatly improve the detection
rate.
Transfer learning technique can improve the accuracy of
intrusion detection for the target domain that has fewer data
by transferring the learned knowledge from a related source
domain, which is also called few-shot network intrusion detection [26]. Chen et al. [27] trained a cross-domain DL-based
model with imbalanced data and achieved high detection
accuracy. Considering that malicious traffic data for IoT is
expensive to collect and seldom available, several domain
adaptation (DA) approaches were proposed to transfer the rich
knowledge from the network intrusion domain to facilitate the
intrusion detection for data-scarce IoT domains [28]. Since
the network and IoT share several common attack types, by
mapping both domains into a common feature subspace, these
DA approaches can transfer the enriched network intrusion
knowledge to assist intrusion detection in the target IoT
domain [29]. Wu et al. [30] proposed a joint semantic transfer
network toward effective intrusion detection for IoT network.
By using a multisource heterogeneous DA algorithm, the
proposed method obtained average a 10.3% of accuracy boost
in their experiments.
However, the DA-based approaches rely heavily on the
common attack types between source and target domains.
For the IoT network, due to the many types of sensors and
actuators, and the big differences in network traffic characteristics, these transfer models based on the DA algorithm
are difficult to apply to the intrusion detection of the IoT
network. Additionally, these published papers fail to validate
the detecting performance of their proposed models targeting

Fig. 2.

The framework of AHDM.

extremely small-sample cyber-attacks, e.g., the extremely
small-sample cyber-attacks (e.g., the amount of attack samples
is less than 10), which always making intrusion detection more
challenge.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
We propose an autoencoder-based hybrid detection model,
abbreviated as AHDM to detect the malicious traffic of
network. This work aims at applying AHDM to detect the
malicious traffic, particularly facing the situation of extremely
small-sample cyber-attacks; and developing a lightweight
detection model for quickly adapting to the resource constrained IoT devices. These aims are achieved by combining
three key parts, including data preprocessing, AFE algorithm,
and malicious traffic hybrid detection. AHDM’s framework is
shown in Fig. 2.
I. Data preprocessing: this step involves converting raw
network packets into vectors of header and statistical features,
and removing any invalid network features that could interfere
with anomaly detection. Additionally, we will convert discrete
variables into numeric values and normalize the continuous
variables of raw features.
II. AFE algorithm: in this step, we analyze the statistical
attributes of various traffic classes to identify subtle differences
between normal and malicious traffic. We then encode features
using autoencoder for detecting small-sample malicious traffic.
III. Hybrid detection: to improve detection accuracy and
reduce false alarms, we construct a dual classifier that uses
deep neural network (DNN).
The following sections will provide more details on each
of these methods and show how their synergies lead to
remarkable detection performance for malicious traffic.
A. Data Preprocessing
AHDM processes large amounts of traffic by converting
raw network packets into statistical features, which are then
used for enhancing features and detecting malicious traffic.
The data preprocessing involves two main steps. Firstly,
statistical processing is done to remove duplicate streams
from raw network packets and normalize continuous variables.
Secondly, raw stream encoding is done to encode discrete

WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 3.

2405

Architecture of the AFE algorithm.

variables using one-hot encoding and convert labels to numeric
values using the word2vec method [31]. These steps are the
basic operations of the data preprocessing method, which may
cause some latency depending on the capabilities of the device
where AHDM is deployed.

gj ,t =

B. AFE Algorithm
We creatively propose an autoencoder-based feature
enhancement method to describe the subtle difference between
normal traffic and abnormal traffic. Compared with traditional
clustering methods, this novel can screen out the clustering
information from the features of traffic types, and describe the
subtle difference between normal traffic and malicious traffic
with low-dimensional embedded features. As shown in Fig. 3,
this novel method implemented with two major steps: feature
grouping and feature encoding.
Step I: the feature grouping is first proposed in our previous
work [32], and here is applied to separate the raw features into
four subgroups according to their statistical characteristics,
providing grouped features for generating clustering features.
l
be value of i-th traffic sample and j-th feature.
Let xi,j
l = 1, 2, . . . , L denotes the traffic type, for instance, l = 1
represents normal traffic, l = 2 represents DOS traffic. i =
1, 2, . . . , M is the number of traffic samples, j = 1, 2, . . . , N
is the number of traffic features. Let F = {f1 , f2 , . . . , fN }
be the features of traffic and fjl is the j-th feature of l-th
type traffic. Then, we can calculate the three tuples of the
features of each traffic type, including the coefficient of mean
x l·,j , standard deviation σjl , and skewness Sjl , using the follow
equations:
m

1  l
xi,j
m
i


m 
2
 1 
l − xl
σjl = 
xi,j
·,j
m −1
i=1

3
l − xl
m
xi,j

·,j
1
sjl =
 3
m
σjl
i=1

x l·,j =

where t = {1, 2, 3} represents the coefficient of mean x l·,j ,
standard deviation σjl , and skewness Sjl , respectively. The
upper quartile qj ,t = [qj ,1 , qj ,2 , qj ,3 ] is used as a threshold of
contribution index gj .

(1)

(2)

1, where stdj ,t > qj ,t
0, else

(5)

where gj ,t is the contribution index of j-th feature and t-th
tuple. The final contribution index of j-th feature can be
obtained by gj = 1 + T
t=1 gj ,t , where the value of gj
ranges from 0 to 3. Consequently, the four subgroups of raw
features (x = [x 0 , x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ]) can be obtained according
to the contribution index of raw features. For instance, x 1
involves the features that has a contribution index gj = 1.
Step II: feature encoding is implemented by auto-encoder
(AE). Suppose the input network features x g belongs to ng
dimensional space and the encoding features z g belongs to kg
dimensional space. Considering the contribution index of the
features, we use four auto-encoders for each encoded feature
group. The encoding dimensional kg can be defined as:
kg = 4 − g, g = 0, 1, 2, 3

(6)

An auto-encoder is a special and tricky threelayered neural network in which we set the output
g T
) equal to the input x g =
hW ,b (x g ) = (x1g , x2g , . . . , xm
g g
g T
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ) . J is the reconstruction error. AE is an
unsupervised learning algorithm and uses back propagation
algorithm for training. The description of AE are as follows:
(7)
hW ,b (x g ) = g(f (x g )) ≈ x g


1
2
J (W , b; x g , z g ) = hW ,b (x g ) − z g 
(8)
2
where W and b are the weight and bias of the auto-encoder
network. The final encoded features are combined as z g =
[z 0 , z 1 , z 2 , z 3 ].
C. Malicious Traffic Hybrid Detection

(3)

After that, we use the standard deviation of the traffic type to
illustrate the difference of j-th feature for traffic types, which
can be describes as follows:

(4)
stdj ,t = stdj ,1 , stdj ,2 , stdj ,3

The malicious traffic detection system utilizes a dual classifier that uses deep neural networks to process both raw and
generated features. The output of the model determines the
class to which the traffic belongs. The architecture of the
malicious traffic detection model is illustrated in Fig. 4.
The raw features are inputted into classifier I of the malicious
traffic detection model to identify large-sample network traffic.
The encoding features are inputted into classifier II of the

2406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

B. Datasets

Fig. 4.

Three well-known intrusion detection datasets, including
KDD CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23, are applied to
build network intrusion detectors [33], [34]. As the same as
[31], the preprocessed dataset is then divided into a training
and a testing set using a 7:3 split ratio. For validating the
performance of proposed detection model targeting smallsample dataset, we synthesized seven training datasets with
different percentage between normal and abnormal traffic
samples for each dataset. The numbers of the dataset used in
our experiment are shown in Table I.

Architecture of the hybrid detection model.

malicious traffic detection model to identify small-sample
malicious traffic. Furthermore, the final detection results are
obtained by combining the outputs of both detection models.
IV. I MPLEMENTATION
We ran AHDM on a 64-bit Windows 11 system with
32GB of RAM, 1TB of storage space, an 11th Gen Intel
Core i7-11800H CPU running at 2.30GHz, and an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 3050Ti Laptop GPU with 16GB of memory.
The detection model we used was implemented in Python
3.9 and relied on the numpy, pandas, sklearn, and PyTorch
libraries. For the malicious traffic detection model, we used
fully-connected neural networks with 3 hidden layers, each
comprising 50, 30, and 10 neurons, respectively, for each
classifier. The number of neurons in the input and output layers
was equal to the number of features and the number of traffic
types, respectively. We trained the neural networks using the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001.
V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
In this section, we first describe the datasets and evaluation
metrics used in our performance evaluation. Then, we discuss
how the feature enhancement method can magnify the subtle
differences between normal and abnormal traffic, highlighting
its superiority. Finally, we validate the performance of AHDM
by comparing it with advanced NIDSs in the KDD CUP 99,
CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23 datasets.
A. Evaluation Metrics
We utilize the testing data to calculate confusion matrices,
which are then used to determine the values of True Positive
(TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP), and False
Negative (FN) inferences. In addition, we employ five classic
metrics to assess the quality of the classification results,
including Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F-score (F1), and false
alarm rate (FAR). As the number of traffic classes exceeds
two and the distribution of raw traffic is imbalanced, we use
weighted averaging for each metric.
Accuracy = (TP + FN )/(TP + FP + FN + TN )

(9)

Precision = TP /(TP + FP )
(10)
Recall = TP /(TP + FN )
(11)
F 1 = 2 ∗ Precision ∗ Recall /(Precision + Recall )
FAR = FP /(FP + TN )

(12)
(13)

C. Feature Enhancement
For visualizing the performance of feature enhancement
method, we apply principal component analysis to extract the
three principal components and plot the 3D scatter of the
features (see Fig. 5).
The RF represents the raw features of network traffic
instances. The CC means the clustering center of the feature
clusters obtained by k-means algorithm, which is the same to
the feature enhancement methods used in [31]. The CD applies
the clustering distance between traffic sample and clusters,
which is used in [35]. The AE represents the features obtained
by auto-encoders. The AFE is the features refined by the AFE
algorithm proposed in this work.
The visualized results reveal some interesting observations.
For the dataset of KDD CUP 99, the differences between
Normal and PROBE in RF are more obvious, but it is difficult
to distinguish them from the space concentrated at (0,0,0) in
DOS. The similarity between R2L and Probe sample spaces
is high, making it difficult to distinguish them. After using
AE, the distribution of network traffic features is similar to
the original features, and there is no significant change in
the differences between features. After using CC and CD
features, the resolution of R2L samples with other network
traffic features has been improved, but the overlap between
other malicious traffic features and Normal features is high.
The enhanced features obtained by using the AFE algorithm
have significantly enhanced the differences between DOS and
PROBE, and can clearly distinguish the spatial distribution
of the two. R2L samples are distributed on the periphery of
Normal samples, and R2L malicious traffic features can be
easily identified by visualization.
The CIC-IDS-2017 dataset contains 10 types of malicious
traffic features and Benign traffic features, totaling 11 categories. The Heartbleed sample features in the RF and AE
features show a significant difference in distribution compared
to other traffic features, making them easy to distinguish.
The remaining traffic, including the Benign feature, has a
more concentrated spatial distribution, making it difficult to
distinguish between malicious and normal traffic. The use of
CC and CD features has increased the spatial distribution
difference between Benign and DOS samples, but the overall
recognizability of the samples has not significantly improved.
The use of AFE features has made the spatial distribution of
network traffic samples more dispersed, with high recognition
rates for DOS, BOT, DDoS, PortScan, Xss, and Benign
samples, which is beneficial for improving the detection rate

WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION

2407

TABLE I
T HE N UMBERS OF T RAFFIC C LASSES

of malicious traffic detection models. However, in the 3D
distribution map, the Infiltration and Sql_Injection types of
malicious traffic samples have a small number, making it
difficult to distinguish them visually.
Regarding to the dataset of IOT-23,IOT-23 dataset has a
small sample size and an imbalance in the number of malicious
traffic samples. The article mentions that the Benign, C&C,
and PortScan malicious traffic samples are easier to distinguish
using the RF, CC, CD, and AE features, but it is difficult to
visually distinguish the small sample size of DDoS samples.
However, in the AFE feature, DDoS is more recognizable.
Overall, using the AFE algorithm to obtain enhanced features compared to the original features, the spatial distribution
recognizability of network traffic samples is more obvious,
which is beneficial for enhancing the detection rate of malicious traffic detection models.
D. Network Intrusion Detection Results
According to Fig. 6, there are four models shown in
three classic datasets, and their accuracy, precision, recall,
F-score, and FAR are displayed in a radar chart. The models
are deep learning neural networks (DNN), AFE algorithm
combined with DNN (AFE+DNN), and adaptive clusteringbased intrusion detection (ACID). In Fig. 6(a), for the KDD
CUP 99 dataset, the ACID model performs poorly with
an F-score of only 99.69% and a FAR of 0.07%. This
indicates that using CC features for enhancement does not
effectively improve the detection of malicious traffic. The
DNN model, compared to ACID, shows an improvement of
0.02% to 0.03% in accuracy, precision, recall, and F-score
while reducing the false alarm rate by 0.01%. Building upon
this, incorporating the AFE algorithm into the DNN model
results in a further 0.01% improvement in accuracy, precision,
recall, and F-score but also increases the FAR by 0.01%. It is
evident that while the AFE algorithm enhances features and

helps improve the detection of malicious traffic by increasing
feature distinctiveness, it also leads to an increase in false
alarms. The AHDM model achieves a prediction accuracy,
precision, recall, and F-score of 99.76%, 99.75%, 99.76%,
and 99.74%, respectively, all of which are higher than those
of the DNN, AFE+DNN, and ACID models. Additionally,
the AHDM model has a false alarm rate of only 0.06%,
which is lower than that of the other three models. Therefore,
by adopting a dual detection framework, it is possible to
effectively combine the advantages of DNN and AFE+DNN,
enhancing detection accuracy while reducing the model’s FAR.
The same situation also occurred in the CIC-IDS-2017
dataset (Fig. 6 (b)). In this case, the AHDM model improved
by 0.05%, 0.10%, 0.05%, and 0.07% respectively in terms
of accuracy, precision, recall, and F-score compared to the
DNN model; again, the false positive rate decreased by 0.01%.
On the other hand, the ACID model decreased by 0.06%,
0.07%, 0.06%, and 0.07% respectively in terms of accuracy,
precision, recall, and F-score compared to the DNN model;
the false positive rate increased by 0.01%. Compared to the
DNN model, the AFE+DNN model exhibits a slight increase
in FAR, while precision has improved by 0.01%.
In the IoT-23 dataset, AHDM model shows significant
improvements in accuracy, precision, recall, and F-score compared to the DNN model, with increases of 0.12%, 0.09%,
0.12%, and 0.17%, respectively; and the FAR has decreased by
0.04%. Although the overall performance of the ACID model
is not as good as the AHDM model, it still shows a slight
improvement compared to the DNN model, especially in terms
of detection precision, with an increase of 0.09%.Overall, the
detection performance of the AHDM model is better than that
of the DNN, AFE+DNN, and ACID models, especially in the
detection of malicious traffic in small-sample of IOT networks,
with significant improvements in detection accuracy and false
positive rates compared to traditional models. Although AFE
algorithm can improve the accuracy, precision, recall, and

2408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 5. Visualization of feature enhancement methods. (The datasets include:
(a) KDD CUP 99, (b) CIC-IDS-2017, and (c) IOT-23).

F-score of DNN, but it may increase the FAR as well.
Additionally, the ACID model is not as effective as the DNN
model in KDD CUP 99 and CIC-IDS-2017, it performs better
than the DNN model in detecting malicious traffic in smallsample of IOT networks.
Based on the sample ratio shown in Table I of the KDD
CUP 99 dataset, it can be seen that the number of Normal
and DOS samples is greater than 500, and the ACID, DNN,
AFE+DNN, and AHDM models all have a detection rate over
99% for these two types of traffic. In Fig. 7, when malicious
traffic accounts for 1%, the number of Probe, R2L, and U2R
samples is less than 50, with 24, 12, and 2 respectively. For
the U2R with the least number of samples, all four models
used in this study were unable to successfully detect it. For
R2L type of malicious traffic, the detection rate of the AHDM
model was improved by 0.02 compared to DNN due to the use
of the AFE algorithm. For PROBE, the detection rate of DNN,

Fig. 6. Detecting performance of the models. (The datasets include: (a) KDD
CUP 99, (b) CIC-IDS-2017, and (c) IOT-23).

ACID, and AHDM all reached 0.77. When malicious traffic
accounts for 5%, the number of Probe, R2L, and U2R samples
is 122, 58, and 4 respectively. The detection rates of AHDM
for Probe, R2L, and U2R are 0.920, 0.840, and 0, respectively.
In this case, when the number of malicious traffic samples is
less than 5, the malicious traffic detection models are unable
to successfully detect the malicious traffic. Additionally, by
using AFE algorithm, 0.005 of the Probe type traffic are
detected as DOS, which may increase the FAR of AFE+DNN
model.
When malicious traffic accounts for 10%, the detection rates
of ACID, DNN, AFE+DNN, and AHDM for U2R are 0.420.
It proves that when the number of malicious traffic samples
is greater than 5, the detection rate of the detection model
can reach 0.420. When malicious traffic accounts for 15%, the
number of U2R traffic samples is 13, and the detection rate of
AFE+DNN and AHDM are 0.58, which are higher than that
of DNN and ACID at 0.5. When malicious traffic accounts for

WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 7.

2409

Normalized confusion matrixes of detection results in KDD CUP 99.

20%, AHDM’s detection rate for R2L is 0.98, which is better
than other three models. When malicious traffic accounts for
30%, the number of malicious traffic samples exceeds 25, and
the detection effects of the three models are equivalent. The
detection rates for malicious traffic are all higher than 0.9.
Overall, although the AHDM model cannot detect malicious
traffic when the number of malicious traffic samples is less
than 5 in this dataset, its detection rate is higher than DNN and
ACID when the number of malicious traffic samples is greater
than 5. Again, by introducing dual classifier framework, the
FAR of AHDM is lower than that of AFE+DNN model.
According to the flow sample ratio in Table I of the CICIDS-2017 dataset, there are 10 types of malicious traffic, which
is more than the KDD CUP 99 dataset. In Fig. 8, when the
malicious traffic accounts for 1%, the sample sizes of Bot,
Brute_Force, Heartbleed, Infiltration, PortScan, Sql Injection,
and Xss are all less than 5. DNN, ACID, and AHDM can
only detect Heartbleed attacks that have significant differences
from other traffic features, but they are powerless against Bot,
Infiltration, Sql Injection, and Xss malicious traffic. As for the
Bot malicious traffic that DNN and ACID cannot recognize,
the detection rate of AFE+DNN and AHDM model reach
0.1 and 0.3, respectively. At the same time, in terms of the
detection rate of PortScan malicious traffic, AFE+DNN and
AHDM are 0.07 higher than ACID. However, in this case,
the false alarms caused by the adoption of the AFE algorithm
are also quite evident. For instance, in the case of a larger
sample size for DOS attacks, AFE+DNN exhibits a 0.02
decrease in detection rate compared to DNN, with 0.4% of
them being incorrectly identified as DDoS attacks. Therefore,
in this dataset, the AHDM model has an advantage over DNN,

Fig. 8. Normalized confusion matrixes of detection results in CIC-IDS-2017.

AFE+DNN and ACID in detecting small-sample malicious
traffic.
The IOT-23 dataset collects much less data than KDD
CUP 99 and CIC-IDS-2017. In Fig. 9, the Benign has only
1500 samples, with C&C, PortScan, and DDoS having 15, 1,

2410

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Normalized confusion matrixes of detection results in IOT-23.

and 1 sample respectively when malicious traffic accounts for
1%. DNN, AFE+DNN, ACID, and AHDM can all achieve
100% detection rate for C&C type detection. This is because,
as shown in Fig. 5(c), the distinguishability of C&C is high,
even with a small number of samples, accurate detection can
still be achieved. In terms of detecting DDoS type malicious
traffic, AFE+DNN and AHDM model show absolute advantages, with the detection rate of 0.71, much higher than the
DNN (0.14) and ACID (0.14) models.
When the malicious traffic accounts for 5%, the detection
rate of ACID model for DDoS is 0.29, which is better than
DNN and AHDM. When the malicious traffic accounts for
20% and 30%, the number of PortScan and DDoS samples
are less than 5. The detection rate of DNN and ACID
models for PortScan reaches 0.29, but is still lower than
that of AFE+DNN and AHDM model (0.71). When the
malicious traffic accounts for 25%, the detection rates of the
four models for PortScan and DDoS are consistent, which
are 0.14 and 0.67 respectively. However, at this time, the
AHDM model will classify the remaining PortScan as DDoS
in the detection results. Although the model cannot accurately
identify the PortScan type, it can distinguish it from the Benign
and determine it as malicious traffic. Furthermore, in the
predictions produced by the AFE+DNN model, due to the
influence of the AFE algorithm’s enhanced features, when
the proportion of malicious traffic is at 15%, 20%, and 30%,
the detection rate for the C&C-type malicious traffic decreases
by 0.4%. Building upon this, the dual-structured AHDM model
effectively mitigates this risk.
Therefore, AHDM has a significant advantage over DNN,
AFE+DNN, and ACID models in terms of detection rate for
small-sample IoT network malicious traffic detection. Even
when the number of malicious traffic samples is less than 5,
it can achieve a high detection rate and effectively detect IoT
network attack behaviors.

VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
This paper focus on the malicious traffics detecting with
small-sample dataset. Given this, we propose an auto encoderbased hybrid detection model, namely AHDM, for the
malicious traffics detection in IoT systems. This model trains
first neural network based on the encoding features obtained
from the autoencoder feature enhancement algorithm to detect
small-sample malicious traffic. It trains second neural network
using the original features to detect normal traffic and largesample malicious traffic. The final detection result of malicious
traffic is obtained by combining the detection results of the two
neural networks. Additionally, for validating the performance
of AHDM, we design three delicate case study with the classic
datasets, including KDD CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT23, and compare it with advanced network intrusion detection
systems (NIDSs). The experimental results show that:
I. The detection performance of the AHDM model is
superior to that of the DNN and ACID models, with significant
improvements in detection accuracy, recall rate, and false
alarm rate (FAR) compared to advanced models. In the IoT23 dataset, the AHDM model shows significant improvements
in accuracy, precision, recall rate, and F-score compared to
the DNN model, with increases of 0.12%, 0.09%, 0.12%, and
0.17%, respectively. At the same time, the false alarm rate has
decreased by 0.04%.
II. The AHDM model has a higher detection rate for
small-sample malicious traffic compared to the DNN and
ACID models. Based on the KDD CUP 99 dataset, when
the malicious traffic accounts for 1% of the dataset, the R2L
sample size is 12. For this type of malicious traffic, the
AHDM model has detection rate improvements of 0.01 and
0.13 compared to the DNN and ACID models, respectively. In
the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset, the AHDM model has a detection
rate of 0.3 for the Bot that the DNN and ACID models

WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION

cannot detect. In the IOT-23 dataset, the AHDM model shows
an absolute advantage in detecting DDoS type of malicious
traffic, with a detection rate of 0.71, which is much higher
than the DNN (0.14) and ACID (0.14) models.
However, we also found that in our case studies, when the
number of malicious traffic sample is less than 5, the NIDSs
we used are difficult to detect these small-sample malicious
traffics. Thus, how to improve the detection rate of the NIDSs
with such extremely small-sample malicious traffic is still an
important issue for our future research.

R EFERENCES
[1] S. Smys, A. Basar, and H. Wang, “Hybrid intrusion detection system for
Internet of Things (IoT),” J. ISMAC, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 190–199, 2020.
[2] S. Hameed, F. I. Khan, and B. Hameed, “Understanding security
requirements and challenges in Internet of Things (IoT): A review,” J.
Comput. Netw. Commun., vol. 2019, Jan. 2019, Art. no. 9629381.
[3] A. Qureshi, H. Larijani, J. Ahmad, and N. Mtetwa, “A heuristic intrusion
detection system for Internet-of-Things (IoT),” in Proc. Intell. Comput.
Conf., 2019, pp. 86–98.
[4] Z. Yang et al., “A systematic literature review of methods and datasets
for anomaly-based network intrusion detection,” Comput. Security,
vol. 116, May 2022, Art. no. 102675.
[5] M. Chalé and N. D. Bastian, “Generating realistic cyber data for training
and evaluating machine learning classifiers for network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 207, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 117936.
[6] G. Apruzzese, L. Pajola, and M. Conti, “The cross-evaluation of machine
learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5152–5169, Dec. 2022.
[7] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “Manda: On
adversarial example detection for network intrusion detection system,”
IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1139–1153,
Mar./Apr. 2023.
[8] A. Basati and M. M. Faghih, “PDAE: Efficient network intrusion
detection in IoT using parallel deep auto-encoders,” Inf. Sci., vol. 598,
pp. 57–74, Jun. 2022.
[9] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Perez, and P. Patras, “Adversarial attacks against
deep learning-based network intrusion detection systems and defense
mechanisms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 1294–1311,
Jun. 2022.
[10] S. Shitharth, P. R. Kshirsagar, P. K. Balachandran, K. H. Alyoubi,
and A. O. Khadidos, “An innovative perceptual pigeon galvanized
optimization (PPGO) based likelihood Naïve Bayes (LNB) classification
approach for network intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 46424–46441, 2022.
[11] W. Ma, R. Liu, K. Li, S. Yan, and J. Guo, “An adversarial domain adaptation approach combining dual domain pairing strategy for IoT intrusion
detection under few-shot samples,” Inf. Sci., vol. 629, pp. 719–745,
Jun. 2023.
[12] D. Wang, J. Yang, W. Cui, L. Xie, and S. Sun, “CAUTION: A
robust WiFi-based human authentication system via few-shot open-set
recognition,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17323–17333,
Sep. 2022.
[13] S. Arisdakessian, O. A. Wahab, A. Mourad, H. Otrok, and M. Guizani,
“A survey on IoT intrusion detection: Federated learning, game theory,
social psychology and explainable AI as future directions,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4059–4092, Mar. 2023.
[14] P. Shukla, “ML-IDS: A machine learning approach to detect wormhole
attacks in Internet of Things,” in Proc. Intell. Syst. Conf. (IntelliSys),
2017, pp. 234–240.
[15] E. Anthi, L. Williams, M. Słowińska, G. Theodorakopoulos, and
P. Burnap, “A supervised intrusion detection system for smart home
IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 9042–9053,
Oct. 2019.
[16] Y. Jia, F. Zhong, A. Alrawais, B. Gong, and X. Cheng, “Flowguard: An
intelligent edge defense mechanism against IoT DDoS attacks,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9552–9562, 2020.
[17] M. Injadat, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “Detecting botnet attacks in
IoT environments: An optimized machine learning approach,” in Proc.
32nd Int. Conf. Microelectron. (ICM), 2020, pp. 1–4.

2411

[18] A. Moubayed, M. Injadat, and A. Shami, “Optimized random forest
model for botnet detection based on DNS queries,” in Proc. 32nd Int.
Conf. Microelectron. (ICM), 2020, pp. 1–4.
[19] M. Ge, X. Fu, N. Syed, Z. Baig, G. Teo, and A. Robles-Kelly, “Deep
learning-based intrusion detection for IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE 24th
Pac. Rim Int. Symp. Depend. Comput. (PRDC), 2019, pp. 1–9.
[20] C. D. McDermott, F. Majdani, and A. V. Petrovski, “Botnet detection
in the Internet of Things using deep learning approaches,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[21] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 12–22, 2018.
[22] Y. Xiao and X. Xiao, “An intrusion detection system based on a
simplified residual network,” Information, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 356, 2019.
[23] X. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, L. Han, and J. Lin, “A multiple-layer
representation learning model for network-based attack detection,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 91992–92008, 2019.
[24] L. Maglaras, T. Cruz, M. A. Ferrag, and H. Janicke, “Teaching the
process of building an intrusion detection system using data from a
small-scale SCADA testbed,” Inf. Sci., vol. 3, no. 1, p. e132, 2020.
[25] X. Gao, C. Shan, C. Hu, Z. Niu, and Z. Liu, “An adaptive ensemble
machine learning model for intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 82512–82521, 2019.
[26] R. Duan, D. Li, Q. Tong, T. Yang, X. Liu, and X. Liu, “A survey of
few-shot learning: An effective method for intrusion detection,” Security
Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–10, 2021, Art. no. 4259629.
[27] Y. Chen et al., “Cross-domain industrial intrusion detection deep model
trained with imbalanced data,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 584–596, Jan. 2023.
[28] J. Wu, H. Dai, Y. Wang, K. Ye, and C. Xu, “Heterogeneous domain
adaptation for IoT intrusion detection: A geometric graph alignment
approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 10764–10777,
Jun. 2023.
[29] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, and J. Zhao, “A novel hierarchical attentionbased triplet network with unsupervised domain adaptation for network
intrusion detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53, pp. 11705–11726, May 2023.
[30] J. Wu et al., “Joint semantic transfer network for IoT intrusion detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3368–3383, Feb. 2023.
[31] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
[32] N. Wei et al., “A feature enhancement-based model for the malicious
traffic detection with small-scale imbalanced dataset,” Inf. Sci., vol. 647,
p. 119512, 2023.
[33] A. S. Shekhawat, F. Di Troia, and M. Stamp, “Feature analysis of
encrypted malicious traffic,” Exp. Syst. Appl., vol. 125, pp. 130–141,
Jul. 2019.
[34] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “BotMark: Automated
botnet detection with hybrid analysis of flow-based and graph-based
traffic behaviors,” Inf. Sci., vol. 511, pp. 284–296, Feb. 2020.
[35] L. Duan and Y. Xiao, “An intrusion detection model based on fuzzy Cmeans algorithm,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Emerg. Commun.
(ICEIEC), 2018, pp. 120–123.

Nan Wei received the Ph.D. degree from Southwest
Petroleum University in 2020. He is currently a
Lecturer of Network Security with the Cyberspace
Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou
University, Guangzhou, China. He has authored
more than 20 publications published by refereed international journals and conferences, e.g.,
Information Sciences, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, Applied
Energy, and Energy. His research interests include
network traffic analysis, anomaly detection, and load
forecasting.

2412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Lihua Yin received the Ph.D. degree from the
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China. She
is currently a Professor and an Associate Dean with
the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China. She has
been a Project Leader of the National Natural
Science Foundation of China, the National Key
research and Development Plan of China, the Major
State Basic Research Development Program of
China, and the National High-Tech Research and
Development Program of China. She has authored
more than 120 papers published by refereed international conferences and
journals, e.g., IEEE T RANSACTION ON K NOWLEDGE DATA E NGINEERING,
IEEE T RANSACTION ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSACTION
ON S OFTWARE E NGINEERING , Computer Security, and Infocom. Her
research interests include network security, Internet of Things, secure threat
intelligence sharing, and big data. She is an Editorial Board Member of the
Journal of Network and Information Security.

Jingyi Tan received the master’s degree in computer science from the University of Birmingham,
U.K. She is currently an Associate Professor with
Guangzhou Xinhua College and serves as the
Director of the Information Resource Management
Program. Her research focuses on data mining and
big data analytics.

Chuhong Ruan is currently pursuing the B.Eng.
degree in cyberspace security with Guangzhou
University, Guangzhou, China. His research focuses
on malicious traffic detection.

Chuang Yin is currently pursuing the B.Eng. degree
in cyberspace security with Guangzhou University,
Guangzhou, China. His research focuses on network
anomaly detection.

Zhe Sun received the B.S. degree from the
Dalian University of Technology in 2010, the
M.S. degree from the University of Science and
Technology of China in 2012, and the Ph.D.
degree from the University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences in 2019. He is an Associate Professor with
the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
Guangzhou University, China. He has authored
over 30 publications in international conferences
and journals, focusing on privacy-preserving mechanisms for multiparty data sharing and deep learning.
In recognition of his exceptional achievements, he was awarded the prestigious President’s Award by the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019.
Moreover, he serves as a Committee Member of the Big Data Security and
Privacy Computing Committee within the Chinese Association for Chinese
Information Society.

Xi Luo received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences in 2019. He is currently an Associate
Professor of Network Security with the Cyberspace
Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou
University, Guangzhou, China. He has authored
more than 30 publications published by refereed
international journals and conferences, e.g., IEEE
T RANSACTION ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS,
Computer Communications, Neural Computing and
Applications, High Performance Computing and Communications. His
research interests include AI-enabled threat analysis, Internet of Things
security, and network anomaly detection.