18172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

ARISE: Graph Anomaly Detection on Attributed
Networks via Substructure Awareness
Jingcan Duan , Bin Xiao , Siwei Wang , Haifang Zhou, and Xinwang Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Recently, graph anomaly detection on attributed
networks has attracted growing attention in data mining
and machine learning communities. Apart from attribute
anomalies, graph anomaly detection also aims at suspicious
topological-abnormal nodes that exhibit collective anomalous
behavior. Closely connected uncorrelated node groups form
uncommonly dense substructures in the network. However,
existing methods overlook that the topology anomaly detection
performance can be improved by recognizing such a collective pattern. To this end, we propose a new graph anomaly
detection framework on attributed networks via substructure
awareness (ARISE). Unlike previous algorithms, we focus on the
substructures in the graph to discern abnormalities. Specifically,
we establish a region proposal module to discover high-density
substructures in the network as suspicious regions. The average
node-pair similarity can be regarded as the topology anomaly
degree of nodes within substructures. Generally, the lower the
similarity, the higher the probability that internal nodes are topology anomalies. To distill better embeddings of node attributes,
we further introduce a graph contrastive learning scheme, which
observes attribute anomalies in the meantime. In this way, ARISE
can detect both topology and attribute anomalies. Ultimately,
extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show that ARISE
greatly improves detection performance (up to 7.30% AUC and
17.46% AUPRC gains) compared to state-of-the-art attributed
networks anomaly detection (ANAD) algorithms.
Index Terms— Attributed networks, graph anomaly detection,
graph neural networks (GNNs), network substructure.

Notations
G
Cj
vi
A ∈ Rn×n
D ∈ Rn×n

N OMENCLATURE
Definitions
Attributed network.
Substructure in the network.
ith node of G.
Adjacency matrix of G.
Degree matrix of A.

Manuscript received 23 September 2022; revised 28 March 2023 and 14 July
2023; accepted 31 August 2023. Date of publication 22 September 2023; date
of current version 3 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China under Project
2020AAA0107100 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Project 62325604 and Project 62276271. (Corresponding
authors: Bin Xiao; Xinwang Liu.)
Jingcan Duan, Haifang Zhou, and Xinwang Liu are with the College
of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense
Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: jingcan_duan@163.com;
haifang_zhou@nudt.edu.cn; xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn).
Bin Xiao is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065,
China (e-mail: xiaobin@cqupt.edu.cn).
Siwei Wang is with the Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory, Beijing
100071, China (e-mail: wangsiwei13@nudt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3312655

X ∈ Rn×d
xi ∈ R1×d
′
H(ℓ) ∈ Rn×d
h(ℓ) ∈ R1×d
′
′
W(ℓ) ∈ Rd ×d
t
R
′

Ra
yi ∈ {0, 1}
score(vi )

Attribute matrix of G.
Attribute vector of vi .
Hidden subgraph representation of the ℓth
layer.
Node hidden representation of the ℓth layer.
Network parameters of the ℓth layer.
Number of topology anomaly detection
round.
Number of attribute anomaly detection
round.
Ground-truth label of a instance pair.
Final anomaly score of vi .
I. I NTRODUCTION

A

TTRIBUTED networks have the powerful capability of
modeling and analyzing numerous complex scenarios in
the real world. In recent years, researches [1] on attributed networks tasks are becoming an increasingly appealing direction
for academia and industry. In particular, anomaly detection
has been a vital topic in attributed networks [2], which has
ubiquitous applications in many fields, such as financial fraud
detection [3], social spam detection [4], network intrusion
detection [5], and information system error detection [6].
Attributed networks anomaly detection (ANAD) intends
to discern anomalous nodes that diverge from frequent patterns [2]. Unlike the raw data widely applied in other
fields [7], [8], [9], attributed networks include both network
topology and node attribute information. According to the
previous literature [10], [11], [12], [13], the mismatch between
the above two types of information will cause two typical
kinds of anomalies in attributed networks, i.e., the topology
anomalies and attribute anomalies. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
the topology anomaly has normal attribute values at a glance,
while it densely links to the uncorrelated nodes [14]; on the
contrary, the attribute counterpart has a normal neighborhood
connectivity relationship, while its attribute values may be contaminated by noise and are not similar to the neighborhoods.
Further analysis demonstrates that the pattern of topology
anomalies is the collective behavior of a group of anomalous
nodes, which form uncommonly dense substructures in the
networks.
Early shallow methods [15], [16], [17], [18], [19] primarily
focus on feature engineering or pattern recognition methods
to detect the anomalous behaviors of nodes. Such models
rely on specific domain knowledge of researchers to improve
detection performance. Besides, they cannot effectively dig

2162-237X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

DUAN et al.: ARISE

Fig. 1. Toy example contains two typical anomalous nodes in attributed
networks: 1) Topology anomaly: uncorrelated nodes with dense links in the
red circle. 2) Attribute anomaly: nodes with dissimilar attribute values from
neighborhoods.

deep nonlinear information from the topology structure and
the node attributes. The above reasons hinder them from
discriminating abnormal nodes effectively.
Recently, the graph neural network (GNN) has made
remarkable advances in many fields, e.g., natural language processing [20], traffic systems [21], recommender systems [22],
and chemistry [23]. Therefore, GNN has become a natural
choice for the ANAD task and can solve the problems faced by
traditional methods better. DOMINANT [24] designs a graph
convolution network (GCN)-based autoencoder, which regards
the reconstruction errors of structure and attribute matrices as
the anomalous degrees. AnomalyDAE [25] replaces GCN with
graph attention network (GAT). ResGCN [26] improves GAT
by adding residual information. Differently, [27] combines
multiple graph filters and solves the anomalous information
smoothing of nodes caused by GCN’s low-pass filter. To avoid
the labor-intensive and time-consuming cost of collecting node
labels, CoLA first introduces the graph contrastive learning
paradigm into ANAD. [28], [29], [30] boost the detection performance with the addition of node-level contrastive network,
generative loss, and graph multiview contrastive paradigm.
Although existing works have achieved impressive results
in the detection performance, there is still a relative lack
of research on effectively detecting topology anomalies.
The common practice of most contrastive-based previous
approaches is the comparison of attributes between the target
node and its neighbors. Besides, reconstruction-based methods
compare the original attribute and topology information of the
target node with the one reconstructed from its neighbors.
It is obvious that such a strategy is effective in detecting
the anomalous behaviors of attribute anomalies. An attribute
anomalous node can be easily captured if it is dissimilar from
its neighbors. However, the topology anomaly has normal
attribute values but more complex connectivity relationships
with other topology anomalies. It is difficult to discern them

18173

under such a strategy. Therefore, a new algorithm that can
effectively detect topology anomalies and cooperate well with
attribute anomaly detection needs to be explored.
In this article, we make a new attempt to remedy the
mentioned defects in ANAD. To this end, we propose a novel
graph Anomaly detection framework on attRIbuted networks
via Substructure awarEness (ARISE), which both detects
the topology and attribute anomalies concurrently. Topology
anomalies are groups of uncorrelated nodes with dense links
between them. Such a group of anomalous nodes viewed as
a whole will form an uncommonly dense substructure in the
networks. It is the anomalous behavior manifested by nodes
combined together. However, existing works are unaware that
the key to topology anomaly detection is discerning such a
collective pattern from the network topology. To overcome this
challenge, we elaborate a new topology detection scheme from
a substructure-based perspective, which can detect their collective anomalous behaviors. To be specific, we first leverage a
density-based algorithm in the region proposal module to discover high-density substructures as suspicious regions. Then,
the anomalous degrees of the internal nodes are measured
by their attribute similarities. On the other hand, we adopt
a graph contrastive network for attribute anomaly detection.
It can distill better node embeddings for similarity measures in topology anomaly detection simultaneously. Finally,
a well-designed aggregator is utilized to fuse the topology
and attribute anomalous information. Extensive evaluations
and comprehensive metrics on benchmarks show ARISE’s
astonishing effectiveness compared to strong competitors.
In general, the main contributions of this work are summarized below.
1) We redesign a new principle to detect the topology
anomalies. Specifically, it perceives their collective
anomalous behaviors from the perspective of network
substructures.
2) We propose a new integrated anomaly detection framework (ARISE) in attributed networks, which experts in
detecting topology anomalies and attribute anomalies
simultaneously.
3) Experiments demonstrate the remarkable advantage of
ARISE against current ANAD methods.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we will review the related work in terms of
1) ANAD and 2) graph contrastive learning.
A. Attributed Networks Anomaly Detection
An attributed network is a structured network with multidimensional attribute information. Many traditional algorithms
have been proposed in ANAD. They are based on the nondeep
anomaly detection way, which captures anomalous patterns
from either topology or node attributes of the network.
LOF [15] and Radar [18] find the differences in attributes
between the target node and the context or most of the
nodes. Among the methods based on topology information,
SCAN [16] is one of the most well-known works. AMEN [17]

18174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

and ANOMALOUS [19] both use node attribute information and network topology information to achieve powerful
results. However, the traditional methods cannot excavate
deep information, making it difficult to improve performance
continuously.
The emergence of GNN has dramatically improved the
ability of the algorithms to extract the deep information of
the attributed networks. They have been widely used in many
fields [31], [32], [33], [34], [35]. It is natural to introduce GNN
to graph anomaly detection. AAGNN [36], which is improved
from the traditional anomaly detection algorithm, incorporates
the one-class support vector machine (SVM) algorithm into
attributed networks to identify anomalous samples. Algorithms
based on the self-supervised learning paradigm have also
achieved great success. The generative self-supervised learning method DOMINANT [24] performs anomaly detection
by calculating the differences between the attribute matrix,
the adjacency matrix, and the original matrices after GCN
reconstruction. COMMANDER [37] pays attention to solving
the cross-domain problem in ANAD. Auxiliary attributebased HCM [38] adopts a node-to-hop count pretext task
that takes the predicted values of hop counts of nodes and
first-order neighbors as node anomaly scores. CoLA [14]
introduces the contrastive learning paradigm to ANAD for the
first time, constructing node- and subgraph-level comparisons
to identify anomalies by the differences between the node
and contrastive subgraph attributes in positive and negative
pairs. ANEMONE [28], SL-GAD [29], and Sub-CR [30]
do further research based on CoLA. Multiscale strategies [39]
have been proven effective in other domains. ANEMONE
forms multiscale contrastive with new node-level comparison
and captures more anomalous information. SL-GAD adopts
both contrastive learning and reconstruction patterns. Sub-CR
works in a multiview way with a global graph view generated
by the diffusion model. Differently, PAMFUL [40] captures
global information by a synergistic approach. However, most
of these methods focus on digging the information of node
attributes and pay less attention to the topological information.
III. G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING
The primary purpose of GNN algorithms is to transform
the attributes of nodes into low dimensions according to the
needs of specific tasks. The expensive label collection progress
limits the supervised and semi-supervised learning algorithms.
As an essential branch of the graph self-supervised paradigm,
graph contrastive learning can compensate for the above
problem to a certain extent by obtaining enough supervision
information from ingeniously designed pretext tasks. Based
on the contrastive scale [41], most graph contrastive learning
methods can be divided into two leading mainstream. One
is same-scale contrastive learning. GRACE [42] generates
two comparison views by graph augmentation methods that
bring the positive pair nodes in the view closer and push
the negative pair nodes farther. After two graph views are
generated, HeCO [43] is trained on the heterogeneous graph
with encoders maximizing the mutual information of the same
nodes in the views. To alleviate the burden of constructing
negative pairs, BGRL [44] uses the Siamese network approach

for model training. The other one is cross-scale contrastive
learning. The pioneering work DGI [45] proposes to maximize
the mutual information of node representation and graph-level
representation to obtain global information. After generating
two views through data augmentation, MVGRL [46] maximizes the node representation in one view and the graph-level
representation in the other view. Therefore, we focus on
using cross-scale contrastive learning, which provides a better
solution to distill the representation of node attributes for
ANAD tasks.
IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this section, we will first define the main problem of
ANAD formally. The primary notations used throughout this
article are summarized in Nomenclature. Then, we introduce
the proposed framework, ARISE. Finally, we conduct complexity analysis of the model.
A. Attributed Networks Anomaly Detection
An attributed network G = (V, E, X) consists of: 1) the
set of nodes V, where |V| = n; 2) the set of edges E, where
|E| = m; and 3) the node attributes matrix X ∈ Rn×d , indicates
the attribute values of nodes. In addition, the adjacency matrix
A ∈ Rn×n contains the topology information of the network,
and Ai j = 1 represents there is an edge between node vi
and v j , otherwise, Ai j = 0. In ANAD, the model is trained to
learn a function score(vi ) that calculates the anomaly score for
node vi in G. The larger the anomaly score, the more likely
the node is anomalous. It is worth noting that we conduct the
ANAD task strictly unsupervised in this article.
B. Proposed Method
In this subsection, we will introduce our method ARISE.
As shown in Fig. 2, it consists of three main components.
The first part is the topology anomaly detection module,
which uses a density-based algorithm to perceive high-density
substructures as suspicious regions. The anomaly degrees of
internal nodes are evaluated by the average node-pair similarity
in the substructure. The second part is the attribute anomaly
detection module, which forms a contrast of node-subgraph
level to obtain node attribute anomaly degree. It should be
pointed out that these two modules leverage both node attribute
information and network topology information. The last one
is the anomaly score calculation, which aggregates the anomalous information from the first two modules to obtain the final
anomaly score for each node. Such two types of anomaly score
calculations are performed under multiround detection. In each
detection, the former employs a multisize substructure scoring
strategy, which takes into account the size of the substructure.
The latter combines the effects of both positive and negative
pairs.
1) Topology Anomaly Detection: Previous methods [14],
[28], [29] constitute node-subgraph pairs in the contrastive
network by random walk [47], [48], [49], [50], [51]. Nevertheless, the uncertainty caused by random walk does not always
contribute to learning the node-local topology information

DUAN et al.: ARISE

18175

Fig. 2. Overview of the ARISE model. It consists of three modules. 1) Topology anomaly detection: we design a region proposal module to perceive
high-density substructures as suspicious regions. The average node-pair similarity indicates the anomaly degrees of nodes within the substructure. 2) Attribute
anomaly detection: the target node forms a positive pair with its located subgraph and forms a negative pair with the irrelevant subgraph. After the contrastive
learning network, the node embeddings are also used in topology anomaly detection. 3) Anomaly score calculation: we treat the reciprocal of average node-pair
similarity as the topology anomaly estimates of its inner nodes and adopt a multiscale substructure scoring strategy. The node attribute anomaly score is
calculated by measuring the relationship between it and its contrastive subgraphs. Finally, the aggregator calculates the final anomaly score by fusing the
attribute and topology anomaly scores of each node.

that is beneficial for the task. In extreme cases, the sampled subgraph around an anomalous node may contain a
few similar nodes in its neighborhoods, which will harm
detecting it. On the other hand, this node-subgraph contrastive
mode ignores the collective abnormal behavior of topology
anomalies on the network topology. Therefore, we make a
new attempt to leverage local topology information from the
perspective of substructures in the networks. We design a
region proposal module to extract suspicious substructures and
overcome the above deficiency. Afterward, we discriminate
the anomalous nodes in the substructure based on the average
node-pair similarity.
a) Region proposal module: A group of topology anomalies will form an uncommonly dense substructure in the
networks. To this end, we employ a density-based algorithm
to discover the high-density substructures that may contain
topology anomalies. In practice, we first utilize a k-core
method [52] to find the k-core graphs. Then, they will be
partitioned into substructures based on the node connectivity.
In addition to this straightforward density-based algorithm,
other more sophisticated algorithm strategies are also applicable under our substructure-aware framework as one of the
potential directions in the future. Ultimately, these substructures {C0 , . . . , Cb } with possible anomalous nodes can be
regarded as suspicious regions.
b) Topology anomaly degree estimate: In reality, there
are some scenarios where normal samples possess close
connections between them, e.g., there are frequent email
correspondences between managers and their secretaries. Conversely, the intensive email exchanges between assembly line

workers and secretaries could be regarded as abnormality [53].
Therefore, some suspicious regions have only normal nodes,
while others contain normal nodes and topology anomalies.
In light of this, we measure the anomaly degree of internal
nodes by average node-pair similarity in the substructure.
It should be pointed out that the nodes with more significant
differences in attributes have a higher anomalous possibility.
To obtain more accurate similarity, we utilize the embeddings
of node attributes instead of the original attribute values.
Specifically, we choose cosine distance as the node-pair similarity measurement


dk,q = Similarity z k , z q = cos z k , z q
(1)
where z k and z q represents the embedding of node vk and vq .
After that, we utilize an average function to compute the
average node-pair similarity for each substructure
n̂ j

1 X (l)
d
dj =
n̂ j l=1 k,q

(2)

where n̂ j is the number of the node pairs in the substructure C j .
And node vk and vq belong to C j .
So far, it has not been solved how to obtain more qualified
node embeddings for the similarity metric in (1). In addition,
it is essential to detect attribute anomalies in ANAD. Hence,
we introduce the graph contrastive learning scheme in attribute
anomaly detection, which can acquire better node representations in the meantime.
2) Attribute Anomaly Detection: The recent success of
graph contrastive learning introduced in Section III has shown

18176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

great potential to discern attribute anomalies. Inspired by this,
we define contrastive instance pairs following [14]. Afterward,
the node attribute anomaly degree is calculated by measuring
the similarity between the embeddings of instance pairs. More
importantly, ARISE can learn better node representations
served in the topology anomaly detection module.
a) Subgraph sampling: The construction of positive and
negative pairs is vital for contrastive learning. While there are
multiple-scale contrasts, one of the most potent comparisons is
the contrast of node and subgraph for ANAD. The supervision
information from the subgraph includes both neighborhood
attributes and topology. For the target node vi , it forms a
positive pair with the subgraph where it is located and forms
a negative pair with the subgraph where another random
node is located. To avoid the interaction between the node
and subgraphs, the attribute values of the node are masked,
i.e., all attribute values are set to 0.
There are many subgraph sampling methods, but we use
a random walk-based algorithm in this article. Because it
is practical and straightforward to implement. A generated
subgraph is composed of a node and its neighborhoods.
b) Contrastive learning network: The contrastive learning network pulls the positive pairs and pushes the negative
pairs into the latent space. In this process, the node representations are optimized. First, we learn the representation of the
subgraph corresponding to the target node vi through a GCN
layer. The hidden layer representation of the subgraph in the
positive pair can be defined as

 −1
−1
Ai e
(3)
Di 2 Hi(ℓ) W(ℓ)
Hi(ℓ+1) = σ e
Di 2 e
where Hi(ℓ+1) and Hi(ℓ) denote the hidden representation of the
−(1/2) e e−(1/2)
(ℓ + 1)th and ℓth layer, e
Di
Ai Di
is the normalization
of the adjacency matrix, W(ℓ) denotes the network parameters,
and σ (·) is activation function ReLU here.
After GCN, we manage to define a Readout function, which
converts the embedding of the subgraph Ei to the same shape
as vi . In practice, we choose average to achieve Readout
ñ

ei = Readout(Ei ) =

i
1 X
(Ei )l
ñ i l=1

(4)

where ñ i denotes the number of nodes within the subgraph,
(Ei )l denotes the ℓth row of Ei , and ei is the final representation of the subgraph.
Then, we need to encode the attribute of the target node into
the same embedding space as subgraphs. The embedding of
the target node can be acquired by using the model parameters
of GCN


hi(ℓ+1) = σ hi(ℓ) W(ℓ)
(5)

i.e., the similarity
e i⊤
si = Bilinear(z i , ei ) = sigmoid z i We



(6)

e denotes the parameter matrix and sigmoid(·) is the
where W
logistic sigmoid function.
According to the characteristics of the ANAD task,
we decide to apply the binary cross-entropy loss [45] as
the objective function of the module. It can be expressed as
follows:
n
X
L=−
(7)
(yi log (si ) + (1 − yi ) log (1 − si ))
i=1

where yi is equal to 1 in positive pairs, while is equal to 0 in
negative pairs.
3) Anomaly Score Calculation:
a) Topology anomaly score: Since the average node-pair
similarity is negatively correlated with the anomaly degree
of nodes in the substructure, the reciprocal of the average node-pair similarity is naturally used to represent their
anomaly degrees. Then, we treat the reciprocal value as the
topology anomaly estimate of each internal node within the
substructure. We calculate the topology anomaly estimate for
each node in the substructure
1
(8)
ti =
dj
where d j is the inner-node similarity of substructure C j . And
ti represents the topology anomaly score of the target node vi
that belongs to C j .
It is unknown which substructure the topology anomalies
belong to. We perform multiround detections with a gradually
increasing k. To avoid unnecessary calculations, we start the
detections with a specific k equal to the average node degree δ.
The substructure discovery algorithm will be stopped when
returning NULL. In each detection, we compute the topology
anomaly estimates for the nodes detected in any substructure
via (1), (2), and (8). The other nodes that have not been
detected in any substructure will be assigned with a topology
anomaly score of 0. Noble and Cook [54] and He et al. [55]
indicate that smaller substructures appear frequently in the network while larger substructures appear infrequently. According
to the characteristics of ANAD, we design the topology
anomaly scoring method by combining the average node-pair
similarity and the substructure size. In general, we adopt a new
multisize substructure scoring strategy for topology anomaly
detection. In practice, we adopt the number of nodes in the
substructure to measure this impact. Therefore, we finally
average the anomaly scores from multiround detection to
determine the topology anomaly score for each node. So, the
final topology anomaly score of the target node can be defined
as follows:
Rt

where hi(ℓ+1) and hi(ℓ) denote the hidden representation of the
(ℓ)

(ℓ + 1)th and ℓth layer, W denotes the network parameters,
and σ (·) is ReLU here. The last two are both shared with
GCN. z i is the final representation of the target node.
We utilize a bilinear model to tease out the relationship
between the target node vi and its counterpart subgraph,

score_t(vi ) =

1 X
C j ti(r )
R t r =1

(9)

where |C j | indicates the number of the node in the substructure
C j that vi belongs to. And R t is the number of topology
anomaly detection rounds. score_t (vi ) denotes the final topology anomaly score of the target node vi .

DUAN et al.: ARISE

18177

b) Attribute anomaly score: The attribute anomaly detection module obtains the similarities between the embeddings
of each target node and contrastive subgraphs. We calculate
the node attribute anomaly score according to the similarities
information. For a normal node, its embedding should be
similar to the subgraph in the positive pair, i.e., si, p is
close to 1. On the contrary, it is dissimilar to the subgraph
in the negative pair, i.e., si,n is close to 0. For an anomalous
node, its embedding should be dissimilar to the subgraphs in
both positive and negative pairs, i.e., si, p and si,n are both close
to 0. Therefore, we define the attribute anomaly estimate of
the target node as follows:
ai = si,n − si, p

(10)

where si,n is the similar degree of vi and its corresponding
subgraph in a negative pair, and si, p is the similar degree of vi
and its corresponding subgraph in a positive pair.
Due to the randomness of the subgraph sampling method,
it cannot reflect all the attribute information of the node
neighborhoods in one sampling. Thus, we perform multiround
detection and construct multiple groups of positive and negative pairs. Then, the final attribute anomaly score of the target
node is expressed as follows:
Ra

1 X (r )
a
score_a(vi ) = a
R r =1 i

(11)

where score_a(vi ) denotes the final attribute anomaly score of
the target node vi and R a is the number of attribute anomaly
detection round.
c) Final anomaly score: After the topology and attribute
anomaly scores for each node are determined, we employ an
aggregator to fuse them. First, each kind of score is normalized
to unify its magnitudes. Then, the aggregator sums the two
scores according to weight and obtains the final anomaly score
score(vi ) for each node
score(vi ) = (1 − α) · score_t(vi ) + α · score_a(vi ) (12)
where α ∈ [0, 1] is a trade-off parameter to balance the importance between two scores.
In general, the overall procedures of ARISE are shown
in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Proposed ARISE
Input: An attributed network G = (V, E, X); Number of
training epochs E; Batch size B.
Output: Anomaly score function scor e(·).
1: // Topology anomaly detection
2: Calculate the average degree δ of nodes in graph.
3: for k = δ to kmax do
4:
Detect high-density substructures {C0 , . . . , Cb }.
5:
for C j do
6:
Measure the inner-node embedding similarities of

C j via Eq.(1).
Calculate the average node-pair similarity of C j via
Eq.(2).
8:
end for
9: end for
10: // Attribute anomaly detection
11: for e = 1 to E do
12:
V is divided into batches with size B by random.
13:
for vi ∈ B do
14:
Form the positive and negative pairs by random
walk sampling.
15:
Estimate the similarity scores for the embeddings of
the target node and two subgraphs in the positive
and negative pair via Eq.(6).
16:
Calculate the loss L via Eq.(7).
17:
Back propagation and update trainable parameters.
18:
end for
19: end for
20: // Anomaly score calculation
21: By multiple round detection, calculate the final anomaly
score for each node via Eq.(8), (9), (10), (11), and (12).
7:

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF T IME C OMPLEXITY FOR D IFFERENT A NOMALY
D ETECTION M ETHODS IN ATTRIBUTED N ETWORKS . R I S THE
N UMBER OF ROUNDS IN I NFERENCE FOR THE C OMPARED
M ETHODS . A ND THE OTHER N OTATIONS A RE THE
S AME AS S ECTION IV-C

C. Complexity Analysis
We analyze the time complexity of each component in
ARISE. In the topology anomaly detection module, the time
complexity of k-core method is O(max(n, m)) (n is the
number of nodes in the graph and m represents the number of
edges in the network). Therefore, R t rounds of detection need
O(max(n, m)R t ). For the attribute anomaly detection module,
each RWR subgraph sampling for all nodes is O(cδn) (c is
the number of nodes within the subgraphs and δ is the mean
degree of the network). The time complexity of GCN for all
nodes is O((K qd + K cd 2 )n) (K is the number of layers, d is
the dimension of node attributes in hidden space, and q is
the number of edges in subgraphs). Hence, this module needs
O(n(cδ+K qd+K cd 2 )(T +R a )) (T is the number of epochs in
training and R a is the round of attribute detection). The overall

time complexity of the proposed model is O(max(n, m)R t +
n(cδ + K qd + K cd 2 )(T + R a )).
In the meantime, we conduct time complexity analysis of
recent important ANAD methods. Table I shows that since the
augmented view is generated by graph diffusion, Sub-CR [30]
has the largest time complexity of all the methods. In summary, our method improves performance without significantly
increasing complexity.

18178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE II
S TATISTICS OF DATASETS

V. E XPERIMENT
To verify the effectiveness of ARISE, in this section,
we conduct experiments on six benchmark datasets and evaluate the model through three metrics.
A. Experimental Settings
1) Datasets: We perform experiments on six datasets commonly used in ANAD. The details of each dataset are
presented in Table II. They are Cora [56], CiteSeer [56],
DBLP [57], Citation [57], ACM [57], and PubMed [56].
DBLP is an author network. There is an edge between two
authors if they have a coauthor relationship. The others are
publication network datasets, which are composed of scientific
publications. Each paper is regarded as a node. The citation
relations form the edges of the network.
2) Anomaly Injection: Since the above six datasets are commonly attributed network datasets, they are usually considered
to have no anomalies. Therefore, we need to inject anomalous nodes into these datasets for the experiment to work
successfully. Following the previous literature [10], [11], [12],
we inject both topology and attribute anomalies into the
datasets. Considering the balance, such two types of anomalies
have the same number in each dataset.
a) Topology anomaly injection: Topology anomalies are
mainly generated by perturbing the topology of the attributed
networks. If many nodes in the dataset with dissimilar
attributes are much more closely connected than the average,
this can be considered a typical anomalous situation [10], [12].
Specifically, we randomly select m̂ nodes that make them
fully connected and repeat this operation p times. The number
m̂ is set to 15 in practice. The number p is 5, 5, 10,
15, 15, and 20 on Cora, CiteSeer, DBLP, Citation ACM,
and PubMed.
b) Attribute anomaly injection: Attribute anomalies are
mainly generated by perturbing the attribute values of nodes.
Using the method proposed in the literature [11], attribute
anomalies are generated by modifying node attribute values.
First, we randomly select a node vi and another n̂ nodes. The
number n̂ is usually 50. Then, we calculate the Euclidean
distance between vi and each of the n̂ nodes. Finally, the
attribute values of vi are changed to be the same as that of
node v j , which has the largest Euclidean distance. The number
of attribute anomalies is 75, 75, 150, 225, 225, and 300 on
each dataset, respectively.

3) Baselines: We select eight well-known ANAD algorithms to compare with our proposed framework, ARISE. They
are LOF1 [15], ANOMALOUS2 [19], DOMINANT3 [24],
CoLA4 [14], ANEMONE5 [28], SL-GAD6 [29], HCM7 [38],
and Sub-CR8 [30]. The first two are nondeep methods, and
the last six are deep methods. Following the operation of
CoLA, the datasets are first preprocessed before running
ANOMALOUS. Specifically, the attributes dimension of nodes
is reduced to 30 by PCA.
4) Evaluation Metric: Our experiments employ three common metrics to evaluate the model comprehensively.
a) AUC: The ROC curve is a plot of the true-positive
rate against the false-positive rate according to the ground
truth and the anomaly scores of the nodes. AUC value is
the area under the ROC curve. A higher value means the
score function assigns a higher score to the randomly chosen
anomalous sample than a normal sample.
b) AUPRC: The PR curve is a plot of precision against
recall according to the ground truth and the anomaly scores
of the nodes. AUPRC value is the area under the PR curve,
reflecting the performance of the positive samples. In practice,
we use the method of calculating the average precision to
obtain AUPRC value [58].
c) Precision@K: It indicates the proportion of truepositive samples among the top k samples with the largest
anomaly scores. The value of Precision@K ranges from 0 to 1,
and close to 1 means the model performs better.
5) Parameter Settings: In the attribute anomaly detection
module, we set the size of subgraphs in positive pairs and
negative pairs to be 4. In the meantime, the basic network
model (GCN) is one layer, and the latent embedding dimension is 64 on all datasets. The learning rate of the model
for Cora, CiteSeer, DBLP, Citation, ACM, and PubMed is
0.003, 0.003, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.0005, and 0.001. To get better
performance, the number of training epochs on Cora, CiteSeer,
and PubMed is 100. It is set to 400 on DBLP, Citation,
and ACM.
6) Computing Infrastructures: Except for ANOMALOUS,
the experiments of other models run on the PyTorch
1.10.2 platform using an Intel9 Core10 i9-10850K CPU
(3.60 GHz), 64 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX
3070 8 GB GPU. The experiments of ANOMALOUS run on
MATLAB R2020b platform using the same machine.
B. Experimental Results
1) Analysis of Performance Comparison: The ROC curves
of these nine models on these six datasets are shown in Fig. 3.
The specific AUC values and AUPRC values are shown
1 https://github.com/damjankuznar/pylof
2 https://github.com/zpeng27/ANOMALOUS
3 https://github.com/kaize0409/GCN_AnomalyDetection_pytorch
4 https://github.com/GRAND-Lab/CoLA
5 https://github.com/GRAND-Lab/ANEMONE
6 https://github.com/KimMeen/SL-GAD
7 https://github.com/Juintin/GraphAnomalyDetection
8 https://github.com/Zjer12/Sub
9 Registered trademark.
10 Trademarked.

DUAN et al.: ARISE

18179

Fig. 3. ROC curves comparison on six benchmark datasets. The area under the curve is larger, the anomaly detection performance is better. The black dotted
lines are the “random line,” indicating the performance under random guessing. (a) ROC curve of Cora. (b) ROC curve of CiteSeer. (c) ROC curve of DBLP.
(d) ROC curve of Citation. (e) ROC curve of ACM. (f) ROC curve of PubMed.
TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR AUC AND AUPRC. OOM I NDICATES THE I SSUE OF O UT- OF -M EMORY H APPENS D URING T RAINING . T HE B OLD AND
U NDERLINED VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST AND RUNNER -U P R ESULTS , R ESPECTIVELY

in Table III. Meanwhile, the Precision@K of total anomaly and
topology anomaly line diagrams are shown in Fig. 4. Through
comparison, we can conclude as follows:
a) AUC and AUPRC results: As shown in Table III,
we observe that ARISE has a stronger ability to distinguish
anomalous nodes from normal nodes than other models.
In particular, ARISE attains a remarkable AUC gain of
2.46%, 0.62%, 1.85%, 7.30%, 2.92%, and 0.52% on Cora,
CiteSeer, DBLP, Citation, ACM, and PubMed, respectively.
At the same time, the AUPRC results reflect that ARISE
makes a remarkable improvement in the positive sample detection compared with its competitors on most datasets, and it
obtains about 17.46% AUPRC increment on the ACM dataset.

These indicate that ARISE has a more comprehensive performance and can adapt to the different needs of various
scenarios. It is worth noting that the well-design topology
anomaly detection module brings about 2.19%–15.29% AUC
and 11.97%–34.32% AUPRC gains when compared with the
pioneering baseline CoLA.
Fig. 3 offers an intuitive illustration that the under-curve
areas of the deep methods are significantly larger than most
nondeep methods, and the contrastive learning-based methods
work best among the deep methods. This indicates that deep
methods, especially contrastive learning-based methods, can
learn more effective embeddings of node attributes than nondeep methods for the ANAD task.

18180

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Performance comparison results with respect to Precision@K of total anomaly and topology anomaly on six benchmark datasets.

b) Precision@K results: For a more comprehensive
evaluation, we also report Precision@K on the six datasets
in Fig. 4. For each dataset, the odd columns are Precision@K
results reflecting the proportion of true total anomalies, which
contains both attribute and topology anomalies, in its top k
ranked nodes. The even columns are Precision@K measuring
the proportion of veritable topology anomalies in its top k
anomaly scores. As suggested by results in Fig. 4, ARISE
achieves best or comparable results in odd column subfigures.
It is noticeable that ARISE brings tangible Precision@K
improvement to the competitors except on Citation in even
column subfigures. These phenomena verify the effectiveness of our novel substructure-based paradigm on topology
anomaly detection. According to the odd column subfigures,
the proposed framework has stronger comprehensive detection
performance than competitors.
2) Study on Topology Anomaly Injection: Currently, there
are two major topology anomaly injection methods. The first
one is making randomly selected nodes fully connected [12].
The other is to randomly dropout partial links between
the selected nodes after the operation of the first injection

method [13]. Our article adopts the first method in the experiments, which has been widely used in [14], [24], [28], [29],
and [30].
We perform comparative experiments to further investigate
the generalization ability of our model on topology anomaly
detection. To be specific, we follow the second injection
method of topology anomalies, which drops out 10% edges
between the randomly selected nodes (the injection of attribute
anomalies remains unchanged). As shown in Table IV, our
model still outperforms the competitors on all experimental
datasets. Besides, we observe that most methods suffer from
performance degradation under the new injection condition.
This means such an injection method would make it more
difficult to discern topology anomalies from normal nodes.
This will be one of the challenges for future work.
3) Analysis of Time Efficiency: We further concretely
investigate the time efficiencies of all methods. In practice, we compute the average running time (second) for
each epoch out of 100 epochs. Fig. 5 shows the relationships between performance and running time (second) for
all methods on Citation. Most methods spend near time,

DUAN et al.: ARISE

18181

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR AUC U NDER D IFFERENT T OPOLOGY
I NJECTION S ETTINGS (D ROPOUT 10% E DGES B ETWEEN S ELECTED
N ODES ). OOM I NDICATES THE I SSUE OF O UT- OF -M EMORY
H APPENS D URING T RAINING . T HE B OLD AND
U NDERLINED VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST
AND RUNNER -U P R ESULTS , R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE VI
A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE S UBSTRUCTURE D ETECTION M ETHOD IN
THE T OPOLOGY A NOMALY D ETECTION M ODULE W ITH R ESPECT TO
AUC VALUES . T HE B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS

TABLE VII
A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE C OMPONENTS OF (2) AND (9) W ITH
R ESPECT TO AUC VALUES . “W/O AVERAGING ” M EANS D ELETING
THE AVERAGING T ERM IN (2). A ND “N ODE PAIR ” I NDICATES
R EPLACING THE N UMBER OF N ODES IN THE S UBSTRUCTURE
W ITH THE N UMBER OF N ODE PAIRS . T HE B OLD AND
U NDERLINED VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST AND
RUNNER -U P R ESULTS , R ESPECTIVELY

Fig. 5. Relationships between AUC result and running time for all models
on Citation. The running time results (second) are calculated by averaging the
running time for each epoch out of 100 epochs.
TABLE V
A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE M ETHOD OF O BTAINING N ODE
R EPRESENTATIONS W ITH R ESPECT TO AUC VALUES .
T HE B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS

while ANOMALOUS runs significantly longer. And our model
takes comparable time and achieves the best performance.
C. Ablation Study
In this section, we investigate the effects of the node
representation acquisition strategies, the substructure detection method in the topology anomaly module, the topology
anomaly score calculation strategy, and the score-fusion strategy on the model performance.
1) Analysis of Node Representations Acquisition: In the
topology anomaly module, the inner-node embedding similarities are highly correlated with the anomalous degree of the
substructure. Hence, how to enjoy better node representations
becomes a vital problem. We compare the performance of
using raw node attributes with node embeddings from the
contrastive network. Table V shows that the contrastive network learns more effective node representations for topology
anomaly detection, further enhancing the ANAD performance.
2) Analysis of Substructure Detection Method: In the meantime, we perform ablation study on the substructure detection
method in the topology anomaly module with other seven

classical community search algorithms. EHPPG [59] divides
the graph into communities by iteratively swapping node pairs
to reduce the edge cut between them. Greedy Modularity [60]
modifies the community partition of nodes by a greedy pattern
until it reaches the max modularity of the graph. Label Propagation [61] is a semisynchronous label propagation method.
DANMF [62] detects communities in the graph by combining
nonnegative matrix factorization and deep autoencoder. PercoMCV [63] first performs the clique percolation algorithm,
then computes eigenvector centrality. EdMot [64] designs
an edge enhancement approach for motif-aware community
detection. DNTM [65] works based on a distributed neighborhood threshold method. As shown in Table VI, the adopted
k-core [52] based method outperforms the other community
search methods, which means it can more effectively capture
suspicious substructures and work better with the framework.
3) Analysis of Topology Anomaly Score Calculation:
As for topology anomaly score calculation, the number of node
pairs can also be used to measure the size of substructures
in (9). To study the effectiveness of the averaging component
in (2), we conduct additional experiments on all datasets.
The comparison between the first and last row in Table VII
indicates that the number of nodes works better in our
scheme. In the meantime, compared with “W/O Averaging,”
our scheme achieves the best or comparable performance. The
experiment results verify the effectiveness of our topology
anomaly score calculation strategy.
4) Analysis of Fusion Strategy for Topology and Attribute
Anomaly Scores: After gathering important topology and
attribute anomaly scores, we analyze the fusion strategies to
get final anomaly scores. To boost the performance, we explore
three different combination strategies: 1) Max: we choose the
largest value to represent the node anomaly degree; 2) sum:
we sum the two scores directly; and 3) weight: the scores are

18182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE VIII
A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE F USION M ETHOD OF T OPOLOGY AND
ATTRIBUTE A NOMALY S CORES W ITH R ESPECT TO AUC VALUES .
T HE B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS

Fig. 6.

Trade-off parameter α with respect to AUC values.

summed by weight. As shown in Table VIII, ARISE adopts
the weight fusion strategy, which is not always the best but
the most comprehensive and effective choice.
D. Parameter Analysis
In the following subsection, we analyze the influence
of coefficient α and its related settings on the detection
performance.
1) Score-Fusion Strategy: We first study the direct effect of
α on the score-fusion strategy. As shown in Fig. 6, we vary the
coefficient α from 0 to 1.0 and obtain its effect on the AUC
value. Finally, we adopt α equal to 0.8 on all datasets. We note
that the lines show an upward trend followed by a downward
trend. The performance on α = 0 or α = 1 is significantly
lower when α is between 0 and 1. This reflects that using the
topology and attribute anomaly module concurrently greatly
improves the detection ability of the model compared with
only one.
To further explore this phenomenon, we report the Precision@K results of topology anomaly and attribute anomaly
when α = 0.2 and α = 0.8 on Citation and PubMed
in Fig. 7. Table IX shows the AUC comparison of our model
on different datasets. When α = 0.2, ARISE relies more
on topology anomaly scores than attribute ones. In this case,
Fig. 7 indicates that the performance of detecting topology
anomalies is much better than detecting attribute anomalies on
all datasets. The model has a weak ability to detect attribute
anomalies.
However, we aim to effectively detect such two types
of anomalies simultaneously. Apparently, the model cannot
achieve the goal when α = 0.2. The comparison of AUC
results in Table IX also validates it. On the contrary, α =
0.8 can balance the effects of two types of anomaly scores
and enhance the detection performance of attribute anomalies.

Fig. 7. Impact of trade-off parameter α with respect to Precision@K of total
anomaly, topology anomaly, and attribute anomaly on Citation and PubMed.
(a) Citation (α = 0.2). (b) Citation (α = 0.8). (c) PubMed (α = 0.2).
(d) PubMed (α = 0.8).

TABLE IX
I MPACT OF T RADE -O FF PARAMETER α W ITH R ESPECT TO AUC R ESULTS

Under these circumstances, our model would have a more
comprehensive detection performance. Therefore, we employ
such a value strategy for α.
2) Imbalanced Anomaly Injection: As mentioned in
Section V-A2, we inject two types of anomalous nodes
with the same number into the original graph. However,
an imbalanced injection method might affect the selection of
the trade-off parameter α. We perform further experiments
to study the relationship between the ratio of two types of
nodes and α. In practice, we design five different injection
ratios of the topology anomalies and the attribute anomalies
as shown in Table X. The total number of anomalies remains
unchanged in all datasets and we change the ratio according

DUAN et al.: ARISE

18183

TABLE X
N UMBER OF E ACH T YPE OF A NOMALIES I NJECTED I NTO E ACH DATASET. “TA” R EPRESENTS THE T OPOLOGY A NOMALIES , “AA”
I NDICATES THE ATTRIBUTE A NOMALIES . “R ATIO ” I S THE R ATIO OF T OPOLOGY A NOMALIES AND ATTRIBUTE A NOMALIES

Fig. 8. Impact of trade-off parameter α with respect to AUC values under different ratios of topology and attribute anomalies. (a) Ratio = 9:1. (b) Ratio =
7:3. (c) Ratio = 1:1. (d) Ratio = 3:7. (e) Ratio = 1:9.

to the injection method in Section V-A2. Fig. 8 indicates the
effect of the trade-off parameter α under different anomaly
ratios on detection performance.
We can intuitively observe that the model achieves the best
performance on most datasets when α = 0.8 in Fig. 8(a)–(d).
And all of the detection performances reach the peak when
α = 1.0 in Fig. 8(e). As mentioned in Section V-D1,
α = 0.8 can provide a more comprehensive detection performance for such two types of anomalies in most cases.
However, the number of attribute anomalies is nine times
more than the number of topology ones under the last
anomaly injection ratio. The model needs a stronger attribute
anomaly detection performance under such an imbalanced
injection. Hence, when α = 1.0, the model achieves the best
performance.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose a novel graph anomaly detection
framework on attributed networks via substructure awareness
termed ARISE. Different from existing works, we design a

new topology anomaly detection principle from the perspective
of network substructure. Specifically, we use a density-based
algorithm to detect high-density substructures as the region
proposed. Then, the average node-pair similarity of nodes is
measured to discern topology anomalies. For this purpose,
we introduce a graph contrastive learning method to obtain
better embeddings of node attributes and to detect attribute
anomalies. The experiments demonstrate that ARISE makes
a great improvement on ANAD. In future work, we continue
to explore how to better aggregate the attribute and topology
anomaly scores of nodes to avoid information loss.
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[2] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access,
Oct. 8, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3118815.
[3] G. Zhang et al., “eFraudCom: An e-commerce fraud detection system
via competitive graph neural networks,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 40,
no. 3, pp. 1–29, Jul. 2022.

18184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

[4] S. Rao, A. K. Verma, and T. Bhatia, “A review on social spam detection:
Challenges, open issues, and future directions,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 186, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 115742.
[5] M. Mongiovì, P. Bogdanov, R. Ranca, E. E. Papalexakis, C. Faloutsos,
and A. K. Singh, “NetSpot: Spotting significant anomalous regions on
dynamic networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, May 2013,
pp. 28–36.
[6] Y. Boshmaf, K. Beznosov, and M. Ripeanu, “Graph-based Sybil Detection in social and information systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf.
Adv. Social Netw. Anal. Mining (ASONAM), Aug. 2013, pp. 466–473.
[7] Z. Cheng, S. Wang, P. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Liu, and E. Zhu, “Improved
autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Intell. Syst.,
vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 7103–7125, Dec. 2021.
[8] Z. Cheng, E. Zhu, S. Wang, P. Zhang, and W. Li, “Unsupervised outlier
detection via transformation invariant autoencoder,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 43991–44002, 2021.
[9] J. Hu, G. Yu, S. Wang, E. Zhu, Z. Cai, and X. Zhu, “Detecting anomalous
events from unlabeled videos via temporal masked auto-encoding,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[10] D. B. Skillicorn, “Detecting anomalies in graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Intell.
Secur. Inform., May 2007, pp. 209–216.
[11] X. Song, M. Wu, C. Jermaine, and S. Ranka, “Conditional anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 631–645,
May 2007.
[12] K. Ding, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Interactive anomaly detection on attributed
networks,” in Proc. 12th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining,
Jan. 2019, pp. 357–365.
[13] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detection on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. 26th Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, 2022, pp. 1–15.
[14] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
[15] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2,
pp. 93–104, Jun. 2000.
[16] X. Xu, N. Yuruk, Z. Feng, and T. A. J. Schweiger, “SCAN: A structural
clustering algorithm for networks,” in Proc. 13th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2007, pp. 824–833.
[17] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, Jun. 2016,
pp. 207–215.
[18] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
[19] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “Anomalous: A joint
modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
Proc. IJCAI, 2018, pp. 3513–3519.
[20] D. Marcheggiani and I. Titov, “Encoding sentences with graph convolutional networks for semantic role labeling,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical
Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2017, pp. 1506–1515.
[21] J. Zhang, X. Shi, J. Xie, H. Ma, I. King, and D. Y. Yeung, “GaAN: Gated
attention networks for learning on large and spatiotemporal graphs,” in
Proc. 34th Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell. (UAI) 2018, pp. 1–10.
[22] R. Ying, R. He, K. Chen, P. Eksombatchai, W. L. Hamilton, and
J. Leskovec, “Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 974–983.
[23] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
“Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
[24] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2019, pp. 594–602.
[25] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for
anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
[26] Y. Pei, T. Huang, W. van Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “ResGCN:
Attention-based deep residual modeling for anomaly detection on
attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Adv. Anal.
(DSAA), Oct. 2021, pp. 1–2.
[27] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks for
anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2205.15508.

[28] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[29] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 12, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TKDE.2021.3119326.
[30] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2022,
arXiv:2205.04816.
[31] X. He, K. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and M. Wang, “LightGCN:
Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr.,
Jul. 2020, pp. 639–648.
[32] L. Chen, L. Wu, R. Hong, K. Zhang, and M. Wang, “Revisiting
graph based collaborative filtering: A linear residual graph convolutional
network approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 27–34.
[33] L. Wu, P. Sun, R. Hong, Y. Fu, X. Wang, and M. Wang, “SocialGCN:
An efficient graph convolutional network based model for social recommendation,” 2018, arXiv:1811.02815.
[34] J. Liu, Z.-J. Zha, R. Hong, M. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Deep adversarial
graph attention convolution network for text-based person search,” in
Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2019, pp. 665–673.
[35] J. Shuai et al., “A review-aware graph contrastive learning framework
for recommendation,” 2022, arXiv:2204.12063.
[36] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-L. Chung, “Subtractive
aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
[37] K. Ding, K. Shu, X. Shan, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Cross-domain graph
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
no. 6, pp. 2406–2415, Jun. 2022.
[38] T. Huang, Y. Pei, V. Menkovski, and M. Pechenizkiy, “Hop-count
based self-supervised anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2021,
arXiv:2104.07917.
[39] Y. Wang, J. Peng, H. Wang, and M. Wang, “Progressive learning with
multi-scale attention network for cross-domain vehicle re-identification,”
Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 1–15, Jun. 2022.
[40] T. Zhao, T. Jiang, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “A synergistic approach
for graph anomaly detection with pattern mining and feature learning,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2393–2405,
Jun. 2022.
[41] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023.
[42] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph
contrastive representation learning,” 2020, arXiv:2006.04131.
[43] X. Wang, N. Liu, H. Han, and C. Shi, “Self-supervised heterogeneous graph neural network with co-contrastive learning,” in Proc.
27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
pp. 1726–1736.
[44] S. Thakoor, C. Tallec, M. G. Azar, R. Munos, P. Veličković, and
M. Valko, “Bootstrapped representation learning on graphs,” in Proc.
Workshop Geometrical Topological Represent. Learn. (ICLR), 2021,
pp. 1–14.
[45] P. Velickovic, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. ICLR, vol. 2, no. 3, 2019,
pp. 1–17.
[46] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view representation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
pp. 4116–4126.
[47] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos, and J.-Y. Pan, “Fast random walk with restart
and its applications,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), 2006,
pp. 613–622.
[48] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning of
social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2014, pp. 701–710.
[49] J. Qiu et al., “GCC: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network
pre-training,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 1150–1160.
[50] Y. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Wu, X. Lin, and X. Zhao, “Unsupervised
metric fusion over multiview data by graph random walk-based crossview diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 57–70, Jan. 2017.

DUAN et al.: ARISE

18185

[51] Y. Wang, X. Lin, and Q. Zhang, “Towards metric fusion on multi-view
data: A cross-view based graph random walk approach,” in Proc. 22nd
ACM Int. Conf. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), 2013, pp. 805–810.
[52] V. Batagelj and M. Zaversnik, “An O(m) algorithm for cores decomposition of networks,” 2003, arXiv:cs/0310049.
[53] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media
anomaly detection,” ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newslett., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 1–14, Aug. 2016.
[54] C. C. Noble and D. J. Cook, “Graph-based anomaly detection,” in Proc.
9th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2003,
pp. 631–636.
[55] W. He, G. Hu, and Y. Zhou, “Large-scale IP network behavior anomaly
detection and identification using substructure-based approach and multivariate time series mining,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 1–13,
Apr. 2012.
[56] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Gallagher, and
T. Eliassi-Rad, “Collective classification in network data,” AI Mag.,
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 93–106, Sep. 2008.
[57] X. Yuan, N. Zhou, S. Yu, H. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Xia, “Higher-order
structure based anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2021, pp. 2691–2700.
[58] H. Schütze, C. D. Manning, and P. Raghavan, Introduction to Information Retrieval, vol. 39. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[59] B. W. Kernighan and S. Lin, “An efficient heuristic procedure for
partitioning graphs,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 291–307,
Feb. 1970.
[60] A. Clauset, M. E. J. Newman, and C. Moore, “Finding community structure in very large networks,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids
Relat. Interdiscip. Top., vol. 70, no. 6, Dec. 2004, Art. no. 066111.
[61] G. Cordasco and L. Gargano, “Community detection via semisynchronous label propagation algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop,
Bus. Appl. Social Netw. Anal. (BASNA), Dec. 2010, pp. 1–8.
[62] F. Ye, C. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Deep autoencoder-like nonnegative
matrix factorization for community detection,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int.
Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2018, pp. 1393–1402.
[63] N. Kasoro, S. Kasereka, E. Mayogha, H. T. Vinh, and J. Kinganga,
“PercoMCV: A hybrid approach of community detection in social
networks,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 151, pp. 45–52, Jan. 2019.
[64] P.-Z. Li, L. Huang, C.-D. Wang, and J.-H. Lai, “EdMot: An edge
enhancement approach for motif-aware community detection,” in Proc.
25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019,
pp. 479–487.
[65] R. Jaiswal and S. Ramanna, “Detecting overlapping communities using
ensemble-based distributed neighbourhood threshold method in social
networks,” Intell. Decis. Technol., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 251–267, Jun. 2021.

Jingcan Duan is currently pursuing the master’s
degree with the College of Computer Science and
Technology, National University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China.
His current research interests include graph representation learning, graph anomaly detection, and
artificial intelligence (AI) for science.

Bin Xiao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electrical engineering from Shanxi Normal
University, Xi’an, China, in 2004 and 2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
from Xidian University, Xi’an, in 2012.
He is currently a Professor with the Chongqing
University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Chongqing, China. His research interests include
image processing and pattern recognition.

Siwei Wang received the Ph.D degree from
the National University of Defense Technology
(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2023.
He is currently an Assistant Research Professor
with the Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory,
China. He has published several articles. His current
research interests include kernel learning, unsupervised multiple-view learning, scalable clustering,
and deep unsupervised learning.
Mr. Wang served as a PC Member/reviewer
in top journals and conferences, such as IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE),
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YS TEMS (TNNLS), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING (TIP),
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS (TCYB), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON M ULTIMEDIA (TMM), International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), IEEE/CVF Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference
(CVPR), European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), and International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI).

Haifang Zhou received the Ph.D. degree from
the National University of Defense Technology
(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2003.
She is now a Professor at the College of Computer
Science and Technology, NUDT. She has published more than 60 peer-reviewed papers, including
those in highly regarded journals and conferences
such as Concurrency and Computation Practice and
Experience (CCPE), Journal of Software, Parallel Computing, International Conference on Parallel
Processing (ICPP), etc. Her current research interests
include bigdata processing and intelligent parallel computing.

Xinwang Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree from the National University of
Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in
2013.
He is now a Professor at the College of Computer
Science and Technology, NUDT. He has published
more than 100 peer-reviewed papers, including
those in highly regarded journals and conferences
such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NAL YSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE (T-PAMI),
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA
E NGINEERING (T-KDE), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING
(T-IP), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING
S YSTEMS (T-NNLS), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA (T-MM),
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY (TIFS), International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), IEEE/CVF Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conference (CVPR), AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI), International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), etc.
His current research interests include kernel learning and unsupervised feature
learning.
Dr. Liu serves as the Associate Editor of Information Fusion Journal. More
information can be found at https://xinwangliu.github.io/.