IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

5411

Artificial Intelligence-Based Zero Trust Security
Approach for Consumer Industry
Senthil Murugan Nagarajan , Member, IEEE, Ganesh Gopal Devarajan , Senior Member, IEEE,
M. Suresh Thangakrishnan , T. V. Ramana, Ali Kashif Bashir , Senior Member, IEEE, and Ahmad Ali AlZubi

Abstract—Development in Internet technology made consumer
electronics growth to another extent where several consumers
from all over the world utilize various essentials through recent
development. However, consumer electronics based devices could
be vulnerable to cyber attacks if it is not appropriately secured.
In this research work, we proposed AI-enabled deep learning
model based zero trust security (AIDL-XTS) framework for
verification and authentication for devices, users, and applications for every access request. We use smartphone sensor
data for user authentication using Deep CNN-BiLSTM network.
Furthermore, we proposed Bayes theorem based trust score
to evaluate the zero trust security. This proposed framework
assumes all users, devices, and applications are un-trusted which
requires verification and authentication for every access request,
regardless of the user’s location or device. To evaluate the trust
score in the zero trust security model, Bayes theorem-based trust
score (Bayes-TSC) model is proposed. The performance of model
is analyzed over three datasets: WISDM-HARB, HMOG, and
UCI-HAR, using four metric measures: accuracy, equal error
rate, success rate, and authentication time. From the results,
the performance of proposed framework outperforms when
compared with traditional benchmark deep learning models for
user authentication while protecting against unauthorized access
in minimal authentication time.

Manuscript received 8 May 2023; revised 21 August 2023, 20 October
2023, 4 February 2024, and 4 April 2024; accepted 3 June 2024. Date of
publication 27 June 2024; date of current version 11 December 2024. This
work was supported by the King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
through the Researchers Supporting Project under Grant RSP2024R395.
(Corresponding author: Ganesh Gopal Devarajan.)
Senthil Murugan Nagarajan is with the Department of Mathematics,
Université du Luxembourg, L-4365 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
(e-mail: senthil.nagarajan@uni.lu).
Ganesh Gopal Devarajan is with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, SRM Institute of
Science and Technology (Delhi NCR Campus), Ghaziabad 201204, India
(e-mail: dganeshgopal@gmail.com).
M. Suresh Thangakrishnan is with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Einstein College of Engineering, Tirunelveli 627012, India
(e-mail: suresh.nellai@gmail.com).
T. V. Ramana is with the Department of Computer Science
and
Engineering,
Jain
University,
Bengaluru
562112,
India
(e-mail: Venkataramana.t@gmail.com).
Ali Kashif Bashir is with the Department of Computing and Mathematics,
Manchester Metropolitan University, M15 6GB Manchester, U.K., also
with the Woxsen School of Business, Woxsen University, Hyderabad
502345, India, and also with the Department of Computer Science and
Mathematics, Lebanese American University, Beirut 03797751, Lebanon
(e-mail: dr.alikashif.b@ieee.org).
Ahmad Ali AlZubi is with the Computer Science Department,
Community College, King Saud University, Riyadh 11437, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: aalzubi@ksu.edu.sa).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3412772

Index Terms—Artificial intelligence, consumer industry, deep
learning, security, zero trust.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ECENT advancements in technologies have made world
to become victims of connectivity with digitization.
Because of increasing connection between devices and trending tools such as Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing,
and sensors within the network which exchanges information
or data across various places which results in need and importance of network security requirements [1], [2]. In today’s
modern world, various security concepts used in the network
is based on separation between external and internal networks.
The internal networks are isolated using Network Access
Controls (NACs), Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), and
Firewalls [3]. Different services, devices, users are trustworthy
when they are inside the protected internal network. However,
other devices and users who are outside will be treated as
intruders. This is where the realm of trustworthy protocol or
zero trust security is playing an important role that should be
practiced in various consumer environment [4], [5].
These challenges were adversely promoted by zero-trust
concept that is growing in recent days. In this methodology,
the main idea behind this is develop no trustworthy in which
each and every request or information must be validated and
approved before transferring through the network. Several
organizations are still depend on perimeter-based model
despite of the potential ability towards zero-trust solutions for
secure networking [6], [7]. However, there is a multifaceted
and complex process in investing for new security approaches.
This becomes more important for customers, employees, and
business process to take informed decisions for their consumer
based industries. Various research has focused on technical
aspects of zero trust security and business oriented questions
were neglected [8], [9].
The paradigm of cyber-security is known to be zero trust
where it is mainly focused on protection of resources in
which continuous evaluation is must before implicitly granting
trust. Trustworthiness is the degree that viewed coarsely for
the people who has confidence for the product or service
that behaved as promised, intended, and advertised [10]. In
the environment of Zero-trust, continuous authorization and
verification are required for users while they access to the
resources of enterprise. The Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA)

R

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1558-4127 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

helps in improving analytics and viability across various
enterprise network. An Ericom software survey has detailed
that 83% out of 1300 risk and security specialists have
responded and thus the zero trust is agreed and implemented
the solutions for their enterprise [11], [12], [13].
Transition towards ZTA will be an questionable task and
also challenging to understand and long journey to have proper
use. The migration to Zero Trust ecosystem is an challenging
and have several barriers for the enterprise industries [14]. It
is due to lack of concrete frameworks and industry standards
that can efficiently implement this methodology in different
enterprises. The requirements for infrastructure must be understood clearly before migrating to ZTA as various standards
of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and IT system interoperability
and compatibility is different. More applicability towards AI
and zero trust security is integrated to develop an reliable
architecture to improve trust in enterprise industries [12], [15].
The main contributions of this research is summarized below:
• User authentication is analyzed using DeepCNN BiLSTM
network based on smartphone sensor data.
• Furthermore, the trust-score of zero trust security solution
is evaluated using Bayes theorem.
In this research, we proposed AI-enabled deep learning
model based zero trust security (AI-DL-XTS) framework
for verification and authentication for devices, users, and
applications for every access request. We use smartphone
sensor data for user authentication using Deep-CNN-BiLSTM
network. Furthermore, we proposed Bayes theorem based trust
score to evaluate the zero trust security.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
Organizational operations have been changed these days
with increase in work from home popularity where devices
and users need dynamic access to various applications and
data from the outside to connect with internal network of
certain consumer based industries, organizations, and much
more [1]. Syed et al. [16] presented a extensive survey
about zero trust and critical infrastructure risk management.
Authors described the role of access control and authentication
of zero trust architectures in different scenarios. Authors
also discussed the various challenges associated with access
control schemes, software-defined perimeter, contemporary
authentication schemes, micro-segmentation approaches, and
risk computation techniques which affect the zero trust
implementation.
Eidle et al. [17] presented Observe, Orient, Decide, Act
(OODA) framework implementation based on experimental
test-bed results of plane feedback with automatic control. In
their model, automated threat response with identity management and combined with packet-based authentication of
trust levels towards eight distinct network. Poppo et al. [18]
presented two main frameworks for supply chain management
on zero trust security. First one authors mentioned as calculative trust in which economics transaction cost is associated
closely and second is relational-trust in which sociological
theories were closely aligned. Sedjelmaci et al. [19] proposed
hybrid model for security framework which combined of

machine learning and security experts for protecting the edge
computing network from unknown and known attacks by
minimizing false alarm rate.
Grzonkowski and Corcoran [20] proposed authentication
framework by user centric approach for home networks.
Authors used zero knowledge proof authentication scheme
into the cloud infrastructure by allowing users to transfer their service temporarily within a trusted environment.
Furthermore, sophisticated services and sharing of personal
content is enabled over convenient TCP/IP protocol by using
this approach. Wan et al. [21] presented zero knowledge proof
with high efficiency for data authentication by extending the
previous zk-SNARK scheme. Authors developed off-chain
data based on zero-knowledge authenticated and zk-AuthFeed
for achieving both authenticity and privacy for blockchain
enabled DApps.
Dubin [22] presented deep Content Disarm and
Reconstruction (CDR) methodology based on zero-trust in
which the validation is first executed using the CDR and
prevention rate with effect of disarming were presented and
measured. Authors used well-know dataset for analyzing the
performance of DeepCDR model where they proved that
reconstruction file is functional and usable. Chen et al. [23]
proposed a protection and security awareness system for
5G-based healthcare platform using zero-trust architecture.
Four key dimensions were considers in 5G-based healthcare
such as terminals, users, and much more for constructing
trust-able dynamic access control models.
Zhang et al. [24] realized the intelligent emergency
analysis, management and trustworthy using emergent semantic based information centric-fog system. They designed
efficient dissemination network for emergency information
and aggregating. Furthermore, authors filtered fake contents using semantic based trustworthy routing scheme.
Abou-Nassar et al. [25] come up with the solution where
semantic gaps is reduced by the Indirect Trust Inference
System (ITIS) and budget authentication by smart contract
and enhanced estimation of Trustworthy Factor (TF) using
network edges and node with the help of proposed Blockchain
Decentralized Interoperable Trust framework (DIT) for IoT
zones.
Hosney et al. [26] proposed an alternative solution based
on machine learning algorithms for saving time and increase
efficiency for maintaining security posture with less human
intervention. In this mode, configured policies and information
about security feeds are enforced and maintain zero-trust
network policies. Kant and Johannsen [27] used AI based security features in small and medium sized companies (SMEs) and
concluded the potential impact of security level is surveyed.
Saleem et al. [28] proposed zero-trust security framework
based on rich model for verification of trust by involving
federated learning in the cloud environments.
Tiwari et al. [29] demonstrated secure data aggregation
without using bi-linear groups with the support of verifiable
federated learning method to address malicious third-party
aggregation. Patil and Kundu [30] proposed a scheme based
on member reputation and member list chain based association (MLC-R b A) for changing the type of authenticated

NAGARAJAN et al.: AI-BASED ZERO TRUST SECURITY APPROACH FOR CONSUMER INDUSTRY

5413

data. Authors also proposed two necessary functions for
root authentication without using external trust for hierarchical trust model in which revoked members were controlled
without causing inconvenience to user. Kumar et al. [31]
introduced authentication and key agreement (AKA) and
AI based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) for analyzing
computation cost. However, authors proposed explainable AI
based on blockchain for securing consumer applications in
smart cities. Itani et al. [32] computed situation values by
integrating three factors such as IoT-threat, IoT-attack, and
IoT-attack probabilities. Then authors applied proposed model
to decompose sequences with the help of variational mode
decomposition (VMD) and developed CNN-BiLSTM model
for predicting sub-sequences.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
The growth of recent technologies made consumer electronics to reach millions of people and increased in usage for daily
life style. Such consumer electronic devices like smart phones,
banking transactions, smart environment, and much more
made ease of usage and routine work life balance which also
lead consumers to obtain different advantages. However, this
flexibility also leads to severe cyber attacks as these devices
are not always protected from firewall devices. To enable
security against Internet-enabled consumer electronics, we
proposed an AI-based deep-learning enabled zero-trust security (AI-DL-XTS) model that use deep-learning techniques
for bio-metric authentication to detect authorized smartphone
user. Smartphones are equipped with various sensors that sense
user touch during a different activities like reading, writing,
eating, sitting, walking, etc. based on the sensor data, the
proposed deep learning model detects user authentication. The
zero trust security model uses DL method outcomes and other
networking activities to allow or deny the user request. Fig. 1
represents the proposed AL-DL-XTS model architecture for
detecting cyber attacks in consumer electronics.
Zero Trust Security model: Here, it assumes by default
that no user, device, or network is trusted and all resources
must be secured and continuously authenticated. In the context
of consumer electronics, such as smartphones and laptops,
implementing a Zero Trust security model requires several
components working together, including a policy enforcement
point, policy engine, data store, and deep learning-based trust
engine for user authentication using various factors such as
smartphone, IP address, device, and location.
Policy Enforcement Point (PEP): It is the component that
enforces the security policies in the Zero Trust model. It sits
at the point of access to resources and ensures that only
authenticated and authorized users can access them.
Policy Engine: It defines the security policies that the PEP
enforces. It determines the criteria for granting or denying
access to resources based on the user’s location, device, IP
address, and behavior patterns.
Data Storage: The data store contains information about the
users, devices, and resources in the system. The trust engine
uses it to build user profiles, establish baselines for normal
behavior, and store authentication data.

Fig. 1.

Proposed AL-DL-XTS Framework.

DL-CNN BiLSTM Model: We proposed a deep learningbased CNN-BiLSTM (Deep-CNN-BiLSTM) model for user
authentication that uses smartphone-based sensor data for
typical user patterns and behavior. The proposed Deep-CNNBiLSTM consists of deep learning-based Convolutional Neural
Networks (Deep-CNN), which helps in the extraction of
features and Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (BiCNNLSTM) network that is used for extracting temporal dynamic
elements from the input data. The trust engine is a deep
learning-based system that continuously evaluates user behavior and makes authentication decisions based on multiple
factors. It analyzes patterns and behavior over time to build a
user profile and establish a baseline of “normal” behavior for
that user.
The proposed model in Fig. 1 outlines a scenario where an
authenticated user (AU) is accessing her account file using her
smartphone device, and a deep learning-enabled Zero Trust
model is used to verify her location, Internet connection,
and behavior patterns to authenticate her. The model also
checks her authorization to access the specific account file and
grants her access if authorized. When an unauthorized user
(UAU) gains access to Alice’s device and tries to access the
account file, the model detects a deviation from Alice’s typical

5414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

behavior patterns and blocks Bob’s access. Similarly, when
an unauthorized user (UAU1) tries to access the account file
from a different location and Internet address using an other
device, the model analyzes the context of the access request
and blocks John’s access as his behavior patterns do not
match Alice’s typical behavior. The proposed model combines
authentication, authorization, threat detection, and contextual
analysis to enhance user authentication security measures.
Let Sdatax be input to the Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model
that gathers from smartphone sensor reading,  the learning
parameter, and Deepy be the target output. Equation (1)
represents the formula for Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model.
Deepy = Softmax(Sdatax ; )

(1)

The softmax function is used classifier that uses features
extracted from CNN and Bi-CNN-LSTM network. The DeepCNN component applies a series of convolutional filters to
the smartphone sensor input data to extract relevant features.
Equation (2) represents the mathematical expression for feature extraction.


(2)
Concf = ReLU Wcf ∗ x + bcf
where, Wcf and bcf represents the convolutional weighted filter
and bias term, and ReLU is the rectilinear activation function
and is expressed as ReLU(x)=max(0,x). The output Concf of
the CNN component represent a set of feature maps.
To extract temporal characteristics of smartphone sensor
data, we apply the BiCNN-LSTM network over a convolutional feature set Concf . BiCNN-LSTM network is a
bidirectional CNN-LSTM network that extracts features from
two networks in two directions: forward network in the
forward direction with learning parameter FD
lstm and backward
network in the backward direction with model learning parameter BK
lstm . The output of forward and backward CNN-LSTM
networks are given in (3) and (4).
Let BiLSTMhfd and BiLSTMhbk be the output of forward and
backward CNN-LSTM networks, respectively.


(3)
BiLSTMhfd = BiLSTMhfd Concf ; FD
lstm


BK
BiLSTMhbk = BiLSTMhbk Concf ; lstm
(4)

connected layer that generates output DeepFCO , and can be
expressed mathematically as per (6).
DeepFCO = WFC ∗ BiLSTMho + bFC

(6)

where, WFC and bFC are weight matrix and bias term applied at
fully connected layer, and BiLSTMho is the final hidden output
state of the BiCNN-LSTM network. The softmax classifier
is used for user authentication classification and is expressed
in (7).
Deepy = Softmax(DeepFCO )

(7)

During the training phase, the model parameters (weights
and biases) are learned by minimizing the loss function using
an optimization algorithm such as Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) or Adam. The loss function can be represented as
per (8).



Loss = −
Deepyi ∗ log Deepyi




(8)
− 1 − Deepyi ∗ log Deepyi
where, Deepyi is the ground truth label of the sensor input data
(“authenticate” or “unauthenticated”), Deepyi is the predicted
probability of the sensor input data belonging to the authenticated user, and a log is the natural logarithm. Main goal of
this optimization algorithm is to minimize the loss function
loss value by updating the model parameters iteratively.
Bayes theorem-based trust score (Bayes-TSC) Process: The
Zero Trust security model uses a trust score to determine
whether a device, user, or network should be granted access
to a resource or not. The trust score is calculated using a
mathematical equation based on Bayes’ theorem. The decision
to grant or deny access can be made based on a threshold
probability. For example, if the threshold probability is set to
0.7, access will be granted if Trust score > 0.7, and denied if
Trust score < 0.7. The equation can be expressed as per (9).
Trust Score = P(Req|UID , DID , NetLoc , IPAdd , times )
= ω1 ∗ P(UID |Req) + ω2 ∗ P(DID |Req)
+ω3 ∗ P(NetLoc |Req)
+ω4 ∗ P(IPAdd |Req)
+ω5 ∗ P(times |Req)

(9)

where, BiLSTMhfd and BiLSTMhbk are the functions implemented by the BiCNN-LSTM network in the forward and
backward directions. The output of the forward network
BiLSTMhfd and backward network BiLSTMhbk is concatenated
to produce the final hidden output state of the BiCNN-LSTM
network, and mathematically, it is expressed in (5).




BiLSTMho = tanh Who ∗ BiLSTMhfd ⊕ BiLSTMhbk + bho
(5)

where, Req is the access request, UID is the user identity, DID
is the device identity, NetLoc is the network location, IPAdd is
the IP address, and times is the time of the access request. To
calculate the probability of granting access (Req), given the
user identity (UID ), device identity (DID ), network location
(NetLoc ), IP Address (IPAdd ), and time (times ), we need to
consider conditional probability P(En|Req) is given in (10).

where, [BiLSTMhfd ⊕ BiLSTMhbk ] represents the concatenated
hidden state output of the forward and backward BiCNNLSTM, Who is the weight matrix, bho is the bias term, and
tanh is the tangent activation function.
The concatenated output of the final hidden output state
of the BiCNN-LSTM network then passes through a fully

where, P(En|Req) is the probability of the Entity (En)
being valid given the access request (Req), P(Req|En)
is the probability of observing the access request (Req)
given that the entity (En) is valid, P((En)) is the prior
probability of the Entity (En) being valid. P(Req) is the
probability of observing the access request (A); EntityEn =

P(En|Req) = P(Req|En) ∗ P(En)/P(Req)

(10)

NAGARAJAN et al.: AI-BASED ZERO TRUST SECURITY APPROACH FOR CONSUMER INDUSTRY

Algorithm 1 Proposed DL-TE Algorithm
Input: Smatphone sensor reading,  is the learning parameter,
Sdatax is the input data
Output: Deepy is target output
Apply convolution filter for Sdatax using Conff =
ReLU(Wcf ∗ x + bcf )
if device type=smartphone then
Yl = Deep − CNN − BiLSTM(Sdata, )
Compute P(En|A) = P(En|Req) = P(Req|En) ∗
P(En)/P(Req) //for each Entity
Compute
Trust
Score
=
=
ω1 ∗
P(Req|UID , DID , NetLoc , IPAdd , times )
P(UID |Req) + ω2 ∗ P(DID |Req) + ω3 ∗ P(NetLoc |Req) +
ω4 ∗ P(IPAdd |Req) + ω5 ∗ P(times |Req)
else
ComputeP(En|A) = P(En|Req) = P(Req|En) ∗
P(En)/P(Req)//foreachEntity
Compute
Trust
Score=
P(Req|DID , NetLoc , IPAdd , times ) = ω1 ∗ P(DID |Req) +
ω2 ∗P(NetLoc |Req)+ω3 ∗P(IPAdd |Req)+ω4 ∗P(times |Req)
end if
if trust score ≥ 0.7 then
UserAut=Authenticated
else
UserAut=Unauthenticated
end if
Return UserAut

{useridentity(B), deviceidentity(C), networklocation(D)},
{Ipaddress(E), timeoftheaccessrequest(F)}. The pseudo-code
for proposed model is depicted in Algorithm 1.

IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
This section typically describes the experiments conducted
to evaluate the performance of the proposed deep learningbased zero trust security (DL-XTS) model. Furthermore,
we proposed a Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model for continuous user authentication using smartphone sensing data. Our
experiments were conducted on three benchmark datasets:
WISDM-HARB, HMOG, and UCI-HAR. To evaluate the
performance of the proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model, we
used three authentication metrics: confusion matrix, accuracy,
and Equal Error Rate (EER). To assess the effectiveness of the
proposed DL-XTS model, we used success rate as a metric
measure.
The proposed user authentication Deep-CNN-BiLSTM
model is evaluated using error rate-based metrics, such as false
rejection error rate (FRER) and false acceptance error rate
(FAER). FRER and FAER increase and decrease, respectively,
as sensitivity rises. The equal error rate (EER) represents the
sensitivity point where FRR and FAR are equal. Metrics such
as FAER, FRER, accuracy, and EER are calculated using
formulas to determine authentication failures. Additionally,
accuracy and confusion matrices are used to evaluate the
classification performance of the authentication scheme.

5415

FAER represents the probability of categorizing a pattern as
“Authenticate” if it does not belong to it and mathematically
it is expressed as (11).
FAER =

FAV
FAV + TRV

(11)

FRER represents the probability of not classifying a pattern
as “Authenticate” if it does and is expressed mathematically
as per (12).
FRER =

FRV
FRV + TAV

(12)

Accuracy measures the likelihood of a pattern classifying
correctly and is expressed mathematically as (13).
Accuracy = ((TAV + TRV))/((TAV + TRV + FAV + FRV))
(13)
EER is the error rate obtained by equalizing FAER and
FRER using the system’s detection threshold. The EER is
, where
calculated using the formula: EER = FAER+FRER
2
|FAER + FRER| is the smallest value.
A. Dataset Description
The UCI-HAR dataset [33], also known as the “UCI
Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset,” is
a dataset collected from smartphone sensors that can be used
to recognize human activities such as walking, standing, and
sitting. The dataset contains 10,299 instances of 561 features
extracted from accelerometer and gyroscope signals collected
from 30 subjects while performing six activities. The dataset
is commonly used for machine learning, data mining, and
activity recognition research.
The WISDM-HAR dataset [34], also known as the
“Wireless Sensor Data Mining for Human Activity
Recognition dataset,” is a dataset collected from an Android
phone’s accelerometer and gyroscope sensors that can be
used to recognize human activities such as walking, jogging,
and sitting. The dataset contains 1,098,207 instances of three
features (x, y, and z acceleration) collected from 29 subjects
while they performed six activities. The dataset is commonly
used for research in machine learning, data mining, and
activity recognition.
The HMOG dataset [35], also known as the “Human Motion
Database,” is a dataset collected from an inertial measurement
unit (IMU) that can be used to recognize human activities
such as walking, running, and jumping. The dataset contains
data collected from 11 subjects while they performed various
activities. The dataset includes a total of 12,960 instances
of 10 features extracted from the IMU sensors. The dataset
is commonly used for machine learning, data mining, and
activity recognition research.
V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
This study evaluated the proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM
authentication framework against basic deep learning
algorithms using three public datasets: UCI-HAR, WISDMHARB, and HMOG. The following subsections provide the

5416

Fig. 2.
Dataset.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

Result Analysis for Different Physical Activities on UCI-HAR

experimental observations of these deep learning methods
trained on mobile sensing data on various datasets.

Fig. 3. Result Analysis for Different Physical Activities on WISDM-HARB
Dataset.

which involves sensor data from 30 volunteers engaging in six
activities.
B. WISDM-HARB Dataset

A. UCI-HAR Dataset
Figure 2 demonstrates the authentication performance comparison of proposed work with different models such as
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), CNN-LSTM, Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM), Deep Neural Network (DNN),
ensemble based deep federated learning (E-DFL), and cascaded federated deep learning (C-FDL) using UCI HAR
dataset. For performance evaluation for this work, we considered the UCI HAR dataset comprises smartphone sensor data
collected from 35 volunteers. The accuracy and EER (Equal
Error Rate) are the metrics assessed. As shown in Fig. 2, the
Deep-CNN-BiLSTM based PEP model outperforms existing
models such as CNN, CNN-LSTM, LSTM, DNN, E-DFL, and
C-FDL in terms of accuracy and EER across all six activities
(walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing, and laying). The Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model achieves an
average accuracy of 94.4% (±8.432%) and an average EER of
5.16% (±8.532%). On the other hand, the CNN model obtains
an average accuracy of 96.20% (±4.603%) and an average
EER of 5.27% (±7.034%). In comparison, the CNN-LSTM
model achieves an average accuracy of 88.60% (±11.593%)
and an average EER of 10.41% (±14.874%). However, E-DFL
and C-FDL performs better and close to proposed method.
Consequently, the Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model performs better
than the CNN and CNN-LSTM models for the given dataset.
Proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model in Fig. 2 outperforms
current baseline deep learning models in average accuracy and
EER across all activity patterns using the UCI-HAR dataset,

For WISDM-HARB dataset, 44 individuals that encompasses mobile sensor data performing 18 physical activities are
considered. The dataset was evaluated using three deep learning models: CNN, CNN-LSTM, and Deep-CNN-BiLSTM.
The authentication performance metrics for each of the 18
physical activities were computed, including Accuracy and
Equal Error Rate (EER). Based on Fig. 3, the Deep-CNNBiLSTM model exhibited the highest accuracy of 99.81%
(±0.529%) for sitting, while the lowest EER of 0.19%
(±1.714%) was obtained for clapping by the same model.
Results indicate that the proposed model outperforms the
other models for most physical activities, followed by E-DFL,
C-FDL, and CNN-LSTM model, and then the CNN model.
C. HMOG Dataset
Fig. 4 depicts the authentication performance metrics of
CNN, CNN-LSTM, Deep-CNN-BiLSTM, and Deep-CNNBiLSTM models for the HMOG dataset, which consists of
sensor data collected from 100 smartphones for six different
activities. Accuracy and equal error rate (EER) are the reported
metrics. For reading, while sitting, all three models achieved
accuracy above 99.45%, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the
highest accuracy of 99.64% and the lowest EER of 0.46%.
Similarly, all three models showed an accuracy above 99.50%
for reading while walking, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM again
having the highest accuracy of 99.62% and the lowest EER
of 0.38%. For writing, while sitting, all models achieved very
high accuracy, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the highest

NAGARAJAN et al.: AI-BASED ZERO TRUST SECURITY APPROACH FOR CONSUMER INDUSTRY

Fig. 4. Result Analysis for Different Physical Activities on HMOG Dataset.

accuracy of 99.99% and the lowest EER of 0.01%. However,
for writing while walking, the accuracy of all models was
slightly lower, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the highest
accuracy of 99.34% and the lowest EER of 1.02%. For the
activity of using a map while sitting, all models obtained high
accuracy above 98.77%, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the
highest accuracy of 99.99% and the lowest EER of 0.01%.
For using a map while walking, all models achieved accuracy
above 99.08%, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the highest
accuracy of 99.55% and the lowest EER of 0.73%. Overall,
the results suggest that Deep-CNN-BiLSTM outperformed the
other models regarding accuracy and EER for most activities
in the HMOG dataset.
D. Success Rate
Success rate states how the proposed model correctly
recognizes the authenticated user and allows access permission
to request files and is mathematically expressed in Eqn. (14):
SR =

NSA
TNAA

∗ 100

(14)

where, SR is the success rate, NSA is the Number of
Successful Authentication, and TNAA is the Total Number of
Authentication Attempts.
Figure 5(a) represents the success rate for the proposed AIDL-XTS and non-AI-DL-XTS models. The result showed that
the proposed AI-DL-XTS model has a higher success rate than
the non-AI-DL-XTS model (MEC without ZTS). The success
rates for the AI-DL-XTS model were 78.5% to 81.5% for
different user node configurations, while the success rates for
the non-AI-DL-XTS model were 39% to 61%. This indicates
that the AI-DL-XTS model is more effective at accurately
authenticating users.

5417

Fig. 5. Success Rate and Authentication Time-based Analysis for Proposed
Model.

Authentication time is the time taken by the model to
authenticate a user and is expressed in Eqn. (15):
AT =

TTAU
ms
Number of Users

(15)

where, AT is the authentication time and TTAU is the Total
Time Taken to Authenticate All Users.
Figure 5 (b) shows the outcome of authentication time. It
is observed that in terms of authentication time, the proposed
AI-DL-XTS model also performs better. The proposed AI-DLXTS model authenticates all the user nodes between 10 to 100
in 80 ms to 81 ms, while the non-AI-DL-XTS model takes
90.5 to 91.5 ms. From the result, it was suggested that the
AI-DL-XTS model is faster at authenticating users than the
non-AI-DL-XTS model.
The proposed zero-trust security solution not only stands out
in terms of technical innovation but, more importantly, offers
tangible benefits for end-users. Unlike traditional approaches,
our framework prioritizes user-centric security by reduced
false positives and increased accuracy. This work focused
in ensuring a seamless and secure digital experience for
consumers. In the realm of cyber-security, the user experience
is paramount. This work distinguishes itself by placing a
strong emphasis on enhancing the overall user experience. By
minimal authentication hassles and adaptive security which
ensures that consumers can stay secure. Furthermore, leverages
threat intelligence data to proactively update security policies
and block access to known malicious entities. The proposed
algorithm can classify and monitor sensitive data, ensuring that
proper access controls are in place and sensitive information
is not compromised.

5418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

VI. C ONCLUSION
With the increasing use of consumer electronics, including
smartphones and laptops, in our daily lives, the threat of
cyber-attacks is also increasing. In this regard, we have
proposed an AI-based deep learning-enabled zero-trust security (AI-DL-XTS) model that uses deep learning techniques
Deep-CNN-BiLSTM for secure authentication to detect authorized smartphone users. We presented the Bayes-TSC method
for trust score calculation in the zero trust security model.
The proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model for continuous user
authentication using smartphone sensing data has been evaluated on three benchmark datasets: WISDM-HARB, HMOG,
and UCI-HAR. Our experiments demonstrate that the DeeCNN-BiLSTM model outperforms other deep learning models,
namely CNN-LSTM, LSTM, DNN, E-DFL, and C-FDL in
terms of accuracy and equal error rate for all six activities.
The proposed AI-DL-XTS model has also shown high success rates, providing a robust and secure solution against
cyber-attacks. Future enhancements to this model can further
improve its performance and extend its capabilities to various
other scenarios. Furthermore, analysis based on cloud native
environments for zero trust security.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank King Saud University for funding this
work through the Researchers Supporting Project number
(RSP2024R395), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Chen, H.-C. Hu, and G.-Z. Cheng, “Design and implementation
of a novel enterprise network defense system bymaneuveringmultidimensional network properties,” Front. Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng.,
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 238–252, 2019.
[2] M. Wazid, A. Kumar Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchainenabled security framework against ransomware attacks for smart
healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28,
Feb. 2023.
[3] J. Y. V. M. Kumar, A. K. Swain, K. Mahapatra, and S. P. M. verify,
“Fortified-NoC: A robust approach for trojan-resilient network-on-chips
to fortify multicore-based consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 57–68, Feb. 2022.
[4] B.-C. Chifor, S.-C. Arseni, I. Matei, and I. Bica, “Security-oriented
framework for Internet of Things smart-home applications,” in
Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Control Syst. Comput. Sci. (CSCS), 2019,
pp. 146–153.
[5] A. Moubayed, A. Refaey, and A. Shami, “Software-defined perimeter
(SDP): State of the art secure solution for modern networks,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 226–233, Oct. 2019.
[6] X. Yan and H. Wang, “Survey on zero-trust network security,” in
Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Secur. (ICAIS), Hohhot, China, 2020,
pp. 50–60.
[7] C. Buck, C. Olenberger, A. Schweizer, F. Völter, and T. Eymann, “Never
trust, always verify: A multivocal literature review on current knowledge
and research gaps of zero-trust,” Comput. Secur., vol. 110, Nov. 2021,
Art. no. 102436.
[8] E. Weishäupl, E. Yasasin, and G. Schryen, “Information security
investments: An exploratory multiple case study on decision-making,
evaluation and learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 77, pp. 807–823,
Aug. 2018.
[9] D. Xu, C. Peng, W. Wang, H. Liu, S. A. Shaikh, and Y. Tian, “Privacypreserving dynamic multi-keyword ranked search scheme in multi-user
settings,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 890–901,
Nov. 2023.
[10] P. Laplante and J. Voas, “Zero-trust artificial intelligence?” Computer,
vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 10–12, 2022.
[11] M. Campbell, “Beyond zero trust: Trust is a vulnerability,” Computer,
vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 110–113, 2020.

[12] P. Phiayura and S. Teerakanok, “A comprehensive framework
for migrating to zero trust architecture,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 19487–19511, 2023.
[13] N. Vashistha, M. M. Hossain, M. R. Shahriar, F. Farahmandi, F. Rahman,
and M. M. Tehranipoor, “eChain: A blockchain-enabled ecosystem
for electronic device authenticity verification,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 23–37, Feb. 2022.
[14] J. Chen et al., “Collaborative trust blockchain based unbiased control
transfer mechanism for industrial automation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl.,
vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 4478–4488, Aug. 2020.
[15] Z. A. Collier and J. Sarkis, “The zero trust supply chain: Managing
supply chain risk in the absence of trust,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 59,
no. 11, pp. 3430–3445, 2021.
[16] N. F. Syed, S. W. Shah, A. Shaghaghi, A. Anwar, Z. Baig, and R. Doss,
“Zero trust architecture (ZTA): A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 57143–57179, 2022.
[17] D. Eidle, S. Y. Ni, C. DeCusatis, and A. Sager, “Autonomic security
for zero trust networks,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Annu. Ubiquitous Comput.,
Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), 2017, pp. 288–293.
[18] L. Poppo, K. Z. Zhou, and J. J. Li, “When can you trust “trust”?
Calculative trust, relational trust, and supplier performance,” Strategic
Manag. J., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 724–741, 2016.
[19] H. Sedjelmaci, S.-M. Senouci, N. Ansari, and A. Boualouache, “A
trusted hybrid learning approach to secure edge computing,” IEEE
Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 30–37, May 2022.
[20] S. Grzonkowski and P. M. Corcoran, “Sharing cloud services: User
authentication for social enhancement of home networking,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1424–1432, Aug. 2011.
[21] Z. Wan, Y. Zhou, and K. Ren, “zk-authfeed: Protecting data feed to
smart contracts with authenticated zero knowledge proof,” IEEE Trans.
Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1335–1347, Apr. 2023.
[22] R. Dubin, “Content disarm and reconstruction of RTF files a zero
file trust methodology,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 1461–1472, 2023.
[23] B. Chen et al., “A security awareness and protection system for 5G
smart healthcare based on zero-trust architecture,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10248–10263, Jul. 2021.
[24] Q. Zhang, J. Wu, M. Zanella, W. Yang, A. K. Bashir, and W. Fornaciari,
“Sema-IIoVT: Emergent semantic-based trustworthy information-centric
fog system and testbed for Intelligent Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE
Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 70–79, Jan. 2023.
[25] E. M. Abou-Nassar, A. M. Iliyasu, P. M. El-Kafrawy, O.-Y. Song,
A. K. Bashir, and A. A. A. El-Latif, “Ditrust chain: Towards blockchainbased trust models for sustainable healthcare IoT systems,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 111223–111238, 2020.
[26] E. S. Hosney, I. T. A. Halim, and A. H. Yousef, “An artificial intelligence
approach for deploying zero trust architecture (ZTA),” in Proc. 5th Int.
Conf. Comput. Informat. (ICCI), 2022, pp. 343–350.
[27] D. Kant and A. Johannsen, “Evaluation of Ai-based use cases for
enhancing the cyber security defense of small and medium-sized
companies (SMEs),” Electron. Imag., vol. 34, no. 3, p. 387, 2022.
[28] M. Saleem, M. Warsi, and S. Islam, “Secure information processing for
multimedia forensics using zero-trust security model for large scale data
analytics in SaaS cloud computing environment,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl.,
vol. 72, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103389.
[29] P. Tiwari, A. Lakhan, R. H. Jhaveri, and T.-M. Grønli, “Consumercentric Internet of Medical Things for cyborg applications based on
federated reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 756–764, Nov. 2023.
[30] V. C. Patil and S. Kundu, “Realizing robust, lightweight strong PUFs for
securing smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 68, no. 1,
pp. 5–13, Feb. 2022.
[31] A. Kumar, G. Rathee, C. A. Kerrache, M. Bilal, and T. R. Gadekallu,
“A secure architectural model using blockchain and estimated trust
mechanism in electronic consumers,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 996–1004, Nov. 2023.
[32] S. Itani, S. Kita, and Y. Kajikawa, “Multimodal personal ear authentication using acoustic ear feature for smartphone security,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 77–84, Feb. 2022.
[33] J. Reyes-Ortiz, D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, and P. Xavier, 2012,
“Human activity recognition using smartphones,” UCI Machine Learning
Repository. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24432/C54S4K
[34] G. M. Weiss, WISDM Smartphone and Smartwatch Activity and
Biometrics Dataset, UCI Mach. Learn. Repository, Irvine, CA, USA,
2019.
[35] Z. Sitová et al., “HMOG: New behavioral biometric features for continuous authentication of smartphone users,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 11, pp. 877–892, 2015.