9374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

ATVITSC: A Novel Encrypted Traffic Classification
Method Based on Deep Learning
Ya Liu , Xiao Wang , Bo Qu , and Fengyu Zhao
Abstract— The increasing prevalence of encrypted communication on the modern internet has presented new challenges
for traffic classification and network management. Traditional
traffic classification methods cannot handle encrypted traffic
effectively. Meanwhile, many existing methods either rely on
hand-crafted features or fail to extract the underlying interaction patterns between data packets adequately. In this paper,
we propose a novel encrypted traffic classification method called
the Attention-based Vision Transformer and Spatiotemporal for
Traffic Classification (ATVITSC). In the preprocessing stage,
packet-level images within a session, generated from the payload
of data packets, are combined into a session image to mitigate
information confusion. In the classification stage, session images
are first processed by the packet vision transformer (PVT)
module, which employs the transformer encoder and multihead self-attention mechanism, to capture the global features.
In parallel, session images are also processed by the spatiotemporal feature extraction (STFE) module, where spatial features
of packets are extracted by the convolution operation with the
attention mechanism and temporal features between packets are
then combined by the bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM). The global and spatiotemporal features are fused in
the feature fusion classification (FFC) module by a dynamic
weighting mechanism and encrypted traffic is finally classified
based on the fused features. Comprehensive experiments on
various types of encrypted traffic, including virtual private
network (VPN), onion router (Tor), malicious traffic, and mobile
traffic, show that the ATVITSC successfully improves the macrof1 scores to 97.88%, 98.79%, 99.67%, 94.90%, respectively. The
results also reveal that the ATVITSC exhibits better classification
performance and generalization ability than the state-of-the-art
methods.
Index Terms— Encrypted traffic classification, self-attention
mechanism, a dynamic weighting mechanism, spatialtemporal
network.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

N RECENT years, network security has been elevated to
a significant strategic position in many countries. Encryption technology is one of the most widely used methods to
safeguard network security [1]. However, cybercriminals can
also be hidden in the encrypted network traffic. To address
this challenge, encrypted traffic classification has been extensively applied in intrusion detection systems and malware
propagation detection. It seems impossible to classify the
encrypted traffic if the encrypted algorithm is applied safely.
Nevertheless, this hypothesis is not always correct. Lin et al.
[2] evaluated the randomness of 5 ciphers through 15 sets
of statistical tests, and found that all these ciphers could not
achieve the ideal randomness. Furthermore, because encrypted
communication increases the payload and latency of the network, different types of encrypted traffic may result in different
impacts on the network. Hence, if encrypted traffic is classified
correctly, network administrators can better understand and
manage various communication behaviors [3].
Early traffic classification relies on port numbers, where different types of network traffic can be classified based on their
source and destination ports [4]. However, with the widespread
usage of dynamic and non-standard ports, port-based methods
become less reliable. Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) methods [2], which classify network traffic by analyzing the
content of network packets, are more precise than port-based
methods but only applicable to unencrypted traffic and require
substantial computational resources. Machine learning is also
used to classify network traffic by analyzing the behavior
or statistical features of network traffic, such as the transmission frequency, size, and flow duration of packet [5].
Although this method is more robust than port-based and
DPI methods, the performance depends on manually designed
features.
The application of deep learning in traffic classification
can automatically extract features, which avoids the laborious
steps of feature engineering [6]. Deep learning models can
adapt to different encryption scenarios and perform end-to-end
encrypted traffic classification [7]. Encrypted traffic classification based on deep learning has been a hot spot of network
security in recent years. However, on the one hand, previous
research studies extracted the spatial or temporary features
of network flows and the relationships among packets inadequately, resulting in the limited ability of feature extraction
and insufficient robustness of classification [8]. On the other
hand, some methods that attempt to capture the spatiotemporal
features of traffic may lead to confusion in temporal informa-

Received 19 December 2023; revised 9 June 2024; accepted 16 July
2024. Date of publication 25 July 2024; date of current version 10 October
2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62002184, in part by the Doctoral Startup
Fund of Guangdong University of Science and Technology under Grant
XJ2023002001, in part by the Open Topics from The Lion Rock Labs of
Cyberspace Security under Project #LRL24017, and in part by the Scientific
Research Initiation Fund for High-Level Talents of Shanghai Publishing and
Printing College under Grant 2024rcky22. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Ghassan
Karame. (Corresponding author: Bo Qu.)
Ya Liu is with the School of Optical-Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, China,
and also with the Lion Rock Labs of Cyberspace Security, CTIHE, Hong
Kong, China.
Xiao Wang is with the School of Optical-Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093,
China.
Bo Qu is with the School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of
Science and Technology, Dongguan 523083, China (e-mail: bo@qubo.im).
Fengyu Zhao is with the Department of Information and Intelligence
Engineering, Shanghai Publishing and Printing College, Shanghai 200093,
China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3433446
1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

tion. For example, in the cascaded structure of convolutional
neural networks and recurrent neural networks, convolutional
operations are based on local neighborhoods, which may lead
to a lack of temporal relationships among the spatial features
extracted from packets, thereby affecting the extraction of
spatiotemporal features [9].
To tackle the aforementioned problems, we propose a
novel scheme called Attention-based Vision Transformer and
Spatiotemporal for Traffic Classification (ATVITSC). In the
preprocessing stage, the raw traffic is split into network sessions. Within each session, the packet sequence is transformed
into a sequence of packet images, which are combined into a
session image. All session images are divided into fixed-size
patches to avoid information distortion. In the classification
stage, session images are fed into the packet vision transformer
(PVT) and spatiotemporal feature extraction (STFE) modules
in parallel to capture the global and spatiotemporal features.
In the PVT module, the patches are transformed through
packet embedding, positional embedding, and length embedding, which are added together to feed into a PVT encoder
with a Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) mechanism to
extract global features of the network flow. In the STFE module, the patches are transformed through the attention-based
convolution operation and the bidirectional LSTM network
to capture spatial features of each packet within the session and temporal features among packets, thereby obtaining
spatial-temporal features of the entire network session. The
global and spatial-temporal features are fused in the feature
fusion classification (FFC) module by a dynamic weighting
mechanism and encrypted traffic is finally classified based on
the fused features. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:
(1) Propose a packet-level preprocessing method to transform encrypted traffic into session images, which not only
mitigates the issue of information disorder but also enhances
the capability to learn inner relations among packets. In addition, this preprocess method adopts both position encoding and
length encoding to capture the order and length information
among packets, which alleviates the problem of information
loss after image generation.
(2) Design the PVT and STFE modules with the attention mechanism, which accurately identifies network traffic.
In the PVT module, three kinds of embedding operations
are designed, and then added together to feed into a PVT
encoder with the MHSA mechanism to retain the time and
position information and extract global features fully. In the
STFE module, the convolution operation with the self-attention
mechanism and bidirectional LSTM network are designed
so that ATVITSC can accurately capture spatiotemporal
features.
(3) Propose a dynamic weighting mechanism that adaptively
adjusts the weights of global and spatial-temporal features,
thereby resulting in the appropriate fusion of these two features. Additionally, by introducing a temperature parameter,
ATVITSC avoids the highly imbalanced weight distribution
of different features during the feature fusion process. Meanwhile, it ensures that different feature extraction modules
perform sufficient learning during the training stage.

9375

(4) A large number of comprehensive experiments on four
datasets, i.e., USTC-TFS, ISCX-Tor, ISCX-VPN and CrossPlatform (U.S. Android APP), are performed to demonstrate
the superior performances of ATVITSC. From the view of
the accuracy, Macro-F1, Macro-Recall and Macro-Precision,
ATVITSC outperforms ten advanced schemes in most cases.
In addition, we also explain the reasons for selecting hyperparameters by conducting experiments, such as the number of
chosen packets, the first m bytes selected from each packet
and the temperature.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II
introduces the related work on encrypted traffic classification. Section III presents our novel approach ATVITSC.
Section IV provides a detailed experimental analysis of
ATVITSC. Finally, section V concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
The current approaches employed for traffic identification
can be categorized into port-based methods, payload-based
methods, machine learning methods that rely on statistical
features and end-to-end deep learning methods [10].
As discussed above, port-based traffic classification and
payload-based methods such as DPI cannot be suitable for
analyzing the encrypted traffic. Machine learning methods use
statistical features to perform encrypted traffic classification.
For instance, AppScanner [11] trained a random forest classifier using statistical features based on the packet size, while
BIND [12] used statistical features based on time features.
However, these features are only suitable for specific scenarios,
and it is difficult to design a universal set of statistical features
that can be adapted to different encryption scenarios.
In recent years, encrypted traffic classification methods
based on deep learning have developed very rapidly. Liu et al.
proposed an FS-Net based on recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) to automatically extract the simplistic features from
the sequence of packet sizes for the encrypted traffic classification [13]. Shapira and Shavitt used FlowPic [14] to extract
packet size and arrival time from raw traffic to construct
images for classification. Wang et al. used 1D-CNN [15]
and 2D-CNN [16] approaches for the traffic classification by
converting the first 768 bytes of network flows into grayscale
images. However, they didn’t handle them at the packet level,
thereby resulting in the confusion of packet image information
from different periods during the convolutional operations.
Shen et al. proposed GraphDApp based on graph neural
networks to classify encrypted traffic by constructing a Traffic
Interaction Graph (TIG) [17]. However, compared to other
methods, GraphDApp takes more time to label unknown flows
and the accuracy decreases when adjustments are made to
the application fingerprints. Huoh et al. [18] considered the
raw bytes, metadata and inter-packet relationships in traffic to
construct a traffic graph. They used graph neural networks
to extract graph representations for classification. In traffic
recognition, Wang [19] stressed the significance of detecting
essential byte features, and analyzed the impact of the first
25 bytes, the first 100 bytes and the least helpful 300 bytes
of the payload for encrypted traffic classification to indicate
the initial 200 bytes were the most crucial. Lotfollahi et al.

9376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 1.

The frame of ATVITSC.

discovered that 96% of packet payloads have a length of less
than 1480 bytes [20]. Hence, they used the first 1500 bytes as
the model’s input and considered protocol fields in the network
and transport layers. Taking the entire payload as input will
increase the computational complexity of the model. However,
these fields are primarily designed for network transmission
rather than application classification. Thus, protocol fields
below the application layer usually contain minimal helpful
information. Excessive irrelevant information would increase
the data complexity and potentially lead the model to rely
on unimportant details, thus reducing its ability to differentiate fine-grained traffic classification. Yao et al. proposed
HAN [21] by combining the attention mechanism with LSTN
to extract temporal features from raw traffic. Kumano et al.
[22] demonstrated that the minimum number of packets
needed for processing certain features was 10. This result
provided a basis for reducing the number of packets required.
Lin et al. proposed TSCRNN [23] by combining CNN and
LSTM in a cascade structure, which only extracted temporal
and spatial features from network flows and did not fully

capture the relationships among packets in the flow. Therefore,
TSCRNN cannot extract the global features of the entire
flow. The CMTSNN [24] proposed by Zhu et al. also used
a cascaded structure of CNN and LSTM. In a word, these
methods do not adequately capture the dependencies among
local features and the interaction among packets of the network
flow.
III. ATVITSC
This section introduces a novel method ATVITSC, shown
in Figure 1. It comprises a preprocessing layer, the packet
vision transformer, the spatiotemporal feature extraction layer,
and the feature fusion classification layer. First, the raw traffic
is partitioned into bidirectional flows called sessions. Second,
extract a portion of the payload of each data packet within
one session to generate a byte-level grayscale image for each
packet, which is then combined to construct session-level
grayscale images. Next, these session-level grayscale images
are input into the PVT and STFE modules to capture global
and spatiotemporal features, respectively. Finally, a dynamic

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

9377

Fig. 2. Generation of grayscale image for application layer data of the packet.

weighting mechanism (DW) is proposed in the feature fusion
classification layer to perform the feature fusion, thereby
accurately achieving the encrypted traffic classification.
A. Raw Packets Preprocess
The raw traffic, including various types of packets,
is divided into flows to achieve a more precise classification.
IP addresses, port numbers, and protocol types are typically
used to identify and organize flows [25]. Specifically, the
original network traffic data can be denoted by R as follows:
n , where t , s , d , sp and d p repR = {(ti , si , spi , di , dpi )}i=1
i i i
i
i
resent the timestamp of the i-th packet, the source IP address,
the destination IP address, the source port and destination port
number, respectively. Partition R into different network flows:
S = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm }. Each flow S j contains a set of packets
with the same source IP address s j , the same source port sp j ,
the same destination IP address d j and the same destination
nj
port d p j : S j = {(t j,k , s j,k , sp j,k , d j,k , dp j,k )}k=1
, where n j
represents the number of packets in the j-th flow.
In the ATVITSC scheme, we mainly focus on a bidirectional flow called a session. The source IP, the destination
IP, the source port, and the destination port in a session
can be interchangeable. Therefore, the session contains more
interactive information than a unidirectional flow. According
to the timestamps of the bidirectional flows in chronological
order, combine the bidirectional flows to generate a session
flow Ssession , i.e., Ssession = SSr c→Dst ∪ S Dst→Sr c , where
SSr c→Dst represents the flow of packets with the source IP as
Src, the destination IP as Dst and the source port as SrcPort,
and S Dst→Sr c represents the flow of packets with the source IP
as Dst, the destination IP as Src and the source port as SrcPort.
The symbol ∪ denotes the combined operation. During the
combining process, the packets are arranged by the timestamps
in chronological order.
After extracting the sessions, remove those packets irrelevant to encrypted traffic classification to eliminate the dataset’s
noise and redundancy. The protocol fields below the application layer contain almost no useful information. They are
mainly used for network transmission rather than network
recognition. Additionally, IP addresses should not be used
for classification learning because they may cause the model
to focus on packet sources too much. Therefore, only the
application layer’s data packets of each session flow should be
retained. Fixed-step sampling is used for data augmentation,
i.e., a fixed number of packets are sampled in the session to
increase the dataset’s richness and the model’s robustness [26].
At the final stage of preprocessing, ATVITSC proposes
a novel method of constructing packet-level session images,
effectively alleviating the confusion of packet information.
The process of converting the payload of each packet into
a grayscale image is shown in Figure 2. Precisely, for a
given session flow SSession , we extract the first m bytes of

Fig. 3. The combined operation of the packet image, Pi represents the image
of the i-th packet in the session flow.

the application layer’s data for each of the n packets, where
m is a perfect square s p 2 and n is also a perfect square.
The application layer’s data will be truncated if its length
is more than m bytes. Otherwise, it will be padded with
0 × 00. Similarly, the number of packets will be padded to
n if the number of packets is less than n. Read each packet
byte by byte, convert each byte to an integer, and transform
each integer to a packet image of size s p × s p , represented as
Pi ∈ Rs p ×s p . Finally, the packet images are combined into a
session image. The combined operation is shown in Figure 3
for the case of n = 4 and m = 256.
B. Packet Vision Transformer
This subsection proposes a global feature extraction method
called packet vision transformer (PVT), which is inspired by
vision transformer (ViT) [27]. PVT contains a session embedding layer and applies a multi-head self-attention mechanism.
In a session embedding layer, PVT decomposes session images
into a sequence of multiple packet images to perform embedding processing. Then, using the multi-head self-attention
mechanism, PVT captures the interaction information among
all packets and extracts global features from the session flows.
1) Embedding Operations:
a) Packet embedding: During the embedding process, the
session image is divided into multiple packet images, and
each is projected into a d-dimensional space. Specifically,
we perform a two-dimensional convolution operation on the
session image. The convolution operation has a stride of s p ,
a kernel size of s p ×s p , and a channel size of d. Subsequently,
we obtain the embedding ei ∈ Rd for each packet.
b) Position embedding: Due to the use of self-attention
mechanisms, PVT cannot capture the sequential information directly. However, since the packets in the session are
chronological, we can embed the position of each packet
to preserve their orders and position information. In the
ATVITSC scheme, PVT combines sine and cosine functions
to obtain sequential details on data packets and better capture
their intrinsic dependencies. Specifically, let pi ∈ Rd represent
the position embedding of the i-th data packet in the session,
which can be expressed as:
pi,2 j = sin(

posi
),
100002 j/d

pi,2 j+1 = cos(

posi
)
100002 j/d

9378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

where j represents the j-th dimension of the positional embedding and posi denotes the position of the i-th data packet in
the session flow. This formula is derived from the absolute
positional embeddings used in Transformers [28].
c) Length embedding: After converting the packets into
images, the information on the length of packets is lost. Introducing the length embeddings for the packets could mitigate
this deficiency. Since the length of each packet is a discrete
value, we convert it into a one-hot vector and then generate
a length embedding by using a linear layer. Let len i denote
the length of the i-th packet, which can be transformed into a
one-hot vector lvi ∈ Rmax_len as follows:
(
1, j = leni
lvi, j =
0, j ̸ = leni
By using learnable parameter Wlen ∈ Rd×max_len , we can
compute the length embedding li ∈ Rd by li = Wlenlvi .
Let max_len be 1500 due to the Ethernet standard’s maximum transmission unit (MTU) of the data link layer frame
being set to 1500 bytes [29]. Finally, find the sum of the
packet embeddings ei , position embeddings pi and length
embeddings li to obtain the final embeddings h i ∈ Rd for
each packet: h i = ei + pi + li , i = 1, 2, . . . , n.
Similarly, inspired by BERT [30], a learnable embedding
Vs ∈ Rd is added at the beginning of these embeddings to
represent the global features of the session. The output after
feeding the session into the embedding layer is computed
by E s = [Vs ; h 1 ; h 2 ; . . . ; h n ], where [a; b] denotes the new
vector obtained by concatenating vectors a and b along the
time dimension.
2) Packet Vision Transformer: The encoder of PVT uses the
multi-head self-attention mechanism to capture global dependencies and process features through a feed-forward neural
network, enabling efficient modeling and feature extraction
of packet image sequences. The encoder of PVT, as shown
in Figure 4, follows a similar structure to the Transformer’s
encoder. The k-head self-attention mechanism projects queries,
keys, and values into k subspaces based on the self-attention
mechanism and performs separate self-attention operations
in each subspace. Specifically, for the i-th head, the query
matrix(Q i ), key matrix(K i ) and value matrix(Vi ) are calculated by the linear projection as follows:
Q

Q i = E s Wi , K i = E s WiK , Vi = E s WiV
Q

where Wi ∈ Rd×dh , WiK ∈ Rd×dh and WiV ∈ Rd×dv are
learned weight matrices, dh is typically set to d/k.
Next, we use the scaled dot-product attention mechanism [31] to compute the self-attention weight matrix:
Qi K T
Ai = so f tmax( √ i ),
dh

S Ai = Ai Vi

where √Ai denotes the attention weight matrix for the i-th
head, dh represents the scaling factor used to solve the
problem of gradient explosion, and S Ai denotes the output
of the self-attention mechanism of the i-th head.
After concatenating the outputs of all attention heads,
we obtain the final output of the multi-head self-attention

Fig. 4.

Packet Vision Transformer encoder.

layer by applying a linear projection: M H S A(E s ) =
[S A1 , S A2 , . . . , S Ak ]Wmhsa , where k represents the number
of heads, [·] denotes concatenation along the last dimension
and Wmhsa ∈ Rk·dh ×d is a learned weight matrix.
Algorithm 1 demonstrates the process of the packet vision
transformer. The PVT encoder consists of multiple submodules, each of which includes a multi-head self-attention
mechanism (MHSA) and a fully connected layer (FC) with
a LeakyRELU [32] activation function. Layer normalization
(LN) [33] and residual connections [34] are utilized in each
sub-layer as well.
This architecture design enables the encoder to conduct
multi-level transformations and generate representations of
input sequences, thereby enhancing the ability of PVT to
capture the semantic and contextual information embedded in
the input sequences. It can be formalized as:
O ′(llayer ) = MHSA(L N (E s (llayer ) )) + E s (llayer −1)
O (llayer ) = FC(L N (O ′(llayer ) )) + O ′(llayer )
where L is the number of layers of the PVT encoder, and
llayer ∈ [0, L] is the llayer -th layer.
To obtain this global feature, we extract the first vector
from the output sequence O L of the final layer in the PVT
encoder, which is regarded as the global feature of the session:
Fglobal = O0L .
C. Spatiotemporal Feature Extractor Module
The spatiotemporal feature extraction(STFE) module consists of two core components: the residual Attention

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

9379

Algorithm 1 The Workflow of PVT
Input: the normalized network session image Sn , the session
length sequence L n , the global feature dimension dmodel ,
the number of transformer encoder nlayer s .
Output: The global feature Oglobal ;
1: P K E = PaketEmbedding(Sn ,Conv2d(s p ,s p ));
2: L E = LengthEmbedding(L n ,Embedding(1500,dmodel )
3: P E = PositionEmbedding(Sn )
4: I E = Addition(P K E,L E,P E)
5: for i = 1 to n layer s do
6:
L Nie = LayerNorm(I E);
7:
Wmhsa = MultiHeadSelfAttention(L Nie ,dmodel );
8:
RC= Addition(Wmhsa ,I E)
9:
I E = FeedForward(RC,dmodel )
10: end for
11: Fglobal = I E
return Fglobal ;
Algorithm 2 The Workflow of STFE
Input: Normalized network session image Sn , Temporal feature dimension dt , Spatial feature dimension ds , The
number of AttetionConvResNet n c .
Output: The spatiotemporal feature Fst ;
1: Split Sn into a sequence of packet images Ps ;
2: T = Length(Ps )
3: t = 1
4: for X in Ps do
5:
Fm = BN(Conv2d(X ));
6:
Wspatial = ConvAttention(GAP(Fm ),GMP(Fm ),ds );
7:
Fspatial = MatMul(Fm ,Wspatial );
8:
Fm′ = Addition(Shortcut(Fspatial ),Fm );
9:
Fs(t) =Flatten(Conv1×1 (Fm′ ));
10:
t = t + 1;
11: end for
12: h f , h b = BiLSTM(Fs(1) , Fs(2) , Fs(3) , . . . , Fs(T ) );
13: Fst = FC(Concat(h f,n , h b,n ),ds );
return Fst ;

Convolutional layer (ResAtConv) with residual connections
and the attention mechanism and the Bidirectional LSTM layer
(Bi-LSTM). ResAtConv extracts high-level spatial features of
each packet and solves the problem of temporal information
disorder while convolving the entire session image. Then,
these spatial features with temporal features are fed into BiLSTM [35] to capture the spatiotemporal features of a session
further. Algorithm 2 shows the process of the spatiotemporal
feature extraction module.
1) Residual Attention Convolution Layer: Inspired by
SeNet [36], we propose a Residual Attention Convolutional
Module. This module primarily consists of a convolutional
layer and an attention layer. Its structure is shown in Figure 5.
The convolutional layer is responsible for the feature extraction of the packet images. Because the contribution of each
channel’s feature map is different, the ATVITSC scheme
presents an attention layer to determine the weights of each
channel.

Fig. 5.

Residual Attention Convolution.

The session image is segmented into packet images, and
convolutional operations are performed on each packet to
generate a set of feature maps Fm . By applying global max
pooling (GMP) and global average pooling (GAP) on Fm , each
feature map is compressed into a scalar [37] which still retains
the important information of Fm , and Fm will be compressed
into two vectors (the dimension is equal to the number of
channels of Fm ) which will be fed to the fully connected
(FC) layer with an S-shaped Activation function. Next, the
feature map is weighted by using the attention values of each
channel. This weight will focus on feature maps with more
significant contributions while suppressing unimportant feature
maps. Finally, a 1 × 1 convolutional kernel is applied to adjust
the features at different positions. Similar to PVT, we also
apply batch normalization (BN) [38] and residual connections
[34] in this module. This process can be formalized as:


 Fm = B N (Conv(X ))
Fm′ = FC(FC(G A P(Fm )) + FC(G M P(Fm )))Fm + Fm

 ′′
Fm = Conv1×1 (Fm′ )
Due to the small size of individual data packet images,
multiple ResAtConv operations may lead to overfitting. Thus
ATVITSC only uses one ResAtConv operation for each packet
image, which can learn the weights of each channel, allowing
the model to focus on more critical feature maps during the
convolution process. Finally, 1×1 convolution is used to adjust
the information of different positional features in the weighted
feature map to highlight critical spatial features. The output of

9380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

the last layer of ResAtConv is flattened to obtain the spatial
features Fs of a packet: Fs = Flatten(Fm′′ ).
2) Bidirectional LSTM: After obtaining spatial features
of each packet through ResAtConv, these features are then
sequentially fed into the Bi-LSTM. The nature of Bi-LSTM
allows it to simultaneously capture the forward and backward
information of the packet sequence, which can enhance the
modeling ability of ATVITSC to capture the correlations
among packets. Each packet’s spatial features Fs(t) is fed into
the LSTM cell in both temporal order and reverse temporal
order to capture the temporal dependencies of the spatial
features Fs(t) .
h f,t = LSTM(Fs(t) , h f,t−1 ),

h b,t = LSTM(Fs(t) , h b,t+1 )

where h f,t represents the forward hidden state of the LSTM
at time step t and h b,t represents the backward hidden state
of the LSTM at time step t. Concatenate the last hidden states
from both the forward and backward hidden state sequences
to obtain the spatiotemporal features of the session. Subsequently, these concatenated hidden states undergo a nonlinear
transformation by using a fully connected layer (FC) with
the LeakyRELU activation function: Fst = FC([h f,n , h b,n ]),
where n represents the maximum value of the time step, i.e.,
the length of the packet sequence.
D. Feature Fusion Classification Layer
Traditional methods, such as simple concatenation or fixed
weighted fusion, cannot fully utilize the correlations between
these two features and cannot adaptively adjust the weights.
In the ATVITSC scheme, we propose a dynamic weighting
mechanism in the Feature Fusion Classification layer (FFC) to
compute the weight coefficients of the global feature Fglobal
and the spatiotemporal feature Fst . After the weighted fusion
of Fglobal and Fst , the fused feature is fed into two fully
connected layers (FC) and the softmax function to generate
the classification probability distribution. The Algorithm 3
describes the workflow of FFC.
Algorithm 3 The Workflow of FFC
Input: Global feature of session Fglobal , Spatiotemporal feature of session Fst .
Output: Result of classification;
1: Fg,s = Concat(Fglobal ,Fst );
2: αg , αs = DynamicWeight(Fg,s );
3: v = Matmul&Addition(αg , αs , Fglobal , Fst );
4: y = Softmax(FeedForwad(v));
5: Class Result = ArgMax(y);
6: return Class Result;
The dynamic weighting mechanism assigns different
weights for Fglobal and Fst of different sessions. Moreover,
we also introduce a temperature parameter τ to control the
balance of weights among different feature extraction modules
and to prevent the feature extraction module from failing
during the training process [39]. It can be formalized as:
z = tanh(Wg,s · [Fglobal ; Fst ] + bg,s ),

ξ = Wz z + bz

αg =

exp(ξ1 /τ )
exp(ξ2 /τ )
, αs =
exp(ξ1 /τ ) + exp(ξ2 /τ )
exp(ξ1 /τ ) + exp(ξ2 /τ )

where Wg,s , bg,s , Wz and bz are learnable parameters, tanh(·)
represents the hyperbolic tangent function, exp(·) represents
the exponential function, ξ ∈ R2 is a unnormalized weight
for the feature, and ξ1 ∈ R2 and ξ2 ∈ R2 are separate
unnormalized weights for the global and local features. The
temperature parameter τ is a hyperparameter that balances the
attention of FFC to different features and alleviates extreme
cases of weight coefficients when normalizing them. How to
select τ will be discussed in section IV.
After computing the normalized weights for different features, the fusion vector v can be represented as: v = αg ·
Fglobal + αs · Fst . Finally, v is fed into two fully connected
layers, and a non-linear transformation is applied to the hidden
layer to obtain a higher-level representation. The softmax
function, i.e., y = softmax(FC(LeakyRELU(FC(v)))), is used
to determine the category of the encrypted traffic.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL
In this section, we evaluate the performance of ATVITSC
on four different scenarios of encrypted traffic: Virtual Private
Networks (VPN), Tor (the Onion Router), malicious traffic,
and Android mobile traffic. The implementation configurations
of the experiments are shown in Table I. Among these parameters, ATVITSC selects a standard batch size and learning
rate in deep learning classification tasks to strike a balance
between its training speed and its performance. Additionally, it employs the cross-entropy as the loss function due
to the cross-entropy demonstrating the efficacy of previous
classification tasks, which effectively quantifies the disparity
between model predictions and the truth labels [40]. The
selection of the Adam optimizer is due to its favorable convergence properties during the training process, adaptive learning
rate adjustments, and ability to handle sparse gradients [41].
PyTorch is chosen as the deep learning framework to support
the model’s design and training processes in our experiments.
We compare ATVITSC with ten state-of-the-art traffic classification methods and further investigate the roles of its
sub-modules through an ablation study. These experiments
aim to demonstrate the generalization and effectiveness of
ATVITSC in various encryption environments.
A. Datasets
We select four widely used datasets to study the performance of ATVITSC. These datasets are listed in the following:
• USTC-TFS2016 dataset [16]: This dataset contains samples of encrypted network traffic from 10 categories of
benign traffic and ten categories of malicious traffic.
• Tor-nonTor dataset (ISCXTor2016) [42]: This dataset is
designed to classify encrypted applications on Tor, which
contains samples from 16 different applications.
• VPN-nonVPN dataset (ISCXVPN2016) [43]: This dataset
focuses on encrypted traffic classification on virtual
private networks (VPNs), which comprises both VPN
and non-VPN traffic samples from 6 communication
applications.

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

9381

where Nc represents the number of classes, F1i , Recalli
and Pr ecision i are the F1-score, the Recall score and the
Precision score for class i.

TABLE I
E XPERIMENTAL C ONFIGURATION

C. Exploration of Hyperparameters

Cross Platform (US Mobile APP) [44]: This dataset
provides a large amount of mobile traffic for analysis
and evaluation, which contains 59 Android traffic from
the United States for specific classification tasks.
These datasets provide abundant samples and features,
allowing us to verify the validation of ATVITSC and evaluate
its performance in real-world scenarios. By studying and
analyzing these datasets, we enhance the understanding of
encrypted traffic classification in various encryption environments.
•

B. Metrics
To evaluate the performance of the ATVITSC, we use
four metrics: Accuracy, Macro-F1, Macro-Recall, and MacroPrecision. Accuracy is a standard metric in classification
schemes, representing the ratio of correctly classified samples to total samples [45]. Macro-F1, Macro-Recall, and
Macro-Precision are evaluation metrics designed for multiclassification problems [46]. These metrics can be expressed
using the following formula:
TP +TN
TP
, Recall =
T P + FP + T N + FN
T P + FN
TP
pr ecision · r ecall
Pr ecision =
, F1 = 2 ·
T P + FP
pr ecision + r ecall
Accuracy =

where T P, T N , F P, and F N represent true positive, true
negative, false positive, and false negative.
N

c
1 X
F1macr o =
F1i ,
Nc

i=1

Prmacr o =

Nc
1 X

Nc

i=1

N

c
1 X
Rcmacr o =
Recalli
Nc

We explore three important hyperparameters: the number
of chosen data packets (denoted by Packet Number), the
first m bytes selected from each data packet (denoted by
ByteNum), and the temperature coefficient of ATVITSC in the
ISCX VPN dataset to determine how to select the appropriate
hyperparameters.
1) Packet Number and ByteNum: We do a series of experiments to explain the selections of two parameters, i.e., Packet
Number and ByteNum. First, to select the appropriate number
of data packets, we consult previous research, especially
Kumano’s results, which show that selecting 10 data packets
during the visualization process can achieve relatively good
classification results [22]. To maximize the search space,
we choose the number of data packets to be 4, 9, 16, 25,
36, and 49. Second, since Wang have demonstrated that the
traffic after 300 bytes of the payload has little significance for
improving the traffic classification [19], we choose ByteNum
being 16, 36, 64, 100, 169, 256, 324, and 400. For all combinations of selected parameters, the accuracy of the ATVITSC
in the test set is shown in Figure 6. The results show that the
performance of ATVITSC tends to stabilize when the Packet
Number is more than 9, and the accuracy of ATVITSC is high
when ByteNum is between 100 and 300 bytes. Finally, after
careful analysis, the accuracy of ATVITSC reaches its optimal
value of 0.9436 when the Packet Number is 16 and ByteNum
is 256.
2) Temperature Parameter: We study the selection of the
temperature parameter τ in the feature fusion classification
layer (FFC). This parameter τ depends on a dynamic weighting mechanism that adjusts the weight distribution between
global and spatiotemporal features to achieve adaptive fusion
of different features. Randomly select 500 samples from each
category in four different datasets for training. During the
training process, τ is set from 1 to 800 in step 20. After
20 rounds of training, Figure 7 shows the change of accuracy
under different values of τ . The accuracy of ATVITSC significantly improves at larger values of τ . Conversely, when τ
is set to a small value, the weight distribution between global
features and spatiotemporal features may not be reasonable,
resulting in a decrease in the performance of ATVITSC. In particular, when τ is more than 400, the classification accuracy
tends to stabilize. By reasonably selecting the value of τ ,
we can effectively improve the performance of the ATVITSC
and avoid unreasonable weight distribution during the initial
stage of training. In a word, the temperature parameter τ ,
which plays a crucial role in the FFC module, is of great
significance for achieving feature fusion and improving the
performance of ATVITSC.

i=1

D. Comparison With Other Methods
Pr ecision i

We compare ATVITSC with other state-of-the-art traffic classification schemes on the USTC-TFS, ISCX-Tor,

9382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 6.

Accuracy under different combinations of the number of data packets and the first m bytes of each packet.

used autoencoder and convolutional neural network structure,
HAN combined the attention mechanism and recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification. Flow-GNN
uses geometric deep learning that simultaneously considers
raw bytes of packets, metadata features, and the relations
among packets for classification. These schemes cover various popular neural network structures and algorithms in the
current field of deep learning, which makes us comprehensively compare the performances and effectiveness of different
advanced encrypted traffic classification schemes based on
deep learning.

Fig. 7.

Accuracy variation curves under different values of τ .

ISCX-VPN and Cross-Platform (US Android APP) datasets,
including some classic schemes based on machine learning
such as AppScanner [11] and BIND [12], and some advanced
schemes based on deep learning such as FS-Net [13], GraphDApp [17], FlowPic [14], HAN [21], TSCRNN [23] and
DeepPacket [20], CMTSNN [24], Flow-GNN [18]. These
schemes based on deep learning cover almost all neural
network structures. For example, FS-Net used a structure
with recurrent neural networks to classify temporal features,
FlowPic converted statistical features into images and used
convolutional neural networks for classification, GraphDApp
used graph neural network structure for encrypted traffic
classification, TSCRNN and CMTSNN combined recurrent
and convolutional neural network architecture, DeepPacket

1) Malicious Traffic Classification: According to the experimental results provided in Table II, ATVITSC achieves the
best result in terms of Rcmacr o and F1macr o . However, four
other methods, such as DeepPacket, TSCRNN, CMTSNN,
and Flow-GNN, also show considerable performance on the
UTSC-TFC dataset because the UTSC-TFC dataset contains
plaintexts in the application layer of malicious traffic. These
plaintexts make it easier for the models to learn patterns
of different categories from unencrypted data and achieve
accurate classification. Table III shows the experimental results
on a 20-classification task of USTC-TFC.
2) Tor Traffic Classification: In Table IV, ATVITSC
achieves an accuracy of 98.79%, which is 3.79% higher than
the previously best result, TSCRNN, because TSCRNN fails
to fully capture the relationships among packets and only
extracts spatiotemporal features by using a cascaded structure.
In contrast, ATVITSC designs the Packet Vision Transformer
to extract global features and a dynamic weighting mechanism

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

9383

TABLE II

TABLE V

C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N USTC-TFC

C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF ISCX T OR

TABLE III
C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF USTC-TFC
TABLE VI
C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N ISCX VPN

TABLE VII
C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF ISCX VPN
TABLE IV
C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N ISCX T OR

to fuse global and spatiotemporal features for classification. Meanwhile, the accuracy of ATVITSC also surpasses
DeepPacket’s by 24.30%, because DeepPacket has a weaker
generalization ability. Table V shows the experimental results
of a 16-classification task on Tor2016.
3) VPN Traffic Classification: Table VI demonstrates all
experimental results on the dataset ISCX VPN. We find that
the accuracy of ATVITSC is about 97.89%, which is more
than the accuracy of Flow-GNN, CMTSNN, DeepPacket,
and TSCRNN by 0.33%, 4.59%, 4.6%, and 6.19%, respectively. Although Flow-GNN can achieve similar accuracy,

the F1macr o of ATVITSC is more than Flow-GNN’s by
3.05%. In fact, ISCX VPN is an imbalanced dataset. In this
dataset, TSCRNN uses random sampling to enhance data
diversity, DeepPacket uses undersampling to mitigate the data
imbalance, and CMTSNN, designed only for encrypted traffic classification in IoT, adopts the cost penalty matrix and
improved cross-entropy loss function without the attention
mechanism. In contrast, ATVITSC uses the attention mechanism for each module to explore the interactive relationship
among packets in ISCX VPN fully. Please refer to Table VII
for more detailed experimental results on twelve classification
tasks performed on VPN2016.
4) Mobile Traffic Classification: We also perform
ATVITSC and other ten schemes on Cross-Platform (US

9384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N C ROSS -P LATFORM

Android APP). Table VIII gives comparison results. From
Table VIII, ATVITSC demonstrates superior performance
across four key metrics again. Specifically, its F1macr o
score surpasses those of HAN, CMTSNN and Flow-GNN
by 7.05%, 7.18% and 3.52%, respectively. Although HAN
also uses attention mechanisms, it has certain limitations
in extracting temporal features. CMTSNN only extracts
features at the spatiotemporal dimension level. Flow-GNN
achieves suboptimal classification results by utilizing
statistical features and constructing a graph of the order
among the original data packets. In contrast, ATVITSC
not only captures the interactions among data packets but
also extracts spatiotemporal features from network flows,
resulting in more accurate classification. The classification
report for 59 categories of U.S. Android app traffic in the
Cross-platform is listed in Table IX.
5) Comparison of Inference Speed: We list the inference
time of 9 different deep learning methods in Table X when
the batch size is 16. Since AppScanner and BIND are based
on machine learning, we do not analyze them. First, FS-Net
has the fastest inference speed of 18.67ms because FS-Net
only accepts simple sequence features as input. However,
simple sequence features also affect its classification accuracy.
Second, FlowPic uses a simple CNN structure, but its input
matrix (1500×1500) is too large, resulting in its inference time
of 71.52ms. Although the model structure of ATVITSC is relatively complex, its input size is relatively small. For example,
when Packet Number is 16 and ByteNum is 256 bytes, the size
of input received by ATVITSC is only 80 × 80. So ATVITSC
can achieve an inference speed of 32.54ms.
In summary, the inference speed of different models is
influenced by the complexity of input features and model
structure. FS-Net has advantages in speed, but its classification
accuracy is relatively low. ATVITSC achieves a good balance
between inference speed and classification accuracy.
6) Analysis and Discussion: According to the above experimental results, ATVITSC shows significant performance
advantages over other state-of-the-art traffic classification
methods on multiple datasets, while the performances of other
methods are not stable enough on different datasets. The F1
value of TSCRNN in the USTC dataset is 98.70%, while it
is 92.70% in the VPN dataset. The F1 value of DeepPacket
in the USTC dataset is 96.50%, but it drops to 75.49% in
the Tor dataset. AppScanner and Bind perform the worst in

the three datasets, mainly due to the insufficient applicability
of encrypted traffic classification methods based on statistical
features in different datasets. It is necessary to redesign the
features for each type of traffic. FS-Net uses packet sizes
as features and then applies recurrent neural networks for
computing. However, such features are too simplistic and
make it difficult to accurately reflect the encrypted network
traffic features. GraphDAPP constructs a TIG for encrypted
traffic based on the packet length and direction. Then it
applies a graph neural network for classification. However, the
constructed graph structure may not capture the key features of
encrypted traffic. Meanwhile, when the fingerprint of the application changes, the accuracy will correspondingly decrease.
DeepPacket chooses the IP header and the first 1480 bytes of
each packet to form a 1500-byte input, which contains the data
below the application layer. However, this selection will result
in excessive computation and data redundancy. In addition,
the CNN model fails to effectively extract the relationship
between temporal features and data packets, resulting in lower
accuracy. FlowPic converts packet size and arrival time into
images and uses CNN for classification. Using simplistic
features as input makes it difficult to accurately extract traffic
features. TSCRNN and CMTSNN combine CNN and LSTM
in a cascaded structure to extract spatiotemporal features from
network flows but do not consider the interaction among data
packets. HAN combines LSTM with the attention mechanism,
but it can only extract packet features from the temporal
dimension, which is not comprehensive enough. Flow-GNN
utilizes the sequential relationship among data packets, raw
traffic and meta features as network inputs, which can fully
extract traffic features for classification. However, due to
its lack of attention mechanism, its ability to extract global
features may be weak in certain scenarios.
ATVITSC achieves an F1 value of over 97% in datasets
such as USTC, VPN, and Tor, and the F1 value on the
Android Mobile traffic dataset also reaches 94.9%. Clearly,
it demonstrates stable performance in various application
environments. This advantage mainly stems from ATVITSC’s
comprehensive use of the PVT and STFE modules, augmented
by various feature extraction methods, such as the attention
mechanism, feedforward neural network, residual attention
convolution module, and bidirectional LSTM. These methods
collectively extract the spatiotemporal and spatial features of
traffic data. In addition, the PVT module of ATVITSC first
embeds each data packet in the traffic image to obtain the
initial vector of the packet. It uses an attention mechanism to
learn the interaction relationship among the packets and uses
a feedforward neural network to extract the global features
of the entire flow. Compared with traditional visualization
methods, our proposed traffic visualization method can avoid
the problem of temporal information distortion caused by
convolution operations in network traffic.
After obtaining the spatial features of the data packet,
bidirectional LSTM is used to accurately extract spatiotemporal features, and the dynamic weighting mechanism can
dynamically adjust the weights of global and spatiotemporal
features for feature fusion based on the features of the data.
Compared to previous methods with fixed weights in advance,

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

9385

TABLE IX
C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF C ROSS -P LATFORM (U.S. A NDROID APP)

TABLE X
C LASSIFICATION T IME FOR D IFFERENT M ODELS W HEN BATCHSIZE I S 16

ATVITSC is more flexible and could enhance the applicability
of the model in different environments. In contrast, other
methods have limitations in feature extraction and model
design, resulting in unstable or unsatisfactory performance.
Meanwhile, they could not consider the interaction among data
packets.

Fig. 8.

Attention Visualization.

E. Interaction of Packets
In this experiment, let the number of packets be 16 and
the payload size be 256 bytes while keeping other parameters
unchanged. Our main objective is to observe the dependencies
among packets by visualizing the attention in the PVT. To simplify the analysis, we train ATVITSC on the VPN dataset and
randomly select a sample. The attention matrix computed by
PVT is then mapped onto a session image. Figure 8 illustrates
the attention distributions of different packets within the same
session (for display purposes, only four packets are chosen).
Different colors represent the attention level of the model
towards different parts, with darker colors indicating greater
attention. The red box represents a packet. Obviously, for
different data packets, the model focuses on different parts,

which further proves that ATVITSC can capture the interaction
of different packets and extract global features adequately.
F. Dynamic Weighting Mechanism
We analyze the role of the dynamic weighting mechanism
on the ISCX-Tor dataset. In the training process, without using
the temperature parameter τ , significant fluctuations in the
weight of the STFE and PVT modules lead to an unstable
training process, as seen in Figure 9. After 400 steps of
training, the model encounters an extreme weight distribution
problem where the weights of the STFE approach 0. During
the initial stage of training, if there is a significant difference in
contribution between the two feature extraction modules, the

9386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 9.

Weight changes in training without τ .

Fig. 11. Training accuracy on ISCX Tor with/without dynamic weighting
mechanism.
TABLE XI
E VALUATION OF D IFFERENT P REPROCESS M ETHODS

weighting mechanism can improve the convergence speed and
accuracy of training. This result is attributed to the adaptive
adjustment of the importance of different features during the
training process, leading to a stable and effective model.

Fig. 10.

Weight changes in training.

weight of one of the modules may approach 0. In this case, the
weight of the PVT approaches 1, while the weight of the STFE
module approaches 0. Consequently, the STFE is ignored
after 400 steps, rendering it unable to continue learning.
Therefore, without using the temperature parameter τ , the
two sub-modules of ATVITSC cannot sufficiently complete
the training.
With the temperature parameter τ , ATVITSC can achieve
more balanced attention between the STFE and PVT modules.
This adjustment makes both sub-modules effectively learn
rather than directly disregard the weaker one. Thus ATVITSC
allows the initially lower-weighted module to actively participate in feature extraction and classification processes. In our
experiment, let τ be 500, which is a more reasonable change
in the weights of the two modules. The weight changes of the
two modules are depicted in Figure 10. Introducing τ alleviates
the problem of extreme weight coefficient distributions. Both
sub-modules effectively accomplish learning, and the fusion
classification layer assigns corresponding weights to the global
and spatiotemporal features of different sessions to complete
traffic classification.
Compare the simple concatenation of global and spatiotemporal features with a dynamic weighting mechanism to those
without a dynamic weighting mechanism. The accuracy variations of the two methods during the training process are
shown in Figure 11. The results indicate that the dynamic

G. Comparison of Preprocess Methods
To validate the superiority of the proposed preprocess
method in this paper, we compare it with a traditional approach
of generating session-level images (using the first 1600 bytes
of each session). Due to the incompatibility of the traditional
method with the ATVITSC model, a widely used 1D-CNN
model [15] is applied for performance comparison in this
experiment. In the VPN dataset, 1000 sessions are randomly
selected for each class. To ensure similar image sizes between
the two methods, our preprocess approach uses the first
256 bytes of the payload and selects the first four packets
of each session for image generation, which is compared
with the traditional preprocess method based on session-level
images. Table XI demonstrates that our method performs better. Generating images on the packet level allows the processed
data to retain their temporal features and effectively prevent
temporal information distortion from convolutional operations.
Additionally, length embeddings are introduced to maintain the
packets’ length information. Conversely, simply extracting the
first z bytes at the session level can lead to confusion and loss
of information.
H. Ablation Study
Module ablation experiments and independent validation
experiments need to be conducted on all modules to evaluate
the performance of each module in the ATVITSC system. The
ablation analysis of ATVITSC is performed on the ISCX-Tor
dataset and the results are shown in Table XII. PVT exhibits
the best performance, followed closely by STFE. Obviously,

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

9387

TABLE XII
E VALUATION OF D IFFERENT M ODULES

Fig. 12.

Classification results of PVT in a single packet dataset.

the STFE’s performance is relatively weaker than PVT’s.
When the PVT and STFE modules are combined, the network
traffic features in both global and spatiotemporal dimensions
can be considered comprehensively, leading to improved identification accuracy. Furthermore, more accurate classification
performance is achieved by introducing the dynamic weighting
mechanism to fuse the features extracted by the two modules.
In a word, the dynamic weighting mechanism is better suited
for combining different types of features.
We study the performances of PVT and STFE in sessions
that only contain a single packet. A sample containing one
packet is selected from six categories in the UTSC dataset:
BitTorrent, Facetime, Gmail, MySQL, Outlook and Skype.
The confusion matrices of the PVT and STFE are shown
in Figure 12 and Figure 13. In this case, the accuracy of
STFE is superior to that of PVT. With only one packet,
there is no information to interact across locations, degrading the self-attention mechanism to a fully connected layer.
Specifically, if the packet sequence contains only one packet,
denoted as x1 , its embedding vector representation can be
expressed as x1 ∈ R1×d , the query vector Q ∈ R1×dh , the
key vector K ∈ R1×dh and the value vector V ∈ R1×dv in the
following:
Q = X W Q = x1 W Q ,
K = X W K = x1 W K ,
V = X WV = x1 WV

Fig. 13.

Classification results of STFE in a single packet dataset.

where W Q ∈ R d×dh , W K ∈ R d×dh , WV ∈ R d×dv are the
weight matrices of Query, Key and Value, respectively, dh and
dv represent the dimensions of Key and Value.
According to the calculation formula of the self-attention
mechanism, the unnormalized score S ∈ R 1×1 is obtained by
the values of Q and K :
x1 W Q W KT x1T
QK T
S= √
=
√
dh
dh
For a sequence S = [S1 ] that contains only one packet, the
attention weights a can be obtained by the softmax function:
exp(s1 )
a = so f tmax (S) V = P1
(x1 WV )
j=1 exp(s j )
exp(s1 )
=
(x1 WV ) = x1 WV
exp(s1 )
Based on the above formula, we can find that the
self-attention mechanism is similar to the fully connected
layer in this scenario, which causes PVT to be unable to
capture critical information. However, STFE can still extract
important temporal and spatial features from a single packet,
making STFE more efficient in this case. For longer sequences,
the self-attention mechanism within the PVT module can use
more context information to generate a stronger representation.
Given the unique advantages of PVT and STFE, it is essential
to use a dynamic weighting mechanism to effectively combine
global and spatiotemporal features.

9388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

V. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes a new encrypted traffic classification
scheme called the ATVITSC. ATVITSC first presents a method
to generate network flow images at the packet level, which
preserves the original sequential nature of different packets
after the image generation. Second, the ATVITSC splits the
session image into multiple packet image sequences and
extracts global and spatiotemporal features by using a multihead self-attention mechanism and spatiotemporal feature
extraction method. Next, ATVITSC applies a dynamic weighting mechanism to fuse these features to classify encrypted
traffic effectively. Our scheme shows higher accuracy and
generalization ability than existing methods in the tasks of
encrypted malicious traffic classification, VPN encrypted traffic classification, Tor encrypted application classification, and
mobile traffic classification.
However, ATVITSC also faces certain challenges. For
example, it is still being determined whether ATVITSC can
classify the encrypted traffic for dynamic datasets effectively.
The encryption algorithms are updated constantly and the
emergence of new algorithms may decrease the accuracy of
ATVITSC in encrypted traffic classification. In the future,
we will explore incremental learning methods to make the
ATVITSC maintain good reusability in dynamic network environments. Meanwhile, we will introduce the latest multi-scale
retention mechanism in the ATVITSC, which aims to speed up
the time for classification and optimize its performance from
the view of accuracy and efficiency.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Xiang, N. Fulton, and S. Chong, “Relational analysis of sensor attacks
on cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Comput. Secur. Found.
Symp. (CSF), Jun. 2021, pp. 1–16.
[2] X. Lin, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic
classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2022,
pp. 633–642, doi: 10.1145/3485447.3512217.
[3] R. Liu and X. Yu, “A survey on encrypted traffic identification,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Cyberspace Innov. Adv. Technol., New York, NY, USA, 2021,
pp. 159–163, doi: 10.1145/3444370.3444564.
[4] J. Erman, A. Mahanti, M. Arlitt, and C. Williamson, “Identifying and
discriminating between web and peer-to-peer traffic in the network core,”
in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. World Wide Web. New York, NY, USA, 2007,
pp. 883–892, doi: 10.1145/1242572.1242692.
[5] R. T. Elmaghraby, N. M. A. Aziem, M. A. Sobh, and
A. M. Bahaa-Eldin, “Encrypted network traffic classification
based on machine learning,” Ain Shams Eng. J., vol. 15,
no. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 102361. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2090447923002502
[6] Z. Okonkwo, E. Foo, Q. Li, and Z. Hou, “A CNN based encrypted network traffic classifier,” in Proc. Australas. Comput. Sci. Week. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, Feb. 2022, pp. 74–83, doi: 10.1145/3511616.3513101.
[7] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81,
May 2019.
[8] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, and T. Geng, “DarknetSec:
A novel self-attentive deep learning method for darknet traffic classification and application identification,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 116, May 2022, Art. no. 102663. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404822000621
[9] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural networks
for Internet of Things,”IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050, 2017.
[10] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A survey of techniques for
mobile service encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 54024–54033, 2019.

[11] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[12] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with
bi-directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput.
Secur. Appl., New York, NY, USA, Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188, doi:
10.1145/2991079.2991123.
[13] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[14] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI),
Jul. 2017, pp. 43–48.
[16] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[17] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[18] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jul. 2023.
[19] Z. Wang, “The applications of deep learning on traffic identification,”
BlackHat USA, Las Vegas, LV, USA, Tech. Rep., 2015, pp. 1–10.
[Online]. Available: https://www.blackhat.com/us-15/briefings.html#theapplications-of-deep-learning-on-traffic-identification
[20] M. Lotfollahi, R. S. H. Zade, M. J. Siavoshani, and M. Saberian,
“Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using
deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020, doi:
10.1007/s00500-019-04030-2.
[21] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
[22] Y. Kumano, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I. Oka, “Towards
real-time processing for application identification of encrypted traffic,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Feb. 2014,
pp. 136–140.
[23] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification
scheme of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal
features for efficient management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no. 107974. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128621001067
[24] S. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “CMTSNN: A deep learning model
for multiclassification of abnormal and encrypted traffic of Internet of
Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11773–11791,
Jul. 2023.
[25] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions
in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, Jan. 2012.
[26] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
just a few labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets,”
2018, arXiv:1812.09761.
[27] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[28] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook,
NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[29] T. Völker, M. Tüxen, and E. P. Rathgeb, “The search of the path MTU
with QUIC,” in Proc. Workshop Evol., Perform. Interoperability (QUIC),
vol. 802. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
Dec. 2021, pp. 22–28, doi: 10.1145/3488660.3493805.
[30] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
arXiv:1810.04805.
[31] S. Chaudhari, V. Mithal, G. Polatkan, and R. Ramanath, “An attentive
survey of attention models,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 12,
no. 5, pp. 1–32, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3465055.
[32] A. L. Maas. (2013). Rectifier Nonlinearities Improve Neural
Network Acoustic Models. [Online]. Available: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16489696
[33] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” 2016,
arXiv:1607.06450.

LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING

[34] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[35] A. Graves, Long Short-Term Memory. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012,
pp. 37–45, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24797-2_4.
[36] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 7132–7141.
[37] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2014.
[38] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[39] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[40] Z. Zhang and M. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for
training deep neural networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, Eds., vol. 31.
Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/file/f2925f97bc13
ad2852a7a551802feea0-Paper.pdf
[41] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[42] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 253–262.
[43] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[44] T. Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting on
encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
Jan. 2020, pp. 1–18.
[45] C. Catal, “Performance evaluation metrics for software fault prediction
studies,” Acta Polytechnica Hungarica, vol. 9, pp. 193–206, Jan. 2012.
[46] C. Liu, W. Wang, M. Wang, F. Lv, and M. Konan, “An efficient
instance selection algorithm to reconstruct training set for support
vector machine,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 116, pp. 58–73,
Jan.
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0950705116304257

Ya Liu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the
Mathematics Department, Anhui Normal University,
in 2004 and 2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
in computer system architecture from Shanghai Jiao
Tong University in 2013. She is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Shanghai
for Science and Technology. Her research interests
include cryptology, federated learning, the scalability
and privacy protection of blockchain, and network
security by network analysis. She serves as a member for IACR, CACR, and CCF.

9389

Xiao Wang received the B.S. degree in engineering
from the Huanghe University of Science and Technology in 2021 and the M.S. degree in engineering
from the University of Shanghai for Science and
Technology in 2024. His research interests include
encrypted traffic classification.

Bo Qu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
information security and computer science from
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, in 2009 and
2012, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in intelligent systems from Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, in 2017. Before joining
Guangdong University of Science and Technology,
he worked with the Peng Cheng Laboratory as
a Research Associate. He was also with Tencent
Technology as a Researcher in applied research
of network security. His research interests include
network security by network analysis and network representation learning.

Fengyu Zhao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in computer engineering from Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1984 and 1989,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from Fudan University in 2010.
From 1998 to 1999, he was a Visiting Scholar with
Linköping University, Sweden. He is currently a
Professor with the Department of Information and
Intelligence Engineering, Shanghai Publishing and
Printing College. His research interests include the
design and analysis of software systems. He serves
as a member for the Software Engineering Professional Committee of CCF.