15372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Auto-Updating Intrusion Detection System for
Vehicular Network: A Deep Learning Approach
Based on Cloud-Edge-Vehicle Collaboration
Chunyang Fan , Jie Cui , Senior Member, IEEE, Hulin Jin , Hong Zhong , Member, IEEE, Irina Bolodurina ,
and Debiao He , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Intrusion detection systems play a crucial role in ensuring the safety of vehicle driving. Traditional intrusion detection
systems face challenges in efficiently extracting key features from
network traffic, resulting in inefficiency. To obtain better detection
performance, many researchers adopted deep learning to build
intrusion detection systems for vehicular network. However, these
systems can only identify learned network attacks, while failing
to identify the unknown attacks present in open scenarios. In this
paper, we propose a deep learning-based auto-updating intrusion
detection system for vehicular network, which uses a two-layer
filter to effectively sense unknown attacks in open scenarios and
proactively updates the attack recognizer to enable it with the
ability to identify unknown attacks. In addition, we design a cloudedge-vehicle collaborative model updating approach, where the
updating task of the attack recognizer is deployed on a cloud server
to reduce the computational load of the vehicle. The comprehensive
experiments on three open scenarios show that the updated attack
recognizer can accurately identify both known and unknown attacks.
Index Terms—Vehicular network, intrusion detection system,
deep learning, unknown attack.

I. INTRODUCTION

W

ITH the application of sensor and wireless communication technologies in transportation systems, the world

Manuscript received 16 October 2023; revised 20 March 2024; accepted
30 April 2024. Date of publication 10 May 2024; date of current version
17 October 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant U23A20308, Grant 62202008, Grant
62302008 and Grant 62325209, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for
the Central Universities under Grant 2042023KF0203, in part by the Natural
Science Foundation of Anhui Province, China under Grant 2208085QF196, and
in part by the University Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province under
Grant GXXT-2022-049. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof.
Liehuang Zhu. (Corresponding author: Jie Cui.)
Chunyang Fan, Jie Cui, Hulin Jin, and Hong Zhong are with the Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of
Education, School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University,
Hefei 230039, China, and also with the Anhui Engineering Laboratory of
IoT Security Technologies, Anhui University, Hefei 230039, China (e-mail:
cuijie@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
Irina Bolodurina is with the Faculty of Mathematics and Information
Technologies, Orenburg State University, 460018 Orenburg, Russia (e-mail:
prmat@mail.osu.ru).
Debiao He is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China, and also with the Shanghai Key Laboratory
of Privacy-Preserving Computation, MatrixElements Technologies, Shanghai
201204, China (e-mail: hedebiao@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3399219

Fig. 1.

The process of recognizing attacks by intrusion detection system.

has transitioned into an era of intelligent transportation [1].
Smart vehicles are equipped with an increasing number of safety
and entertainment applications, such as road prediction, assisted
driving, and audio/video streaming downloads [2]. However,
while vehicle users enjoy the services of vehicular applications,
malicious attackers may launch network attacks on vehicles
and cause serious traffic accidents [3], [4], [5]. In particular,
vehicular networks operate in open scenarios, and malicious
attackers will constantly create new types of attacks to attack
vehicular networks. Since this new type of attack is unknown
to the intrusion detection system, it is difficult for the detection
system to recognize the new unknown attack accurately, and the
vehicle is more vulnerable to the attack. Therefore, to ensure the
security of vehicular network, the development of an efficient
and reliable intrusion detection system for vehicular network
becomes increasingly important [6]. Traditional intrusion detection methods mostly use fixed rules and features as the basis
for network attack detection [7], [8]. However, in large-scale
and complex vehicular network environments, these methods
prove ineffective as extracting useful features from network flow
becomes challenging [9], [10]. In recent years, the application
of deep learning in image recognition and natural language processing has led researchers to explore its potential in constructing
intrusion detection systems for vehicular network, yielding improved results [11]. Despite these advancements, most existing
vehicular network intrusion detection methods can only identify
learned network attacks and cannot detect possible unknown
attacks [12]. Since the types and number of network attacks are
not constant in the real world, there will always be unknown
attacks that have not been learned by the intrusion detection
system. As shown in Fig. 1, a malicious attacker launches three
types of network attacks on a target vehicle. Since the intrusion

0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH

detection system has learned the data features of two types of
known attacks, the network flows of the known attacks are easily
recognized and defended by the detection system. However, the
third type of attack is an unknown attack that has not been learned
by the intrusion detection system, which makes it difficult for
the detection system to recognize this attack.
In particular, many researchers utilize datasets consisting of
fixed types of attacks to train intrusion detection systems, leading
to the system’s outputs being confined within a limited range,
while unknown attacks do not fall within this range. Therefore,
when faced with an unknown attack, the intrusion detection
system produces two possible results [13]. The first result is
that the unknown attack is judged as normal traffic, resulting in
the vehicle being victimized directly. The second result is that
the unknown attack is judged to be a known attack, leading the
vehicle to deal with the unknown attack using methods that defend against known attacks. However, the defenses employed by
the vehicle may be ineffective due to the different characteristics
of the different attacks [14].
To address the above problem, we propose an auto-updating
intrusion detection system for vehicular network, which periodically updates the attack recognizer to identify known/unknown
network attacks present in open scenarios. The basic idea of the
proposed system is mainly 1) filtering out the network flows of
unknown attacks from the mixed traffic, 2) since there may be
more than one kind of unknown attack, the obtained unknown
attack flows need to be classified, 3) based on the network
flows of unknown attacks and the initial dataset, a new dataset
containing normal flows, known/unknown attacks is formed and
the attack recognizer is updated using this dataset. 4) the updated
attack recognizer has the ability to recognize known/unknown
attacks. Moreover, it is important to note that the update of the
attack recognizer cannot be performed on the vehicle due to its
limited computing and storage capacity. As a result, we design a
cloud-edge-vehicle cooperative model update method to avoid
the vehicle computation task overload problem. In summary, the
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
r We propose a deep learning-based auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network, which can
effectively detect unknown attack flows present in open
scenarios and proactively update the attack recognizer to
improve the ability to recognize unknown attacks.
r We propose a cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration-based
model updating approach, which deploys the attack recognizer updating task on cloud servers to reduce the computational and storage load of vehicles.
r The comprehensive experiments on three open scenarios
show that the proposed intrusion detection system for
vehicular network can effectively identify both known
and unknown attacks, and outperform the state-of-the-art
methods in terms of precision, recall and F1-score.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
related work is described in Section II. The preliminaries are described in Section III. In Section IV, we introduce the proposed
auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network.
In Section V, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
system. Finally, we summarize our work in Section VI.

15373

II. RELATED WORK
Recently, there has been a proliferation of research on intrusion detection systems. In this section, we will discuss four main
categories of intrusion detection systems.
A. Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection Methods
Anomaly-based intrusion detection system is a popular
method for detecting unknown attacks, which utilizes the features of normal traffic to build an attack recognizer for detecting
the presence of anomalous attack traffic in the network. Zhang
et al. [15] proposed an anomaly detection method for unknown
attacks, which uses Kmeans and isolated forests to detect the
presence of anomalous traffic in mixed traffic. To avoid botnet
attacks on network devices, Sriram et al. in [16] proposed a
botnet attack detection framework based on a multilayer perception, which identifies malicious traffic based on statistical
features of network flows. Considering that the training data may
contain privacy information of users, Shi et al. [17] proposed a
hybrid intrusion detection system based on differential privacy
and machine learning, which uses one class support vector
machine and local outlier factor algorithm for network traffic
detection. To reduce the false alarm rate of network anomalies,
Li et al. [18] propose an anomalous traffic detection method
based on a bidirectional gated recurrent unit and an attention
mechanism, which uses a stacked sparse auto-encoder to extract
useful features of network traffic, so as to improve the accuracy
of detection. The above-mentioned anomaly-based intrusion
detection methods all achieve good results in terms of detection
accuracy. However, these methods can only determine whether
the network contains anomalous traffic, and cannot construct
suitable defenses for such anomalous traffic.
B. Machine Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Methods
To formulate appropriate defense strategies against different
types of network attacks, many researchers have conducted
fine-grained analyses for network anomalies (i.e., categorizing
anomalous network traffic). In this subsection, we focus on
machine learning-based intrusion detection methods, while in
the next subsection, we will discuss deep learning-based intrusion detection methods. Alani et al. [19] propose a two-layer
intrusion detection method for malicious attacks in networks,
which uses multiple machine learning algorithms for packetlevel data and flow-level data. Yang et al. [20] proposed a
multi-layer hybrid intrusion detection method that uses decision
trees, random forests, and other algorithms as base classifiers to
identify both inside and outside vehicle anomalous messages. To
avoid distributed denial of service attacks on vehicles, Anyanwu
et al. [21] proposed a vehicular network intrusion detection
method based on the RBF-SVM kernel, which uses a grid search
cross-validation algorithm to select the hyperparameters of the
model. Jin et al. [22] proposed an intrusion detection method
based on outlier detection, oversampling and metric learning
for achieving fast detection of malicious attacks in a vehicular
network environment. These aforementioned schemes achieve
the fine-grained classification of network attacks. However, the

15374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

accuracy of machine learning algorithms is relatively low due
to their weak learning ability on large-scale datasets. Moreover,
machine learning algorithms rely on manual feature selection,
which increases the training cost.
C. Deep Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Methods
To improve the accuracy of identifying network attacks at a
fine-grained level, more and more researchers have used deep
learning to train intrusion detection models. Deep learning can
use multilayer neural networks to perform automatic feature
extraction on large-scale data and obtain high accuracy rates. To
detect false message attacks in vehicular networks, Yu et al. [23]
proposed an intrusion detection system based on long and shortterm memory networks, which uses vehicle message sequences
as input to determine emergency message classes. Shu et al. [24]
proposed a GAN distributed training-based intrusion detection
method for the biased flow problem in vehicular networks, which
increases the robustness of the model by collecting network
traffic from multiple regions. Tian et al. [25] proposed an intrusion detection method based on residual convolutional neural
networks, which uses a distributed deep learning system to
improve the accuracy of the classification model. These intrusion
detection schemes mentioned above can achieve accurate and
fine-grained identification of network attacks. However, since
the models of these solutions usually do not have the ability
to sense unknown attacks, they cannot effectively identify unknown attacks in open scenarios.
D. Physical Signal-Based Intrusion Detection Methods
To realize timely detection of network attacks, many researchers have proposed physical signal-based detection methods for vehicular network attacks. Deng et al. [26] proposed
an in-vehicle intrusion detection system called IdentifierIDS,
which detects both periodic and non-periodic malicious frames
by establishing a voltage fingerprint for each CAN identifier
(ID) and does not consume the limited bandwidth of the CAN
bus. It is worth noting that IdentifierIDS does not rely on ECU
and ID mapping knowledge, which greatly enhances utility. Qin
et al. [27] proposed a collaborative cloud-vehicle intrusion detection system based on multidimensional features, which solves
the data heterogeneity problem by abstracting different vehicle
data into the same feature space. Comprehensive experiments
on three real vehicles show that the scheme can effectively
detect potential attacks and greatly improve the robustness of
the detection system. To reduce the consumption of CAN bus
bandwidth resources by the intrusion detection system, Xun
et al. [28] proposed an intrusion detection system based on
vehicle voltage signals, which utilizes the side channel information of the vehicle ECU to detect malicious messages and
attack sources. It is worth mentioning that the experiments of
this system on real vehicles have high detection accuracy and it
takes only 0.537 ms to detect a data frame, which means that the
system can accurately recognize malicious attacks in a shorter
time. To detect malicious spoofing attacks on the CAN bus, Levy
et al. [29] proposed a spoofing attack detection scheme based
on voltage signals, which utilizes the physical side channel to

detect and localize malicious attacks and can adaptively adjust
the detection model according to the surrounding environment.
In summary, many researchers have proposed a large number of intrusion detection schemes to secure the network of
vehicles. However, most vehicular intrusion detection systems
rarely consider the detection of new unknown attacks, resulting
in vehicles being vulnerable to potential attack threats. In this
paper, we propose an auto-updating vehicular intrusion detection
system based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration. The proposed scheme can effectively sense unknown attacks present
in open vehicular network scenarios and improve the detection
capability by continuously updating the attack recognizer. In
addition, the updating process of the attack recognizer is completed by a cloud server, which greatly reduces the computation
and storage overhead of the vehicle.

III. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we formulate the problem of identifying
network attacks in open scenarios and then present the main
components of the proposed attack recognizer.

A. Problem Formulation
Let Dt = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xi , yi ), . . . , (xn , yn )} be a
labeled training dataset that contains M known network attacks,
where t denotes the current time. Define xi as the i-th sample
in dataset Dt and yi as the label corresponding to xi . Define
the current known attack set as C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cj , . . . , cM }
and cj corresponds to the j-th known network attack. Using
dataset Dt to train an initial attack recognizer F t that can
identify the known M network attacks. Assume that at time
t + 1, the attacker launches a novel network attack cM +1 and
the existing attack recognizer F t cannot effectively identify the
unknown attack cM +1 . To prevent the vehicular network against
attackers, we need to update the attack recognizer F t → F t+1
to effectively identify the M + 1 attacks present in the current
scenario. The update of recognizer F t → F t+1 relies on the new
dataset Dt+1 , which contains samples with unknown attacks and
the corresponding labels. Therefore, the core challenge of constructing an intrusion detection system for vehicular network in
open scenarios is to efficiently detect unknown attack flows and
form a dataset containing unknown attacks. The identification
of network attacks in the open scenario can be divided into four
subproblems as follows:
1) To identify existing known attacks, we need to train a
known attack recognizer with high accuracy.
2) Design an unknown attack filter to identify whether an
attack is known or unknown.
3) To determine how many kinds of unknown attacks exist in
the open scenario, an efficient unknown attack classifier
needs to be designed.
4) Generate a labeled dataset Dt+1 containing known attack
flows and unknown attack flows based on the unknown
attack filter and unknown attack classifier, and use Dt+1
to update the attack recognizer.

FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH

B. Composition of Attack Recognizer
The proposed attack recognizer mainly consists of convolutional neural network (CNN) and self-attention mechanism. The
CNN is used to extract useful information about the network
flow, and the self-attention mechanism correlates these information with each other to form a global information representation [30], [31], [32]. It is worth mentioning that CNNs are further
divided into 1D-CNN, 2D-CNN, and 3D-CNN to handle data of
different dimensions (for example, 1D-CNN is commonly used
to handle text data). Since network flow is a kind of text data,
we use 1D-CNN and self-attention mechanism to build an attack
recognizer.
1) 1D-CNN: A classical 1D-CNN model usually consists of
multiple convolutional layers and pooling layers. The convolutional layer is mainly used to extract the features of the network
flow. The specific convolution process is as follows:
⎛
⎞
m−1

wj xi+j + b⎠
(1)
hi = σ ⎝
j=0

where σ is the activation function, m is the size of the convolution
kernel, wj is the j-th weight of the convolution kernel, b is the
offset, xi+j is the (i + j)-th element of the input sequence, and hi
is the output value of the convolution operation. To obtain better
performance, we use multi-layer 1D-CNN for feature extraction
of network traffic. The final convolution result C res needs to be
input to the pooling layer for dimensionality reduction to reduce
the risk of model overfitting and increase the training speed. The
specific pooling process is as follows:
Z = M axP ooling(C res )

(2)

2) Self-Attention Mechanism: Generally, the self-attention
mechanism uses three matrixes of “query”, “key” and “value”
to construct the relational features between vectors. For convenience, “query”, “key” and “value” are denoted as Q, K and V ,
respectively, and their values are calculated as follows:
⎧
⎨Q = Z · W Q
K = Z · WK
(3)
⎩
V = Z · WV
where W Q , W K , and W V are learnable weight matrices.
According to the matrix Q and the matrix K, the value of the
attention matrix A can be calculated by (4)
A = Sof tmax

Q · KT
√
dk

(4)

where the Sof tmax is a activation function, and dk is the
dimension of K. Note that the matrix A contains the relationship
between any two elements of the pooling result Z. Then, we
use the attention matrix A to extract the key information from
the matrix V and generate a sequence O that can reflect the
relationship between the elements. The value of O can be
calculated by the (5)
O = Attention(Q, K, V ) = A · V

(5)

15375

Note that the O is the output of a single-head attention mechanism, and single-head attention suffers from the drawback of
over-focusing attention on a certain location. Therefore, we
avoid the over-focusing problem by training multi-groups of
different parameter matrices to generate a series of O . Then,
the output sequence O of the multi-headed attention mechanism
can be calculated by (6)

) · WO
O = (O1 ⊕ O2 ⊕ · · · OH

(6)

where W O is a learnable weight matrix, H is the number of
heads of the attention mechanism.
IV. AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR
VEHICULAR NETWORK
The proposed auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network consists of four components: attack recognizer,
unknown attack filter, unknown attack classifier, and update
attack recognizer. The overview of the system is shown in
Fig. 2. Note that the four parts of the proposed system correspond
to each of the four subproblems in the problem formulation.
A. Attack Recognizer
To enable the defense against network attacks, we need to
design attack recognizer with high accuracy to identify the attacks present in the vehicular network. As declared in subsection
B of the preliminaries, the attack classifier mainly consists of
a 1D-CNN and a multi-headed attention mechanism. Initially,
the attack recognizer extracts the key features of the network
flow using 1D convolution and uses maximum pooling to reduce
the risk of model overfitting. Subsequently, the pooled feature
vectors are fed to the multi-headed attention mechanism to
capture the correlation between features. Then, we obtain a
hidden vector O containing the key information of the network
flow. Finally, the vector O is flattened and fed into a linear layer
with a Sof tmax activation function. Note that the Sof tmax
activation function is often used for classification tasks, and its
output is the predicted probability of each category. The output
of the linear layer and the Softmax activation function are shown
in (7) and (8)
y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yM , yM +1 ] = (W T · O) + bf
pj =

exp(yj )
M +1
i=1 exp(yi )

(7)
(8)

where W T is the weight matrix, bf is the offset, y is the
output of linear layer, pj is the predicted probability of the
j-th class, and M + 1 denotes normal traffic and M types of
known attacks. According to (8), we can obtain the probability
p = [p1 , p2 , . . . , pM +1 ] that a flow belongs to normal traffic and
M +1
pi = 1 and pi ≤ 1. The
each of the known attacks, where i=1
type of the network flow is determined by the maximum value
in p, which is denoted as p∗ = Max(p).
To sum up, the attack recognizer has been built. However,
the initial attack recognizer can only identify M known attacks
and cannot identify unknown attacks that may exist in open

15376

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Overview of auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network.

scenarios. Inspired by Sun et al. [33] and our experimental validation, we find that unknown and known attacks show different
distributions on the probability. More specifically, the p∗ value
of a known attack is slightly less than 1, while the p∗ value of
an unknown attack is much less than 1. Therefore, we define a
threshold θ to determine whether a network flow belongs to a
known class or not. When p∗ > θ, the flow is determined to be
a known class, otherwise it belongs to an uncertain class (i.e., it
may be either a known or an unknown class). We set the flows
with p∗ > θ as xk , and the flows with p∗ ≤ θ as xu .

B. Unknown Attack Filter
To further determine whether a network flow is an unknown
attack flow, we need to design a filter to eliminate the normal
flows and known attack flows in xu .
Let Dt be the training dataset with labels at the initial time t,
and Dt contains both normal traffic samples and known attack
samples. Since we do not know any useful information about
the unknown attack at the initial time t, a discriminator for the
unknown attack is difficult to construct. However, the dataset
Dt contains information about both normal flows and known
attack flows. Therefore, a feasible approach is to build a twolayer filter to sequentially filter out the normal flows and known
attack flows in xu based on the features of normal and known
attack flows. Then, the remaining network flows are the unknown
attack flows. Note that the first layer of the two-layer filter is used
to identify whether a network flow is normal or not, while the
second layer of the two-layer filter is used to detect unknown
attack traffic. The reason for this is to avoid some normal flows
being incorrectly recognized as attack flows.

Algorithm 1: Unknown Attack Filter.
Input: Dataset Dt and Dataset xu
Output: Unknown Attack Dataset Du
1 Define Dnt as the normal flow in the dataset Dt ;
2 Define Dkt as the known attack flows in the dataset Dt ;
3 Building OCSVM-based first layer filters using Dnt ;
4 Φn = OCSV M (Dnt );
5 Building OCSVM-based second layer filters using Dkt ;
6 Φk = OCSV M (Dkt );
7 Φn and Φk are used to implement filtering of normal
flows and known attack flows;
8 xu1 = Φn (xu );
9 Du = Φk (xu1 );
10 return Du ;

It is worth mentioning that the two-layer filter is built based
on one-class support vector mechanism (OCSVM) [34], [35].
The OCSVM is a commonly used anomaly detection algorithm
that builds a decision boundary in a high-dimensional space
by features of training data. The decision boundary can cover
most of the normal data and separate out the abnormal data. The
objective function of the decision boundary is as follows:

n
1 
1
2
||w|| +
ζi − ρ
(9)
Minw,ζi ,ρ
2
vn i=1

(w · φ(xi )) ≥ ρ − ζi
s.t.
ζi ≥ 0
where w is the normal vector of the hyperplane, v is a hyperparameter to adjust the slack degree, n is the number of samples,

FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH

ζi is the slack variable, ρ is the offset, and φ(xi ) is the radial
basis kernel function. The detailed filter construction is shown
in Algorithm 1, and based on the unknown attack filter, we can
obtain Du containing the unknown attack flows.

15377

Algorithm 2: Unknown Attack Classification.

C. Unknown Attack Classifier
Although the dataset Du containing unknown attacks is obtained after the two-layer filter, we do not know how many
unknown attacks are contained in Du . Therefore, to further
determine the number of unknown attack types in Du , we need to
perform clustering operation for Du . The process of clustering is
to divide Du into a number of clusters, and the network flows in
each cluster have some similarity to each other. To improve the
accuracy of the clustering results and reduce the computational
complexity, we use principal component analysis (PCA) to
perform dimensionality reduction for dataset Du . PCA is a classical data dimensionality reduction algorithm that reduces the
correlation between features by changing the coordinate system
to find the main features in the data [36], [37]. Specifically, PCA
first normalizes the data so that each feature with mean of 0 and
variance of 1. The data normalization process is as follows:
T =

q−μ
τ

(10)

where q is the feature value, μ and τ are the mean and the
standard deviation of the feature value set respectively, and
T represents the normalization result. Then, we calculate the
covariance matrix to find a feature space that minimizes the
correlation between the features. The covariance matrix is calculated as shown in (11)
CM =

G
T
i=1 (xi − x)(xi − x)

G−1

(11)

where G is the number of samples, xi is the eigenvector of
the i-th sample in Du , and x is the mean vector of samples.
According to the matrix CM , we can calculate its corresponding
eigenvector V and eigenvalue λ. The size of the eigenvalue
reflects the importance of the feature vector. Therefore, we sort
the eigenvector V in descending order by eigenvalue λ and select
the first k eigenvectors to realize data dimensionality reduction.
The dataset after dimensionality reduction is denoted as follows:
Dpca = XV k

(12)

where X is the original data matrix and V k is a matrix consisting
of the first k eigenvectors.
Subsequently, we use the Kmeans clustering algorithm to
analyze how many unknown attacks are contained in Dpca .
Kmeans is a distance-based clustering algorithm that divides
a set of data into κ classes by continuous iterations, where κ is a
hyperparameter. In the initial time, Kmeans selects κ clustering
centers. Then, the distance from sample point s to each cluster
center is calculated according to (13), and the minimum distance
is chosen to determine the class to which the sample point
belongs.

(13)
dj = (s − cj )2

where cj denotes the j-th clustering center. Since the initial clustering centers are chosen randomly, there exists the possibility
that they are not real centroids. Therefore, the clustering centers
need to be updated continuously, and the updating process can
be represented by (14).
1 
si
(14)
cj =
|Nj |
si ∈Nj

where Nj is the sample point in the j-th class and si is the
coordinate of the sample point. Finally, the Kmeans algorithm
generates κ data clusters by continuous iterations and each
cluster is an unknown attack. Since we do not know how many
unknown attacks are present in the open scenario, the value of
κ is set to [2, κmax ]. The number of unknown attacks in the
open scenario is determined based on the best clustering results
(i.e., the silhouette coefficient score). Note that the reason for
not choosing 1 as κ is that the data in Dpca is unlikely to be of
one class. In addition, we consider the case that the unknown

15378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

attack has only one class when κ = 2. The detailed unknown
attack classification process is shown in Algorithm 2. Note that
in Algorithm 2, we design a score threshold η, and determine
that the clustering result is valid only if S max > η. The reason
is to ensure that the unknown attack dataset C u is valid and
accurate.
To improve the sample quality of the unknown attack, we
need to process the obtained C u = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dκ }, where d
denotes a sample cluster. It is well known that the closer sample
points are to the cluster center, the lower the probability of them
becoming outliers. Therefore, the basic idea of improving data
quality is to select samples that are closer to the center of the
cluster. Let D = {dis1 , dis2 , . . . , disi , . . . , disn } be the set of
distances of a sample cluster, where disi denotes the distance
from the i-th sample to the center of the cluster. The average
distance in D is calculated as follows:
disavg =

n
i=1 disi

(15)
n
Then, we use disavg as a threshold to filter the sample points
closer to the cluster center, i.e., if disi < disavg , retain this sample point, otherwise discard it. Similarly, we deal with the sample
clusters in C u based on this idea to improve the sample quality
of unknown attacks, and the processed C u = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dκ }.
Finally, a new dataset Dt+1 is formed based on the obtained C u
and the initial dataset Dt , and the attack recognizer is updated
by utilizing Dt+1 .
D. Update of Attack Recognizer Based on Cloud-Edge-Vehicle
Collaboration
In this subsection, we describe how the proposed attack
recognizer enables auto-updating in cloud-edge-vehicle environments.
The vehicle is not suitable for performing the recognizer
update task due to limited computational and storage capacity.
To alleviate the computational load on vehicles, we propose a
cloud-edge-vehicle collaborative model updating method, and
the specific updating architecture is shown in Fig. 3. As shown in
Fig. 3, the attack recognizer is deployed on the vehicle, while the
unknown attack filter and unknown attack classifier are deployed
on the cloud server. First, the initial attack recognizer on the
vehicle forwards network flows of undeterminable type to the
connected edge base station (i.e. network flows for p∗ ≤ θ). The
edge base station forwards these flows to the cloud server and
forms the dataset xu . Then, the cloud server inputs xu into the
unknown attack filter and unknown classifier in turn and obtains
the dataset C u . C u contains unknown attack features present in
the current scenario and the initial dataset Dt contains normal
traffic and known attack features. Based on datasets Dt and C u
we can generate a new dataset Dt+1 , which contains samples
and labels of normal traffic, known attacks and unknown attacks.
The cloud server updates the attack recognizer using the dataset
Dt+1 to ensure that the updated recognizer can identify unknown
attacks present in open scenarios. It is worth mentioning that the
cross-entropy loss function is used for model training to compute
the losses and the Adam optimizer to update the parameters. The
detailed attack recognizer update is shown in Algorithm 3.

Fig. 3.

A model updating method based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration.

Algorithm 3: Attack Recognizer Update.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Input: Dataset Dt+1
Outuput: New attack recognizer F t+1
Divide the dataset Dt+1 into a training set, a validation
set and a test set;
Resize the number of output SoftMax layers;
Train the new attack recognizer using the training and
validation sets;
Test the new attack recognizer using the test set;
Save the model of the attack recognizer;
The cloud server sends updated model to each vehicle;
Install the updated attack recognizer in each vehicle;

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we describe the dataset used for the experiments, the experimental settings, and the performance analysis
of the proposed auto-updating intrusion detection system for
vehicular network. Specifically, we will discuss five research
questions.
r Q1: How is the overall performance of the proposed autoupdating intrusion detection system for vehicular network?
r Q2: Whether the proposed two-layer unknown attack filter
can effectively extract the unknown attacks?
r Q3: Can the unknown attack classifier effectively classify
unknown attacks?
r Q4: Whether attack recognizer based on 1D-CNN and
multi-head attention mechanisms have higher accuracy
compared to other algorithms?
r Q5: Why are vehicles not suitable for training attack recognizers?

FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH

15379

TABLE I
DIVIDE KNOWN AND UNKNOWN ATTACKS FROM THREE DATASETS

library to build the proposed auto-updating intrusion detection
system for vehicular network.
2) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the performance of the
proposed vehicular network attack recognizer to identify known
or unknown network attacks, we calculated the number of true
positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and
false negatives (FN) predicted by the model. Based on these
definitions, we can calculate the precision, recall, and F1 score
by (16), (17), and (18), respectively.
TP
TP + FP
TP
Recall =
TP + FN
P recision · Recall
F 1 − score = 2 ·
P recision + Recall
P recision =

Fig. 4.

Baidu apollo auto-driving car.

(16)
(17)
(18)

A. Dataset

C. Overall Performance of the Proposed System (Q1)

We use open datasets VeReMi [38], ToN-IOT [39] and EDGEIIOT [40] to train an intrusion detection system for vehicular network. The VeReMi dataset is a dataset for evaluating malicious
vehicle misbehavior in vehicular network that includes DoS,
false location, message replay, and other attacks. ToN-IOT and
EDGE-IIOT are datasets commonly used in intrusion detection
systems in recent years. The ToN-IoT dataset consists of 21,000+
network flows and contains attacks such as DoS, DDoS, XSS,
etc. EDGE is a larger intrusion detection dataset that consists of
millions of network flows and includes attacks such as SQL
injection, port scanning, password, etc. To simulate network
attacks in open scenarios, we further divide each dataset into
known attacks and unknown attacks as shown in Table I. It is
important to mention that the training data of the initial attack
recognizer does not contain unknown attacks.

To answer Q1, we use the confusion matrix to evaluate the
overall performance of the proposed system, and the results of
the confusion matrix are shown in Fig. 5. The Fig. 5(a)–(c) shows
the performance of the initial attack recognizer in detecting
known attacks, while Fig. 5(d)–(f) shows the performance of
the updated attack recognizer in detecting known attacks and
unknown attacks. We can observe that the proposed vehicular
network intrusion detection system can efficiently identify both
known attacks at the initial time and unknown attacks after
auto-updating. In addition, we note that the updated model has a
reduced detection accuracy for some known attacks. The reason
for this phenomenon is that a small amount of known attack
data is incorrectly identified as unknown attacks. However, the
updated model can still identify most of the known attacks
with over 90% accuracy. It is also worth noting that the attack
recognizer performs best on the TON-IOT dataset. The reason
for this phenomenon is the relatively simple feature distribution
of the data samples in the TON-IOT dataset. Some existing
intrusion detection schemes [39], [41], [42] have also achieved
good experimental results on the ToN-IoT dataset.

B. Experimental Settings
1) Experimental Environment: The attack recognizer update
task was deployed on an Xeon(R) Platinum 8336 C cloud server
with 228 G of RAM and an NVIDIA A100 GPU. We use a
high-performance computer as the host for the edge base station,
which is equipped with an Intel(R) Core i9-11900 K CPU, 64 G
of RAM, and an RTX 3090 GPU. The trained attack recognizer
was deployed in the Baidu Apollo auto-driving car shown in
Fig. 4. Moreover, we use the TensorFlow 2.9.0 deep learning
algorithm library and the Sklearn machine learning algorithm

D. Unknown Attack Detection Performance (Q2)
In open scenarios, constructing efficient filters for unknown
attacks is the basis for reconfiguring attack recognizers. In this
subsection, we will discuss the performance of the proposed
two-layer filter. Fig. 6 represents the accuracy of the first layer
filter in identifying normal flows and abnormal flows. Fig. 7

15380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 5. Performance of the attack recognizer at initial and after update on three datasets. (a) The initial confusion matrix of VeReMi. (b) The initial confusion
matrix of ToN-IoT. (c) The initial confusion matrix of EDGE-IIoT. (d) The updated confusion matrix of VeReMi (e) The updated confusion matrix of ToN-IoT. (f)
The updated confusion matrix of EDGE-IIoT.

Fig. 6.

Performance analysis of the first layer of filters.

represents the accuracy of the second layer filter in identifying
known attacks and unknown attacks. We can observe that the
first layer filter is effective in identifying anomalous flows from
mixed flows, and the second layer filter is able to filter out
unknown attacks from mixed attacks. In addition, the two-layer
filter is more sensitive to anomalous data on ToN-IoT datasets.
The reason for this phenomenon is that ToN-IoT is a smaller
dataset and has low data complexity, thus the filters generated
on the dataset perform better. Finally, it is important to note that

Fig. 7.

Performance analysis of the second layer of filters.

we use the true labels of unknown attacks to accurately evaluate
the performance of the two-layer filter.
E. Unknown Attack Clustering Results Analysis (Q3)
To answer Q3, we analyze the clustering results of unknown
attacks in this subsection. Assume that there are at maximum
10 unknown attacks in the open scenario, i.e., set κ to 10.
Then, according to the description in Algorithm 2, we perform
clustering from 2 to 10 on the obtained unknown attack data and
select the best clustering model by silhouette coefficients. The

FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH

15381

TABLE II
UNKNOWN ATTACK CLUSTERING ACCURACY

r NIDT [44]: To improve the accuracy of the intrusion

Fig. 8. Silhouette coefficient scores for the number of unknown attack types
from 2 to 10.

silhouette coefficient scores for the three datasets are shown in
Fig. 8. We can observe that VeReMi and ToN-IoT obtain the
highest silhouette coefficients when the number of unknown
attack types is set to 2, while EDGE-IIoT obtains the highest
silhouette coefficients when the number of unknown attack types
is set to 3. It corresponds exactly to the number of unknown
attack types set in Table I.
Furthermore, we analyze the accuracy of clustering and the
results are shown in Table II. We observe that the clustering
accuracy for each unknown attack is higher than 89%. It should
be mentioned that the higher the clustering accuracy, the higher
the accuracy of the updated model to identify unknown attacks.
Similarly, we used the true labels of the unknown attack data to
evaluate the unknown attack classifier.
F. Comparison With Other Methods (Q4)
To answer Q4, we compare the proposed attack recognizer
with some existing methods [23], [43], [44] in terms of precision,
recall, and F1-score. The main features of the compared schemes
are as follows:
r TLOC [43]: To detect both in-vehicle network attacks
and out-of-vehicle network attacks faced by vehicles, the
scheme proposes an intrusion detection method based on
five advanced CNN models such as VGG16, VGG19,
Xception, Inception, and InceptionResnet, and optimizes
the hyper-parameters using particle swarm.
r LIDS [23]: To detect the presence of false message attacks
in vehicular network, an LSTM-based intrusion detection
method is proposed, which utilizes the strong processing
capability of LSTM on time series to detect whether a
message sequence is abnormal or not.

detection model and reduce the false alarm rate, an intrusion detection method based on CNN and BiGRU
is proposed, which uses CNN to extract the spatial
features of the network traffic, and then uses BiGRU
to extract the time series information of the network
traffic.
The comparison results are shown in Table III, we can observe that the proposed method achieves a high performance
and outperforms these compared methods. The reason for this
result is that 1D-CNN and the multi-head attention mechanism
can effectively extract the features of network traffic and the
correlation between the features. In addition, we further analyze
the shortcomings of the compared methods. (1) The TLOC [43]
builds an intrusion detection system by integrating five advanced
CNN models, but this simple integration may result in overall
performance degradation due to the poor performance of one
of the base learners. (2) LIDS [23] utilizes the powerful timeseries processing capability of LSTM to detect network attacks
on vehicles, but LSTM suffers from gradient vanishing when
processing longer sequences, resulting in poor performance. (3)
Similarly, the reason for the poor performance of NIDT [44] is
that BiGRU has difficulty in capturing long-term dependencies
in longer sequences. Compared with these methods, the proposed attack recognizer with 1D-CNN + multi-head attention
mechanism can achieve more flexible and efficient detection
for network traffic. Specifically, 1D-CNN can effectively extract local features of network traffic, and multi-head attention
utilizes these local features to form a global information representation, which enhances the long-range dependency between
different locations and improves detection accuracy. In addition,
it is important to note that our proposed intrusion detection
system is composed of multiple modules, and each module
works individually. This implies that the detection system is
highly scalable (e.g., the attack recognizer based on 1D-CNN +
multiple-attention mechanism can be flexibly replaced with an
LSTM-based attack recognizer).
G. Comparison of Vehicle and Server Efficiency on Training
Models (Q5)
We explain why vehicles are not suitable for training attack
recognizers by comparing the efficiency of vehicle and cloud
server training models. The comparison results are shown in
Fig. 9. We can clearly observe that as the data scale increases,
the time consumed to train the model on the vehicle increases
significantly, while the time consumed on the cloud server is
relatively low. When the computational resources of a vehicle are
occupied for a long time due to updating the attack recognizer,
it is likely to affect the operation of normal safety applications,

15382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

TABLE III
COMPARISON WITH OTHER METHODS

Fig. 9. Comparison of vehicle and cloud servers in terms of model training
efficiency.

leading to an elevated probability of traffic accidents. In addition, the vehicle requires a large amount of data to complete
the update of the attack recognizer. However, the vehicle has
limited storage capacity and this training data is not important
for the usual operation of the vehicle. Therefore, vehicles are
not suitable for the task of updating attack recognizers in terms
of both computation and storage, whereas cloud servers have
more powerful computation and storage capabilities, and model
updating is more efficient and independent of the surrounding
environment.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network, which can detect known
attacks and unknown attacks present in open scenarios. More
specifically, the system mainly consists of an attack recognizer,
an unknown attack filter, an unknown attack classifier, and an
update attack recognizer. The initial attack recognizer based
on 1D-CNN and multi-headed attention mechanism is able
to accurately identify known attacks in open scenarios. The
unknown attack filter is used to filter the unknown attack data
present in the open scenario. Then, the unknown attack classifier

is used to determine how many unknown attacks are present in
the open scenario. Finally, the attack recognizer is updated using
the known attack data and the unknown attack data. The updated
attack recognizer is able to identify more network attacks. In addition, we devise a cloud-edge-vehicle model updating method
that makes the vehicle not responsible for attack recognizer
updating tasks, thus reducing the computational and storage load
on the vehicles. Our comprehensive experiments on three open
scenarios demonstrate that the proposed auto-updating vehicular
network intrusion detection system can effectively identify both
known and unknown attacks.
In the future, we will study a federated learning-based intrusion detection system for vehicles that enables joint training
of multi-area detection models, as well as the ability to detect
unknown attacks in multiple areas. Vehicular ad hoc networks
are large distributed networks, and an intrusion detection system
trained solely on network traffic in one region is prone to the
biased flow problem, resulting in a small detection range of
the model. In addition, most existing federated learning-based
intrusion detection models for vehicles rarely consider the identification of unknown attacks, leading to poor robustness of the
models. Therefore, building an open federated learning-based
vehicular intrusion detection system is the direction of our future
work.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Zhu, Y. Lv, Y. Chen, X. Wang, G. Xiong, and F.-Y. Wang, “Parallel
transportation systems: Toward IoT-enabled smart urban traffic control
and management,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 10,
pp. 4063–4071, Oct. 2020.
[2] Z. Zhang, Y. Cao, Z. Cui, W. Zhang, and J. Chen, “A many-objective
optimization based intelligent intrusion detection algorithm for enhancing
security of vehicular networks in 6G,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
no. 6, pp. 5234–5243, Jun. 2021.
[3] T. Alladi, B. Gera, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and F. R. Yu,
“DeepADV: A deep neural network framework for anomaly detection in
VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 12013–12023,
Nov. 2021.
[4] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Event-triggered interval-based
anomaly detection and attack identification methods for an in-vehicle
network,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2941–2956,
2021.
[5] M. Zang and Y. Yan, “Machine learning-based intrusion detection system
for Big Data analytics in VANET,” in Proc. IEEE 93rd Veh. Technol. Conf.,
2021, pp. 1–5.

FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH

[6] X. Li et al., “CAN bus messages abnormal detection using improved
SVDD in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 3359–3371, Mar. 2022.
[7] I. Butun, S. D. Morgera, and R. Sankar, “A survey of intrusion detection
systems in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 16,
no. 1, pp. 266–282, Firstquarter 2014.
[8] E. Benkhelifa, T. Welsh, and W. Hamouda, “A critical review of practices
and challenges in intrusion detection systems for IoT: Toward universal and resilient systems,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 3496–3509, Fourthquarter 2018.
[9] W. Li, W. Meng, and L. F. Kwok, “Surveying trust-based collaborative
intrusion detection: State-of-the-art, challenges and future directions,”
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 280–305, First Quarter 2022.
[10] S. T. Mehedi, A. Anwar, Z. Rahman, K. Ahmed, and R. Islam, “Dependable intrusion detection system for IoT: A deep transfer learning
based approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1006–1017,
Jan. 2023.
[11] M. F. Murk, N. Zahid, A. H. Sodhro, and B. Zahid, “Decentralized
smart grid system:a survey on machine learning-based intrusion detection
approaches,” in Proc. IEEE 96th Veh. Technol. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–5.
[12] R. Ramachandra, A Survey on Unknown Presentation Attack Detection for
Fingerprint, vol. 1382, Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2021, pp. 189–202.
[13] E. M. Rudd, A. Rozsa, M. Günther, and T. E. Boult, “A survey of stealth
malware attacks, mitigation measures, and steps toward autonomous open
world solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1172,
Secondquarter 2017.
[14] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detection: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198,
pp. 175–185, 2022.
[15] Y.-L. Zhang, L. Li, J. Zhou, X. Li, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Anomaly detection
with partially observed anomalies,” in Proc. Companion Proc. Web Conf.,
2018, pp. 639–646.
[16] S. Sriram, R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, and S. KP, “Network flow based
IoT botnet attack detection using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2020, pp. 189–194.
[17] J. Shi, Y. Lin, Z. Zhang, and S. Yu, “A hybrid intrusion detection system
based on machine learning under differential privacy protection,” in Proc.
IEEE 94th Veh. Technol. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[18] H. Li, E. He, C. Kuang, X. Yang, X. Wu, and Z. Jia, “An abnormal traffic
detection based on attention-guided bidirectional GRU,” in Proc. IEEE
22nd Int. Conf. Commun. Technol., 2022, pp. 1300–1305.
[19] M. M. Alani and A. I. Awad, “An intelligent two-layer intrusion detection
system for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19,
no. 1, pp. 683–692, Jan. 2023.
[20] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[21] G. O. Anyanwu, C. I. Nwakanma, J.-M. Lee, and D.-S. Kim, “RBF-SVM
kernel-based model for detecting DDoS attacks in SDN integrated vehicular network,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 140, 2023, Art. no. 103026.
[22] F. Jin, M. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Yuan, and S. Wang, “Intrusion detection on Internet of Vehicles via combining log-ratio oversampling,
outlier detection and metric learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 579, pp. 814–831,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0020025521008021
[23] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detection system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false
message detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022.
[24] J. Shu, L. Zhou, W. Zhang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Collaborative intrusion
detection for VANETs: A deep learning-based distributed SDN approach,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4519–4530, Jul. 2021.
[25] Z. Tian, C. Luo, J. Qiu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “A distributed deep
learning system for web attack detection on edge devices,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1963–1971, Mar. 2020.
[26] Z. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Xun, and J. Qin, “IdentifierIDS: A practical voltagebased intrusion detection system for real in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 661–676, 2024.
[27] J. Qin, Y. Xun, and J. Liu, “CVMIDS: Cloud–vehicle collaborative intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 321–332, Jan. 2024.
[28] Y. Xun, Z. Deng, J. Liu, and Y. Zhao, “Side channel analysis: A novel
intrusion detection system based on vehicle voltage signals,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 7240–7250, Jun. 2023.

15383

[29] E. Levy, A. Shabtai, B. Groza, P.-S. Murvay, and Y. Elovici, “CAN-LOC:
Spoofing detection and physical intrusion localization on an in-vehicle
CAN bus based on deep features of voltage signals,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 4800–4814, 2023.
[30] R. Hu and S. Xiang, “Reversible data hiding by using CNN prediction and
adaptive embedding,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44,
no. 12, pp. 10196–10208, Dec. 2022.
[31] S. Mohine, B. S. Bansod, R. Bhalla, and A. Basra, “Acoustic modality
based hybrid deep 1D CNN-BiLSTM algorithm for moving vehicle classification,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16206–16216,
Sep. 2022.
[32] H. Tan, X. Liu, B. Yin, and X. Li, “MHSA-Net: Multihead self-attention
network for occluded person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8210–8224, Nov. 2023.
[33] X. Sun, Z. Yang, C. Zhang, K.-V. Ling, and G. Peng, “Conditional Gaussian
distribution learning for open set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 13480–13489.
[34] A. Derhab, M. Belaoued, I. Mohiuddin, F. Kurniawan, and M. K. Khan,
“Histogram-based intrusion detection and filtering framework for secure
and safe in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 2366–2379, Mar. 2022.
[35] S. Fong and S. Narasimhan, “An unsupervised bayesian OC-SVM approach for early degradation detection, thresholding, and fault prediction
in machinery monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–11,
2022.
[36] D. Paul, S. Chakraborty, and S. Das, “Robust principal component analysis: A median of means approach,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
early access, Aug. 07, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3298011.
[37] Z. Li, F. Nie, J. Bian, D. Wu, and X. Li, “Sparse PCA via, p-norm
regularization for unsupervised feature selection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 5322–5328, Apr. 2023.
[38] J. Kamel et al., “VeReMi extension: A dataset for comparable evaluation
of misbehavior detection in VANETs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.,
2020, pp. 1–6.
[39] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. den Hartog,
“ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of
features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data sets,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022 .
[40] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke, “EdgeIIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of IoT and
IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
[41] A. Oseni et al., “An explainable deep learning framework for resilient
intrusion detection in IoT-enabled transportation networks,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1000–1014, Jan. 2023.
[42] P. Kumar et al., “PPSF: A privacy-preserving and secure framework using
blockchain-based machine-learning for IoT-driven smart cities,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2326–2341, Jul.–Sep. 2021.
[43] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A transfer learning and optimized CNN based
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 2774–2779.
[44] B. Cao, C. Li, Y. Song, and X. Fan, “Network intrusion detection technology based on convolutional neural network and BiGRU,” Comput. Intell.
Neurosci., vol. 2022, 2022 .

Chunyang Fan is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree with the School of Computer Science and
Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China. His research interests include vehicular network intrusion
detection and mobility management of the software
defined vehicular networks.

15384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Jie Cui (Senior Member, IEEE) was born in Henan
Province, China, in 1980. He received the Ph.D. degree from the University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, China, in 2012. He is currently a
Professor and Ph.D. supervisor with the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei. He has more than 150 scientific publications in reputable journals, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS
AND SECURITY, IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL
ELECTRONICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, academic books and international conferences. His
research interests include applied cryptography, IoT security, vehicular ad hoc
network, cloud computing security, and software-defined networking (SDN).

Hulin Jin was born in Jilin Province, China, in 1977.
He received the Ph.D. degree from Sejong University,
Seoul, South Korea, in 2013. He is currently a Professor and Ph.D. supervisor with the School of Big Data,
Anhui University, Hefei, China. He has more than 100
scientific publications. His research interests include
Big Data, computer vision, cloud networks, and cloud
computing.

Hong Zhong (Member, IEEE) was born in Anhui
Province, China, in 1965. She received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in
2005. She is currently a Professor and Ph.D. supervisor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei. She has more than
200 scientific publications in reputable journals, such
as IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL
AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE
COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS,
AND IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, academic books and international
conferences. Her research interests include applied cryptography, IoT security,
vehicular ad hoc network, cloud computing security, and software-defined
networking (SDN).

Irina Bolodurina received the Ph.D. degree from
South Ural State University, Chelyabinsk, Russia. She
is currently a Professor and Head of the Department
of Applied Mathematics, Orenburg State University,
Orenburg, Russia. She has more than 60 scientific
publications in academic journals and international
conferences which indexing in Scopus and WoS. She
has participated in more than 20 scientific projects
supported by the RFBR and other Russian scientific
programs. Her research interests include theory of
optimal control, mathematical modeling, information
analysis software, control of social and economic systems, decision support
systems, data integration, and processing.

Debiao He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in applied mathematics from the School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China, in 2009. He is currently a Professor with the
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, and the Shanghai Key Laboratory
of Privacy Preserving Computation, MatrixElements
Technologies, Shanghai, China. He has authored or
coauthored more than 100 research papers in refereed
international journals and conferences, such as IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY,
and Usenix Security Symposium. His main research interests include cryptography and information security, in particular, cryptographic protocols. He was
the recipient of the 2018 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL Best Paper Award and the
2019 IET Information Security Best Paper Award. His work has been cited
more than 10000 times at Google Scholar. He is in the Editorial Board of several
international journals, such as Journal of Information Security and Applications,
Frontiers of Computer Science, and Human-centric Computing & Information
Sciences.