IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

153

Automatic Evasion of Machine Learning-Based
Network Intrusion Detection Systems
Haonan Yan , Xiaoguang Li , Wenjing Zhang , Rui Wang, Hui Li , Member, IEEE, Xingwen Zhao,
Fenghua Li, and Xiaodong Lin , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (IDS) are often
considered effective to thwart cyber attacks. Currently, state-ofthe-art (SOTA) IDSs are mainly based on machine learning (ML)
including deep learning (DL) models, which suffer from their own
security issues, especially evasion attacks by using adversarial
examples. However, previous studies mostly focus on extracted
features rather than the traffic sample itself, and/or assume that
the adversary knows the information of the target model more
or less, which severely restricts attack feasibility in practice. In
this paper, we re-investigate this problem in a more realistic labelonly black-box scenario and propose a practical evasion attack
strategy to solve the above limitations. In this newly considered
case that the adversary morphs the traffic sample and only obtains the results accepted or rejected without other knowledge, we
successfully leverage the model extraction and transfer attack to
evade the detection. The entire attack strategy is automated and a
comprehensive evaluation is performed. Final results show that the
proposed strategy effectively evades seven typical ML-based IDSs
and one SOTA DL-based IDS with an average success rate of over
75%. We also discuss the corresponding countermeasures against
our attack, which finally highlight the need for effective defenses
against our attack.
Index Terms—Adversarial traffic example, black-box evasion
attack, model extraction attack, network intrusion detection
system, transfer attack.

I. INTRODUCTION

N

ETWORK intrusion detection systems (IDS) are utilized
as a common and effective measure to classify malicious

Manuscript received 4 June 2022; revised 7 February 2023; accepted 16
February 2023. Date of publication 22 February 2023; date of current version
12 January 2024. The work of Hui Li was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3103400,
in part by Shaanxi innovation team project under Grant 2018TD-007, and in part
by Higher Education Discipline Innovation 111 project under Grant B16037. The
work of Haonan Yan was done when he visits the School of Computer Science
at the University of Guelph. (Corresponding authors: Xiaoguang Li; Hui Li.)
Haonan Yan is with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks,
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710126, China, and also
with the School of Computer Science, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G
2W1, Canada (e-mail: yanhaonan.sec@gmail.com).
Xiaoguang Li, Rui Wang, Hui Li, and Xingwen Zhao are with the State
Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710126, China (e-mail: xg_li@outlook.com;
785340571@qq.com; lihui@mail.xidian.edu.cn; xwzhao@xidian.edu.cn).
Wenjing Zhang and Xiaodong Lin are with the School of Computer
Science, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada (e-mail:
wzhang25@uoguelph.ca; xlin08@uoguelph.ca).
Fenghua Li is with the State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academic of Sciences, Beijing 100045,
China, and also with the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China (e-mail: lfh@iie.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3247585

traffics in advance to resist cyber-attacks which cause serious
issues such as equipment halt and privacy breach [1], [2]. There
are two categories of IDS, signature-based and model-based
IDSs. The traditional signature-based IDSs can no longer meet
the increasingly complex and ever-changing network detection
requirements. Meanwhile, the excellent performance of machine
learning (ML), especially deep learning (DL) on classification
tasks allows it to be widely used as the core classifier of the IDS
to detect new and malicious traffic for network security. Admittedly, ML-based IDS is state-of-the-art in network security
detection [3], [4]. As a result, the ML-based IDS is considered
in this work.
Despite the fact that ML models are essential for the IDS,
they lack reliability because the malicious sample may be misclassified as accepted, resulting in false-negative outcomes [5].
This causes the attack to go undetected even though it actually
occurred. Besides, the emergence of adversarial examples also
exacerbates the detection error problem [6]. Motivated adversaries can add trivial perturbations into the traffic sample to make
it be misclassified by the target model, leading to an evasion
attack, which further shows the vulnerability of the ML-based
IDS[7].
The evasion attack in ML models can be divided into two
categories: white-box attacks and black-box attacks, depending
on the information about the target model mastered by the
adversary. For white-box attacks, it assumes that the adversary
knows all relevant information about the target IDS, such as
classification algorithms, model internals, and training dataset.
Some representative works [8], [9], [10] successfully implement
evasion attacks, but it is impossible for an adversary to access
all these information, so such an assumption is not reasonable
in practice. For black-box attacks, knowing the classification
scores of the output results, Xu et al. [11] automatically evade the
classifier by black-box accessing the target model. The adversary
in these works needs to know the information of the target model
more or less. However, IDS is a typical label-only black-box
system, it only outputs abnormal (attack detected) or normal (no
attack detected), and the confidence score is not output to the
adversary. This means that the only information the adversary
can obtain is whether the detection was successfully evaded or
not, without confidence scores. This practical situation makes
existing related attacks infeasible in IDS cases. To our best
knowledge, (Limitation 1:) none of the existing evasion attacks
against ML-based IDSs considers feasibility in a real-world
label-only black-box scenario.

1545-5971 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. An illustration of our evasion attack strategy. The procedure consists of three steps, i.e., step 1: model extraction, step 2: local white-box attack, and step
3: black-box transfer attack.

Although there are many related evasion attacks launched
around images [12], text [13], and malicious files[14], but these
works are not suitable for traffic scenarios. This is because
traffic samples follow a specific protocol format, and these works
cannot ensure the functionality of traffic after modification. Most
previous related works modify the traffic feature, but in practice
adversaries often need to directly provide adversarial traffic samples, which further limits the capability of adversaries. Another
reason is that, unlike images that inherently contain explicit
features that can be directly inputted into the model, traffic
features are statistical and thus cannot be modified directly.
Moreover, the obfuscation scheme in [15] does not explore
adversarial traffic samples to optimize their attack effects and
costs. Consequently, (Limitation 2:) there is still a lack of a
practical adversarial traffic sample construction method.
In this work, we propose a practical automatic black-box evasion attack against the network ML-based IDS. Compared with
previous works, we consider a more realistic evasion scenario,
where the adversary does not have any knowledge of the target
ML-based IDS, and only the output of the target ML-based IDS
is available, i.e., the adversary’s ability is consistent with that of
normal users. Our attack strategy is as follows:
Step 1. a model extraction attack is performed on the target
ML-based IDS to obtain local substitute models,
which allow adversaries to apply previous adversarial example methods with full access to the model.
For enhancing extraction efficiency, three synthetic
queries are devised in traffic scenarios to extract
the decision boundary of the target ML-based IDS.
Besides, since a single model is difficult to deal with
complex scenarios, ensemble learning is introduced
to train the local substitute model with lower number
of queries and higher data utilization.
Step 2. a local white-box attack is performed on the extracted
models to craft adversarial traffic examples. Considering statistical features of traffic, three morphing
schemes for adversarial traffic examples are devised
to replace the current common scheme of adding
noise directly, which cannot maintain the original

maliciousness and is not feasible in the traffic domain. The adversary could also formulate the attack
into an optimization problem to guide the morphing
direction.
Step 3. a black-box transfer attack is performed by using adversarial traffic samples. Due to the transferability of
adversarial examples [16], malicious traffic examples
can evade the detection of the target ML-based IDS
with a high success rate.
We implement the framework which automates the complete
attack process. Our evasion process is shown in Fig. 1. The
framework improves the two limitations aforementioned. We
also experimentally evaluate the framework and the corresponding defenses.
Contribution. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
1. Devise a practical evasion attack strategy against MLbased IDS. We propose an automatic evasion strategy for
ML-based IDS in a realistic label-only black-box scenario,
combining model extraction and transfer attack, and improve the extraction attack for traffic scenarios, which
is more practical and effective than previous adversarial
attacks for network traffic.
2. Explore the generation method of evasive traffic samples.
We provide practical adversarial traffic example morphing
methods under the constraint of network protocol format,
without any knowledge about the target model’s internal
states. Our method guarantees the evasion effectiveness
and protocol functionality of the sample. We also formulate the construction of evasive samples as an optimization
problem to guide the sample morphing and reduce the
attack cost.
3. Evaluate our attack and defense. We implement and evaluate our ML-based IDS evasion framework which automates all attacks and improvements aforementioned to
test the robustness of ML-based IDS. Experiments demonstrate that our attack is effective on seven kinds of typical ML-based models and one state-of-the-art DL-based
model. We also discuss corresponding countermeasures.

YAN et al.: AUTOMATIC EVASION OF MACHINE LEARNING-BASED NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

The final results show that they have a certain effect in defending our attacks, but each of them has great limitations,
which highlights the need for effective defense against our
attacks.
Roadmap. The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II describes the motivating scenario and its challenges;
Section III elaborates on our attack strategy, including the process of extraction and transfer attack; Section IV presents our
measurement study and experiment results; Section V introduces
three directions of defense against our proposed attack; Section
VI discusses the limitations of our current design and potential
future research; Section VII reviews related prior research and
Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
In this section, we introduce the attack scenario to illustrate the
problem of ML-based IDS in Section II-A. Then, we present our
evasion idea in Section II-B and the corresponding challenges
in Section II-C.
A. Motivating Scenario
Administrators often set up the IDS at network entrances to
detect and prevent malicious traffic timely. At present, the most
advanced detector usually takes a machine learning model as a
core classifier, which is pre-trained by extracting features from
a collection of typical malicious traffic as learning samples.
Regular malicious traffic is easily and effectively detected by
the existing ML-based IDSs [17]. Therefore, adversaries try to
evade the detection of the target ML-based IDS by adaptively
modifying the features of the malicious traffic. They can deliberately construct traffic samples to request the detector and
observe the binary response from the detector, which is also
called a label-only black-box scenario.
However, this brings the new problem that frequent malicious
probing with a single account or IP will cause the administrator
to be alert and take corresponding countermeasures such as
banning requests or updating the classification model. The work
in [18] shows that it is possible to identify the purposeful queries
for adversarial examples from the past queries. Besides, a large
number of queries increase the risk of being detected. Therefore, the adversary needs to construct effective malicious traffic
within a limited number of tests. There are two cases white-box
and black-box depending on whether the adversary knows the
internal information of the IDS. Note that the white-box scenario
has limited applicability in practice for IDS. Here, we consider
the case where the adversary relies on the least amount of
information about the target, which is the most difficult scenario
to devise evasion strategies, i.e., the adversary has no knowledge
about the internal condition of the target detector, such as model
algorithm, training datasets, or feature space.
B. Evasion Idea
In order to construct the malicious traffic example evading
detection effectively, adversaries can utilize its transferability.

155

Specifically, they perform the extraction attack and test the malicious sample on the obtained local model. Although adversaries
may not know the traffic features used in the target model,
changes in the traffic samples can lead to changes in the features
extracted by the target ML-based IDS. On the basis of this,
adversaries can constantly morph the traffic sample to change its
feature value while ensuring samples’ maliciousness, and thus
obtaining a series of variants. These traffic variants misclassified
by the local model are expected to evade the detection of the
target ML-based IDS since the local model is generated from
the ML-based IDS. As a result, the adversary can successfully
evade the detection of the IDS and current ML-based IDSs are
under the threat of this type of new evasion attack.
C. Challenges in Black-Box Evasion
When the constructed sample is misclassified by the local
substitute model, adversaries expect that sample to evade the
detection due to the transferability between the machine learning
models. Two important challenges emerge here.
The first challenge is how to make traffic samples more
transferable. The transferability works better when the extracted
model is high-fidelity to the original model, and two models
should be functionally consistent, i.e., give the same response to
the same request. However, with black-box access, the adversary
can only get a binary output of acceptance/rejection from the
detector, which greatly increases the difficulty of extraction.
Most of the previous works contain some auxiliary information
more or less, such as confidence values or model algorithms.
Nevertheless, in practice, this situation does not occur often.
The second challenge is how to provide valid malicious traffic
samples. One malicious sample is easily morphed to pass the
detection, but it is difficult to ensure that the maliciousness of the
modified packet remains. The essence of successful evasion is
that the adversary achieves misclassification by finding a blind
spot or ambiguous decision boundary of the target classifier,
where malicious samples are treated as benign samples. In the
network scenario with a limited number of accesses, previous
works [12], [13], [14] are not feasible due to the specificity of
the traffic sample under the specific protocol format.
III. PROPOSED AUTO EVASION FRAMEWORK
In this section, we propose a framework for generating malicious adversarial traffic samples to automatically evade MLbased IDS detection. First, we present synthetic queries used to
extract the ML-based IDS in Section III-A and the algorithm
selection for local substitute model training in Section III-B.
Then, we devise adversarial traffic examples using this substitute
model in Section III-C. Finally, we provide an optimization
problem to formulate the adversarial attack. The framework
automates our whole attack strategy, which is more practical
than previous works, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
As stated in Section II-A, the main strategy is to train local
substitute models for the target ML-based IDS using synthetic
datasets in the black box scenario first. The labels come from
the output of the target ML-based IDS. When adversarial traffic
examples are crafted using the substitute model, these examples

156

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

using these features. Note that our scheme is a packet-level
scheme, even if unseen ML-based IDS uses new or different
features, these features will also change with the packet change,
which means our scheme also works.
1) Query 1: Linear Query Matrix: We build a linear feature
query matrix M composed of an identity matrix and a zero-row
vector, shown as
⎤
⎡
1 0 ··· 0
⎢ 0 1 ··· 0 ⎥
⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢
,
M = ⎢ ... ... . . . ... ⎥
⎥
⎢
⎣ 0 0 ··· 1 ⎦
0 0 · · · 0 (d+1)×d

Illustration of the proposed auto evasion framework.

are expected to evade ML-based IDS detection with a high
success rate due to their transferability. The works [16], [19] also
prove the transferability of adversarial examples even among the
heterogeneous models.
A. Constructing Synthetic Queries
Adversaries need lots of labeled datasets to train the local
substitute model. The reason is that machine learning models
with good performance always require large data for training.
However, blind queries will increase the cost to adversaries, and
alert administrators after sending a large number of ineffective
malicious queries. Therefore, the most common method for
adversaries currently is to synthesize queries and treat the target
ML-based IDS as an oracle to label these queries. With this
synthetic dataset, adversaries could train the local substitute
model of the target ML-based IDS. The previous representative
data synthesis method is Jacobian-based dataset augmentation
[16]. It is essentially a reference to the idea of gradient descent.
By using this method, new sample points are obtained along
with the sign of the Jacobian matrix dimension based on the
initial point, which essentially follows the principle of gradient
descent. However, this method is not suitable for traffic because
it is limited by the selection of initial points, and it is not
stable. Moreover, the relationships among traffic features are
complex and the value of features varies greatly, which makes
the calculation of the Jacobian matrix more difficult.
Conversely, we propose three practical query construction
methods here. The first two kinds of queries are in the feature
space, the adversary could manipulate the packet to adjust its
feature to the query one, details are shown below. Formally, for
the traffic example t to be queried, its extracted traffic feature
vector is x, and thus we have
x = E(t),

(1)

where E denotes the feature extraction function. Although adversaries have no knowledge of features in the target model
under our setting and different ML-based IDSs may use different features in the training, we observe that most features in
traffic classification come from three main categories, and these
features are highly correlated. Based on our statistics, here we
summarize and select the features used frequently in previous
works shown in Table II, and construct query traffic examples

where d is the number of the common feature dimension. The
element 1 in i-th (i = 1, 2, . . . , d) row of M is used to solve
for the i-th weight coefficient of the target linear model. The
last row in M is used to solve the bias of the model. The linear
query matrix can also be denoted as


M = m1 · · · m d 0 .
For the construction of traffic example t, it is impossible to
directly construct traffic examples with extracted feature values
of 0 or 1, but we can construct examples whose features are the
minimize and maximize value to respectively approximate the
0 and 1. Once the feature dimension i is determined, we can
empirically adjust the query traffic example t in (1) to let xi
obtain the extreme value and other feature dimensions keep the
same. For example, when we try to extract the coefficients of the
packet length in the target model, we can make the constructed
traffic example length 40 or 1480 bytes, and the feature value
after feature extraction is the minimum or maximum, which is
approximately 0 or 1 in the linear query matrix.
The principle of the linear query matrix is solving equations
by linear algebra. It can extract the parameters of the target model
with the least theoretical cost and 100% successful rate, i.e., it
copies the target model exactly. It can run quite fast as it only
needs m+1 queries and calculations. The only weakness is that
it only works on linear models.
2) Query 2: Feature Space Traversal: Considering realworld scenarios, the adversary can prejudge the value range of
each feature of the traffic sample. For example, the packet length
of each flow ranges from 40 to 1480 bytes. Thus, the adversary
can construct samples by traversing each feature space according
to the arithmetic sequence, then shuffling samples in each feature
column, and concatenating all feature columns into the synthetic
dataset finally. Formally, suppose D is the value range of one
sample’s feature, and the size of the synthetic dataset is n, the
traversal interval ρ should be
ρ = D/(n − 1).
After the feature value is determined, the traffic example can
be constructed by the adversary’s manipulation. Note that many
features are interconnected, for example, the length of the payload and the length of the packet, it is impossible to increase the
payload but decrease the packet’s length. Therefore, we divide

YAN et al.: AUTOMATIC EVASION OF MACHINE LEARNING-BASED NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

features into three categories from three independent dimensions, i.e., length-related features, the number of packets, and
time-related features, and only traverse representative features
of these three dimensions in our experiments. The construction
method of the traffic sample is the same as the one in Query 1.
The ML-based IDS’s “knowledge”, i.e., its malicious traffic
detection capability, is derived from the training dataset. Thus,
the training dataset of one effective ML-based IDS should comprehensively cover the value space of the feature as much as
possible. This type of query can ensure that the ML-based IDS’s
training dataset is always a subset of the synthetic dataset so that
the local substitute model trained with the synthetic dataset will
have high fidelity to the target model.
3) Query 3: Dataset Migration: In this work, we use typical traffic datasets as the basement queries. The representative dataset selection method is also applied to reduce the
number of queries for the target model extraction. Excellent ML-based IDSs have the basic competency requirement
that performs well on typical attack traffic datasets (e.g.,
CIC-IDS2017 [20]). The traffic features of the same kind
of network attack are basically identical, even in different
datasets. Besides, the training dataset of one excellent MLbased IDS always contains many normal attack data, which
are similar to these typical attack datasets. Even if the target
model never has access to these typical datasets, these datasets
can still help determine the decision boundary of the target
model.
After queries are sent to the target model, adversaries use the
accepted or rejected feedback as labels to construct the training
dataset for the local substitute model. The adversary constructs
the query dataset using the 3 synthetic query methods aforementioned. These queries are generated considering simplicity and
efficiency, and the adversary can flexibly adjust the proportion
of three queries to request the target model simultaneously
depending on the scenario.
B. Extracting Detection Model
Constructing malicious examples with full knowledge of
the model parameters can significantly improve the adversarial
properties of examples. Therefore, it is helpful to construct a
local substitute model pertinently. Note that the ultimate goal of
the model extraction is to train a substitute model approximating
the decision boundary of the target model rather than a more
accurate model.
1) Algorithm Selection: In black-box scenarios, adversaries
have no knowledge about the model algorithm of the target
ML-based IDS. Nevertheless, many existing studies, such as
knowledge distillation [21], have shown that substitute models
can have high fidelity for the complex structured source models.
For instance, one complex deep neural network model can be
functionally replaced by a well-structured logistic regression or
decision tree model [22]. Therefore, we run several different
machine learning algorithms, as shown in experiments. After a
large range of experiments, the final substitute models can reach
more than 80% fidelity of the target model, which is enough to
perform subsequent attacks.

157

2) Local Model Training: The proper choice of local training
model can improve data utilization. The basic idea to select
the algorithm of the substitute model is by utilizing the crossvalidation method. The model with the best performance is
chosen for a later test. To further improve the consistency of the
local model, we introduce ensemble learning and implement it
with mature autoML technology [23]. The reason is that different
models usually have different transfer rates for the same target
model. One single model is difficult to cope with different target
models and its transfer rate is low. Besides, using synthetic
datasets from the target model, ensemble learning makes the
extracted decision boundary be more towards the target model.
The work [24] also shows that using an ensemble of local models
can improve the transfer rate of adversarial examples.
In our framework, the adversary can automatically choose the
current best model combination, feature preprocessing steps,
and also set their respective hyper-parameters, according to
their performance on the synthetic dataset. Local models based
on ensemble learning yields the highest transfer rate in our
experiment, which actively demonstrates that local ensemble can
steal the decision boundaries of the target model to the maximum
extent possible, nearly the same decision on the new input as the
oracle. We also validate the performance of ensemble models
and compare the transfer rate in Section IV-B.
C. Devising Evasive Traffic Example
ML-based traffic classification schemes usually use the statistical features of traffic sessions as the classification basis. The
basic unit, session, is composed of all packets in one complete
connection. After statistical analysis, we found that network traffic features mainly come from three dimensions: length, number,
and time. Though adversaries do not know the features used in
target ML-based IDS, malicious tampering can be performed
during the transformation from traffic to features by modifying
the packet length/number and traffic duration. Furthermore, as
long as the adversary ensures that modified packets still conform
to the original protocol standard, the functionality of modified
packets will not be compromised. Based on this, we provide
three methods to modify the extracted features by morphing the
malicious traffic sample to evade detection.
1) Methods of Morphing Traffic: Network flows are first
preprocessed into features, and then these features are used
by machine learning models to classify the traffic. Therefore,
malicious tampering can be performed during the transformation
from network flow to features. Currently, most network features
are extracted mainly from three directions: the length of packets,
the number of packets, and the lasting of the network connection.
Based on this, we give three corresponding methods to change
the extracted features by morphing the malicious traffic packet
to evade the detection. The structure of packet is shown in Fig. 5.
• Method 1: Modifying length-related features. The payload
length of the network traffic packet can be modified by adding
meaningless characters. Specifically, we choose to add the character 0xFF in this method. Similarly, an adversary can add
meaningless characters to change the length of the malicious
packet. It should be noted that the length of the modified payload

158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 3. Method 1: adding payload length. The length-related features are increased by injecting meaningless characters such as 0xFF into the original traffic
packet.

Fig. 4. Method 2: increasing packet numbers. The number of packets in one session can be increased by repeating the request multiple times. For example,
adding characters 0x2a 0x32 (x2) into the request file packet, i.e., request files twice, yields twice response packets.

must be less than the maximum transmission payload size in a
single network-layer transaction (e.g., 1460 bytes for IPv4 TCP
protocol). Our experiments show that adding up to 300 0xFF
characters can change the length-related features of the traffic
flow to be detected, and thus causing the flow to be misclassified
by the classification model. Fig. 3 shows the process of method
1.
• Method 2: Increasing the number of packets. The number
of packets contained in one complete session is often applied
as an important feature in the field of network classification. An
adversary can try to change this feature by splitting the requested
content into more parts or by repeating some certain content to
send, which is shown in Fig. 4. Note that the timestamp and
sequence number of the modified packets are in accordance with
the normal distribution, which will not be filtered out as the
retransmission packet. This method is effective for classifiers
that rely on features related to the number of packets. Fig. 4
shows the process of method 2.
• Method 3: Modifying time-related features. A considerable
fraction of flow features are time-related, so the adversary can
control the duration of the entire session or the interval between
packets to change these features, e.g., by waiting an extra time
before sending packets, to evade the detection, which is shown
in Fig. 6. It should be noted that a long interval will lead to a
connection timeout. Our experiments show that for some simple

Fig. 5. The packet structure. The length-related modifications are mainly in
the payload.

classifiers, it is effective for the adversary to add only 0.001ms
of delay before each packet is sent. Fig. 6 shows the process of
method 3.
Note that though the adversary does not know the feature
dimensions used by the target model, when the traffic example
is perturbed by the three methods mentioned above, the features
extracted by the target model will also change. We also verify this
statement in our experiments. Meanwhile, these perturbations
are designed in terms of the overall statistical features of the traffic flow rather than individual key packets of malicious traffic or
fields of its payload. They are concentrated on three macroscopic
dimensions of length, time, and number, and will not affect the
functionality of the packet. Therefore, in the case where the
perturbations all follow the network protocol specification, the
original maliciousness of the modified traffic sample will not be

YAN et al.: AUTOMATIC EVASION OF MACHINE LEARNING-BASED NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

Fig. 6.

159

Method 3: Changing interval time. The time-related features are increased by adding a delay, e.g., 0.001 ms, before each packet is sent from the client.

lost. Based on this principle, many features of other dimensions
can also work after being modified, which will not be discussed
due to space limitations.
2) Analysis of Adversarial Traffic Examples: Previous research on malicious sample construction is mainly studied in
two directions. The first one is beyond the knowledge of the
classifier. The classification model does not use any malicious
sample for iterative training, resulting in the classifier being
unable to determine the sample based on the “experience”, which
creates a blind spot. The second one is the classification error.
Malicious samples are misjudged due to errors in the classifier’s
decision boundary, which can be exploited by the adversary to
evade detection. Essentially, both methods are expected to let the
target model misclassify malicious traffic samples to achieve the
evasion attack.
In the transformation from traffic to features, adversaries can
maliciously tamper with samples. Although trivial changes in
individual features may play a limited role, adding them together
can cause large changes in the output of ML-based IDS. In fact,
the more accurate classifiers tend to require more features, and
thus it is easier to craft samples to evade their detection. The
methods proposed in Section III-C1 follow all three directions
and aim to change the features of traffic by morphing packets to
evade detection.
D. Local Transfer Attack
Considering that random morphing could yield some successful examples yet bring massive computation cost [25],
here we formulate the morphing procedure as an optimization
problem to present the specific modification direction with less
cost. Adversaries can perform the adversarial example on the
white-box local substitute model to find the modified traffic
which is misclassified by the target model because the transferability holds between the local model and the target model.
However, existing adversarial example generation schemes do
not guarantee the protocol functionality of the generated traffic
since the traffic packet is constrained by network protocols and
cannot be modified or generated in a manner like the image.

Therefore, we directly morph the real-world malicious traffic
packet using three methods in Section III-C1, which will not
reduce the maliciousness of the traffic.
We first present the optimization problem used to craft adversarial features on the local substitute model. Then we show
how to get the adversarial traffic example from the adversarial
features by three methods in Section III-C1.
1) Optimization Problem: Given a legitimate input x and its
ground truth y = foracle (x), the goal of local transfer attack is
to find an instance x satisfying foracle (x ) = y by morphing x
with perturbation δ, i.e., x = x + δ. Formally, we train k local
substitute models denoted as ki=1 αi fi (x), where αi are the
ensemble weights and ki=1 αi = 1. We can approximate the
local transfer attack to solve the following optimization problem:
k

argmin −L
x

αi fi (x ) , y

+ λd(x, x ),

(2)

i=1

where L is to measure the distance between the prediction from
local models and the ground truth from the target oracle, d is a
metric to quantify the distortion between two input examples,
λ is a constant which is often set empirically. Besides, L we
choose here is
L(xi , xj ) = log(1 − xi · xj ),

(3)

which is shown effective in many previous works [12], [24]. The
distortion d between the original example and the adversarial
example are calculated by


2

x(i) − x(i) /N ,
(4)
d (x , x) =
i

where x(i) denotes the i-th feature value of the original example
x, x(i) denotes the one of the adversarial example, and N
denotes the number of the feature dimensionality. This is used
to measure the modification strength in adversarial examples.
In this work, adversaries aim to evade the ML-based IDS
detection, thus only considering the type of non-targeted attack
is enough in this scenario. The targeted attack can be derived

160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE I
TRAFFIC DATASETS

TABLE II
THE EXTRACTED FEATURES USED FOR ML-BASED IDS TRAINING

similarly by replacing the y of the loss function in (2) with target
label y  .
2) Solution: The optimization problem (2) can be solved by
the iteration training. In the iteration procedure, the adversary
fixes parameters of the local model and continuously adjusts the
adversarial feature x to let the local model misclassify. The direction of adjustment keeps the same as the direction of gradient
descent. The adjustment directly acts on x . This process can
also directly use some existing adversarial example algorithms,
such as PGD [26], to find the final adversarial feature. When
reaching the maximum number of iterations set previously or
evading the model’s detection, the x is output. Then, the
adversary perturbs the traffic t to find the corresponding x ,
which is shown as
x = E(t + p),

(5)

where E denotes the feature extraction function, t is the traffic
example to be morphed, and p is added perturbations. The perturbation methods in Section III-C1 change linearly. Consequently,
t = t + p is the constructed adversarial traffic sample. Note that
the adversary can flexibly select some or all feature dimensions
of x to participate in perturbation according to the feasibility
of dimensional modification.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we reproduce malicious traffic identification
models and use our framework to evade the detection of MLbased IDSs.
A. Building Target Model
1) Datasets: The malicious traffic detection model monitors
traffic to and from all devices in real-time for malicious activity
or policy violations We launch a variety of attacks, such as
Denial of Service attack, Man-in-the-Middle attack in LAN.
These attacks are the major network threat currently. We also
collect normal traffic including HTTP, FTP, chat, etc. Then, we
collect and classify these attack flows which are intercepted from
multiple collection stations during different periods, as shown
in Table I.
Furthermore, we reconstruct the automatic traffic filtering
and feature extraction algorithm. Forty representative features,
which are very effective and commonly used in traffic classification [27], [28], [29], are selected to form a set of feature
vectors for the following experiment. The details of features can
be found in Table II. Note that adversaries have no knowledge of
these models, including model algorithms and traffic features.

Fig. 7. ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve of Logistic Regression
based IDS.

2) Model Algorithm: Here we elaborate on the details of
ML-based IDS training. Seven common machine learning models are implemented as ML-based IDSs using the scikit-learn
framework, which is very mature and widely used in real-world
scenarios nowadays [30]. We first show the performance of MLbased IDSs. We split the dataset into 70% for the training set and
30% for the testing set. Each test is run 10 times with randomly
shuffled datasets and the results are averaged. For example, the
LR model uses the BFGS algorithm for convergence and iterates
up to 50,000 times. As a result, the average overall accuracy
of the LR model is 98.10%, consuming 52.4s on average. The
average log loss of the LR model is 0.1070. The AUC of the LR
model is 0.9810. Fig. 7 shows the ROC curve of the LR model.
B. Extracting Target model
1) Synthetic Queries: We reproduce three synthesis queries
in Section III-A. Let n denotes the number of samples in the
target model’s training dataset, we set the budget of synthetic
query from 0.2n to 2.0n to test its performance. The budget
denotes the number of training examples needed to construct
the local substitute model, which is a very important metric to
evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method. For query 3
(dataset migration), CIC-IDS-2017 datasets are used to request
the target model. For query 1 (linear query matrix), the adversary
constructs traffic examples whose extracted features are extreme
values. For example, when the payload of the constructed example is empty, its length-related features are all minimum.
We also choose the most typical linear model Logistic Regression as the target model to verify our statement in Section
III-A1. We divide the 40 features into 4 groups (shown in Table
II) according to their importance and use each group separately
to construct the linear query matrix to query the target LR model.
The results are shown in Fig. 8. Although the importance of

YAN et al.: AUTOMATIC EVASION OF MACHINE LEARNING-BASED NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

161

TABLE III
THE ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT LOCAL SUBSTITUTE MODELS EXTRACTED FROM THE TARGET ML-BASED IDS USING DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS

Fig. 8. Construct 4 kinds of linear query matrixes we proposed based on 4
feature groups in Table II to extract target logistic regression based IDS. The
more the number of queries, the higher the accuracy of the extracted LR model.

group (d) features is the lowest, from the results we can see that
our method is still able to use (d) to achieve good extraction
results when the number of queries is sufficient, i.e., up to 40.
Table III summarizes the the query experiment results. All
results are averaged over 10 runs to obtain more stable results.
Testing on different target models, we find query 1 is effective for
the linear model and obtains the exact parameters of the target
model with the minimum number of queries, which is consistent
with the effect of model extraction attack in [31]. However, query
1 works poorly for nonlinear models, the results obtained from its
queries mainly focus on one specific category. For example, all
the queries from query 1 are judged as Network Flooding Attack
type by the SVM model with confidence above 0.89. Query 2
and query 3 both work well. When the query budget is 0.2n, the
accuracy of the extracted local model is basically usable. When
the budget reaches 0.6n, the accuracy of most local models is
above 0.85. Continuing to increase the budget, the effect is not

obvious, so we do not continue to list the results due to the space
limitation.
2) Ensemble Learning: We let the adversary use these seven
algorithms respectively to retrain the model on the synthetic
dataset. The accuracy of local substitute models on synthetic
datasets is also shown in Table III.
The ensemble model is trained locally using autoML technology [23]. The ensemble learning is able to make full use
of the synthetic dataset, and generate models with the highest
accuracy, which actively demonstrates that the extracted model
fits well with the decision boundary of the target model and is
more conducive to transfer attack. At the same time, the random
forest model, one of the representatives of ensemble learning
in the results, works better than a single decision tree model,
which also shows that ensemble learning works well. The only
disadvantage of the ensemble model is the attack overhead and
complexity because an optimal combination of algorithms is
needed to search, but it is still worthwhile as the transfer success
rates are improved.
C. Crafting Adversarial Example
The specific model combination in the local ensemble is
determined by the autoML default selector. Since the ensemble
model provides a higher transfer rate against target models than
one single model, to be consistent, we use this configuration in
all our experiments attacking target ML-based IDSs.
100 unseen traffic examples are randomly sampled from each
of the 4 malicious classes for 400 total examples and then are
used to find adversarial examples. White-box PGD attacks are
performed on the ensemble loss with 100 iterations to provide the
direction of estimated gradients for the example perturbing. We
choose  = 0.3 following the same setting in [26]. Finally, these
examples are tested on the black-box target model to measure

162

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE IV
THE PERFORMANCE OF ADVERSARIAL MALICIOUS TRAFFIC EXAMPLES ON THE LOCAL SUBSTITUTE MODEL AND THE TARGET ML-BASED IDS

the evading performance. Besides, for method 1, the maximum
length of added characters is set to 300, and the average distortion
is 2.3818. For method 2, the maximum number of added traffic
packets is set to half of the packet number of one session and the
average distortion is 2.4719. For method 3, the increase interval
is set to 0.001ms and the average distortion is 0.9136.
1) Metrics: Three metrics, success rate, transf er rate and
evade rate, are used to evaluate the effect of crafting example.
Let P refers to the number of examples provided by the adversary, L refers to the number of examples misclassified by the
local substitute model, and T refers to the number of examples
misclassified by the target model. Note P = 400. We denote
success rate = L/P, which is used to evaluate the effect of the
adversarial example against the local model. transf er rate =
T /L, which is used to evaluate the effect of the adversarial
example against the target model. evade rate = T /P, which is
used to evaluate the performance of our framework and is our
primary metric.
Table IV summarizes the evading experiment results. All
results are averaged over 10 runs to obtain more stable results.
From the results, the added perturbations allow the adversarial
malicious traffic example to evade the detection of different
target ML-based IDSs with at most 80% probability after test on
the local substitute model. The perturbation added by method
3 is less than others, so the performance of method 3 is low,
but its evade rate can be improved by increasing the perturbation. In addition, the high evade rate often comes with high
success rate. The reason is that the better the classification
effect of the model, the more dependent it is on the features. High
success rate indicates that the model has a poor classification
effect on the disturbed samples, so the evasion performance of
the framework is better. Besides, the results also show the generalization ability of the proposed attack, which works for different
types of traffic classification models. The transfer performance
is also consistent with the findings in [24].
D. Attacking Stronger DL-Based IDS
Previous evaluations are all based on various typical network
ML-based IDSs, to illustrate the performance of our evasion
attack more effectively, here we reproduced the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) published network IDS Kitsune [4]. Kitsune is an unsupervised DL-based IDS, using an ensemble of autoencoders
to differentiate between normal and abnormal network traffic
samples. We train Kitsune by its published traffic datasets and its
default parameters. In this work, Kitsune learns the normal traffic

Fig. 9. Against the web application attack, the detection performance of
the SOTA network DL-based IDS. Each dot denotes one traffic sample to be
detected. The test samples are input after 43min. A higher RMSE score reflects
a higher anomaly, i.e., a malicious sample. The yellow and red dots indicate
the sample is detected as the web application attack traffic packages with high
anomalies.

patterns and behaviors from 70,000 benign traffic instances.
The test datasets consist of 15,000 benign examples and 15,000
malicious examples.
Kitsune outputs the root mean squared errors (RMSE) score
to indicate the degree of abnormality of the traffic example.
Concretely, in this work, Kitsune is trained to fit the benign
output score to log-normal distribution for a more obvious
distinction as the same setting in [4]. The malicious example
with a very low occurring probability will easily raise the alert.
The anomaly scores for each traffic sample in test datasets are
generated from KitNET (Kitsune’s core algorithm) and shown
by dots after 43min in Fig. 9 and 10. We also adjust the packet
timestamp in chronological order for a better display effect.

YAN et al.: AUTOMATIC EVASION OF MACHINE LEARNING-BASED NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

163

TABLE V
FUNCTIONAL VERIFICATION OF MORPHING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC. THE
COMPARISON RESULTS DEMONSTRATE THE TRAFFIC MORPHED BY OUR
METHODS STILL RESULTS IN SUCCESSFUL ATTACKS

and made them conform to the protocol format, here we verify
the attack effectiveness of the morphed attack traffic compared
with the selected original attack traffic without morphing.
The results are shown in Table V. Different attacks have
their corresponding attack effectiveness measurements. From
the comparison, we can see that our methods can preserve the
malicious functionality of the morphed traffic. The reason for a
few failed cases is that the increase of feature value in the time
dimension leads to the reduction of attack efficiency, which is
also consistent with the finding in Section IV-C that method 3
modifies the time-related features with a lower success rate than
the other two methods.
V. COUNTERMEASURES

Fig. 10. Against the DDoS attack, the detection performance of the SOTA
Network DL-based IDS. Each dot denotes one traffic sample to be detected.
The test samples are input after 43min. A higher RMSE score reflects a higher
anomaly, i.e., a malicious sample. The yellow and red dots indicate the sample
is detected as the DDoS attack traffic packages with high anomalies.

The web application attack and DDoS attack are involved in
this test. The results shown in Figs. 9(a) and 10(a) demonstrate
the detection effectiveness of Kitsune. The yellow and red dots
indicate the corresponding abnormal traffic examples, with a
high probability of being malicious samples.
Then CIC-IDS2017 datasets are used to perform the model
extraction attack and ensemble learning technology is used to
train the local substitute models. We generate the adversarial
web application attack and DDoS examples using our proposed
framework and take 5,000 locally successful samples to test.
The evasive effectiveness is shown in Figs. 9(b) and 10(b). For
the DDoS attack, most of the adversarial examples generated by
our framework evade the detection of the DL-based IDS. For
the web application attack, there are still partial samples with a
higher probability to be detected, as shown by the yellow dots
in Fig. 9(b). These are mainly password brute force packages.
Due to the need to repeatedly send packages for testing, the
traffic features of modified examples are still far from the normal
web application traffic packages, but the RMSE gap has been
significantly shortened compared with that before modification.
E. Verifying Morphed Traffic
Though the attack effectiveness of evasive traffic example is
ensured in our construction methods, since our morphing methods have not compromised the functionality of modified packets

The attack proposed in this paper can be defended from two
perspectives. One is to defend against the model extraction
attack, and the other is to improve model robustness. There
are also some other defenses such as gradient masking, which
prevents the adversary from getting useful gradients to construct
the adversarial examples directly. However, such defenses are
not effective for the black-box attack used in this work, since the
adversary can still obtain the gradient direction from the local
substitute model based on the transferability of the adversarial
examples.
A. Defending Against Model Extraction Attack
Transfer attacks rely on the local substitute model extracted
from the target model. Thus, the defender can protect the model
from being extracted. However, directly restricting the service
of the target model will affect the benefit of the service provider.
It is also ineffective against collusion attacks. Besides, note that
model extraction attack cannot be fully defended, the defender
can only consider increasing the cost of model extraction or
reducing the accuracy of the extracted model. Currently, existing
defense schemes are mainly based on perturbation and monitoring, both of which have made good progress. The scheme in
[32] that combines the above two schemes is also worthy to be
adopted by defenders. Here we do not repeat the verification of
this kind of defense.
B. Improving Model Robustness
In addition to improving the model’s ability to detect adversarial example inputs, it is also feasible to improve the robustness
of the model, which is also known as adversarial learning.
This kind of method puts malicious samples into the model
training dataset in advance. The model is exposed to as many
adversarial examples as possible during the training phase to

164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 11. The Evade Rate of Logistic Regression (LR) and Neural Network
(NN) models trained on datasets containing adversarial samples. The lower the
evade rate, the better the robustness of the model after adversarial training.

correct the learned decision boundary. This scheme significantly
improves the robustness of the model and effectively counteracts
adversarial sample attacks.
Here we evaluate the effectiveness of adversarial training
against our proposed evasion strategy. First, we add adversarial
traffic examples into the training datasets of the target model.
Examples are generated by our strategy and used to build a robust
classifier in the ML-based IDS. Then, we repeat our evasion
strategy against the robust model, comparing it with the normal
model without adversarial examples in the training dataset. Due
to the space, we select two representative models LR and NN
to illustrate the robustness improvement. The results of other
models are quite similar.
From Fig. 11, we can see that adversarial training is effective
to improve the robustness of ML-based IDSs and defense against
our proposed evasion attack. The reason is that adversarial examples make the decision boundary of models more complicated
in a robust way. For the model, more new examples increase
the model’s “knowledge” and reduce the effective space of
adversarial example’s features. From another angle, our work
can also be used to generate adversarial traffic examples and
feed them into the training dataset of the deployed IDS model
to improve model robustness.
Another interesting observation is that we find adversarial
training changes models’ feature importance distribution, which
decreases the classification accuracy of normal traffic, shown
in Fig. 12. We verify this conjecture by the feature weight of
models. The results show in Fig. 13. Models’ features after
adversarially trained are concentrated in key features, and the
feature distribution of models whose training set without adversarial examples is relatively noisy. For the limited capacity
model like LR, adversarial training improve the robustness
against adversarial traffic examples at the expense of accuracy
on normal examples, which is a disadvantage of the method.
Another disadvantage is that when the model encounters the
adversarial example not in the adversarial training datasets, it
still cannot perform effective defense.
C. Adjust Feature Dimension of Model
Adversarial examples are related to feature dimensions in
models. Feature selection and reduction [33], [34] can be used

Fig. 12. The use Accuracy of Logistic Regression (LR) and Neural Network
(NN) models trained on datasets containing adversarial examples. The higher the
accuracy, the better the model performance of the model, and the less affected
after adversarial training.

to find dimensions that are more susceptible to perturbation,
then reduce corresponding feature weights or directly remove
vulnerable features to prevent the evasion attack. This kind of
method can limit the generation of adversarial examples to a
certain extent as it is more difficult for adversaries with fewer
available features and more perturbation needed to add. However, the work in [35] shows that limiting the number of features
that the adversary can control does not completely prevent this
type of attack, even if 5 random features can give adversarial
samples a 50% success rate. Besides, reducing some vulnerable
feature dimensions that may also work for normal examples will
result in a decrease in accuracy, which is unacceptable for tasks
requiring extremely high classification accuracy. Here we also
do not repeat the verification of this kind of defense.
VI. DISCUSSION
The experiment results demonstrate that an adversary using
our framework has a very high probability to evade various MLbased IDSs. The results are in line with our expectations. The
black-box scenario considered throughout this work is also very
realistic, which fully reflects the threat of this security issue. In
addition, ML-based malicious traffic classification models are
heavily dependent on the traffic sample features, so we make
the malicious traffic samples plausible by morphing them to
change their features. Finally, the modified sample can evade
the detection of ML-based IDSs while maintaining the original
maliciousness.
Our work is a specific application of adversarial examples in
the network traffic classification scenario. Almost all previous
works focus on the domain of image classification. Unlike images, which inherently contain explicit features, network traffic
example follows a certain protocol format and its features are
statistical. Therefore, these attack schemes for images, such as
[16], cannot be used directly in the traffic scenario. In addition,
the current query generation schemes for images, such as [36],
are also ineffectual on network traffic. The reason is that network
traffic needs to comply with protocol standards without losing
functionality, otherwise, it will be filtered by the ML-based IDS
directly. To solve the above problem, we devise a specialized
generation scheme for synthetic queries with low cost and good

YAN et al.: AUTOMATIC EVASION OF MACHINE LEARNING-BASED NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

Fig. 13.

165

The distribution change of top 11 feature weight in normal model and robust model after adversarial training.

TABLE VI
THE COMPARISON RESULTS OF THE REALISTIC CONDITIONS MET OR NOT

effect of training substitute model, which also improves the efficiency of traffic classification model extraction. The ensemble
learning we used in model extraction does work better than a
single model, which is consistent with the findings in [24].
• Limitations. There are two limitations of this work. First,
traditional payload-based IDSs are not considered in this work.
This kind of IDSs’ rules are usually provided by protocol analysis and deep packet inspection (DPI). The main consideration in
this paper is the ML-based solution. Second, a high false-positive
model or white-list model will significantly weaken the attack.
However, this type of model is less commonly used in reality.
• Future Work. In future work, we plan to achieve more accurate and lower cost of model extraction and evasion detection
and apply the adversarial example to more problems in the field
of traffic besides the ML-based IDS. Although transfer attack is
easy to use and effective, there are some more advanced attacks
[37], [38], which have lower attack cost and are less likely to
be detected, so these attacks will later be introduced into our
framework to improve the efficiency of the attack. Moreover,
the work of this paper belongs to the untargeted attack, which
aims at expecting malicious traffic to be considered benign
by the target model and evade detection. For targeted attacks,
its goal is to make the model output a specific target class,
rather than just misclassification. Targeted attacks have more
application scenarios, but their transfer loss is high, which is
more challenging.

VII. RELATED WORK
Machine learning is widely used to solve security issues in
the field of network traffic. As the core component of network
security systems, IDSs also adopt machine learning classification models to monitor and discover malicious traffic in recent
years. However, many evasion attacks [43], [44] against IDS do
not consider ML models. As a result, this work focuses on constructing adversarial traffic examples to evade ML-based IDSs.
Some works [8], [39], [40], [45] assume that the adversary
knows more or less information about the target model, such as
similar training datasets, model structure, or confidence scores
of the results. To be more realistic, this work strictly restricts
the black-box experimental scenario, where the adversary only
obtains the label when accessing the model.
Some works do not consider the feasibility and cost of adversarial traffic samples. [41] directly modify the feature of
traffic example, which is not feasible in practice. [15], [42],
[46] randomly modify or/and obfuscate the traffic sample to
evade the detection, resulting in low attack efficiency and high
cost. Besides, two works also adopt the transfer attack to evade
the detector. Papernot et al. [16] improves the synthetic query
by using reservoir sampling [47] and Jacobian-based dataset
augmentation techniques. Li et al. [36] uses an active learning
strategy to further reduce the number of queries. However, these
schemes cannot be applied to this problem as neither their
synthetic query nor adversarial example construction scheme

166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2024

is suitable for network traffic whose features are statistics. This
paper proposes the traffic example crafting method and performs
the transfer attack to address these two limitations. We also make
a comparison of our work and previous works in Table VI, which
shows that our work meet the most realistic conditions and is
more practical in the real environment.
There are also some works to improve the transferability of
adversarial samples. Liu et al. [24] propose novel ensemblebased approaches to improve the accuracy of transfer attacks.
Dong et al. [48] propose momentum-based iterative algorithms
to boost adversarial attacks. They also propose a translationinvariant attack method to generate more transferable adversarial
examples in [49]. Xie et al. [50] improve the transferability
of adversarial examples by applying random transformations
to inputs at each iteration. This work mainly focuses on how
to successfully apply adversarial sample techniques into traffic
classification scenarios, these improvements can be taken into
account in future work for specific traffic problems.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigate a restricted real label-only
black-box scenario for the adversary to evade the detection
of intrusion detection. The adversarial example technique is
introduced into the field of malicious traffic identification to
successfully implement the evasion attack. At the same time,
three methods for constructing traffic query samples and three
methods for generating adversarial malicious traffic examples
are given to strengthen the extraction and evasion effect. Ensemble learning is also introduced to improve the extraction
effect. Besides, although the main evaluations are on intrusion
detection tasks, the proposed framework has wider applications
to other learning-based systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the editor and all the anonymous reviewers for their
valuable guidance and constructive feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] J.-M. Flaus and J. Georgakis, “Machine learning based intrusion detection
approaches for industrial IoT control systems: A review,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Ind. Internet Things Smart Manuf., Sep. 2018.
[2] A.-R. Sadeghi, C. Wachsmann, and M. Waidner, “Security and privacy challenges in industrial internet of things,” in Proc. 52nd
ACM/EDAC/IEEE Des. Automat. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[3] S. Gulghane, V. Shingate, S. Bondgulwar, G. Awari, and P. Sagar,
“A survey on intrusion detection system using machine learning algorithms,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Innov. Data Commun. Technol. Appl., 2019,
pp. 670–675.
[4] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. 25th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, California, USA: The Internet Society, Feb. 18-21, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://dblp.org/rec/conf/ndss/MirskyDES18.bib
[5] F. Hachmi, K. Boujenfa, and M. Limam, “Enhancing the accuracy of
intrusion detection systems by reducing the rates of false positives and false
negatives through multi-objective optimization,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage.,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 93–120, 2019.
[6] L. Huang, A. D. Joseph, B. Nelson, B. I. Rubinstein, and J. D. Tygar,
“Adversarial machine learning,” in Proc. 4th ACM Workshop Secur. Artif.
Intell., 2011, pp. 43–58.
[7] M. A. Ayub, W. A. Johnson, D. A. Talbert, and A. Siraj, “Model evasion
attack on intrusion detection systems using adversarial machine learning,”
in Proc. IEEE 54th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., 2020, pp. 1–6.

[8] M. J. Hashemi, G. Cusack, and E. Keller, “Towards evaluation of NIDSs
in adversarial setting,” in Proc. 3rd ACM CoNEXT Workshop Big DAta,
Mach. Learn. Artif. Intell. Data Commun. Netw., 2019, pp. 14–21.
[9] M. Sharif, S. Bhagavatula, L. Bauer, and M. K. Reiter, “Accessorize
to a crime: Real and stealthy attacks on state-of-the-art face recognition,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2016,
pp. 1528–1540.
[10] N. Šrndić and P. Laskov, “Practical evasion of a learning-based classifier:
A case study,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2014, pp. 197–211.
[11] W. Xu, Y. Qi, and D. Evans, “Automatically evading classifiers:
A case study on PDF malware classifiers,” in Proc. 23rd Annu.
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, California, USA:
The Internet Society, Feb. 21-24, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://wp.internetsociety.org/ndss/wpcontent/uploads/sites/25/2017/
09/automatically-evadingclassifiers.pdf
[12] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 39–57.
[13] J. Li, S. Ji, T. Du, B. Li, and T. Wang, “Textbugger: Generating
adversarial text against real-world applications,” in Proc. 26th
Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, California,
USA: The Internet Society, Feb. 24-27, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/textbuggergeneratingadversarial-text-against-real-world-applications/
[14] H. Dang, Y. Huang, and E.-C. Chang, “Evading classifiers by morphing in
the dark,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017,
pp. 119–133.
[15] I. Homoliak, M. Teknos, M. Ochoa, D. Breitenbacher, S. Hosseini,
and P. Hanacek, “Improving network intrusion detection classifiers by
non-payload-based exploit-independent obfuscations: An adversarial approach,” 2018, arXiv:1805.02684.
[16] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z. B. Celik, and A. Swami,
“Practical black-box attacks against machine learning,” in Proc. ACM Asia
Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 506–519.
[17] P. Mishra, V. Varadharajan, U. Tupakula, and E. S. Pilli, “A detailed investigation and analysis of using machine learning techniques for intrusion
detection,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 686–728, First
Quarter 2018.
[18] S. Chen, N. Carlini, and D. Wagner, “Stateful detection of black-box
adversarial attacks,” in Proc. 1st ACM Workshop Secur. Privacy Artif.
Intell., 2020, pp. 30–39.
[19] C. Szegedy et al., “Intriguing properties of neural networks,”
2013, arXiv:1312.6199.
[20] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[21] M. W. Craven and J. W. Shavlik, “Extracting tree-structured representations of trained networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1996,
pp. 24–30.
[22] M. Kesarwani, B. Mukhoty, V. Arya, and S. Mehta, “Model extraction
warning in MLaaS paradigm,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl.
Conf., 2018, pp. 371–380.
[23] M. Feurer, K. Eggensperger, S. Falkner, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter, “Autosklearn 2.0: The next generation,” 2020, arXiv:2007.04074.
[24] Y. Liu, X. Chen, C. Liu, and D. Song, “Delving into transferable adversarial
examples and black-box attacks,” 2016, arXiv:1611.02770.
[25] W. Brendel, J. Rauber, and M. Bethge, “Decision-based adversarial
attacks: Reliable attacks against black-box machine learning models,”
2017, arXiv:1712.04248.
[26] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu,
“Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,”
2017, arXiv:1706.06083.
[27] H. Kim, K. C. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, and K.
Lee, “Internet traffic classification demystified: Myths, caveats, and the
best practices,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT Conf., 2008, pp. 1–12.
[28] W. Li, M. Canini, A. W. Moore, and R. Bolla, “Efficient application identification and the temporal and spatial stability of classification schema,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 790–809, 2009.
[29] H. Yan et al., “PGSM-DPI: Precisely guided signature matching of deep
packet inspection for traffic analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf.,
2019, pp. 1–6.
[30] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, “Towards
the deployment of machine learning solutions in network traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1988–2014, Second Quarter 2018.
[31] F. Tramèr, F. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart, “Stealing
machine learning models via prediction APIs,” in Proc. 25th USENIX
Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 601–618.

YAN et al.: AUTOMATIC EVASION OF MACHINE LEARNING-BASED NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

[32] H. Yan, X. Li, H. Li, J. Li, W. Sun, and F. Li, “Monitoring-based differential
privacy mechanism against query flooding-based model extraction attack,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2680–2694,
Jul./Aug. 2022.
[33] I. Guyon and A. Elisseeff, “An introduction to variable and feature selection,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3, no. Mar, pp. 1157–1182, 2003.
[34] D. Han et al., “Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of machine
learning-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2632–2647, Aug. 2021.
[35] R. Sheatsley, N. Papernot, M. Weisman, G. Verma, and P. McDaniel,
“Adversarial examples in constrained domains,” 2020, arXiv:2011.01183.
[36] L. Pengcheng, J. Yi, and L. Zhang, “Query-efficient black-box attack by active learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2018,
pp. 1200–1205.
[37] C.-C. Tu et al., “AutoZOOM: Autoencoder-based zeroth order optimization method for attacking black-box neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 742–749.
[38] A. Ilyas, L. Engstrom, A. Athalye, and J. Lin, “Black-box adversarial
attacks with limited queries and information,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 2137–2146.
[39] Z. Wang, “Deep learning-based intrusion detection with adversaries,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 38367–38384, 2018.
[40] X. Peng, W. Huang, and Z. Shi, “Adversarial attack against DoS intrusion
detection: An improved boundary-based method,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int.
Conf. Tools Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1288–1295.
[41] G. Apruzzese, M. Colajanni, and M. Marchetti, “Evaluating the effectiveness of adversarial attacks against botnet detectors,” in Proc. IEEE 18th
Int. Symp. Netw. Comput. Appl., 2019, pp. 1–8.
[42] C. V. Wright, S. E. Coull, and F. Monrose, “Traffic morphing: An efficient
defense against statistical traffic analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., Citeseer, vol. 9, 2009.
[43] T.-H. Cheng, Y.-D. Lin, Y.-C. Lai, and P.-C. Lin, “Evasion techniques:
Sneaking through your intrusion detection/prevention systems,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1011–1020, Fourth Quarter
2012.
[44] I. Corona, G. Giacinto, and F. Roli, “Adversarial attacks against intrusion detection systems: Taxonomy, solutions and open issues,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 239, pp. 201–225, 2013.
[45] O. Ibitoye, O. Shafiq, and A. Matrawy, “Analyzing adversarial attacks
against deep learning for intrusion detection in IoT networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6.
[46] E. Stinson and J. C. Mitchell, “Towards systematic evaluation of the
evadability of bot/botnet detection methods,” in Proc. 2nd Conf. USENIX
Workshop Offensive Technol., 2008, pp. 1–9.
[47] J. S. Vitter, “Random sampling with a reservoir,” ACM Trans. Math. Softw.,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 37–57, 1985.
[48] Y. Dong et al., “Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
pp. 9185–9193.
[49] Y. Dong, T. Pang, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “Evading defenses to transferable
adversarial examples by translation-invariant attacks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 4312–4321.
[50] C. Xie et al., “Improving transferability of adversarial examples with input
diversity,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
pp. 2730–2739.

167

Wenjing Zhang is working toward the PhD degree
with the School of Computer Science, University of
Guelph, Canada. Her research interests include data
privacy and machine learning.

Rui Wang received the BS degree in information
security from Xidian University, in 2019. He is currenly working toward the master’s degree with the
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University. His
research interests focus on tor and network traffic.

Hui Li (Member, IEEE) received the BSc degree
from Fudan University, in 1990, and the MASc and
PhD degrees from Xidian University, in 1993 and
1998, respectvely. Since June 2005, he has been a
professor with the School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an Shaanxi, China. His research
interests are in the areas of cryptography, wireless
network security, information theory, and network
coding. He is a chair of ACM SIGSAC CHINA. He
served as the technique committee chair or co-chair
of several conferences. He has published more than
200 international academic research papers on information security and privacy
preservation.
Xingwen Zhao received the BS and MS degrees from
the School of Telecommunications Engineering of
Xidian University, in 1999 and 2004 respectively,
and the PhD degree from the School of Information
Science and Technology of Sun Yat-sen University,
in 2011. He is now an associate professor with the
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University. He
is also an editor of International Journal of Technology in Computer Science & Engineering. His research interests include machine learning (or artificial
intelligent) based network security, multi-party data
sharing, anonymous authentication, broadcast encryption, traitor tracing, key
agreement.

Haonan Yan received the bachelor’s degree from
Xidian University. He is currently working toward the
PhD degree with the School of Cyber Engineering,
Xidian University, Xi’an, China. His current research
interests focus on machine learning security and network traffic.

Fenghua Li received the BS degree in computer
software, and the MS and PhD degrees in computer
systems architecture from Xidian University, Xi’an,
China, in 1987, 1990, and 2009, respectively. He is
currently a professor and a doctoral supervisor with
the State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. He is also a doctoral
supervisor with Xidian University and the University
of Science and Technology of China. His current
research interests include network security, system
security, privacy computing, and trusted computing.

Xiaoguang Li received the bachelor”s degree from
Xidian University. He is currently working toward
PhD degree with the School of Cyber Engineering,
Xidian University, Xi’an, China. He visited the Department of Computer and Information Technology,
Purdue University from 2019 to 2021. His current
research interests focus on differential privacy.

Xiaodong Lin (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree in information engineering from the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, China,
and the PhD degree (with Outstanding Achievement
in Graduate Studies Award) in electrical and computer
engineering from the University of Waterloo, Canada.
He is currently a professor with the School of Computer Science at the University of Guelph, Canada.
His research interests include computer and network
security, privacy protection, applied cryptography,
computer forensics, and software security.