IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

2715

AutoML4ETC: Automated Neural Architecture
Search for Real-World Encrypted
Traffic Classification
Navid Malekghaini , Elham Akbari, Mohammad A. Salahuddin , Member, IEEE,
Noura Limam , Member, IEEE, Raouf Boutaba , Fellow, IEEE, Bertrand Mathieu ,
Stéphanie Moteau, and Stéphane Tuffin
Abstract—Deep learning (DL) has been successfully applied
to encrypted network traffic classification in experimental settings. However, in production use, it has been shown that a
DL classifier’s performance inevitably decays over time. Retraining the model on newer datasets has been shown to only
partially improve its performance. Manually re-tuning the model
architecture to meet the performance expectations on newer
datasets is time-consuming and requires domain expertise. We
propose AutoML4ETC, a novel tool to automatically design efficient and high-performing neural architectures for encrypted
traffic classification. We define a novel, powerful search space
tailored specifically for the early classification of encrypted traffic using packet header bytes. We show that with different search
strategies over our search space, AutoML4ETC generates neural architectures that outperform the state-of-the-art encrypted
traffic classifiers on several datasets, including public benchmark
datasets and real-world TLS and QUIC traffic collected from
the Orange mobile network. In addition to being more accurate,
AutoML4ETC’s architectures are significantly more efficient and
lighter in terms of the number of parameters. Finally, we make
AutoML4ETC publicly available for future research.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, neural architecture search, AutoML, HTTP/2, TLS, QUIC.

I. I NTRODUCTION
RAFFIC classification (TC) is an important task for
the operation and management of computer networks.
It is essential for traffic analysis and can be used for effective network planning, resource provisioning and allocation,
providing differentiated Quality-of-Service (QoS), improving
customer Quality of Experience (QoE), monitoring network
security, etc. For instance, the Internet service provider (ISP)
can use TC to identify different types of traffic in the
network and to differentiate the services provided to them,

T

Manuscript received 19 June 2023; revised 26 September 2023; accepted 6
October 2023. Date of publication 17 October 2023; date of current version
12 July 2024. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and
approving it for publication was N. Zincir-Heywood. (Corresponding author:
Noura Limam.)
Navid Malekghaini, Elham Akbari, Mohammad A. Salahuddin, Noura
Limam, and Raouf Boutaba are with the David R. Cheriton School of
Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
(e-mail: nmalekgh@uwaterloo.ca; eakbaria@uwaterloo.ca; mohammad.
salahuddin@uwaterloo.ca;
noura.limam@uwaterloo.ca;
rboutaba@
uwaterloo.ca).
Bertrand Mathieu, Stéphanie Moteau, and Stéphane Tuffin are with
the Networks/WNI, Orange Labs, Orange Labs, 22300 Lannion, France
(e-mail: bertrand2.mathieu@orange.com; stephanie.moteau@orange.com;
stephane.tuffin@orange.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3324936

e.g., prioritizing certain types of traffic over others. Moreover,
it could be used to guarantee service and resources to critical
business services that are associated with a specific type of
traffic. Another example would be the use of TC in Intrusion
Detection Systems (IDS); with TC, an IDS could distinguish
unknown network traffic from other types of traffic and take
appropriate actions, such as blocking them. This example is an
application of TC for anomaly detection. Due to the pervasive
use of encryption nowadays, the bulk of Web-based applications communicate using Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
(HTTPS), which relies on Transport Layer Security (TLS) to
encrypt the application message, making TC a difficult task.
Deep learning (DL) has been widely employed for
encrypted traffic classification (ETC) with performance
exceeding traditional machine learning (ML) methods [1], [2],
[3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. However, the classification performance
is known to vary based on the model architecture and the target dataset. The effect of the dataset on model performance, in
particular the distribution of data across classes, is especially
important, as some distributions are easier to learn than others. For real-world ETC datasets, the data collection process,
e.g., location of monitoring sensors in the network, duration
of traffic capture, and employed filters, can affect the data distribution. For example, a dataset collected from a local area
network is expected to have a different distribution from an
ISP-level network dataset, as the larger the number of users
in a network, the more diverse the generated traffic.
In 2020, we designed UWOrange [8], a DL-based serviceand application-level encrypted traffic classifier with a novel
tripartite architecture that out-performed state-of-the-art classifiers on Orange mobile traffic data as well as existing, publicly
available datasets. However, as time went by, we observed that
the performance of UWOrange on our ISP partner’s newer
traffic data was decaying. We thoroughly investigated this
issue and reported in [9], [10] how in a production setting,
even when the data collection process is the same, state-ofthe-art DL encrypted traffic classifiers (including UWOrange)
are prone to performance decay. We highlighted the stark
differences in state-of-the-art DL model performance across
datasets, which was partly attributed to a change in the properties and statistical distribution of data over time, also known
in the ML community as data drift.
Our findings suggested that in production, periodic model
re-training over newer datasets was inevitable to alleviate the

c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

effect of data drift. However, re-training UWOrange on newer
datasets did not prevent performance loss, which was particularly significant on specific datasets [9], [10]. The decreasing
performance of the re-trained classifier on newer datasets
led us to assert that the architecture of UWOrange, initially
designed to perform particularly well on baseline datasets,
was no longer suitable for newer datasets. It became clear
that in production, the hyper-parameters of the DL classifier, e.g., learning rate, had to be re-tuned and the model
architecture adapted by a domain expert on a regular basis,
both of which are time-consuming and primarily based on
trial-and-error.
When experimenting with UWOrange on Orange network
data, it also became apparent that the use cases of interest
required a more efficient, light-weight model architecture,
capable of classifying traffic with just a few initial packets per flow (i.e., early classification) with high accuracy.
These requirements, in addition to the challenges posed by
data drift, i.e., constant, manual re-tuning or re-tweaking of
the model architecture, motivated the need for an automated
tool to design neural network architectures that are: (i) capable
of classifying an encrypted flow with high accuracy from the
first few packets, and (ii) lighter and more resource-effective
models with comparable or better performance than the state of
the art. Such a tool can be used to automatically produce new
architectures adapted to newer datasets instead of manually
re-tuning older ones.
Automating the process of finding the right architecture with
the right hyper-parameters is a problem known to DL. In metalearning, it was previously suggested to use a supervisory
neural network to learn the hyper-parameters of a subordinate neural network [11], [12]. Recently, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) [13], [14], a sub-field of Automated Machine
Learning (AutoML) [15], was introduced to automatically
learn the best neural network architecture given a particular
dataset. NAS arose from the extensive architectural engineering effort needed every time a new image classification dataset
emerges. This closely aligns with the practical challenges pertaining to ETC. However, NAS requires choosing the building
blocks of the architecture search space, which is not trivial
and requires domain expertise.
In this regard, our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose AutoML4ETC, a novel resource-effective
tool to automatically design efficient and high-performing
neural network architectures for ETC, given a target
dataset. We show that in addition to being more accurate, the AutoML4ETC’s architectures are significantly
more efficient and lighter than state-of-the-art encrypted
traffic classifiers in terms of the number of parameters.
• We define a novel, powerful architecture search space tailored specifically for producing efficient encrypted traffic
classifiers that leverage packet raw bytes. The building
blocks of the search space were carefully selected after
we exhaustively studied state-of-the-art architectures for
ETC and extensively experimented with different architectures on real-world encrypted network traffic collected
on the Orange mobile network. We show that the produced models achieve high classification accuracies from

the first three Transport Layer Security (TLS) handshake
packets and, for the first time in ETC literature, from the
singleton ClientHello packet of the Quick UDP Internet
Connection (QUIC) protocol. This makes these classifiers
suitable for early traffic classification.
• We validate AutoML4ETC by extensively experimenting with real-world encrypted network traffic collected
on the Orange mobile network. AutoML4ETC’s architectures show superior performance both on QUIC and TLS
traffic, with service-level and application-level classification alike. We further experiment with publicly available
datasets for the reproducibility of results and make the
tool publicly available1 to advance the state of the art.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II describes the background and discusses related
literature works. Section III provides an exposition of the
core components of AutoML4ETC. Section IV evaluates
AutoML4ETC’s search space, search algorithms, and training
strategies. It showcases the efficacy of the AutoML4ETCgenerated architectures over public and real-world datasets,
and demonstrates their superior performance in comparison to
state-of-the-art encrypted traffic classifiers. Finally, Section V
concludes the paper and instigates future directions.
II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORKS
A. Neural Architecture Search
NAS [14] leverages a controller Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) to generate neural network architectures. Figure 1
shows an architecture generated by NAS that consists of convolutional layers only, where a layer in the Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) is described by a sequence of tokens.
Each token determines a separate characteristic of the convolutional layer, such as filter size and stride. The different
compositions and permutations of the sequences determine the
model architectures that can be generated, which represents the
search space.
In NAS, a controller RNN is trained using Reinforcement
Learning (RL), where the actions are the choice of tokens
while the reward signal is the validation accuracy of the model,
i.e., the sequence of tokens. RL consists of a series of trials,
where a child model is created by sampling the parameter
values generated by the RNN at the end of each trial. As
shown in Figure 2, a sampled model is trained and evaluated
on a dataset per trial to compute the reward, which makes
NAS computationally expensive.
The RL algorithm described above operates within a space
of possible sequences. This space is decided by the set of
possible tokens that the controller RNN can generate at each
time step. It is up to the domain expert to determine the set of
possible tokens for RNN, which is similar to the set of words
in the dictionary of a language generator. Researchers in [14]
proposed two different search spaces for creating both CNNs
and RNNs. The authors increased the complexity of the convolutional models by introducing anchor points (cf. Figure 1)
into the search space, which determines the probability of
1 https://github.com/OrangeUW/AutoML4ETC

MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

2717

Example CNN model descriptions and skip connections for each layer [14].

Overview of NAS with RL [14].

having skip connections between a layer and its previous layers. This allowed the architecture to contain branching or skip
connections similar to the ones in ResNet [16]. Their results
showed that the generated CNN models perform within an
error rate of 1% from the state-of-the-art image classifiers on
the CIFAR-10 dataset [17]. The high performance is attributed
to training 12,800 architectures using 800 GPUs for concurrent
training, which makes their approach very resource-intensive.
Authors in [18] enhanced the set of tokens, i.e., architecture building blocks that the RNN generates in [14]. Their
enhancement is based on the observation that state-of-the-art
image classifier architectures have repeated network motifs,
i.e., small building blocks in the architecture’s graph that are
replicated. Their proposed search space consists of a sequence
of Normal and Reduction cells, in which only the Reduction
cells reduce the size of the feature map. Between different
architectures in the search space there is variation in the
interior structure of the Normal and Reduction cells. Each
cell is made up of a constant number of network motifs,
where each motif consists of two inputs fed into two blocks
that are aggregated. The types of blocks (e.g., separable
convolution, identity, 1x1 convolution) and the aggregation
function (e.g., add, concatenate) are determined by the controller RNN along with the connections between the motifs.
Their method performed slightly better than the best recorded
performance on CIFAR-10, with the added benefit of being
transferable to the larger ImageNet dataset [19] despite the

computational complexity of NAS. The authors leveraged a
transfer learning approach to speed up child model training
and promote transferability.
Both previous approaches suffer from high computational
complexity. To address this problem, [20] improved NAS’s
time complexity by a factor of 1000 and achieved an error
rate of within 0.3% of NAS. To make this happen, the authors
employed parameter sharing among all child models, which
is inspired by transfer learning [18] and multi-task learning [21]. The authors named their approach Efficient Neural
Architecture Search (ENAS). ENAS uses a more restrictive
search space, where only the child models that can be represented by a directed acyclic graph are considered. Moreover,
their micro search space is without non-separable convolutional blocks. The results of the micro search space are
then compared to those of the search space in NAS. Our
proposed novel search space is inspired by the search space
in ENAS.
The choice of the search algorithm has also been explored
in NAS, where some works leveraged RL while others resorted
to Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs). Outside the realm of
NAS, [22] proposed Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) that
extended the well-known Multi-armed Bandit technique in RL
to tree-structured search spaces. This inspired an interesting
approach in [23] that improved the controller by using MCTS
to find the best architecture hyper-parameters. Using MCTS
with Upper Confidence bound applied to Trees (UCT) is
known to balance exploitation and exploration in the searching process and overcome possible sub-optimal solutions.
The main idea is to use MCTS to find the model’s hyperparameters in a layer-by-layer fashion in the child model
descriptions. Selection, Expansion, Playout with simulation,
and Backpropagation are the main steps of MCTS. To reliably estimate the search directions in MCTS, the child models
are trained multiple times. The authors suggested using simulation to estimate the child model’s accuracy, such that the
child model is trained only once on the dataset, as opposed
to multiple times, which saves on training time. The model’s
accuracy is then estimated by aggregating the training and
simulation results.

2718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

EAs are an alternate to RL for searching the neural architecture search space [24], [25]. Authors in [24] evolved an
initial population of strings representing neural architectures
by using a tournament selection algorithm, where after each
pairwise comparison the worse individual dies and the better
one mutates. The fitness of each string is determined by the
respective architecture’s validation accuracy after being trained
on a dataset. Similar to [20], researchers in [25] used an EA
to search the NASNet search space. The authors used a tournament selection algorithm similar to [24] and introduced the
concept of aging to individuals. Comparing their algorithm
to the RL baseline, they showed that their EA achieves a
higher accuracy faster than the RL-based method, however,
both methods converged to the same accuracy asymptote. The
authors argued that the EA-based method is more relevant in
larger search spaces where reaching the optimal solution may
be resource intensive. We compare the EA algorithm in [25] to
other search algorithms over our search space in Section IV.

B. AutoML for Encrypted Traffic Classification
A plethora of ML models have been suggested for TC since
the early 2000s. Numerous classical ML models including
Naive Bayes, Bayesian Networks, k-Nearest Neighbor, and
Random Forests [26], [27] were shown to effectively classify
traffic datasets, including encrypted TOR traffic. A survey of
these classical models can be found in [28]. The use of timeseries features including packet size and direction sequences,
first suggested in [26] as a side channel to attack TOR, was
shown to be especially effective across models.
With the widespread adoption of deep neural networks,
numerous deep architectures were employed for ETC including Multi-Layer Perceptron, Convolutional Neural Networks,
Long Short-Term Memory networks, Gated Recurrent Units,
Stacked AutoEncoders, and Transformers [2], [3], [4], [8],
[29], [30], [31], [32], which have shown to be effective
on private datasets [1], [8], [33] as well as open research
datasets [34], [35], [36]. By and large, some works such as [4],
[30], [32] primarily focused on designing representations of
traffic data for well-known architectures, while others like [2],
[3], [8], [29], [31] focused on designing deep architectures tailored for well-known network traffic data representations. This
paper focuses on automating the latter, more precisely, automatically designing an optimized architecture for a specific
traffic data representation and a particular dataset.
In an attempt to obtain a more realistic evaluation of the
proposed ETC models in the literature, including classical and
deep models, [1], [37] performed comparative studies of existing model performances on real-world datasets. Reference [1]
shows that the performances of deep and classical models are
close, with 1D-CNN and MLP winning over Random Forest
by a small margin. Reference [37] highlighted the importance
of parameter tuning and showed that by simply tuning the
maximum tree depth, XGBoost can significantly outperform
CNN methods.
The importance of hyper-parameter tuning is a driving factor in this work, although we take the opposite direction

from [37]’s experiments with XGBoost, and focus on finding the best hyper-parameters and architecture for a CNN.
Following our previous work, [9], in which we highlight the
challenges in manually adapting a successful deep architecture to new traffic traces, in this work, we explore a way to
automate the manual process, given a dataset and a space of
hyper-parameters.
AutoML was recently employed for TC in [38], [39].
Both [38] and [39] focus on designing traffic representations
for efficient classification. While [38] proposed a normalized packet-level representation, [39] proposed a process
for extracting flow-level features from sequences of packet
size and directions. They both used the publicly available
AutoGluon tool [40]. AutoGluon’s approach to AutoML is
different from NAS. Rather than opting to find the best model
hyperparameters, it creates ensembles of several models by
stacking them in layers. It is designed to be fast and simple to use by non-experts. Its base models include classical
and deep models. For example, [38] used six types of base
models including tree-based methods, deep neural networks,
and neighbors-based classifiers. A similar ensemble-based
method is employed in Mljar [41], a python AutoML package
employed in [42] for malware detection. However, Mljar only
includes classical ML models as base models, hence, [42] is
further from our work than the former two.

III. AUTO ML4ETC
In this section, we describe and discuss the major components of AutoML4ETC, namely: (i) the search space, (ii) the
search algorithm, and (iii) the child model training strategy.
These components are independent of one another, allowing
flexibility in the choice of each component.
A. Search Space
The search space in AutoML4ETC consists of a variety of
operations (e.g., add, concatenate), connections (i.e., input,
output) and their ordering, and the number of supported layers
(e.g., convolution layers). These are the building blocks for
the controller (i.e., search algorithm) to choose from and
interconnect to create the neural network architectures of child
models. The output of any generated child model is connected
to a Softmax layer to produce the final classification.
As depicted in Figure 3, the overall architecture of a child
neural network includes a single Normal cell and a single
Reduction cell, which are composed of the building blocks in
the search space. In comparison to complex sequential architectures, this lightweight structure allows us to learn simpler
and more generalizable models (cf. Section IV-G). The cell
input goes through a hyper-layer before entering a cell, as
shown in Figure 3. The hyper-layer is either a Filter Alignment
or a Factorized Reduction layer depending on the cell type.
• Filter Alignment hyper-layer: A Normal cell is preceded
by a Filter Alignment layer, which consists of sequential
ReLU, convolution, and batch normalization. This layer
introduces filters at the beginning of the cell (i.e., 64
initial filters, which is configurable).

MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

Fig. 3.

AutoML4ETC search space.

Fig. 4.

Factorized Reduction hyper-layer modules.

2719

•

Factorized Reduction hyper-layer: A Reduction Cell is
preceded by a Factorized Reduction layer, depicted in
Figure 4, which is necessary to process and reduce the
input size in half.
We compare the novel search space proposed for
AutoML4ETC against state-of-the-art search spaces
(cf. Section IV-D).
B. Search Algorithms
Given a search space, the search algorithm (i.e., the controller) describes the child neural network architecture. To
accomplish this, as discussed, the search algorithm composes
a single Normal cell and a single Reduction cell from the
search space. Each cell consists of a number of nodes (i.e.,
4, which is empirically deduced and configurable), as shown
in Figure 5. For each node, the search algorithm makes the
following decisions:
1) Choose Input 1 and Input 2 from the output of the
previous nodes. If it is the first node, choose from the
inputs of the cell.
2) Choose the operation for Input 1 and Input 2 from:
(i) identity, (ii) separable convolution hyper-layer with
kernel size 3 or 5, and (iii) average or max pooling with
kernel size 3. These choices are inspired from [18].
3) Add output of the two operations and return as the output
of the node.
A separable convolution hyper-layer consists of sequentially connected layers of ReLU, separable convolution, batch
normalization, and dropout. We found that using a high-rate
dropout layer (e.g., 0.4) during search alleviates overfitting
to training data, leading to a more generalizable model.
Furthermore, similar to [18], we employ two sequentially
connected separable convolution hyper-layers every time the
search algorithm chooses this operation. Such a structure for
convolution layers has also been extensively used for deep

Fig. 5.

Example cell components.

ETC models [2], [8], [33], and has been shown to achieve
high classification accuracy.
Importantly, the search algorithm may not choose the output
from a node as an input to other nodes in the same cell. We call
these unused outputs Loose Ends. Because Loose Ends may
contain useful information, they are fed to the add operation
in the output of the last node of the cell.
Numerous state-of-the-art search algorithms have been
proposed and evaluated in a setting with abundant resources
(e.g., in excess of 400 GPUs [14], [18], [25]) and, or minimal to no time constraint (e.g., up to 50,000 trials [18], 310
epochs for architecture search [20]). Indeed, in a resource- or
time-constrained environment, these algorithms may not converge to their optimal performance. Moreover, simple Random
Search (RS) has proven very competitive against its more complex counterparts. In [23], the authors compared a variation of
EA and MCTS to RS with the spectrum of measured accuracy
ranging between 94.1% and 94.2%. Similarly, authors in [14],
[20], [25] showed RS performance to be within 1% of other
search algorithms.
The modularity of AutoML4ETC allows to choose any
search algorithm independently from the search space.

2720

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Overall AutoML4ETC framework.

Therefore, we investigate different state-of-the-art neural
architecture search algorithms, and evaluate their impact on
the performance and complexity of the best child model.
Specifically, in AutoML4ETC, we experiment with RL [20],
MCTS [23], and EA [25], and compare them against the baseline RS algorithm. With the exception of RS, these search
algorithms were developed and evaluated on the NASNet or
ENAS Micro search spaces, which were an inspiration for
our novel search space in AutoML4ETC. Therefore, comparing these searching algorithms in AutoML4ETC is particularly
relevant (cf. Section IV-E).
C. Child Model Training Strategies
NAS is inherently time consuming and includes the following steps: (i) search algorithm, (ii) child architecture
composition, and (iii) training of child models. In our experiments, we estimated the time taken for the first two steps to be
around a 100 milliseconds, which is negligible in comparison
to the time in training child models. Indeed, every time a child
architecture is composed, it is trained over several epochs and
then evaluated for performance. The performance is a reward
signal for a child model, and helps the search algorithm to
converge to better child neural networks in future trials. Our
goal is to reduce the child model training time (i.e., number
of epochs) without compromising NAS performance.
We investigate two types of child model training strategies
in AutoML4ETC, namely full training and partial training.
Full training pertains to training child models on as many
epochs as needed to generate the best possible architecture. In
contrast, in partial training, the child models are trained on a

smaller number of epochs, and only the best-performing child
model is trained for additional epochs, as needed.
For example, the child models in the partial training strategy
could be trained for 25% of the full training epochs, with the
best performing child model trained further for the remaining 75% epochs. This could significantly reduce NAS time.
However, the best child model from partial training is only
an estimate of the global best child model. Therefore, there is
an interesting trade-off to consider between the two training
strategies in AutoML4ETC (cf. Section IV-F).

IV. E VALUATION
We start by presenting the overall settings and methodology for evaluating AutoML4ETC. The high-level workflow
of the AutoML4ETC framework, including all of its components, is depicted in Figure 6. In Section IV-A, we describe
the baseline state-of-the-art ETC models used for comparing
the performance of the AutoML4ETC-generated models. In
Section IV-B, we present the performance criteria and metrics used in our evaluation. We describe the pre-processing
and labeling process of TLS and QUIC raw packet captures (i.e., PCAP files) as well as the datasets used in our
experiments in Section IV-C.
Our evaluation study is four-fold. We evaluate the search
space of AutoML4ETC and compare it against a baseline
search space in Section IV-D. We evaluate the performance
of different search algorithms and child-model training
strategies in Section IV-E and Section IV-F, respectively.
Finally, in Section IV-G, we compare the performance of

MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

2721

AutoML4ETC-generated architectures against the baseline
state-of-the-art ETC models on various datasets.
A. State-of-the-Art ETC Models
We use four baseline state-of-the-art ETC models that have
shown superior performance on the input features employed
in this work.
The UWOrange [8] model consists of three different
branches each tailored to a specific type of input feature type.
The outputs of the three parts are concatenated and further
processed by dense layers followed by a Softmax layer. One
branch of the model consists of convolutional layers that process packet raw bytes. We call this branch the UWOrange-H
model, and use it as a baseline for comparison.
The UCDavis CNN [33] model is designed to operate on
packet raw bytes. It differs from the UWOrange-H model in
terms of the number of units in the last dense layers, and
it does not use dropout layers. However, the essential part
of the UCDavis CNN and the UWOrange-H models, i.e., the
CNN layers, are similar. Another difference between the two
models is in their input. The raw packet data in UCDavis CNN
includes the first six packets of a flow, while the input data in
UWOrange-H consists of the first 600 bytes of the first three
TLS handshake packets of the flow.
The DeepPacket CNN [2] is a high-performing DL model
designed specifically for packet raw bytes. This CNN model
receives a 1,500-dimensional vector as input and comprises
two 1D convolutional layers placed one after the other, followed by a max-pooling layer. The vector is flattened and fed
through four fully connected layers, with the final layer serving
as the Softmax classifier.
E2E CNN [29] is the first encrypted traffic classifier that
employs 1D-CNNs. It was shown to outperform traditional ML
methods. This model inspired many other CNN architectures
including all the state-of-the-art baseline models considered in
this paper. Furthermore, this CNN-based model is also tailored
for packet raw bytes, making it a valid baseline to compare the performance of AutoML4ETC. E2E CNN receives
a 768-dimensional vector as input and comprises one 1D convolutional layer, followed by a max-pooling layer. The same
structure is repeated and finally, the vector is flattened and fed
to two fully-connected layers with the final layer serving as
the Softmax classifier.
The detailed model architectures implemented in our experiments are depicted in Figure 12.
B. Metrics and Settings
A binary classification task may result in True Positives
(TP), False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN), and False
Negatives (FN). The precision, recall, F1-score and accuracy
of such a classifier are derived as follows:
TP
× 100
Precision =
TP + FP
TP
× 100
Recall =
TP + FN
2 × Precision × Recall
F 1 − score =
× 100
Precision + Recall

Fig. 7.

Pre-processing procedure for real-world datasets.

Accuracy =

TP + TN
× 100
TP + TN + FP + FN

In this work, we aim to use AutoML4ETC to generate
multi-label encrypted network traffic classifiers. As such, we
evaluate the performance of a generated model in terms of
its weighted average recall, weighted average precision, and
weighted average F1-score, by averaging the recall, precision,
and F1-score of the classifier across all classes weighted by
the fraction of flows belonging to each class in the dataset.
We also evaluate the accuracy of the model as the fraction of
correctly classified flows.
Each child network is trained with an initial learning rate of
0.001. Furthermore, while the child models are being trained,
we cut the learning rate in half every 10 epochs. We found this
to be a more effective solution than a fixed learning rate, as
it increases the resolution of the gradient descent’s search as
the search progresses. Moreover, we use the Adam optimizer
and the sparse categorical cross-entropy loss function to train
the child networks. Further details can be found in the source
code (cf. Footnote 1).
Our software stack for neural architecture design and preprocessing consists of Tensorflow 2.2 [43] with Keras [44]
and PySpark 2.4.4 [45], and a custom version of Hypernets
0.2.3 [46] with custom HyperKeras.
C. Datasets and Pre-Processing
The overall procedure for pre-processing and labeling raw
packet captures (i.e., PCAP files) into ML-usable datasets
is shown in Figure 7. The first pre-processing step consists
of removing the packet payloads beyond the TLS or QUIC
header. The resulting PCAP files are broken into flows, where
each flow consists of packets close in time that share source
IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, and protocol.
From each flow, the headers of the first three TLS handshake
packets are extracted. The TLS Server Name Indication (SNI)
header is used for labeling the flow and is obfuscated next,
and so is the TLS cipher information header field. The IP
addresses are also masked. For the QUIC flows, only the first
ClientHello packet in the handshake phase is extracted. The
SNI header is used for labeling the flow and is obfuscated
next, and so is the TLS cipher information header. We do not
include more than one packet for QUIC flows as the latter
packets are encrypted and do not have any information useful
to the classifier.
The real-world datasets were labeled based on the SNI field
in each flow, which is one reason why we obfuscate the SNI
value in preprocessing. Not all flows contain a readable SNI

2722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

TABLE I
S ERVICE -L EVEL DATASETS P ROPERTIES

TABLE II
A PPLICATION -L EVEL DATASETS P ROPERTIES

value. Moreover, the utilization of clear SNI is likely to decline
in favor of the proposed Encrypted SNI (ESNI) extension [47].
Hence, we need traffic classifiers that learn the intrinsic characteristics of the flows rather than a mapping from SNI to
traffic classes.
We used an approximate labeling function to extract labels
from SNIs. We developed a look-up table by visiting top websites in each service class and extracting regular expressions
from their domain names, which are matched with the SNI
value to map each SNI to a label. Because not all flows contain
an SNI value, we also label adjacent flows (i.e., flows with the
same TLS session-id or close-enough start time) based on the
main flow that has an SNI to increase the number of labeled
flows.
The labeling module was initially designed for the TLS
datasets and then adapted to the QUIC dataset. We observed
from the SNIs in the QUIC dataset that some of the TLS
dataset classes did not have any instances in the QUIC dataset.
Similarly, some of the classes are unique to QUIC, such as
resources and e-commerce.
The Resources class contains flows that add material to
the webpage, such as Javascript, CSS, and HTML libraries,
and often have one end in some major hosting service,
e.g., Cloudflare. On the other hand, flows that belong
to third-party advertisement services are categorized under
e-commerce.
We categorize QUIC and TLS using different sets of classes
for two reasons: (i) QUIC is still a relatively new protocol
and is not yet as widely adopted as TLS, and (ii) QUIC offers

a higher connection speed than HTTP over TLS; therefore,
time-sensitive services such as resources adopt it to enhance
the loading time of their clients’ websites. However, it is less
frequently adopted by services such as mail or file download,
where loading time is not crucial.
We evaluate AutoML4ETC on six real-world datasets and
three public benchmark datasets of network traffic generated
either synthetically or in controlled environments [36], [48].
Five of the real-world datasets consist of TLS flows and the
sixth consists of QUIC flows. The real-world datasets were
generated by pre-processing and labeling traffic traces captured
on the Orange mobile network, and named after their year
and month of capture. Table I highlights the properties of the
datasets labeled at the service level. We also experiment with
application-level classification. The application-level labels are
listed in Table II and differ from the service-level labels. In
each dataset, we reserve 80% of the labeled data samples for
training and the remaining 20% for evaluation. For the realworld datasets we use a 600-byte cut-off as suggested in [8].
For the other datasets, we use the pre-processed version made
available by the original authors.
D. Evaluation of the Search Space
In order to show how the AutoML4ETC search space surpasses the performance of current state-of-the-art ETC, we
build another search space based on the state-of-the-art ETC
architectures, which we name CNN + MLP. We then compare
the performance of the best model found in this search space

MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

2723

TABLE III
CNN S EARCH S PACE PARAMETERS , VALUES , AND T YPES

TABLE IV
MLP S EARCH S PACE PARAMETERS , VALUES , AND T YPES

Fig. 8.

Overview of CNN search space.

Fig. 10.
Comparison of average accuracy of top-N child models using
different search algorithms.

Fig. 9.

Overview of MLP search space.
TABLE V
PACKET R AW B YTES S EARCH S PACES C OMPARISON

Fig. 11. Accuracy of top-10 child models with different training epochs; the
× mark is the average for each epoch.

with that of the best model found in AutoML4ETC. The best
models are found using the same RS algorithm.
CNN + MLP: The CNN + MLP search spaces are inspired
by the ETC state of the art [2], [4], [8], [33], [36] and covers
their architecture. The overall structure of the CNN (i.e., 2D
CNNs or 1D CNNs) search space is depicted in Figure 8.
Each CONV-Pool Block is a sequence of one or more CONV
Blocks connected to a pooling layer. The number of CONVPool Blocks in the sequence is determined by the CONV-Pool
Block Repeat parameter. Moreover, the inner CONV Block
is also sequentially repeated CONV Block Repeat number of
times, where the two repeat parameters are independent of one
another. Additionally, for the first two CONV-Pool Blocks, we
set the CONV Block Repeat to two repetitions. Thereafter,
CONV Block Repeat can be from a range of 3 to 5, which
is a number of convolutional layers often used in ETC [2],

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE OF PARTIAL T RAINING OF C HILD M ODELS ( I . E ., 10
E POCHS ) VS . F ULL T RAINING S TRATEGY ( I . E ., 40 E POCHS )

[4], [8], [33], [36]. Also, the number of filters is cut in half
in the following repetitions of CONV Block, i.e., after the
first two CONV-Pool Blocks. The parameters for this search
space are summarized in Table III. Choice means that the
search algorithm chooses a value from a range of values for
that parameter; Optional means that this layer is optional;
Permutation only organizes the best permutation of values;
Reduce factor defines the sequential amount of reduction in
dense units.

2724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

TABLE VII
AUTO ML4ETC V ERSUS THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ODELS IN S ERVICE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION

We connect CNN search space to the MLP search space to
construct the CNN + MLP search space. For the MLP search
space, we use a sequence of dense layers and a permutation
of dropout, batch norm, and activation layers between every
two dense layers, as shown in Figure 9. We repeat this Dense
Block several times, which is specified by the Dense Block
Repeat parameter. These blocks are connected and the number
of units in the dense layer is reduced in the next block by the
Reduce factor parameter. The parameters of the MLP search
space are summarized in Table IV.
Performance Comparison: We showcase the performance
of AutoML4ETC against CNN + MLP by comparing the performances of the best model found in each search space. The
same RS algorithm is used to search all search spaces, as our
goal is to evaluate the search space, not the search algorithm.
Table V shows the best model’s performance on the May 2021
TLS dataset, when the child model is trained for 40 epochs.
We use the May 2021 TLS dataset as it is the smallest of
our TLS datasets for timing purposes. We will justify the 40
epochs and report results with different numbers of epochs
and other datasets in later sections.
The best child model generated from the CNN-2D + MLP
search space after 200 trials, achieves a 77.55% accuracy and
has almost 22 million parameters. The input to the models in
this search space is transformed into two-dimensional images
(i.e., [4] with NAS). However, turning raw bytes into 1D vectors and using 1D CNNs can boost the performance of the
model. We speculate that the arbitrary arrangement of sequential packet bytes in 2D possibly confuses the model, as it
considers learning patterns between bytes that are put next

to one another in 2D for no reason. Evidently, on the CNN1D + MLP search space, it is possible to obtain a child model
that achieves 78.75% accuracy with almost half the number
of parameters after the same number of trials.
RS on the ENAS Micro search space can find a much
lighter model (i.e., 120.6 thousand parameters) that achieves
higher accuracy (i.e., 80.4%), after 200 trials as well. However,
with the AutoML4ETC search space, it is possible to generate a classifier that is not only more accurate (i.e., 82.86%
classification accuracy) but also lighter (i.e., 111.5 thousand
parameters) than any of the above classifiers after only half of
those trials (i.e., 100 trials). Hence our AutoML4ETC search
space outperforms state-of-the-art search spaces both in terms
of accuracy and complexity of the best child model on this
dataset.
E. Comparison of Search Algorithms
We discuss and compare the performances of different
search algorithms in this section after briefly describing the
algorithms.
RL: Based on the RNN controller in [20], and uses
REINFORCE with baseline and Adam as the optimizer. The
RNN controller is a single-layer Long Short-term Memory
(LSTM) with 100 units applied to the controller logits.
Baseline decay is set to 0.999, while the norm of gradients
is clipped at 5.0. The learning rate for the Adam optimizer
is 1e-3.
MCTS: Based on [23] and uses UCT [49]. The maximum
node expansion is set to 10. When rolling out, the sample size

MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

2725

TABLE VIII
AUTO ML4ETC V ERSUS THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ODELS IN A PPLICATION -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION

for the simulation network to assess potential pathways is set
to 10. The simulation network is LightGBM [50] with default
parameters.
EA: Based on [25], where the population size is set to 20.
The number of parent candidates selected per evolution cycle
is set to 5.
RS: Makes random decisions at each step. It does not
maintain a state to update itself based on previous decisions.
For a fair comparison, we fix the other parameters of
AutoML4ETC as follows. We set the number of child model
training epochs to 10 for faster training and set the total number of trials to 100. We will discuss the effectiveness of the
10 epochs of child model training in the next section.
We compare the mean accuracy of the top-N child models
found by each of the search algorithms for N=1, 5, 10, 20,
and 30. This is because we are not only interested in comparing the performance of the global best child models, but also
want to compare the overall ability of each search algorithm
to find reasonably good (i.e., reasonably accurate) child models throughout the search process. As an example, top-5 child
models are the 5 child models that achieve the best validation
accuracy sorted in descending order.
Performance evaluation results are depicted in Figure 10.
Several interesting observations can be made here. First,
concerning the global best child models (i.e., top-1 child
models), it is evident that all of the search algorithms lead

to equally well-performing best child models; the standard
deviation of the accuracy distribution across the best child
models is only 0.25%. This result highlights, in particular, the
power of our search space, where the simplest search algorithm
(i.e., RS) can perform as well as much more complex search
algorithms at the cost of a few more parameters (i.e., 206.53,
231.62, 242.12, and 258.24 thousand for RL, MCTS, EA, and
RS, respectively).
Another interesting observation is that as N increases, the
gap between the mean accuracies of the top-N child models
grows. While the MCTS algorithm is the top performer for
N=5,..,30, RL performs the worst. Moreover, in this same
range, the EA and RS algorithms perform almost identically
and score in between MCTS and RL. This suggests that MCTS
can build more top-performing models with fewer trials and
child model training epochs.
All of these findings and observations suggest that designing a good search space is more important than the search
algorithm itself when using fewer trials and epochs for child
model training. A good search space is when most of the
architecture combinations result in reasonably good accuracy,
and this applies to our search space. Therefore, in the state
of the art versus AutoML4ETC section, for the sake of efficiency in the number of parameters with the best accuracy, we
choose to use RL as our search algorithm. RL showed the best
performance for the top-1 child model and also found the best

2726

Fig. 12.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

The state-of-the-art ETC baseline model architectures used in this paper.

child model with the least number of parameters. However, the
search spaces in AutoML4ETC can be combined with another
search algorithm to realize any other desiderata.
F. Evaluation of Child Model Training Strategies
We start by searching for an upper bound for the number
of training epochs needed to find the best child model. To
find this number, we conduct a set of experiments where we
increase the number of training epochs starting from 10 and
validate every 10 epochs on the testing dataset. Figure 11 is
the mean validation accuracy of the top-10 child models for a
varying number of training epochs. We can see that the average
accuracy of the top-10 child models (i.e., black line curve)
flattens beyond 40 epochs. Therefore, 40 epochs can be set as
our upper bound for the full training of child models.
From another perspective, if we partially train the child
models over 10 epochs only, we can save approximately 75%
of the total NAS time. With this method we just use 10 epochs
for training child models, then extract the top child model and
train it for an extra 30 epochs. However, the best child model
resulting from partial training is an estimate of the global best
child model.

Table VI further shows the trade-off between the accuracy
and complexity of the top child model. We can see that with a
10-epoch partial training strategy, the top child model achieves
79.71% accuracy. However, with the full training strategy,
i.e., training over 40 epochs, the top child model can achieve
a higher accuracy of 82.86%. Additionally, the number of
parameters of the top child model resulting from the full
training approach is less than half of its counterpart. Therefore,
the trade-off can be diluted down to a loss of ∼3% in accuracy with twice as many parameters for a ∼75% lower time
complexity (i.e., search time).
Since the AutoML4ETC models are light in general with
both strategies (i.e., number of parameters) and the difference
in accuracy is noticeable, a 40-epoch full training strategy
seems to be a better option for this particular search space.
G. AutoML4ETC Versus State of the Art
In the previous sections, we concluded that using RL as
the search algorithm, 40 epochs for child model training,
and 100 trials would be our choices for AutoML4ETC. We
now compare the AutoML4ETC-generated model to other
state-of-the-art architectures for ETC (cf. Section IV-A). We

MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

Fig. 13.

2727

AutoML4ETC-generated DNN architecture that achieves 100% accuracy on the QUIC - UCDavis dataset [36].

use the same batch size for all models and also use the input
features suggested in [8] (i.e., TLS handshake header) for
AutoML4ETC.

Table VII presents the performance of the AutoML4ETC
approach compared with other state-of-the-art ETC models
in service-level classification. It is evident that AutoML4ETC

2728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

outperforms the state-of-the-art models across all the datasets.
In fact, the AutoML4ETC-generated model is ∼1 to 60.1%
more accurate than the state of the art. Moreover, it is simpler and lighter, with over 50 times fewer parameters than
the state-of-the-art models on average. Table VIII presents the
same results for application-level classification.
Interestingly, on the synthetic QUIC - UCDavis dataset [36],
AutoML4ETC achieves 100% accuracy recording the highest
achievable accuracy with around 100 times fewer parameters
than the state-of-the-art models. The detailed architecture is
depicted in Figure 13 as an example. The architecture found
by AutoML4ETC is totally different from the hand-crafted
state-of-the-art models, which further reinforces the benefit of
AutoML4ETC.
V. C ONCLUSION & F UTURE W ORKS
In this paper, we introduce AutoML4ETC a novel and fully
automated neural architecture search tool for the early classification of encrypted traffic. AutoML4ETC is comprised of
a powerful neural architecture search space tailored for raw
packet byte-based classification, whose building blocks were
carefully selected based on an exhaustive literature review
along with our experience in designing and experimenting
with a state-of-the-art encrypted traffic classifier. The neural
architecture search space is supplemented with efficient search
algorithms and training strategies, whose evaluation is reported
on several public benchmark and Orange mobile network
traffic datasets. We showcase that AutoML4ETC-generated
architectures are significantly more light-weight, more effective, and better performing than state-of-the-art ETC models
on diverse datasets.
In recent years, Attention Networks [51] and Transformerbased [52] architectures have shown good performance in
ETC. However, their unique architectures with no obvious
repetitive structure, pose challenges for AutoML. In the future,
we will investigate the possibility of including Attention
Networks and Transformers in the NAS search space. We will
also investigate more efficient ways for searching better performing neural architectures, for example, by using one-shot
approaches [53].
R EFERENCES
[1] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted
traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation,
lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
[2] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. Hossein Zade, and M. Saberian,
“Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using
deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020.
[3] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li,
“FS-Net: A flow sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), 2019, pp. 1171–
1179.
[4] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2img: A sequence-to-image
based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2017, pp. 1271–1276.
[5] I. Akbari et al., “Traffic classification in an increasingly encrypted
Web,” Commun. ACM, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 75–83, Sep. 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3559439
[6] A. Khajehpour, F. Zandi, N. Malekghaini, M. Hemmatyar, N. Omidvar,
and M. J. Siavoshani, “Deep inside Tor: Exploring website fingerprinting
attacks on Tor traffic in realistic settings,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput.
Knowl. Eng., 2022, pp. 148–156.

[7] N. Malekghaini, H. Tsang, M. A. Salahuddin, N. Limam, and
R. Boutaba, “FSTC: Dynamic category adaptation for encrypted network
traffic classification,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf. (IFIP Netw.), 2023,
pp. 1–9.
[8] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an
increasingly encrypted Web,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2021.
[9] N. Malekghaini et al., “Data drift in DL: Lessons learned from encrypted
traffic classification,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–9.
[10] N. Malekghaini et al., “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification
in the face of data drift: An empirical study,” Comput. Netw., vol. 225,
Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109648.
[11] T. Schaul and J. Schmidhuber, “Metalearning,” Scholarpedia, vol. 5,
no. 6, p. 4650, 2010.
[12] S. Hochreiter, A. S. Younger, and P. R. Conwell, “Learning to learn
using gradient descent,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2001,
pp. 87–94.
[13] T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, and F. Hutter, “Neural architecture search: A
survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1997–2017, 2019.
[14] B. Zoph and Q. V. Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017, pp. 1–16.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1Ue8Hcxg
[15] M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg, M. Blum, and
F. Hutter, “Efficient and robust automated machine learning,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 2962–2970.
[16] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[17] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada, Rep., 2009.
[18] B. Zoph, V. Vasudevan, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Learning transferable architectures for scalable image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 8697–8710.
[19] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009, pp. 248–255.
[20] H. Pham, M. Guan, B. Zoph, Q. Le, and J. Dean, “Efficient neural
architecture search via parameters sharing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4095–4104.
[21] S. Ruder. “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks.”
2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05098.
[22] L. Kocsis and C. Szepesvári, “Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006, pp. 282–293.
[23] L. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Jinnai, Y. Tian, and R. Fonseca, “Neural architecture search using deep neural networks and monte carlo tree search,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, 2020, pp. 9983–9991.
[24] E. Real et al., “Large-scale evolution of image classifiers,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 2902–2911.
[25] E. Real, A. Aggarwal, Y. Huang, and Q. V. Le, “Regularized evolution for image classifier architecture search,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 4780–4789.
[26] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial
naíve-bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Security,
2009, pp. 31–42.
[27] N. Williams, S. Zander, and G. Armitage, “A preliminary performance
comparison of five machine learning algorithms for practical IP traffic
flow classification,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36,
no. 5, pp. 5–16, 2006.
[28] R. Boutaba et al., “A comprehensive survey on machine learning
for networking: Evolution, applications and research opportunities,” J.
Internet Services Appl., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–99, 2018.
[29] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Inform. (ISI),
2017, pp. 43–48.
[30] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted Internet traffic classification is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 680–687.
[31] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile
encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944.
[32] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT:
A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web
Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3485447.3512217

MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

[33] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identification using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362,
2019.
[34] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[35] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, vol. 2, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[36] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
just a few labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets,”
2018, arXiv:1812.09761.
[37] L. Yang, A. Finamore, F. Jun, and D. Rossi, “Deep learning and zero-day
traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-grade dataset,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4103–4118,
Dec. 2021.
[38] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Security, 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
[39] J. Piet, D. Nwoji, and V. Paxson, “GGFAST: Automating generation
of flexible network traffic classifiers,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf.,
2023, pp. 850–866.
[40] N. Erickson et al., “AutoGluon-Tabular: Robust and accurate automl for
structured data,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06505.
[41] A. Płońska and P. Płoński, “MLJAR: State-of-the-art automated
machine learning framework for tabular data. Version 0.10.3,” MLJAR,
Łapy, Poland, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/mljar/mljarsupervised
[42] D. F. Isingizwe, M. Wang, W. Liu, D. Wang, T. Wu, and J. Li, “Analyzing
learning-based encrypted Malware traffic classification with AutoML,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Technol. (ICCT), 2021, pp. 313–322.
[43] “TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems.”
2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.tensorflow.org/
[44] F. Chollet et al. “Keras.” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io
[45] M. Zaharia et al., “Apache spark: A unified engine for big data processing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 56–65, Oct. 2016. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2934664
[46] D. IO. “Hypernets.” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
DataCanvasIO/Hypernets
[47] E. Rescorla, K. Oku, N. Sullivan, and C. A. Wood, “TLS
encrypted client hello,” Internet Eng. Task Force, Fremont, CA,
USA, Feb. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
html/draft-ietf-tls-esni-14
[48] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. Islam Mamun, and
A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using
time-related features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy,
2016, pp. 407–414.
[49] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer, “Finite-time analysis of the
multiarmed bandit problem,” Mach. Learn., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 235–256,
2002.
[50] G. Ke et al., “LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision
tree,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, pp. 3146–3154.
[51] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[52] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MTFlowFormer: A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic
classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Min., 2022, pp. 2576–2584. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3534678.3539314
[53] G. Bender, P.-J. Kindermans, B. Zoph, V. Vasudevan, and Q. V. Le,
“Understanding and simplifying one-shot architecture search,” in Proc.
ICML, 2018, pp. 549–558.
Navid Malekghaini received the B.Sc. degree in
computer engineering from Sharif University and
the master’s degree in computer science from the
University of Waterloo. After his Master’s, he continued as a Senior ML Researcher and a Consultant
with the University of Waterloo, Canada, in collaboration with Orange Labs R&D, France. His research
revolves around the intersection of machine learning,
network security, network management, and cloud
computing with a focus on automation and scalability. He is also a reviewer for peer-reviewed journals
and conferences.

2729

Elham Akbari received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees
from the Sharif University of Technology. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the University
of Waterloo. Her work concerns network traffic
classification and the application of few-shot and
meta-learning algorithms in encrypted network data
analysis.

Mohammad A. Salahuddin (Member, IEEE)
received the Ph.D. degree in computer science
from Western Michigan University in 2014. He
is currently a Research Assistant Professor of
Computer Science with the University of Waterloo.
His research interests include the Internet of Things,
content delivery networks, network softwarization,
network security, and cognitive network management. His coauthored research publications have
received numerous awards, including the ACM
SIGMETRICS Best Student Paper, the IEEE/IFIP
NOMS Best Papers, and the IEEE CNOM Best Paper. He serves on the
TPC for international conferences and is a reviewer for various peer-reviewed
journals, magazines, and conferences.

Noura Limam (Member, IEEE) received the
M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from
the University Pierre and Marie Curie (currently
Sorbonne University), France, in 2002 and 2007,
respectively. She is a Research Assistant Professor of
Computer Science with the University of Waterloo,
Canada. She is an active researcher and a contributor
in the area of network and service management. Her
current interests revolve around network automation and cognitive network management. She is the
Chair of the IEEE ComSoc Network Operations
and Management Technical Committee, an Associate Editor of the IEEE
Communications Magazine, and a Guest Editor of the IEEE Communications
Magazine Network Softwarization and Management Series.

Raouf Boutaba (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from
Sorbonne University in 1990 and 1994, respectively. He is currently a University Chair Professor
and the Director of the David R. Cheriton School
of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
Canada. He is the founding Editor-in-Chief of
the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND
S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT from 2007 to 2010 and
served as the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE J OURNAL
ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS from
2018 to 2021. He is a Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada, the
Canadian Academy of Engineering, and the Royal Society of Canada.

Bertrand Mathieu received the M.Sc. degree from
the University of Marseille, the Ph.D. degree from
Sorbonne University, Paris, and the Habilitation à
Diriger des Recherches degree from the University
of Rennes. He is a Senior Researcher with Orange
Innovation. He contributed to 14 national/European
projects and published over 80 papers in international conferences, journals, and books. He is
working on programmable networks, QoS and QoE,
and new network solutions. He is a member of
several conferences’ TPC.

2730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Stéphanie Moteau is a Research and Development
Engineer with Orange Labs for 18 years recognized as an Orange Expert on Future Networks.
She works on the IP metrology domain for various purposes: security, quality of service and quality
of experience, content delivery network, and traffic
classification. She participated in many collaborative
projects (French and European ones) as a contributor
and a project leader for Orange. Two years ago, she
became a Data Scientist. This gives her new methods
to perform her research activity.

Stéphane Tuffin is a Research and Development
Engineer with Orange Labs for 20 years recognized
as an Orange Expert on Future Networks. He has
been deeply involved in the transition from circuitswitched voice to IP and spent several years preparing and supporting IMS deployments in Orange
countries. In 2013, he took the lead of a research
project in the field of Web real-time communications which gave birth to a “no backend” offer. Since
2017, he has been leading a research program on
end-to-end network quality which covers network
planning, traffic classification, monitoring-troubleshooting the performance of
Internet applications, and adapting networks to the need of interactive services.
His own research interests are the monitoring of encrypted traffic and lowlatency networking. These last years, he has been refocusing research efforts
on integrating environmental limits in network management.