1446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Classify Traffic Rather Than Flow: Versatile
Multi-Flow Encrypted Traffic Classification
With Flow Clustering
Zihan Chen , Member, IEEE, Guang Cheng , Member, IEEE, Zijun Wei, Student Member, IEEE,
Dandan Niu, Student Member, IEEE, and Nan Fu, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—Encrypted Traffic Classification (ETC) can provide
necessary information support for network management and
security. The state-of-the-art ETC methods take a single flow
as the unit and only use sequence features based on in-flow relationships. In an actual network, one-time access to an application
will generate multiple flows. Taking a single flow as the classification unit will produce many repeated and potentially erroneous
results, which dramatically reduces the classification efficiency
and prevents the results from being used for effective network
management and security. In this paper, we propose a multi-flow
ETC method. Since multiple flows generated by an application
cannot be directly bound in a complex multi-application scenario,
we first cluster the encrypted traffic to acquire flow bunches
through the proposed Time Sequential Hierarchical Clustering
with Sliding Windows (TSHC-SW) algorithm. Then, based on
the flow bunches, we propose five different multi-flow classification schemas that can realize multi-flow classification effectively
with model-independent. Open-world experiments show that our
method is versatile in that it can pursue classification accuracy,
speed, or sample covering rate, respectively, according to the
actual demand and network environment constraints. In flow
clustering, we achieve 95% adjusted Rand Index and 98% purity.
In the multi-flow classification, we have over 99% F1-score, 79%
prediction time saving, and 5% sample covering rate increasing, which is far superior to the state-of-the-art single-flow
methods.
Index Terms—Multi-flow encrypted traffic classification, interflow relationship, flow clustering and flow bunch, TSHC-SW,
open-world environment.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NCRYPTED traffic has become the main form of data
transmission under the Internet of Everything. Currently,
more than 95% of the traffic is encrypted traffic [1]. Encryption
covers the load information in the original plaintext traffic,
making the matching method based on Deep Packet Inspection
(DPI) invalid [2]. The unavailability of information related
to traffic on the network side brings significant challenges to

E

Manuscript received 22 February 2023; revised 6 July 2023 and
7 September 2023; accepted 1 October 2023. Date of publication
9 October 2023; date of current version 15 April 2024. This work is supported by the General Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 62172093 and the Joint Funds of the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant No. U22B2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
T. Inoue. (Corresponding author: Guang Cheng.)
The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China (e-mail: chengguang@
seu.edu.cn; gcheng@njnet.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3322861

network management, information authentication, and network
security of ISP as well as security enterprises. This situation
makes encrypted traffic analysis, especially Encrypted Traffic
Classification (ETC), which can effectively obtain the current traffic, become a hot and essential research direction.
Moreover, ETC makes up for the shortcomings of log analysis
based on the end system and has the advantages of largescale, near real-time, transparent, and cross-temporal analysis.
For network management, ISPs can synchronize the analysis of millions of users on the backbone border gateway
through ETC to achieve billion-level traffic acceleration to
ensure user Quality of Experience (QoE). For network security, ETC can identify and block network attacks even before
they occur. ETC refers to classifying encrypted traffic into
specified known services or applications by extracting features
not covered by the encryption. As the smallest independent
unit for users to interact on the Internet, the application is
highly bound to the enterprise. Therefore, the application classification of encrypted traffic can enable ISPs to secure the
transmission of specific applications of specific enterprises,
thus obtaining numerous benefits. This process is also the basis
for fine-grained application behavior auditing (ISPs must first
know which application the traffic belongs to before further
analyzing it).
Initially, academia and industry tended to use residual plaintext information, such as TLS SNI or plaintext DNS on ETC.
Although encrypted DNS (e.g., DoH, DoT) is not widely
deployed, and ESNI or ECH is far from being adopted, these
technologies, as well as the TLS-1.3 protocol, will completely
invalidate such methods. The complete absence of deterministic residual plaintext information makes Artificial Intelligence
(AI) methods widely used in ETC. As a typical supervised
learning problem, AI methods applied include traditional
machine learning [3], [4], [5], ensemble learning [6], [7] and
deep learning [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. The existing
ETC methods mostly take the flow [14] or the packet sequence
in the flow as the classification unit and extract the statistical
features [3], the residual plaintext features [4], the interarrival time sequence features [15] and the length sequence
features [13] for classification. These methods are mainly
divided into two research paths, encrypted traffic classifier
optimization [16] or encrypted traffic feature engineering [17].
In addition, there is also some research on the clustering
of encrypted traffic. Unknown applications or services are
mainly discovered through feature clustering [18]. However,

c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

Fig. 1. Multi-resource request diagram of Over-The-Top (OTT) applications.

it is worth noting that since the flow is the atomized efficient
unit in network management and analysis, the existing research
on encrypted traffic clustering also takes flow as the basic unit.
However, the above methods ignore an essential phenomenon of network application transmission – an application
or Web page providing services, or even some system control
behavior, will generate multiple flows in the process of onetime access [19], as shown in Figure 1. Existing research on
ETC or feature clustering takes a single flow as the processing
unit. However, multiple network flows from a single access are
correlated with each other [2]. Hence, in the actual network
environment, if each flow is classified, the following problems
may exist: (1) Multiple flows generated by one application,
even in one-time access, have different importance and significance. The classification results of each flow may be different
in terms of category and confidence, leading to a consequential error or even unavailability of the results. (2) The number
of flows generated by the access is enormous, but multiple
flows all point to the same application. The repeated classification wastes computing resources greatly, and the throughput
is reduced exponentially. (3) The information of a single flow
generated by the application may be limited, and the classification results with high confidence cannot be obtained.
(4) Application of the external hyperlink and reusing the same
function or open Web service of a vendor will result in a partial
diversion of reference or mutual confusion, leading to misclassification. Due to the above problems, the current research on
ETC is still challenging to apply to the actual network environment, especially with poor effects in the open-world online
scenario.
A few existing pieces of research also use multiple flows
to encrypt traffic classification [5], [20]. It uses multiple flows
in a TLS/TCP session, that is, all the flows that are transmitted between two communicators over a period of time
(usually during the life of the session, that is, before it expires).
However, the behavior of multiple flows in a session is not
necessarily related, and the ubiquitous randomized flow interspersion brings noticeable conceptual drift to the classification.
In addition, the traffic classification of the entire session is not
interpretable, and it is not easy to give a normalized label to
the traffic of the entire session. In addition, from the classifier’s
input, it is still a single flow classification in essence.

1447

Therefore, this paper focuses on classifying encrypted traffic for multiple flows generated by one-time access to network
applications or services. Our method is fundamentally different from the existing classification based on multiple flows in
a session. First, we discuss in depth the pattern of network
application or service data transmission to further embody the
significance of multi-flow classification. Then, based on the
theory of information entropy and information disclosure, we
analyze the in-flow and inter-flow relationships contained in
the one-time access. It provides a theoretical basis for multiflow classification. Afterward, we put forward the concept of
flow bunch and formalized the flow clustering and multi-flow
classification of encrypted traffic problems. On this basis, aiming at the problem of construct flow bunch, which is the basis
of multi-flow classification, we propose the Time Sequential
Hierarchical Clustering with Sliding Windows (TSHC-SW)
algorithm to realize the clustering of encrypted traffic. Further,
we propose five demand-oriented multi-flow classification
schemas for encrypted traffic, and they are based on three
training modes. In order to measure different schemas, we
propose the Sample Covering Rate (SCR) metric, which represents the proportion of flow bunch results that can be classified
in an actual network environment. Different multi-flow classification schemas can be selected in pursuit of classification
efficiency, accuracy, or applicability. We finally achieved versatility for multi-flow ETC combined with the choosing mode
for flow.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We introduce multi-flow classification into ETC for the
first time and deeply study the generation relationship
during one-time access of an application. Based on
this, the in-flow and inter-flow relationships are formally
analyzed, laying a theoretical foundation for multi-flow
classification.
• We aimed at the problem that the packets cannot be
directly formed to all the flows in one-time access of
an application. To solve this problem, we put forward
the concept of a flow bunch and propose the TSHC-SW
clustering method to realize the binding of multiple flows.
• We propose five kinds of demand-oriented multi-flow
classification optimization schemas for encrypted traffic. It consists of three different training modes, which
are model-independent. We propose a new classification
metric, SCR, which can effectively describe the actual
network applicability of the schemas. Each schema has
its own specialties.
• We collected and published two new encrypted traffic
datasets in the actual CERNET environment. The datasets
contain two dimensions of labels, which can be used to
study ETC and encrypted flow clustering. We conducted
detailed experiments in flow clustering and multi-flow
classification with state-of-the-art models. It proves that
multi-flow classification is versatile and far outperforms
single-flow classification.
The rest of the paper is shown as follows. Section II
introduces the existing research on ETC and clustering. In
Section III, we introduced encrypted application data transmission mode as well as the relationship in and between flows.

1448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE I
A LL THE ACRONYMS U SED IN T HIS PAPER

Then, we formally defined the research problems of this paper.
Section IV presents the flow clustering method and multi-flow
classification schemas. In Section V, we conduct experiments
from three aspects to demonstrate the validity of our method.
Finally, we summarize our research and discuss the future
research directions in Section VI. All the acronyms used in
this paper are shown in Table I.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Existing researches mainly fall into two categories. One is
to classify known services or applications, which is called
ETC. The other is to discover and classify unknown services
or applications, which mainly involves a clustering algorithm,
summarized as encrypted traffic clustering in this paper.
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification
As a typical supervised learning problem, the two most critical elements in the supervised learning problem are feature
and classifier. The initial research on ETC mainly focuses on
classifier optimization, uses statistical features of flow granularity, and introduces traditional machine learning methods
such as decision tree [3], and SVM [5]. However, the accuracy
of traditional machine learning classification methods needs
to be improved, and their performance in large-scale traffic
and multi-category classification could be more satisfactory.
Therefore, ensemble learning methods are gradually used in
ETC. The most representative ones are the ensemble Markov
chain model WENC [6] and the well-known random forest
model [7].
However, both traditional machine learning and ensemble
learning are faced with the problem of poor generalization
ability and the requirement to specify features for classification in advance. In deep learning, the neural network is
used as the classification base, which has good generalization ability and end-to-end learning characteristics, which
is also known as automatic feature selection. Raw data is
directly input into the neural network to realize classification.
Therefore, deep learning methods are widely used in ETC,
representative of which are basic models such as CNN [8],
LSTM [9], Text-CNN [10], and CapsNet [11]. There are also
some mixed models such as STNN (LSTM + 3D-CNN) [12]
and LSCDL (bi-GRU + CapsNet/LSTM) [14]. However, the

deep learning method also has some defects, such as the lack
of the interpretability of the model and the weakness in highdimensional optimization of features [14] as well as ignoring
of structural features [20]. Similar to natural language, traffic
data will be cut into different PDUs due to the network protocol stack, and high-dimensional features will be lost when the
original traffic data is inputted in one go, which would lead to
the suboptimal. In addition, encrypted traffic, unlike images,
is structured data containing security protocols and network
protocol stacks, and such features will be erased when the
original traffic is directly input. Hence, there spawns a large
number of studies on encrypted traffic feature engineering and
some interpretable artificial intelligence studies [21].
In the research of encrypted traffic feature engineering, since
the packet sequence is a data sequence with time intervals,
some studies start from the time series features, such as the
Flowpic in the general domain [22] and time transform domain
features [15].
However, more studies consider that the packet interval
is not a stable feature and will be affected by the fluctuation of the network environment. Therefore, more attention is
paid to the Markov properties among packets, from TLS message type state transition features [17], [23] to length sequence
features [16], [24], [25], [26].
Although the packet length sequence is related to the overall
application data length, taking the packet as the granularity also ignores the high-dimensional feature optimization.
Therefore, there are GraphDApp model [27] using graphic
packet length sequence as features, LSCDL (our previous
work) [13], [14] using multi-PDU length sequence as features, and path signature features to depict packet length
sequences [28]. These works are summarized as Table II.
However, all of these studies use a single flow as a unit. In
the actual network environment, the traffic of an application
or a service consists of multiple flows. Therefore, taking the
traffic of access as a unit for analysis will have better accuracy [29]. In addition, in the scenario of big data, the volume of
traffic is large, and the efficiency of a single flow classification
cannot be guaranteed [30].
Very few studies consider the correlation between multiple
flows and use multiple flows as the classification unit, such as
using the flow triples (destination IP, destination port, protocol)
to form the Bag of Flows (BoF) for further classification [31].

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

1449

TABLE II
R EPRESENTATIVE W ORKS ON ETC (I NCLUDING B OTH C LASSIFIER O PTIMIZATION AND F EATURE E NGINEERING , S ORTED BY Y EAR )

However, in most cases, BoF is just a bag of flows of different users or at different times accessing the same port on the
same server (and this port is likely to be a generic port, such
as 443). These flows are not correlated in behavior, and the
results are challenging to support decision-making. Another
research [32] uses target flow and its contextual flows with
the same device IP as input. Then it classifies the flows into
different applications that overlap with the target bidirectional
flow duration together. However, in the actual network environment, the existence of concurrent behavior and application
long flow (mostly the application session maintenance flow)
will cause the failure of this method in constructing context
inputs. Therefore, this paper selects multiple flows in one-time
access as the classification unit.
B. Encrypted Traffic Clustering
The premise of multi-flow classification is that multiple
flows belong to one access, which involves the study of
encrypted traffic clustering. Encrypted traffic clustering is an
unsupervised process that is based on the features of encrypted
traffic. Most existing research on encrypted traffic clustering
aims to classify the traffic with similar features into a service or application and then determine whether it belongs to
a known one or a new one by other identification methods.
The representative clustering methods include Levenshtein
distance calculation [33] in encrypted video traffic clustering,
CNN combined with K-means [34] in unknown application
mining from traffic, agglomerative clustering [35] as guidance
for classification, and Enhanced Rough K-Means algorithm
(ERKM) [36] to aggregate flows to improve QoS mapping
efficiency. These works are summarized as Table III.
Aiming at the clustering of the encrypted flow,
Mateless et al. [19], used K-means and other algorithms for
flow clustering. This proves that it is feasible and accurate to
cluster the flow of a network entity.

TABLE III
C URRENT W ORKS ON E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LUSTERING

III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Application Data Transmission Pattern
The complexity of applications leads to the diversification of
resources. Taking HTTPS Web as an example, a single Web
access will generate many requests and responses for data.
That is, an application can generate multiple application data
transfers in its use (if two-way data is transferred simultaneously, it can be called interaction). Data are carried by network
traffic, and the basic unit of network traffic is the flow [16],
which is formed by the piecewise decoupling mechanism [37].
In most cases, single access to an application will result in
multiple transfers of application data, that is, multiple flows.
These flows have two modes, the first is the continuation mode,
and the second is the concurrent mode. The continuation mode
means that the subsequent flow is generated after the end of
a flow with the same belonging. The concurrent mode means
that two flows do not have an explicit membership relationship
with each other but simultaneously serve the same access.
In terms of protocols, multiple flows may use similar or
completely different protocols. Because one access may interact with multiple devices, the purpose of different flows may
be different, resulting in different protocols.
It is worth noting that the multi-flow classification in this
paper does not consider the problem that a source IP may

1450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 2. Relative duration distribution of each flow in one representative access of eight applications: (a) Sohu, (b) Douban, (c) Bilibili, (d) Sina, (e) Netease,
(f) JD, (g) Hupu, (h) Youku.

represent multiple network entities in the NAT environment,
and the identification of multiple network entities after the
same IP has been discussed in existing studies [19].
We selected eight typical applications, all of which are
within the dataset proposed in this paper. According to the statistical results of the captured data, it can be found that the time
distribution of multiple flows at a time is shown in Figure 2.
The abscissa of each subgraph is the relative arrival time concerning the start time of the first flow, while the ordinate is
the number of the flow, starting with 1.
As seen from the figure, no matter what kind of application, many flows will be generated in the process of one-time
access, and these flows are almost all continuous in the time
distribution. The result is consistent with our analysis, and this
phenomenon indicates the necessity of flow clustering. The
real application usage information can be obtained only by
classifying all the flows of the access. Otherwise, many same
application classification results will be obtained, which may
contain many errors. Meanwhile, there are apparent differences in the timestamp distribution of multiple flows generated
by one access in different applications, which also provides
essential feasibility support for multi-flow classification.

B. Access Level Encrypted Traffic Length Sequences
ETC relies on features, and better features will provide
more information disclosure, thus raising the upper limit of
classification effectiveness [38]. Hence, we should explore the
residual features of encrypted traffic as much as possible to
make the relative information gain greater to improve the theoretical classification effect of encrypted traffic. The length
sequence feature is the most effective in ETC, so this paper
selects the packet length sequence as the basic feature.
It is worth noting that information gain is the theoretical
upper limit. In practice, using this feature does not mean that
we can fully utilize this feature, and this upper limit needs to
be approximated by the classification model.
Each flow has its sequence of packet lengths for multiple
flows generated by a single access. The encrypted traffic packet

length sequence is a structured discrete value sequence in
which there is a Markov relationship between each value,
which is referred to as an in-flow relationship. The flows
within a single access are correlated, so there is also a certain
correlation between the packet length sequences of multiple
flows. This correlation comes from the resource correlation
caused by the application data transmission mode, which is
called the inter-flow relationship.
The theoretical advantage of multi-flow classification is that
it can use the additional feature space of multi-flow to reduce
uncertainty and improve the classification accuracy’s upper
limit without changing the sample entropy and the original
feature condition entropy. Formally, suppose X is the sample space labeled by category, and Y is the feature space of
single-flow classification. It is equivalent to more than an extra
encrypted traffic feature space Z, making H(X | Y) becoming
H(X | YZ) (H is the conditional entropy). The formula is:

Pr (yz )H (X |(Y = y, Z = z ))
H (X |YZ ) =
y,z ∈Y ,Z

= −



Pr (y) Pr (z )

y,z ∈Y ,Z



x ∈X

Pr(x |y) Pr(x |z ) log2 Pr (x |y) Pr(x |z )
(1)

Therefore, we should also select encrypted traffic packet
length sequences from multiple flows and combine them to
form new features, which is the theoretical source of feature
selection for multi-flow classification.
C. Problem Definition
Two problems need to be considered in this paper: the clustering of encrypted traffic and the multi-flow classification
of encrypted traffic. The clustering of encrypted traffic is a
prerequisite for the multi-flow ETC.
Firstly, we formally describe the problem of encrypted flow
clustering. To realize the clustering, we propose the concept
of flow bunch. A flow bunch refers to a collection of flows

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

formed by flow clustering with certain features around a single
device at one access.
Therefore, the encrypted flow clustering problem is a process of combining multiple encrypted flows to form a flow
bunch based on certain features. Assume that the encrypted
traffic to be analyzed is E, and a total of N encrypted flow
inputs are included. These flows need to be clustered. The
actual application access to which they belong is T, and there
are A pieces of access in total. Then, all the flows generated
by the i-th access are ti , ti ∈ T , i ≤ A, ∀p ∈ ti , p ∈ E .
However, in the real world, we do not know the real number
of access, and we also do not know how many flows there are
for each access. Assume that the k-th flow in all the N flows
(k ) (k )
(k )
can be expressed as pk = [f1 , f2 , . . . , fm ], which m is
(k )
the total number of clustering features, fi
on behalf of the
i-th feature. Then encrypted flow clustering’s goal is to build
a clustering model, θ(p1 , . . . , pN ) to obtain Ã bunches which
is expected to be equal to A, and each clustering produces a
bunch bi = ti as far as possible the same as the ti .
Based on the flow bunches acquired by encrypted flow
clustering, the problem of multi-flow ETC is to classify
flow bunches based on in-flow length sequence features and
inter-flow length sequence features. Suppose that there are
currently M flow bunches to be classified, and there are C
different application categories, the k-th flow bunch bk =
(k ) (k )
(k )
[x1 , x2 , . . . , xu ], and the j-th sample flow in the flow
(j ) (j )
(j )
(j )
bunch xj = [l1 , l2 , . . . , lr ], where lq represents the
length of q-th packet in the flow.
Hence, this paper’s ETC goal is to build a classification
model φ(wk ) and effectively combine the above features of
k
multiple flows in one flow bunch to get a forecast label S
which is expected to be the same as the real label Sk .
It is worth noting that since the ETC in this paper is accessoriented, the concurrent flows of a given app must execute one
and only one transaction. Hence, we do not need to consider
the problem of different flows acting on different functions,
as different functions that users do will be different pieces of
access.

IV. M ULTI -F LOW E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION
In order to realize multi-flow classification, we first cluster multiple flows generated by one access. After clustering
multiple flows, we further study the multi-flow-oriented ETC
approaches.
A. Flow Clustering
Since this paper is focused on multi-flow classification, we
first need to clarify what “multi-flow” is.
From the perspective of traffic generation, multi-flow is
defined as a collection of all flows generated by an application during single access. If the same application is accessed
multiple times in a row, the flows should not belong to the
same multi-flow classification unit (i.e., flow bunch). In other
words, multi-flow classification is access-oriented and takes
access as the minimum unit. It is worth noting that both TCP

1451

and UDP may be used in a single access, depending on each
resource’s transmission requirements and configurations.
Theoretically, all flows in single access belong to the same
source IP address. However, in the actual network environment, we find that some applications use both IPv4 and IPv6
in a single access. If the source IP address is used only to
divide access devices (In actual networks, traffic collection
points are targeted at multiple devices, so devices must be
differentiated first), multiple flows generated simultaneously
are divided into different devices. Here, we take an isometric
mapping approach to map source IP addresses in the case of
both IPv4 and IPv6 in the samples so they can be divided into
the same device. In addition, in the actual traffic environment,
the ISP can synchronize the IPv4 address and IPv6 address of
the same device based on the ADSL number or device number, so the interference caused by the dual-track IPs of a single
device should not be considered.
However, from the perspective of third-party traffic classification, access is a kind of information that cannot be directly
obtained in the actual network environment. We also have no
way of predicting in advance the number of flows that each
access contains or the total amount of access in the current
time window.
In order to ensure QoE, data will be transmitted as soon as
possible during application access, so the access life cycle is
limited. Although a flow is a finite but unbounded time series,
it can also be limited due to the finiteness of the data. In the
actual network environment, the timeliness of ETC also makes
it necessary to truncate a flow by using the sliding window on
timestamps.
Therefore, in the process of flow clustering, we do not need
to consider and should not consider clustering all the flows in
a long period at one breath (or all the flows in the traffic file
in the case of an offline classification scenario). The first step
is to divide the flows by time window and cluster the flow in
the time window. If a flow is divided into two time windows,
feature merging or feature truncation can be used.
The multi-flow clustering process should not affect the
subsequent classification process in the actual network environment. Hence, we use simple statistical features of the
packet or flow granularity for flow clustering. Due to the
immediacy of access, multiple flows in the flow bunch will
also have a concentration in time. The correlation of data may
also make the length and quantity of the packets correlated.
We selected 15 common statistical features. These statistical
features include four categories: general protocol features, general time-dependent features, general quantity related features,
and general length-dependent features, as shown in Table IV.
In protocol features, we only use ports because the bunch may
contain different transport layer protocols, but there may be
similarities or increments between ports. Time-dependent protocols are our focus because flows of the same flow bunch are
time-concentrated and similar in network environments. The
quantity and length features are also theoretically suitable for
flow clustering as they represent data, so we also included
them in the feature significance experiment.
It is worth noting that our clustering goal is the current
traffic, clustering it into multiple access. Even if some access

1452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE IV
A LTERNATIVE S TATISTICAL F EATURES FOR F LOW C LUSTERING

Fig. 3.

Feature significance assessment chart with ARI.

belongs to the same application, these access units will be
separated into different clusters. Furthermore, we evaluated the
feature significance. We used standard hierarchical clustering
to evaluate the clustering significance of single features. We
used the average Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) as the evaluation
criteria for features. The higher it is, the more influential the
feature is.
Firstly, we used the basic hierarchical clustering method to
randomly select parameters to evaluate the significance of the
above features. Since the parameter gap was not considered
in this process, distance_threshold was set as 2, the linkage
was set as the ward, and the time window was set as 300 seconds. The graph of feature significance assessment is shown
in Figure 3.
According to the evaluation results, the two features
pkt_ts_first and pkt_ts_last are finally selected for clustering
because they have the best feature significance. In essence,
network traffic has the characteristics of sudden, so it is reasonable to use the timestamps of the flows for clustering. That
is to say, multiple flows generated by a single access will be
concentrated in a certain time interval, which is also the instant
transmission of resources required by the application to ensure
its QoE.
In the actual clustering process, we cannot predict the total
amount of flows and access in the current time window.
Therefore, distance-based clustering of fixed categories (such
as K-means) should not be chosen. Therefore, the appropriate
methods are density clustering and hierarchical clustering.

Algorithm 1 TSHC-SW
Input: sliding window size sizew , encrypted traffic to be
clustered E, distance threshold parameter d
Output: bunches set B = b1 , b2 , ..., bA
1: foreach flow p in E then
2:
pkt_ts_first_list = get_pkt_ts_first(p) //get the
starting timestamp
3:
pkt_ts_last_list = get_pkt_ts_last(p) //get the ending timestamp
4: end
5: Eremain = E
6: while Eremain = null then
7:
current_ts_first = pkt_ts_first_list[0]
8:
foreach flow p in Eremain then
9:
if Pkt_ts_first_list[p] − current_ts_first ≤ sizew
then
10:
temp_target+ = p
11:
temp_features+ = [pkt_ts_first_list[p],
pkt_ts_last_list[p]
12:
end
13:
else then
14:
current_ts_first = Pkt_ts_first_list[p]
15:
Eremain = Eremain [p:]
16:
windows+ = [temp_target, temp_features]
17:
break
18:
end
19:
end
20: end
21: foreach window w in windows then
22:
foreach flow p in w then
23:
prox _t = calculate_proximity_tensor (w ) //calculate the correlation between each cluster
24:
temp_B + = p
25:
end
26:
while ∃i , j , i = j , distance(tempB [i] , tempB [j ] ) < d
then
27:
temp_B = merge_closest_clusters(temp_B )
//clusters merging through distances
28:
end
29:
B + = temp_B
30: end
31: return B

Since encrypted traffic is a kind of structured non-Euclidean
space discrete sequence data [39], we use a hierarchical
clustering algorithm to cluster multiple flows. Therefore, we
proposed a Time Sequential Hierarchical Clustering with
Sliding Windows algorithm (TSHC-SW) based on agglomerative hierarchical clustering. The algorithm flow of the
TSHC-SW is shown in Algorithm 1. The general idea of the
algorithm is to use the similarity between various clusters to
condense from dispersed massive clusters step by step gradually. Compared with the common agglomerative hierarchical
clustering algorithm, it considers the burst characteristics of
the traffic generated by each access, divides the traffic by time
window, and carries on the continuous agglomeration with the
timestamp as the feature. We did not use density clustering

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

because the time overlap and time interval distribution between
flows is related to the network environment, and there will
be noticeable differences in different applications, so it is not
suitable to describe directly with simple density because this
density is diverse.
The first step of the TSHC-SW algorithm is to form flows
from the input packets. Then, the encrypted traffic is segmented according to the size of the sliding window, and each
time window contains all the flows and truncated flows within
the initial timestamp interval to obtain multiple windows
(line 1 to line 20). Furthermore, within each time window,
the correlation between each cluster is calculated, and if the
distance between the two clusters is less than the distance
threshold, they will be merged (line 21 to line 30). This procedure ends up with the output flow bunches. Density clustering
also has the property that the clustering space is an arbitrary shape, so we use it as a control method to carry out
experiments.
Note that a device may access multiple applications simultaneously, and there may be cross-traffic between different
applications, especially between background applications and
the currently used foreground applications. Therefore, there
will inevitably be some tiny errors in the clustering process.
However, in terms of time, the sudden occurrence of access
will make the traffic very concentrated so that the flows can
be effectively clustered. Multiple accesses to an application
are clustered into different flow bunches.
B. Multi-Flow Application Classification Schemas by Flow
Bunches
After obtaining the flow bunches by clustering, we need to
classify each flow bunch further. However, it is undeniable that
multi-flows are multiple single flows, and the single flow classification of encrypted traffic has already had many research
works. Although the results of single flow classification are
challenging to be used in the actual network environment, its
classification effect has been satisfactory to a certain extent.
Therefore, schemas for bunch-oriented multi-flow application classification are proposed in detail. We summarize these
schemas into the following five schemas.
In order to ensure the consistency of input while simultaneously utilizing the in-flow relationship and inter-flow
relationship, the features in these five schemas are all formed
by the combination of the packet length sequences of flows.
The first schema is to select a flow from the current flow
bunch to directly construct the input feature for classification,
which rules the classification process from multi-flow classification to single-flow classification and uses the classification
result of the most representative flow to determine the classification result of the whole flow bunch. In this schema, we need
to decide which flow to choose. Since the TSHC-SW model
divides the time window, we can obtain the basic information
of each flow in the current time window. The most straightforward idea is to choose the first flow because the first flow
is the fastest to get. For many applications, especially in Web
browsing, the first flow is the core flow. After obtaining the
first flow, there is no need to store the features of subsequent

1453

Fig. 4.

Example graph of SF, EF, and d-CV.

flows further, and only need to maintain the flow bunch. In
addition, it is feasible to select a flow randomly, but it is
only operant when the packet length sequences of all flows
in the flow bunch are cached. We compared the two choosing
modes in a follow-up experiment. In theory, it is a pseudo
multi-flow classification, but it can significantly improve the
efficiency of pure single-flow classification. Furthermore, it
contains the most fundamental advantages of multi-flow classification, making ETC results more usable than single-flow
ones. This schema is referred to as the Single Flow (SF)
schema.
The second schema is to classify each flow in the current
flow bunch and carry out weighted voting on these singleflow classification results for multi-flow classification. This is
a very time-consuming behavior, equivalent to reducing the
multi-flow classification to multiple single-flow classifications.
However, because of the flow bunch, we gain the ability to synthesize the results of each flow to get a real and valid result.
In this case, because each flow needs to get the classification result, the classification process can be done in parallel
with the clustering process. Therefore, this mode can theoretically achieve better classification effects and more usable
classification results than simple single-flow classification. It is
essentially a secondary classification of the results of multiple
single-flow classifications. We call this schema Each Flow
(EF) schema.
In the third schema, d candidate flows are selected from the
current flow bunch for classification, and each is classified to
acquire a result. Weighted voting is also performed on these d
results. Similar to schema SF, this schema also needs to solve
the problem of which flows to choose. The most naive option
is the first-d flows, and the alternative is random-d flows. At
the same time, the value of d also needs to be considered.
This schema is between SF and EF, equivalent to balancing
the efficiency of a single flow representing the whole flow
bunch against the effect of all flows voting to get the result. A
larger d requires more classification times and cache space but
has a better effect. This schema is called d-Candidate Voting
(d-CV) schema.
Noting that in the above three schemas, the size of the
packet length sequence selected by each flow for classification is the same. Examples of these three schemas are shown
in Figure 4.
The fourth schema is to classify the entire current flow
bunch, which is relatively direct according to the clustering

1454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

results. In this schema, the packet length sequence of each
flow should be selected to form a new feature for classification in theory, which is a pure multi-flow classification. It is
because this schema directly utilizes the inter-flow relationship of multiple flows in the flow bunch, unlike EF and d-CV,
which only indirectly utilize the classification results of corresponding flows. However, in the actual network environment,
we need to face two problems. The first one is the consistency
of the input size of the classifier. A trained classifier needs to
have a fixed length input or encode it into a fixed input. In
order to ensure the suitability of the classification model to
different schemas, we do not consider the reencoding process
in this paper. So we have to fix an input upper limit for the
multi-flow classification. Another problem is that there is no
way to know how many flows a flow bunch has or how many
packets each flow has in advance. Hence, we have to fix the
upper limit of the number of chosen flows in advance, similar to d in d-CV. At the same time, to ensure the fairness of
flows (it is impossible to predict which flows in the flow bunch
are more suitable for classification), we should combine the
packet length sequence of the same size from each flow as far
as possible.
In the above circumstances, we use each flow to provide
a fixed-size packet length sequence and combine multiple
sequences of equal size to form new features for classification. The new feature’s total size is equal to that of a single
flow in SF, EF, and d-CV (that is, the size of the packet length
sequence). The fixed size provided by each flow is called each
size. It is a variable parameter, but it needs to be divisible by
the total size of the feature. This schema is called the wHole
Flow (HF) schema.
It is worth noting that the first four schemas are feature size
independent, meaning there is no need to adjust the model’s
structural hyper-parameters (this is especially important in
deep learning). Although retraining may be required under
different schemas (which is not necessary, as demonstrated in
subsequent experiments), the invariability of the model enables
hardware and rapid dynamic schema adjustments, making the
multi-flow classification more suitable for the actual network
environment.
The fifth schema is an extended multi-flow classification
schema, which combines d-CV with HF to introduce the
inter-flow relationship without sacrificing part of the in-flow
relationship. It directly selects d candidate flows from the current flow bunch and extracts each candidate’s packet length
sequence whose size is equal to the one in the SF schema for
classification. The advantage of this schema is that it can utilize more features, but it multiplies the input, resulting in much
overhead. Under this schema, because an inter-flow relationship should be considered, in addition to first-d and random-d,
we add the practice of top-d. This choosing mode selects d
flows with the largest packet counts, truncates it to feature size,
and then combines and classifies it. This schema is called the
d-Candidate Together (d-CT) schema.
Examples of HF and d-CT schemas are shown in Figure 5.
Theoretically, each of the five modes has its emphasis. The
diagram of the five modes is shown in Figure 6. Therefore,

Fig. 5.

Example graph of HF, and d-CT.

we conducted in-depth experiments to determine the effect of
specific models.
It is worth noting that multi-flow classification involves
multiple flows, each with a different number of packets. As a
result, some flows may not meet the input requirements determined by one of the preceding schemas. Different schemas
have different sample availability conditions. Even under some
extreme parameters, all flows in the whole flow bunch cannot
form the features required.
Existing studies tend to use data preprocessing to filter
flows that do not meet the requirements, but in the open-world
actual network environment, sample skipping may be caused.
In order to effectively measure this situation, we proposed the
concept of Sample Covering Rate (SCR). SCR refers to the
proportion of bunch samples conforming to the input requirements in all samples to be classified under the current schema,
which can be expressed as:
k
Number of S
(2)
M
The higher the SCR, the better the adaptability to traffic
in the actual network environment of the open world, the
less sample neglect caused (which will directly cause the
loss of classification information), and the better the global
classification effect.
SCR =

V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In order to prove the effectiveness of multi-flow classification, we conducted experiments on flow clustering, single-flow
classification baseline, and multi-flow classification.
A. Dataset and Experimental Settings
We conducted experiments on three datasets. First, we used
the widely used ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset [3] to prove the
effectiveness of the classifier under single-flow classification.
The second dataset is the latest dataset based on access
(with both access label and application category label) collected by us using the A3C system [37]. Based on this system,
we can get the real label of every access and every flow of
all applications directly on the end system at the same time.
We named this dataset Cernet-Access-2022. This dataset was
collected in the real network environment of CERNET, where

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

Fig. 6.

1455

Schematic diagram of five multi-flow classification schemas.

TABLE V
S TATISTICS OF C ORE CERNET-ACCESS -2022 DATASET (#: N UMBER OF )

user size and network infrastructure are similar to standard
carrier networks. We collect pure traffic on real user devices,
the collection paths including user manual access and script
automatic access, and the devices involve three Windows PCs,
two Linux workstations, and two Android mobile devices.
The data is from May 2022 to November 2022 and covers
the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak and the period after
the outbreak has subsided. It is worth noting that, to ensure
authenticity, we guarantee the time interval between each user
manual access action real, while the automatic access interval
of the script is smaller than the manual access interval to
test the robustness of the clustering. The data from PCs and
workstations in the dataset were all achieved by visiting the
application’s website with a browser, while the samples on
mobile phones originated from native applications.
The details of the dataset are shown in Table V. Among
them, since the unit of our multi-flow classification is one
access of the application, we strictly counted the times of
application access and the total number of flows to calculate
the average number of flows per access.
On top of this, to further test the impact of clustering, we captured 700 times of access from 100 applications
in June 2023 in the same environment, and the add-on is
named CERNET-Access-2023-Aug. Due to the small sample
size of each category, it does not conform to the training scenarios classified in this paper, so it is only used
for testing clustering. The two datasets are published at
https://data.iptas.edu.cn/web/tbps.

We chose a high-performance workstation as the verification
platform for our experiments. It has an AMD 5950x CPU,
64GB memory, and a GTX 3090 GPU. It runs CUDA version
11.1, Pytorch version 1.8.1, and Python version 3.8.8.
In terms of evaluation criteria, classification and clustering have different evaluation criteria. In classification, we still
use precision rate (Pr), recall rate (Rc), and F1-Score as the
evaluation criteria.
Furthermore, we choose three machine learning (C4.5 [3],
SVM [5], kNN), two ensemble learning (XGBoost, RF [7]),
and four deep learning (CNN [8], Deep Packet [40], FSNet [16], LS-LSTM [14]) methods as control methods to be
used as classifiers in ETC for comparison.
In flow clustering, we selected a variety of common clustering evaluation criteria and combined them with the basic
result statistics to describe the clustering effect in an all-round
way. The main criteria include average purity, average Rand
Index (RI), ARI, and average Adjusted Mutual Information
Coefficient (AMIC).
In order to simulate the unknown and unbalanced situation
of some applications in the open-world scenario, we selected
six applications from eight categories as known data, namely
our classification targets, and the other two categories as background traffic to interfere with the classification. To make the
experiment more realistic, we choose Douban, Sohu, NetEase,
Bilibili, JD, and Sina as the available data, while Youku (similar to Bilibili) and Hupu (similar to Douban) as the background
interference traffic. It is important to note that we do not classify the other two types of traffic because, in this scenario, we
do not know that they exist.
B. Experiments of Clustering Performance
Clustering is a process of unsupervised learning, so we do
not divide the training set and test set from the sub-dataset but
directly cluster the whole one. In TSHC-SW, since we need
to define the size of the sliding window of the current traffic
that needs to be clustered before the experiment starts, we first
need to define an interval of the size of the sliding window.
The significance of sliding windows is to ensure the clustering

1456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF A LL C LUSTERING E FFECTS A MONG W INDOW S IZE VALUES IN F IXED D ISTANCE T HRESHOLD

effect with as few flows as possible. That is to improve the
efficiency of clustering (prevent the appearance of busy waiting and reduce the required cache space). Hence, we set the
lower limit of the sliding window to 60 (measured in seconds),
the step to 30, and the maximum to 420.
In addition, since TSHC-SW is based on agglomerative
clustering, the distance threshold should be set to limit the
degree of agglomeration when the total number of clustering
categories is unknown. Ten values of 4, 3.5, 3, 2.5, 2, 1, 0.5,
0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 are selected as alternatives. The optimal
value of this parameter also needs to be verified by experiment.
Furthermore, for agglomerative clustering, we have to figure
out the linkage type to measure the two most similar clusters.
For encrypted traffic, it can be found from the dataset that there
is not a significant difference among the number of flows of
each access, so “ward” is selected as the linkage type, that is,
to minimize the variance increased in the process of cluster
merging.
We have conducted experiments on selecting the above
parameters. First, under the condition of a fixed distance
threshold (“1” was selected as the value of fixed distance
threshold), experiments were conducted on different window
sizes, and ARI was taken as the main evaluation criterion. The
results of all evaluation criteria are shown in Table VI.
As can be seen from the results, bigger is only sometimes
better. Although a small window will make it challenging to
contain complete real flow bunches, thus bringing obvious systematic errors to clustering, a too large window will lead to the
decline of clustering accuracy. The main reason is that when
the amount of data to be clustered is larger, the relative distance between each cluster will become less “far” due to the
dispersion of the overall distance, leading to the mis-clustering
of the boundary flows.
Then, under the condition of fixed window size (300 seconds was selected as the size value), we conducted experiments on different distance thresholds. The experimental
results under ARI as the evaluation criterion are shown in
Figure 7.
On this basis, we comprehensively conducted experiments
on all window sizes and distance thresholds and drew a
3D histogram to get the parameter selection under the best
clustering effect. The clustering effect diagram under ARI as

Fig. 7. Comparison of ARI among distance threshold values in fixed window
size distance threshold with ward as the linkage type.

Fig. 8.

3D histogram of TSHC-SW clustering effect under ARI.

the evaluation criterion is shown in Figure 8, and the results
under AMIC perform the same.
It can be seen from the results that the best one should be a
window size of 330 and a distance threshold of 1. Therefore,
we choose these two values as parameters of TSHC-SW.
Furthermore, to prove the superiority of TSHC-SW, we
compare it with DBSCAN, a typical algorithm of density
clustering methods commonly used in non-fixed category clustering. The optimal clustering results of the two are shown
in Table VII (the optimal parameters of DBSCAN are also
obtained by multi-parameter grid search).
It can be seen from the results that the TSHC-SW algorithm outperforms the DBSCAN algorithm and shows an
excellent clustering effect in various indexes, which proves

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

1457

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON OF C LUSTERING E FFECT B ETWEEN TSHC-SW AND DBSCAN M ETHOD

Fig. 9. Detailed clustering scatter distribution diagram under rectangular
coordinate system of TSHC-SW (15 clusters).
Fig. 10.
Clustering ARI of TSHC-SW under different numbers of
applications on CERNET-Access-2023-Aug.

that multi-flow classification is feasible and lays an essential
foundation for multi-flow classification.
The clustering scatter distribution diagram formed by
TSHC-SW is shown in Figure 9.
In an actual network, a single user may use a huge number
of applications, which may run continuously in the operating system’s background. Therefore, we further consider
the influence of this situation on the clustering effect. Using
the CERNET-Access-2023-Aug dataset, the clustering effect
under different applications with limited continuous access is
tested. The clustering ARI effect under different numbers of
applications is shown in Figure 10. As can be seen from the
figure, with the increase in the number of application classes,
there is no apparent relationship between the number of application categories and the clustering effect, and ARI fluctuates
periodically with the increase of categories. Within each fluctuation, the drop in ARI is caused by the inconsistency in
the tightness of the timestamps of the flows for each application in the time window, which is related to the density of
access, not the number of applications. Generally, the increase
in application categories makes the clustering effect more significant. Hence, the applicability of our method in large-scale
applications is guaranteed.
Since clustering is also time-consuming, we have conducted
experiments on the time-cost performance of clustering. It
is worth noting that since both clustering and classification
require input reading of each flow, the clustering experiment
only needs to consider the time cost of feature reading/writing
and the core TSHC-SW algorithm. Experiments show that
the throughput of clustering can reach 49,081 flows per
second.
We use the clustering result as the input of the subsequent
multi-flow classification.

C. Experiments of Classification Performance
Based on flow clustering, we need to select an appropriate
classifier to classify encrypted traffic. To ensure fairness, we
should use the same classifier for multi-flow and single-flow
classifications. The input size should also be equal to ensure
that the theoretical upper limit of information gain contained
in the sample is consistent.
We test the effect of single-flow classification and take it
as the baseline. It is important to note that this process is
bunch independent, that is, classifying each flow purely by its
application level label. It is worth noting that although deep
learning classification methods are now mainstream, we still
included traditional machine learning methods as the baseline.
Because not all analysis nodes have GPUs in the Internet of
Everything, in many cases, the actual network environment
still uses machine learning methods as classifiers. In addition,
under the Deep learning model, we did not use AppScanner,
Deep Fingerprinting, and GraphDApp, because they had limited application scenarios and rigorous input requirements.
Instead, we chose CNN, Deep Packet, FS-Net, and LS-LSTM,
which are universal.
First, we experimented with machine-learning models. It is
worth noting that training time and prediction time correspond
to 80% sample quantity and 20% sample quantity, respectively,
which is consistent with the training set and test set size. The
bar chart for a comprehensive comparison of F1-score and
training time is shown in Figure 11.
As can be seen from the results, C4.5, RF, and XGBoost
have the best classification F1-score. Therefore, considering
the classification effect and training cost comprehensively, we
will prioritize using C4.5 and RF in the subsequent multi-flow
classification.

1458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 11. Cross comparison of five machine learning and ensemble learning
methods under F1-score and training time.
TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON OF F OUR D EEP L EARNING M ETHODS
ON C ERNET-ACCESS -2022 DATASET

Fig. 13. Comprehensive comparison of four optimal methods on training
time, prediction time and F1-score.

in classification accuracy and convergence speed. Therefore,
FS-Net and LS-LSTM are more suitable for ETC and are
preferred in multi-flow classification.
However, compared with FS-Net, LS-LSTM’s advantage in
terms of time consumption and classification effect is not free
lunch. It has a large model size (98.67 MB), while FS-Net
only has less than one-third of that (29.32 MB). Therefore,
we choose two models, FS-Net and LS-LSTM, as participants
of deep learning for subsequent multi-flow classification.
Then we compare the above optimal machine learning
method, optimal ensemble learning method, and state-of-theart deep learning method. The results in F1-score, training time
and prediction time cost are shown in Figure 13.
The above results will be used as a baseline for multi-flow
classification.
D. Performance Evaluation of Different Bunch Classification
Schemas

Fig. 12. Convergence line diagram of loss and test set accuracy of four deep
learning models.

Further, we conducted experiments on the performance of
four deep learning methods under the dataset. It is worth
noting that we fully respect the limitations of input features and the selection of hyperparameters in previous studies.
However, to ensure the fairness of input, we adjust CNN and
Deep Packet slightly to adapt to the input of length sequence
and keep the four models consistent in the initial input. The
classification results are shown in Table VIII.
It is worth noting that epochs of CNN and Deep Packet
are 200, while those of FS-Net and LS-LSTM are 50 due
to the slow convergence of CNN and Deep Packet. It can be
seen from the results that the two state-of-the-art deep learning
methods (FS-Net and LS-LSTM) have better single-flow classification performance under the Cernet-Access-2022 dataset,
and the training time is also within an acceptable range.
The convergence curve of classification results (including
loss and test set accuracy) is shown in Figure 12. Results
show that LS-LSTM not only has the best classification accuracy but also has the fastest convergence rate and the lowest
initial loss, and FS-Net also has a faster convergence rate.
The two methods are far better than CNN and Deep Packet

Based on determining the classifier of ETC, we finally need
to evaluate the five different bunch classification schemas in
multi-flow classification.
Because there are certain differences between the inputs
of multi-flow and single-flow classification, which are both
reflected in the training and prediction stages, we further summarized five different flow bunch classification schemas into
three training modes in the training stage. They are single-flow
training (corresponding to SF, EF, and d-CV in prediction),
multi-flow training (corresponding to HF), and d-candidate
multi-flow training (corresponding to d-CT).
It is worth noting that in the flow bunch, we want all flows to
belong to the same access as much as possible, so we use the
flow bunch obtained after flow clustering as the classification
unit. However, because there are some errors between the flow
bunch and the real access flows, it is necessary to consider the
influence of such errors on classification results.
Purity directly reflects the number proportion of data
belonging to the cluster in each cluster. Therefore, we need
to multiply purity as a constraint factor to reflect the negative effect of the flow clustering process on multi-flow
classification. According to the clustering experiment in
the first part, the value of this constraint factor is 0.98.
First of all, we experiment with three multi-flow
classification schemas under single-flow training.

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

TABLE IX
C OMPARISON OF S INGLE -F LOW T RAINING W ITH SF P REDICTION
S CHEMA (F IRST-F LOW AND R ANDOM -F LOW ) TO BASELINE
IN F OUR M ETHODS

TABLE X
C OMPARISON OF S INGLE -F LOW T RAINING W ITH EF P REDICTION
S CHEMA TO BASELINE IN F OUR M ETHODS

1) SF Schema: The first-flow and random-flow methods
are adopted in the SF schema to select the flow bunch
representation. The classification results are shown in
Table IX.
It is worth noting that, in order to level out the target number of predictions and make the coverage of flows classified by
the two flow-choosing modes under baseline and SF consistent, we adjusted the prediction time in the baseline results and
SF results to make the total number of flows the same, which
includes 43,853 flows and 9,026 bunches. For prediction, it is
20% samples (1806 bunches). Flows that do not meet input
requirements are screened. Therefore, the number of flows participating in the classification is far less than the total number
(740,743 flows).
It can be seen from the results that compared with the
baseline, the SF schema does not bring significant improvement in classification effect and even reduces some, especially in deep learning methods. However, it significantly
improves prediction efficiency. When using the SF schema,
the prediction time is reduced to more than 10% compared to
the baseline. This prediction time saving is even more significant if we include the filtering of flows that do not meet input
requirements. However, the random-flow choosing mode consumes more prediction time than the first-flow because it needs
to preselect one flow with the random machine. In addition, the
effect is worse than that of the first mode. The reason for this
phenomenon may be that some randomly selected flows have
insufficient feature significance, and their feature boundary is
in a weak position compared with the first flow in the training
process, resulting in a decline in classification F1-score.
Therefore, it is important to take first-flow choosing mode
when using SF schema. In addition, first-flow is more in line
with online classification requirements. As long as the packet
sequence of the first flow that meets the input requirements is
taken as the input, there is no need to wait for other flows,
which significantly saves the cache space.
2) EF Schema: We also aligned the prediction time, and
the classification results are shown in Table X.

1459

As can be seen from the results, EF schema improves
classification accuracy and recall rate, and there is a nice
improvement of more than 2% if we only think about classifications. However, the improvement is limited after considering
the negative effect of clustering. Nevertheless, the prediction
time has been dramatically raised, especially in RF, a relatively
complex ensemble learning method. The prediction time has
reached 300 times the baseline, which is unacceptable.
Moreover, the classification performance in deep learning decreases compared to the baseline approach, mainly
because the deep learning’s dropout operation to ensure generalization capability reduces the classification accuracy of
low-significance flows to some extent. However, the result of
low significance flow has the same weight as that of high significance flow in the final voting, which leads to the wrong
final classification result of the whole flow bunch, resulting
in the decline of the overall classification effect. Moreover,
the complexity of the deep learning model itself leads to a
catastrophic increase in prediction time.
Therefore, the application of EF schema is very narrow
in the actual network environment. It is suitable only when
the number of flow bunches and samples to be classified is
tiny, and the computing resources are sufficient to produce.
This schema is more suitable for traditional machine learning
methods.
3) d-CV Schema: d-CV schema also contains the first and
random schemas and different d values ranging from 2 to 5.
The reason why 5 is the maximum value is that category disappearance will occur if we go higher. In other words, samples of
a certain category do not meet the input requirements and are
discarded, indicating the model’s unavailability. The prediction
results under d-CV are shown in Table XI.
It can be seen from the results that, on the whole, the classification effect is better than that of the baseline except for the
FS-Net in d = 2. The results indicate that the d-CV schema
can effectively improve classification performance. However,
the cost is exceptionally high in prediction time. From the
schema perspective, the main reason is that it has two more
processes. The first is selecting d candidates, and the second is the multiple classification times and subsequent voting
compared with SF.
Consistent with SF, compared with the first mode, the
random mode has less classification effect. It also slightly
increases the time consumed by prediction, proving that flows
generated first will have a higher significance in a single
access.
Furthermore, we compare three different schemas under
single-flow training horizontally.
First, we horizontally compare the F1-score under three
schemas in single-flow training, picking the first choosing
mode for comparison, as shown in Figure 14.
It can be seen from the results that the d-CV schema has
the best classification effect, and with the improvement of d,
the classification F1-score continues to improve. However, the
proportion of improvement has been decreasing. As d gets
larger and larger, the improvement of the classification effect
will be more and more limited. In the extreme case of EF,
the classification effect is worse than all the d-CV results.

1460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE XI
C OMPARISON OF S INGLE -F LOW T RAINING W ITH d-CV P REDICTION
S CHEMA TO BASELINE IN F OUR M ETHODS

Fig. 15.

Fig. 14. Comparison of three schemas under single-flow training of four
models on F1-score.

In addition to the reasons mentioned above for low significance flow, another reason is that EF does not limit the number
of flows each flow bunch can acquire, which also causes the
number of voting results used by different flow bunch to be
inconsistent. Many participants will vote if a bunch is large
and many flows satisfy the input criteria. This situation will
further magnify the influence of low significance flows in the
case of a large flow bunch because, in d-CV, only d candidate
flows are selected even for a large flow bunch.
Then we compare the prediction times of d-CV and EF
horizontally, as shown in Figure 15.
The results show that EF has the highest predictive time,
which is expected because it classifies all the flows at once.
As d goes up, theoretically, the prediction time should go up,

Prediction time comparison of d-CV and EF schemas.

but the actual prediction time goes down. This phenomenon
is because although the number of candidates selected from
each bunch is increasing exponentially, the number of flow
bunches that can participate in the classification is decreasing.
Some of the flow bunches that fail to select d flows to meet
the input conditions are skipped. This situation will be further
elaborated in the subsequent experiments on SCR.
4) Multi-Flow Training and HF Schema: There are obvious differences between multi-flow training and single-flow
training. It lies in that multi-flow training considers multiple
flows and pursues the same feature space size as single-flow
training. In other words, multi-flow and single-flow training
have the same requirements for the packet length sequence
input size. Hence, we need to get the packet length sequence
from not one but multiple flows after determining which flow
needs to be chosen.
In the training process, since we cannot predict the number of packets of each flow in advance, we can only limit the
number of packets of each flow to the subsequent classification, which is called each size θ (this is consistent with the
result of selecting k flows with fix value k as the meta-input
of multi-flow classification). To ensure a uniform input size
and meet the fixed input requirements of the neural network,
we better make sure that each size should be divisible by the
input size so that the number of packets provided by each flow
is fair.
In the actual network environment, we cannot predict the
total number of flows in advance, so selecting flows randomly
and extracting packets according to each size is not appropriate. Therefore, we consider using adjacent flows for sample
formation, and this approach is particularly beneficial in the
case of open-world online classification.
In multi-flow classification, FS-Net would suffer model
crashes, so we have modified it to forgo reconstruction loss.
We selected θ = 10 and θ = 25 as options of each size
to conduct training and testing in the multi-flow training scenario. The results compared with the single-flow are shown in
Table XII. It is worth noting that the training data of multiflow classification is not subject to the purity value reduction
because it is trained according to the exact flow bunch, not
the flow bunch obtained by clustering.
The results show that, on the whole, compared with the
single-flow, the effect of multi-flow classification is better,
mainly reflected in the precision rate, especially in ensemble
learning. When θ = 10, RF’s classification effect is greatly

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

1461

TABLE XII
C OMPARISON OF M ULTI -F LOW T RAINING W ITH S INGLE -F LOW
T RAINING BASELINE W ITH D IFFERENT θ

improved. However, due to the loosing of its flow input restriction, the number of available samples is greatly increased, and
the consumption of I/O is also grown so that the training time
is significantly raised. The maximum increase multiple can
be up to 17 times, which is about proportional to the square
of the number of samples. Since multi-flow and single-flow
classification has different input restrictions for prediction, the
prediction time will be compared in subsequent experiments.
From the perspective of classification accuracy, both θ = 10
and θ = 25 can improve the effect, especially when θ = 10.
However, the cost is that in the same sample space with the
unit of flow, the number of samples in the multi-flow training mode is much larger than that in the single-flow training
(even if the samples are constructed in the way of a sliding
window, not random). The main reason is that classification
under multi-flow training can give more consideration to the
relationship between flows in a bunch than single-flow classification, even if the packet input of each flow is reduced,
sacrificing the expression of a part of the Markov relationship
in the flow. The gains make up for the lack of it, especially
when θ is small.
θ = 10 has a better classification effect than θ = 25.
However, it is worth noting that the TLS-1.2 handshake contains seven packets, and augmented to the TCP three-way
handshake, it all contains ten packets. Therefore, the minimum
value of θ should be at least 10. The above phenomenon is
consistent with the assumption that multiple flows generated
at one access better represent the access than a single flow,
even with the same feature space.
Furthermore, we experimented with multi-flow classification in HF schema, including θ = 10 and θ = 25. There is
not much difference in the number of samples with different categories, each of which selects an input from each flow
bunch. It is worth noting that there will be sequence fragment
repetition under certain circumstances (which has a certain
probability of improving the classification effect very limited,
depending on the characteristics of the model). Regardless, the
whole sample will only be partially alike to avoid the result
invalidation caused by the consistency of the training set and
test set. Detailed classification results based on categories of
θ = 25 are shown in Table XIII, which includes the number
of predicted samples.
As can be seen from the results, under the condition of
θ = 25, the classification result under multi-flow training is
outstanding. No matter what kind of application, they all have
good classification accuracy, which is the same in each model.

Fig. 16. Longitudinal comparison of four models on F1-score under HF
schema with baseline, θ = 10 and θ = 25.

Fig. 17. Longitudinal comparison of four models on prediction time under
HF schema with baseline, θ = 10 and θ = 25.

This result reflects the superiority of multi-flow training over
single-flow training. With the same input size, the introduction of features of inter-flow relationships greatly improves the
classification effect. It is worth noting that this is the result
without purity reduction because it can only be applied to the
whole and cannot be carried out for a specific application.
Purity can only indicate the fit degree between the sample of
the whole cluster and the real category but cannot represent the
degree of aggregation of the sample of a specific application
category and its class.
Next, we conducted a longitudinal comparison of different
models and θ in the HF schema of multi-flow training. The
first is F1-score, as shown in Figure 16.
It can be seen from the results that HF schema significantly
improves the classification effect, which is mainly due to the
feature superiority brought by multi-flow training. It directly
proves that multi-flow classification outperforms single-flow
classification.
We then compare the prediction time in the HF multiflow classification model with the baseline time, as shown in
Figure 17.
The results show that, under the same input size, the
prediction speed of multi-flow classification is faster than that
of single-flow classification, which indicates that multi-flow
classification, especially HF schema multi-flow classification,
is more satisfactory than traditional single-flow classification
in terms of prediction time and classification effect.
5) d-Candidate Flow Training and d-CT Schema: Finally,
we experimented with d-candidate flow training, another
multi-flow classification training mode. Similar to multi-flow

1462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE XIII
D ETAILED A PPLICATION -L EVEL C OMPARISON OF F OUR M ODELS ON P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1-S CORE U NDER HF S CHEMA W ITH θ = 25

TABLE XIV
C OMPARISON OF d-C ANDIDATE F LOW T RAINING W ITH S INGLE -F LOW
T RAINING BASELINE W ITH D IFFERENT d

Fig. 18. Comparison of sample size, training time, and test set F1-score of
LS-LSTM under d-CT schema with different d.

training, it also obtains the flow to be trained through a sliding
window. The comparison of training results with traditional
single-flow training baselines under different values of d is
shown in Table XIV.
It can be seen from the results that d-candidate flow training,
as another form of multi-flow classification, has far better test
results than single-flow classification. The advantages of multiflow classification are further explained, and this process does
not sacrifice part of an in-flow relationship like multi-flow
training. It can be shown that the inter-flow relationship is
effective for classification. However, the increase in training
time is also not negligible. Normally, with the increase of d,
the classification result of the test set should get better, but
there are some exceptional cases. For FS-Net, when d = 4
and 5, the number of samples of some categories is too small,
which leads to the collapse of the model, and thus the overall
classification accuracy decreases seriously.
Furthermore, taking the LS-LSTM model as an example,
we carefully compared the relationship between sample size,
training time, and test set F1-score, as shown in Figure 18. It
should be noted that the purity reduction was not carried out
for F1-score because it was an intra-model comparison.
It can be seen from the results that the larger d is, the fewer
available samples are, and the training time will first increase
and then decrease. It is because SCR and feature space size
weigh each other. The slight decline of LS-LSTM classification F1-score is also due to the overfitting of other categories
caused by too few samples when d = 5.
The schema corresponding to d-candidate training is d-CT.
Although there are differences in training modes, d-CT and
d-CV are similar, both facing the situation that possible

Fig. 19. Comparison of F1-score, sample size, and prediction time under
d-CT schema along with first choosing mode with different d.

samples in the flow bunch are not enough to support
classification.
We first experimented with the first choosing mode under
the d-CT schema. The comparison of the F1-score, model size,
and prediction time of four models under four different values of d is shown in Figure 19. The purity reduction of the
F1-score was also not carried out.
It can be seen from the results that the number of available
samples decreases significantly with the increase of d. The
category F1-score showed slight improvement (FS-Net’s F1score fluctuation was due to model collapse, consistent with
d-candidate training). Excessive in-flow relationships will not
bring significant improvement to classification because they
are sufficient for classification, and the improvement mainly
comes from inter-flow relationships. The overall prediction
time remains mostly the same under different d, which is also
consistent with d-candidate training. Therefore, in the process
of using d-CT schema, the impact caused by the decrease in
available samples cannot be ignored.

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

Fig. 20. Comparison of F1-score under d-CT schema among first, random,
and top choosing mode with different d.

Fig. 21. Comparison of prediction time under d-CT schema among first,
random, and top choosing mode with different d.

Furthermore, we compare the relationship between three
different flow selection modes under d-CT, as shown in
Figure 20.
The results show that the random choosing mode is still the
worst, while the first mode has the best classification effect
on the whole, but for FS-Net, the top mode is better than the
first mode in all d values except d = 3. It indicates that the
top mode introduced in d-CT will have better performance
under partial models, indicating the local applicability of the
top mode.
Then the prediction time of three different flow selection
modes is given, as shown in Figure 21, where 2F refers to the
first choosing mode for d = 2 (R and T stand for random and
top, respectively).
The difference in prediction time is mainly reflected in the
model. At the same time, different choosing modes have little
influence in the case of large data volume classification, such
as d-CT. The main influencing factor lies in the number of
available samples and the size of d, that is, the feature input
size.
In classification effect, d-CT and HF are the best of the
five schemas. These two schemas belong to different multiflow training modes, reflecting the superiority of multi-flow
classification. However, in the actual deployment process, d
or θ should be determined according to the actual situation.
In addition to the classification effect, we also conducted
experiments on the model size, a system resource parameter
closely related to the open-world actual network environment.
The model size of four different models in three different
training modes is shown in Figure 22.

1463

Fig. 22. Comprehensive comparison of model size of four models on three
training modes.

Fig. 23. Comprehensive comparison of SCR under five multi-flow schemas
with all chosen d and θ.

It can be seen from the results that, among machine learning and ensemble learning, the multi-flow training model is the
largest, mainly because there are more samples for training.
The size of the d-candidate flow training model decreases with
the increase of d, because fewer and fewer samples are available. For the deep learning model, due to the fixed structure of
the neural network, the model size is consistent (sample independent). In multi-flow training, RF models are larger than
the huge LS-LSTM models when θ = 10. Therefore, the deep
learning method will have better applicability in an open-world
environment with massive data and multi-flow classification.
Then, we comprehensively evaluated SCR under different schemas, including SCR baselines for single flow
classifications, as shown in Figure 23.
The results show that the EF and SF’s SCRs are comparable to the SCR baseline of the single flow classification
because they are single flow classifications with the extension
of flow bunch. The SCRs of d-CV and d-CT were similar, and
the higher the d, the lower the SCR because there were not
enough samples in the flow bunch. HF’s SCR is higher than
the baseline because the number of packets required per flow
has decreased. The reason why θ = 25 is higher than θ = 10
is that if θ is obtained too small, it will lead to too many flows
required for each flow bunch and fall into the same problem
of insufficient flows faced by d-CV and d-CT. Hence, the HF
schema is the best from an SCR point of view alone.
SCR is a necessary but currently neglected metric in
the open-world actual network environment. The lower the
SCR, the more samples will be ignored in the actual

1464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

classification, resulting in incomplete classification results.
It reflects the superiority of multi-flow classification over
single-flow classification from another aspect.

E. Discussion and Analysis
1) Why Are EF and d-CV Schemas’ Prediction Times So
Many Times Longer Than the Baseline, Which Should Not
Be in Theory?: Although theoretically, the prediction time’s
increase is due to the growth in the number of classifications
and the voting process. However, another external factor that
dramatically increases the prediction time in implementing the
method is the repeated loading of the model. When classifying with flow bunch as the unit, the model needs to be
loaded before each voting to ensure the purity of the result to
be voted. This action is widespread in the open-world actual
network environment. However, the additional overhead of this
implementation can be greatly reduced if caching and parallel computation are used, that is, to compute and split the
bunch simultaneously (but may result in computation wastage
in d-CV schema). Therefore, this results in a dramatic increase
in prediction time for RF and the two deep learning methods, which is not evident in C4.5 due to its small model
size.
2) Why Is the First Choosing Mode More Effective Than
the Random Choosing Mode, But the Difference Between the
Two Is Insignificant in the d-Candidate, Especially When d Is
Large?: This phenomenon is due to the implementation pattern of applications, especially Web pages. HTML and core
resources are prioritized to ensure the user’s QoE. In this way,
even if the network is not good, it can still enable users to
access it as early as possible. Therefore, the previous flows
in each access are, in most cases, more significant because
they are tied to the application’s core data. The subsequent
flow is likely to be irrelevant or duplicate with other applications’ aesthetic data, external link data, and even advertising.
However, in the two schemas of d-candidate, the larger d is,
the more flows need to be selected in each flow bunch. When
the total number of flows in the flow bunch is certain, the
random choosing mode will gradually move closer to the first
choosing mode because the probability of selecting the front
flows increases with the selection times. As a result, the larger
d is, the smaller the gap between them.
3) Since Simple Multi-Flow Classification (Training)
Can Get Good Results, Is Flow Clustering Worthwhile?:
Undeniably, the test set classification results in multi-flow
training are already very good, far better than single-flow
classification. However, it is worth noting that the premise is
that we already have real access-level labels and application
labels. Hence, the selection of flows in multi-flow training
is completely correct, and there will be no case of choosing flows belonging to two different applications to classify.
However, in the actual network environment, it is impossible
to know the distribution of flow bunch without flow clustering.
So clustering is not only worthwhile but also the core basis of
multi-flow classification. On the other hand, flow clustering
can also make the classification results more available than
single flow classification, and it can also make it possible to

dynamically adjust the demand (pursuing classification speed
or classification accuracy).
However, the flow clustering process comes at a cost. Its
throughput is approximately 49,081 flows per second, while
the LS-LSTM in the fastest HF schema has a throughput
of approximately 46,501. In other words, if a deep learning
model is deployed, although the throughput of flow clustering
is higher than that of the classification model, the time expanse
cannot be ignored if serial processing is used. However, in the
actual network environment, the deep learning classification
model relies on the computing power of the GPU, while the
clustering relies on the CPU, and the two can even be processed in parallel on the same device. If multiple devices are
used, the two can be fully parallelized, thus removing the time
overhead effect of clustering on classification.
4) In the Actual Network Environment, How to Choose a
Schema and Balance the Impact of Low SCR?: It can be seen
from the experimental results that HF has the best classification effect, the fastest classification speed, and the highest
SCR. However, it has a potential premise: it needs to ensure
that each flow bunch has enough flow. This premise can be
guaranteed under normal circumstances, but the effect of HF
may not be guaranteed under special situations like sampling
or asymmetric traffic scenarios. Moreover, HF must conduct
multi-flow training in advance, which must also be considered. Although d-CT has a good effect, its low SCR makes it
more suitable for the scenario of heavy flow classification. It
focuses on the application with a long flow, such as the application under the online video service. For SF, EF, and d-CV,
they can meet different needs through the external clustering model without changing the original classification model.
It can be a balance between the classification effect, speed,
and model size, which can be selected according to the actual
demand.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we first carefully excavate the drawbacks of
the existing single-flow ETC methods. To solve this problem,
we first analyze the application data transmission pattern of
encrypted traffic and determine the multi-flow classification
idea based on access. Furthermore, from the perspective of
information entropy and information disclosure, we clarified
the representation of in-flow and inter-flow relationships under
the length sequence features, providing a theoretical basis for
multi-flow classification. Furthermore, since the flow bunch
can not be obtained directly, we propose the TSHC-SW algorithm to obtain the flow bunch. In the end, we proposed five
different multi-flow classification schemas. Each schema has
its specialties, and the pure multi-flow classification schema
HF is superior to the traditional single-flow classification
in classification effect, efficiency, and SCR. Experimental
results show that the proposed flow clustering and multi-flow
classification methods outperform the existing state-of-the-art
methods. It opens up a new research field for ETC.
The current multi-flow classification is not perfect, and there
are some special schemas that we do not consider at present.
At the same time, we did not introduce the graph feature, an
emerging aspect of encrypted traffic feature engineering. In the

CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW

future, we will continue researching multi-flow classification
and flow clustering to achieve an open-world ETC with better
results and more adaptive ability.
R EFERENCES
[1] Google. “HTTPS encryption on the Web—Google transparency report.”
2022. [Online]. Available: https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/
overview
[2] B. Yang and D. Liu, “Research on network traffic identification based
on machine learning and deep packet inspection,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd
Inf. Technol. Netw. Electron. Autom. Control Conf. (ITNEC), 2019,
pp. 1887–1891.
[3] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. Islam Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[4] J. Yang, J. Narantuya, and H. Lim, “Bayesian neural network based
encrypted traffic classification using initial handshake packets,” in Proc.
49th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Netw. Supplement. Vol.
(DSN-S), 2019, pp. 19–20.
[5] J. Muehlstein et al., “Analyzing HTTPS encrypted traffic to identify
user’s operating system, browser and application,” in Proc. 14th IEEE
Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[6] W. Pan, G. Cheng, and Y. Tang, “WENC: HTTPS encrypted traffic
classification using weighted ensemble learning and Markov chain,” in
Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, 2017, pp. 50–57.
[7] S. Bagui, X. Fang, E. Kalaimannan, S. C. Bagui, and J. Sheehan,
“Comparison of machine-learning algorithms for classification of VPN
network traffic flow using time-related features,” J. Cyber Security
Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 108–126, 2017.
[8] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Informat. (ISI),
2017, pp. 43–48.
[9] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
[10] M. Song, J. Ran, and S. Li, “Encrypted traffic classification based on
text convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Comput.
Sci. Netw. Technol. (ICCSNT), 2019, pp. 432–436.
[11] S. Cui, B. Jiang, Z. Cai, Z. Lu, S. Liu, and J. Liu, “A session-packetsbased encrypted traffic classification using capsule neural networks,”
in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun.
IEEE 17th Int. Conf. Smart City IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Syst.
(HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), 2019, pp. 429–436.
[12] Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, X. Ma, and F. Huang, “STNN: A novel
TLS/SSL encrypted traffic classification system based on stereo transform neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib.
Syst. (ICPADS), 2019, pp. 907–910.
[13] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, B. Jiang, S. Tang, S. Guo, and Y. Zhou, “Length
matters: Fast Internet encrypted traffic service classification based on
multi-PDU lengths,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mobil. Sens. Netw. (MSN),
2020, pp. 531–538.
[14] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Xu, S. Guo, Y. Zhou, and Y. Zhao, “Length matters: Scalable fast encrypted Internet traffic service classification based
on multiple protocol data unit length sequence with composite deep
learning,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 289–302, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2352864821000699
[15] G. Baldini, “Analysis of encrypted traffic with time-based features
and time frequency analysis,” in Proc. Global Internet Things Summit
(GIoTS), 2020, pp. 1–5.
[16] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow
sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[17] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM),
2014, pp. 781–789.
[18] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
filtering and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 397–405.
[19] R. Mateless, H. Zlatokrilov, L. Orevi, M. Segal, and R. Moskovitch,
“IPvest: Clustering the IP traffic of network entities hidden behind a
single IP address using machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 3647–3661, Sep. 2021.

1465

[20] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, and A. Pescapé,
“Encrypted multitask traffic classification via multimodal deep learning,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[21] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapè, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
[22] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[23] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute
bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
[24] C. Liu, Z. Cao, Z. Li, and G. Xiong, “LaFFT: Length-aware FFT based
fingerprinting for encrypted network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE
Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[25] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Qual. Service
(IWQoS), 2018, pp. 1–10.
[26] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-net: A hybrid neural network for
encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2020, pp. 424–429.
[27] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[28] S. Xu, G. Geng, X. Jin, D. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic paths:
Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
[29] X. Ma et al., “Context-aware website fingerprinting over encrypted
proxies,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
[30] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè,
“A big data-enabled hierarchical framework for traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2608–2619,
Oct.-Dec. 2020.
[31] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Xiang, and Y. Guan, “Network
traffic classification using correlation information,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 104–117, Jan. 2013.
[32] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning for
activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps during COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022,
Art. no. 109452. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1389128622004868
[33] L. Yang, S. Fu, Y. Luo, Y. Wang, and W. Zhao, “A clustering method
of encrypted video traffic based on Levenshtein distance,” in Proc. 17th
Int. Conf. Mobil. Sens. Netw. (MSN), 2021, pp. 1–8.
[34] Y. Li, Y. Lu, and S. Li, “EZAC: Encrypted zero-day applications classification using CNN and K-means,” in Proc. IEEE 24th Int. Conf. Comput.
Support. Cooperat. Work Design (CSCWD), 2021, pp. 378–383.
[35] H. Wu, X. Chen, G. Cheng, X. Hu, and Y. Zhuang, “BCAC: Batch
classifier based on agglomerative clustering for traffic classification in a
backbone network,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Qual. Service
(IWQOS), 2021, pp. 1–10.
[36] Z. Wu, Y. Dong, W. Tian, and J. Jin, “Enhanced rough K-means
based flow aggregation for QoS mapping in heterogeneous network
environments,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 1197–1210, Jun. 2020.
[37] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Xu, K. Xu, Y. Shan, and J. Zhang, “A3C system:
One-stop automated encrypted traffic labeled sample collection, construction and correlation in multi-systems,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 22,
2022, Art. no. 11731. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/12/22/11731
[38] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in
website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, CCS, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2018,
pp. 1977–1992. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.
3243832
[39] T. Huoh, Y. Luo, and T. Zhang, “Encrypted network traffic classification
using a geometric learning model,” in Proc. IFIP/IEEE Int. Symp. Integr.
Netw. Manag. (IM), 2021, pp. 376–383.
[40] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
“Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification
using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012,
2020.

1466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Zihan Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in software engineering from Central South
University in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in cyber
security from Southeast University in 2023, where
he is currently working as a Postdoctoral Fellow
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering.
His major research interests include cyber security, encrypted traffic classification, encrypted traffic
feature engineering, and deep learning. He works
as a Reviewer for multiple journals such as IEEE
I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.

Zijun Wei (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in computer science from Qingdao
University, Qingdao, China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the master’s degree with the
Department of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University. His major research interests
include traffic measurement and analysis.

Dandan Niu (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in Internet of Things from Jiangnan
University in 2021. She is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree in cyberspace security from the
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast
University. Her major research interests include
cyber security and encrypted traffic analysis.

Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in traffic engineering from Southeast
University in 1994, the M.S. degree in computer
application from the Hefei University of Technology
in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in computer network
from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2003,
where he is a Full Professor with the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering. He has authored
or coauthored seven monographs and more than
100 technical papers, including top journals and top
conferences. His research interests include network
security, network measurement, and traffic behavior analysis. He is a Senior
Member of CCF.

Nan Fu (Student Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
degree from Southeast University in 2022, where she
is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace
security from the School of Cyber Science and
Engineering. Her major research interests include
cyber security, network measurement, and behavior
analysis.