IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

3759

Clients Eligibility-Based Lightweight Protocol
in Federated Learning: An IDS Use Case
Muhammad Asad , Member, IEEE, Safa Otoum , Member, IEEE, and Saima Shaukat

Abstract—Federated learning (FL) enables clients to train
models locally, enhancing privacy by avoiding data centralization.
Traditional FL assumes all clients have adequate resources,
an often unrealistic expectation in heterogeneous networks
with resource constraints like limited battery, memory, and
bandwidth. These limitations can hinder performance, prolong convergence times, and lead to inaccurate models. To
address these challenges, we introduce the Client Eligibility-based
Lightweight Protocol (CELP), optimized for resource-constrained
environments. CELP employs a sample-based pruning mechanism and a re-parameterized FedAvg algorithm, enhancing its
management of resource variability. It also integrates an intrusion
detection system to safeguard against malicious activities. Our
results show that CELP significantly reduces communication
overhead by up to 81.01% compared to FedAvg and up to 72.54%
compared to FedProx and enhances system stability, achieving
93% accuracy on the MNIST dataset and 83% accuracy on
CIFAR-10. These improvements demonstrate CELP’s ability to
deliver robust performance and efficiency in diverse FL scenarios.
Index Terms—Federated learning, client eligibility, heterogeneous network, resource-constrained, intrusion detection.

learning models with local data and only uploads the model
parameters instead of the raw data to the centrally located
server. Upon receiving those parameters, the centralized server
aggregates those collected models and broadcasts the updated
model to all the clients for the next training round. The process
keeps repeating until the model reaches the desired convergence level [3]. Figure 1 shows an illustration of a typical
FL system. Though FL provides an advantage in terms of
communication efficiency and privacy preservation, traditional
FL performs poorly in heterogeneous and resource-constrained
networks. In heterogeneous FL, each client produces data independently, which leads to uneven data distribution, reducing
the effectiveness of conventional stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) based algorithms. Numerous techniques have been
proposed to overcome this challenge; however, the existing
techniques either suffer from slow convergence or a lack of
resources [4].
A. Motivation

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE LATEST advancements in the Internet of Things
(IoT) require significant amounts of data for processing applications such as industrial 4.0, autonomous driving,
and augmented reality [1]. To utilize effective deployment,
those applications require powerful Machine Learning (ML)
algorithms to exploit the generated data properly. However,
conventional ML designs use a centrally located data server
for training the data, which requires a considerable number
of distributed IoT devices to upload their data to a third-party
location, resulting in inefficient communication and a serious privacy concern. To overcome those communication and
privacy concerns, it is essential to introduce edge-deployed,
ML-based distributed algorithms such as Federated Learning
(FL) [2]. In particular, FL allows its clients to train their local

T

Manuscript received 24 January 2024; revised 22 April 2024; accepted
5 May 2024. Date of publication 8 May 2024; date of current version
21 August 2024. This research was supported by the College of Technological
Innovation, Zayed University (ZU), and the Technology Innovation Institute
(TII) under grant numbers RIF-20130 & EU2205. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
G. Han. (Corresponding author: Muhammad Asad.)
Muhammad Asad and Safa Otoum are with the College of
Technological Innovation, Zayed University, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mail:
Muhammad.AkmalAsad@zu.ac.ae; Safa.Otoum@zu.ac.ae).
Saima Shaukat is with the School of Information Science and Technology,
Department of Creative Informatics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 1130033, Japan (e-mail: saima@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3398213

The existing research on FL considered distributed learning
and optimization [5], [6]. However, the critical differences
between FL and traditional distributed optimization are system
heterogeneity and statistical heterogeneity. FL offers a novel
approach to building a combined global model by using
its clients’ model parameters as a learning resource [7].
The comprehensive descriptions of the FL challenges are
covered by [8]. For example, heterogeneity handling can
be done by utilizing on-device training, dealing with high
communication costs, and considering low client participation.
Federated Averaging (FedAvg), a previously developed FL
technique [2], obtains a global model using the local models
of the clients through an iterative process and optimization
strategy. Even though the FedAvg algorithm has contributed
substantially to the FL environment, several fundamental
issues that might be seen in a heterogeneous FL scenario were
neglected.
1) FedAvg assumes that randomly selected clients for
training have uniform capabilities. However, in real-time
scenarios, the participating clients may have different
system configurations.
2) FedAvg drops the clients who can’t complete their task
within a certain period and does not allow clients to
conduct partial or variable amounts of work.
3) FedAvg cannot ensure convergence if the bulk of clients
is dropped or they return diverging model updates from
the target.

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 1. The figure illustrates the typical FL system, where a set of IoT devices are connected to the cloud server. Firstly, the cloud server sends the global
model to the IoT devices; secondly, those IoT devices train the local learning models individually and then upload those trained learning models to the cloud
server. Finally, the cloud server aggregates those local models to generate a new global model for the next round.

4) When the client carries non-IID data, the performance
of FedAvg varies significantly. This means FedAvg is
not suitable for non-IID environments.
On the other hand, to mitigate these risks, our protocol
integrates an advanced Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
specifically designed for FL environments. This IDS actively
monitors and evaluates client behavior to detect and counteract
malicious activities, such as data tampering and false updates,
which are critical threats in FL settings [9]. Malicious clients
in a network can significantly impact the performance of FL
training, as they can disrupt or manipulate the data used for
training and, thus, introduce undesirable biases. In particular,
malicious clients can inject false or misleading data points into
the training datasets, leading to incorrect models or models
that are overfitted to the malicious data. These attacks can
lead to a significant decrease in the performance of FL and,
ultimately, affect the performance of the trained models [10].
In this regard, our enhanced IDS within CELP not only
identifies but also quantifies the extent of malicious activities,
allowing for dynamic adaptation of training processes to
maintain the integrity and robustness of the FL model. This
implementation of IDS in CELP is crucial for maintaining
high-quality, unbiased model training, especially in scenarios
with a high risk of adversarial attacks. An IDS can help
mitigate the effects of malicious clients in an FL network.
An IDS is a system that monitors the network for malicious

activities, such as DoS attacks, data manipulation, and false or
modified updates. The IDSs can detect malicious clients and
alert the network administrators by monitoring the network
for such activities and preventing malicious clients from
disrupting the training process, thus ensuring the accuracy and
robustness of the models trained.
B. Our Contribution
To this end, in this paper, we propose a new FL protocol, namely, Client Eligibility-based Lightweight Protocol
(CELP), that can perform efficiently in heterogeneous and
resource-constrained FL environments. In particular, to reduce
the model size, CELP uses a sample-based pruning technique. In addition, the CELP allows a partial amount
of tasks to resource-constrained clients by measuring the
clients’ eligibility scores (CES). To effectively manage the
challenges presented by heterogeneous networks, we have
re-parameterized the state-of-the-art FedAvg algorithm. The
choice of FedAvg is motivated by its proven effectiveness in aggregating model updates across diverse clients,
thereby ensuring robust model convergence while mitigating
the clients’ variable performance and resource constraints.
This adaptation further enhances CELP’s capability to deliver
reliable and efficient learning outcomes in diverse network
conditions. The experimental results show that the proposed

ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE

protocol outperforms the existing approaches regarding stability in a highly resource-constrained environment. The
significant contributions of the proposed protocol are summarized below:
• We provide a novel lightweight protocol that enables
resource-constrained FL clients to train more efficiently,
avoid selecting unreliable and low-resource clients (i.e.,
clients with limited battery life, memory, and bandwidth),
and allow different local iterations depending on the
client’s resources.
• To reduce the model size, we utilize a sample-based
pruning method that enhances the efficiency of the FL
network.
• The proposed CELP is integrated with a novel incentive mechanism that selects the most reliable clients.
Furthermore, the integration of IDS within CELP is
not just a security feature but a strategic component
that enhances overall model reliability by ensuring the
integrity of client contributions. This approach is particularly beneficial in environments where client reliability
varies significantly.
• The proposed CELP allows resource-constrained clients
to perform partial amounts of tasks, making it more
robust in real-time FL scenarios.
• We conduct extensive simulation experiments to showcase the performance of CELP in terms of pruned
updates, partial participation of clients, statistical heterogeneity, and accuracy in the presence of malicious clients.
C. Paper Organization
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we
briefly discussed the literature review in Section II. The
problem statement and motivations behind the proposed
CELP are defined in Section III. We presented the system
models in Section IV. The complete execution process of
the proposed CELP is explained in Section V. Section VI
describes the convergence analysis. The simulation settings are
discussed in Section VII. Experiments and Results are shown
in Section VIII. Section IX presents the comparative analysis,
and we conclude the paper in Section X.
II. R ELATED W ORK
The latest development of the Internet of Things (IoT)
requires huge amounts of data, which must reconsider
how distributed optimization and learning techniques are
designed [11], [12]. On one end of the spectrum, IoT services
are intended for convenience in terms of architecture, speed,
and Internet availability. On the other end of the spectrum,
the latest developments in IoT edge devices (i.e., sensors,
drones, wearables, and smartphones) allow computation at the
edge devices rather than sending data to the centralized server.
This results in the development of a new paradigm named
FL [13]. However, this new paradigm suffers from several
challenges, such as communication overhead, privacy preservation, system and statistical heterogeneity, and highly dense
federated networks [14], [15]. To this end, several researchers
developed novel optimization techniques (i.e., altering the

3761

direct method of multipliers (ADMM) [16] or mini-batch
gradient descent [17]) that perform significantly in federated
environments and outperform the conventional distributed
methods. However, those techniques perform inefficiently in
heterogeneous networks [18], [19]. For example, to balance
the computation and communication in dense networks, the
distributed optimization technique permits inexact updating of
the local models that activate the limited portion of clients
at every iteration. For instance, [20] proposes a multi-task
learning framework to help FL clients train distinct but similar
models using a primal-dual optimization technique. However,
the suggested method ensures convergence but cannot be
applied to non-convex problems. To overcome the non-convex
problems, FedAvg involves averaging the clients’ local SGD
updates and outperforming the existing approaches. Moreover,
to avoid the clients’ statistical heterogeneity in the FedAvg
algorithm, several methods considered non-federated environments, for example, [21], [22], [23] assuming the data is
uniformly and identically distributed. However, it is unreasonable to presume that each local client utilizes their local
data to execute the same stochastic process in the heterogeneous environment [24]. In addition, in [25], the authors
developed a cooperative learning framework by considering
how wireless quality, such as limited bandwidth and packet
errors, affects model training. They design objective functions
for the optimization problem by considering client selection,
resource factors, and joint learning. Moreover, in [26], the
authors studied the same issues for optimal energy consumption during transmission and model computation of FL in
wireless networks. Despite the importance of those two factors
(optimal energy consumption and transmission quality) in FL
environments, they are not in the area of the proposed protocol.
System heterogeneity is one of the considerable challenges
in the FL context; for example, different clients engaging in the
training may have different amounts of battery life, memory,
computing power, and bandwidth. Such variability impairs
system functionality and worsens straggler problems. It may
require more time or possibly fail to obtain the desired convergence if the number of stragglers increases in the network.
The possible solution is to select only resourceful clients
during the training process and avoid resource-constrained
clients. However, stopping the straggler clients can lead
to a small pool of active clients and bias in training. In
addition, those clients may possess essential data in higher
volume, and dropping them causes poor convergence. Beyond
the heterogeneity of FL clients, model update divergence
or statistical heterogeneity is also a significant challenge.
Some relevant literature investigated theoretical and empirical
methods to ensure convergence for FL setup [27], [28], [29].
The main issue with those FL approaches is that they assume
the participating clients in training are resource-efficient and
can complete the training iterations. These assumptions are
false when we consider them in a realistic FL environment.
To resolve statistical heterogeneity, existing works propose
to share either the server’s proxy data or the client’s local
data [30], [31]. However, disseminating the proxy information
to the clients’ or passing clients’ information to the server
may breach the privacy rules [32]. The framework proposed

3762

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

TABLE I
A C OMPREHENSIVE L IST OF N OTATION U SED T HROUGHOUT THE PAPER A LONG W ITH R ELEVANT A BBREVIATIONS AND T HEIR M EANINGS

in [7] can deal with statistical and system heterogeneity.
They add a proximal term and perform a generalization of
FedAvg to manage statistical heterogeneity and allow partial
amounts of tasks. However, the framework is unsuitable for
realistic networks as they select the clients randomly, similar
to FedAvg, where most clients might be out-of-resources
or inactive. Moreover, the random selection of clients may
result in the selection of all straggler clients that could hardly
perform a single iteration. Recently, in a rapidly evolving field
of federated class-incremental learning has become increasingly crucial [33]. In federated class-incremental learning,
the challenge lies in efficiently integrating new classes into
the learning model without disrupting the existing knowledge
structure [34].
In addition, the random selection of clients also creates
a possibility of malicious clients in the network that can
have detrimental effects on FL training [35]. For instance,
apart from directly injecting false data, these malicious clients
might engage in sophisticated network behaviors that indirectly undermine the model’s integrity. Such activities could
include generating anomalous network traffic to disguise data
poisoning or to interfere with the communication between
honest clients and the server [36]. This nuanced relationship
between direct data manipulation and indirect network-level
disruptions amplifies the risks in FL environments, particularly when dealing with non-IID data distributions [37].
Malicious clients, through these combined strategies, can
significantly distort the training process, leading to a model
that is not only poorly trained but also vulnerable to more
covert attacks [38], [39]. Moreover, this dual-threat approach,
direct data poisoning coupled with malicious network traffic,
can also hinder the participation of legitimate clients, further
exacerbating the challenges in achieving accurate and robust
model training [40].
To this end, in this paper, we propose a lightweight FL
protocol named CELP that can perform efficiently in heterogeneous FL environments. In particular, we divide the whole
protocol into three phases. In the first phase, we perform
sample-based model pruning so that clients and a server can
handle the reduced model size. In the second phase, we
calculate the clients’ eligibility scores (CES) to select the
most resourceful clients (regarding battery life, memory, and
bandwidth) for training. Finally, in the third phase, we perform
a re-parameterization on the FedAvg algorithm and generalize

it to allow partial amounts of tasks according to the client’s
resources. The CELP protocol, with its focus on efficient
client selection and adaptability in heterogeneous environments, shows potential for tackling federated class-incremental
learning challenges. By dynamically adjusting to varying data
distributions and resource constraints, CELP could effectively
manage the incremental introduction of new classes, ensuring
sustained learning performance without significant loss in
accuracy or increase in computational load. To capture the
malicious behavior of clients, we create a network-based IDS
(NIDS) in CELP in the experiments to provide an extra layer
of security. NIDS examines incoming traffic for suspicious
patterns and behaviors and then alerts the Trusted Authority
(TA) when malicious activity is detected. This allows for
quick identification and remediation of any threats, ensuring
the security of the network and its connected clients. The
experimental results prove that the proposed CELP performs
significantly in terms of convergence, especially in resourceconstrained networks. For a quick reference, in Table I, we
present a list of notations and terminologies used throughout
the paper.
III. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
In a realistic FL scenario, the clients possess heterogeneous
capabilities to execute the assigned tasks. During the training
process, there is a high possibility that a client may upload
an inappropriate model, or experience a straggler effect.
Furthermore, these unreliable and inconsistent clients can
delay the training process and negatively impact the model’s
accuracy [41]. This scenario often arises when the server,
unaware of a client’s resource limitations, assigns tasks beyond
their capabilities, or when the model size is too substantial for
a client to handle efficiently [42].
In addition to the direct risks posed by malicious clients
in FL training, such as data manipulation and communication
disruptions, there is also a need to recognize and address
subtler, network-level threats that these clients can introduce.
Malicious clients can employ tactics that extend beyond simple
data breaches or corruption; they can orchestrate complex
network behaviors to create vulnerabilities in the training
process [43]. This could involve generating deceptive network
traffic patterns to obscure their malicious activities or interfere
with the model updates between honest clients and the server.

ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE

3763

Examples of such network-level threats include Sybil attacks,
where a malicious client impersonates multiple clients to
influence the training process disproportionately or replay
attacks, where old network communications are reused to
create confusion or inconsistencies in model updates [44].
The convergence of these direct and indirect threats significantly jeopardizes the security and integrity of the FL
training process. Hence, developing robust security measures
that encompass both data-level and network-level protection
becomes imperative to safeguard the FL training process
against such multifaceted attacks. The integrated IDS in our
protocol is designed to counteract these threats by providing
comprehensive monitoring and response mechanisms that
address both aspects:
• Data-level Protection: Our IDS specifically looks for
anomalies in data submissions, such as sudden shifts in
data distribution or patterns indicative of data tampering
and poisoning. We consider label flipping and clean label
attacks where labels are manipulated either overtly or
subtly to degrade the model’s performance.
• Network-level Protection: The IDS also monitors network
traffic for unusual patterns that could indicate a threat,
such as an unusually high frequency of updates from
a particular client or duplicate data packets that could
signify a replay attack.
By integrating the IDS directly into the training and aggregation processes, we ensure that it acts not just as a passive
observer but as an active defender of the network’s integrity
and the quality of the federated model.

where ω represents the weight vector, Fw represents the objective function, X represents the 
number of clients, i represents a
each client’s
particular client, and Ki ≥ 0, i Ki = 1 shows

impact on FL model which must satisfy i Ki = 1. We
assume thatall the data samples d are available at each client
and d =
i di is the total number of data points; hence,
Ki = ddi . The cloud server disseminates a global model to the
TA. Afterward, the TA announces an FL task by stating the
minimum resource requirements and the CES to participate in
the training. During this process, the IDS actively monitors the
data exchanges for signs of data tampering or any anomalous
behaviors that suggest a security threat, thereby ensuring that
only genuine and secure updates are considered for model
aggregation. The selected clients then train their local models
for e iterations using SGD optimization. The trained models
are then transmitted to the cloud server through TA. Here,
IDS also checks for inconsistencies or signs of attack in the
model updates received. Finally, the cloud server aggregates
and obtains a new global model for the next iteration. This
process keeps repeating until the convergence level is achieved.
Throughout the process, we incorporate redundancy mechanisms within the data aggregation phase to counteract potential
data loss or corruption. These mechanisms are designed to
detect inconsistencies or anomalies in data submissions before
they affect the model’s accuracy. By employing a combination of real-time monitoring and post-process validation,
CELP ensures that all client contributions are both authentic
and constructive toward the FL objectives, thereby maintaining the integrity and reliability of the collective learning
process.

IV. S YSTEM M ODEL
This section presents the system models, which serve
as a foundation of the proposed Client Eligibility-based
Lightweight Protocol (CELP). In particular, we first define
the FL model based on the state-of-the-art FedAvg algorithm.
Secondly, we present the sample-based pruning model that
aims to reduce the model size. Thirdly, we explain the
resource-aware client selection model that selects the most
reliable and efficient clients for training. Finally, the integrated
IDS is detailed as it plays a crucial role in securing the
training process by monitoring and responding to data-level
and network-level threats. Lastly, we present a generalization
model that permits users to complete only a part of the task,
depending on the remaining resources.
A. FL Model
In the proposed FL model, we assume a TA between
the clients X = {1, 2, 3, . . . , X } and a cloud server Q. To
participate in the FL training, all the available clients x ∈
X use their local data D of size Sn . The local training data
consists of a pair of input and output features, where the input
is the vector of data samples, and the output is the label of
each input vector. The target is to minimize the loss function
described as follows:
min(Fω ) =
ω

X

i=1

Ki Fi (ω)

(1)

B. Sample-Based Pruning Model
In a resource-constrained FL environment, the clients may
have limited battery life, memory, or bandwidth, posing challenges in training large-scale ML models [45]. Our proposed
CELP leverages a model-based pruning mechanism to reduce
these large-scale models to smaller sizes, thus easing the
computational load on participating clients [46], [47]. This
pruning mechanism, applied by the cloud server, involves
initially gathering data samples independently or requesting
a small subset from clients. The server then uses these
samples to train a neural network, combining CNN and
back-propagation to learn correlations between pixels and
target outputs [48]. After training, the model is pruned by
removing weights and neurons that do not affect accuracy.
The process of sample-based pruning in CELP is outlined as
follows:
1) The server either independently gathers data samples
on its own or requests a small subset of data samples
from the participating clients from their shared data and
assumes each client provides the data samples.
2) Initially, the cloud server initializes the global model
for the first iteration. In subsequent iterations, the global
model will be updated using local updates received from
the clients.
3) To achieve a targeted pruning level, the server performs
sample-based pruning.

3764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

4) The achieved pruned model is broadcasted to all participating clients, where each client trains their local models
using the pruned global model and their local data.
5) The clients with limited resources are allowed to share
partial amounts of tasks, where the cloud server aggregates the shared models of clients.
The FL process begins once the desired pruned level is
achieved.
C. Resource-Aware Clients’ Selection Model
In FL networks, the prevalent assumption is that all clients
selected at random possess adequate resources to complete
given tasks. Contrary to this, in real-world FL scenarios,
client resources are often heterogeneous, potentially leading
to situations where not all clients can complete their tasks.
Such heterogeneity can result in stragglers, incorrect model
submissions, or delayed responses, hindering the convergence
of the learning process. It is, therefore, imperative that a
protocol assesses clients’ resources and historical performance
before task assignment.
The CELP integrates a resource-aware client selection
model, where the TA specifies task requirements, including
minimum resource requirements such as bandwidth, memory,
and battery life, alongside a Client Eligibility Score (CES)
necessary for training participation. Upon gathering resource
availability data from interested clients, the TA filters and
selects clients who meet the training criteria, while excluding
those who do not.

Fig. 2.
The overview of clients’ eligibility score for the training of
three different clients, where the score is added or negated based on their
performance.

Algorithm 1: Mechanism of resource-aware clients selection.
Input : current round r, local iteration (e), client id (i),
global model parameters (ωr ), and model
deviation (Ω);
Output: eligible clients for training
1 Client Eligibility Score (CES):
r
2 if i upload local model ω within given t then
e
3
add Ri = 0;
4
append CESi = Gi + Gm ;
5 else
CES Calculation
6
add Rie = +1;

The protocol computes the CES by identifying clients 7
if e1 m
i < r5 then
capable of executing the complete training process based 8
append Hie = Gm and CESi = Gi − Gm ;
on available resources. Initially, each client entering the FL 9
else

e
network is assigned a base score of Gi = +75, which also 10
if e1 m
i ≥ r5 append Hi = Gh and
serves as the eligibility threshold for training participation. A
CESi = Gi − Gh ;
trust list L acknowledges clients with adequate resources and
11
else if Rω − Lei > Ω then
an interest in training who are not selected for the current
12
append CESi = Gi − Gs ;
round, granting them a motivation score of Gt = +5.
During training, clients who fulfill their tasks are rewarded 13 Add i to trustworthy clients list T;
with Ga = +5, and those who do not are penalized with 14 Check Resource Mi = f (ν, ξ, );
− 5. Timely submission of trained models is 15 if Mi > Mreq ;
Ga =
incentivized with a score of Gm = +10, whereas failure to 16 return Mi to eligible clients list EC;
submit within the deadline results in a deduction of Gm =
−5. The protocol also maintains a historical record for each
participant, imposing a penalty of Gh = −20 on clients failing
to respond in five consecutive rounds. Furthermore, to mitigate (ωr ), and the model deviation (Ω). Each client is bound to
the straggler effect, clients whose model deviates significantly return the local model parameters within a given time t, which
from the norm are prevented from joining the training by the TA sets. Once the TA passes those training parameters,
assigning a penalty score of Gs = −50. These rewards and the CELP checks whether the client i uploaded its local model
penalties are systematically added to or subtracted from the ω r within a given time (t) or not (Line 2). If the client has
total CES. The methodology for calculating the CES across uploaded the model within a given time, then the TA sets a
ten local iterations for three clients is illustrated in Figure 2, record Rie of client i in current iteration e as 0 and rewards
and the complete mechanism for client selection and CES that client Gm = +10 which is added to its Gi initial score
(Line 3-4). In contrast, the TA sets a record Rie of client i
calculation is encapsulated in Algorithm 1.
In particular, in Algorithm 1, the TA passes the training in current iteration e as +1 and checks the historical record
iteration (e), client id (i), given time (t) for sending back the of that client. If the sum of unsuccessful uploads is less than
local model, global model parameters for the current round five consecutive rounds r, then the TA punishes the client with

ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE

Fig. 3.

3765

The figure presents the three steps process of resource-aware clients’ selection model.

Gm = −5 and updates it in the historical list Hie , which is
negated from the CES (Line 6-8). If the historical record of
that client is more than or equal to five consecutive rounds,
then the TA assigns a penalty of Gh = −20 to that client and
updates the CES accordingly (Line 10). If a client’s model
has a huge deviation from other clients’ models due to the
straggling effect, then the TA assigns a huge penalty to that
client Gs = −50 so that the client won’t be able to participate
in the training because the client will not be able to satisfy
the minimum participation eligibility score (Line 11-12). Once
the client is added to the trustworthy list, the TA checks the
client’s resources (bandwidth ν, memory ξ, and battery ). If
the client’s resources are greater than the required resources
for the particular task, then the client will be added to the list
of eligible clients EC (Line 13-16). The completed process of
the proposed CELP is shown in Figure 3.
D. IDS Deployment
The IDS is an integral component of our CELP, designed
to ensure the integrity and security of the FL process by
monitoring both data-level and network-level interactions. It
dynamically detects and mitigates potential security threats,
such as data poisoning and anomalous network activities,
which could compromise the model’s accuracy or lead to data
leakage.
IDS Functionality: The IDS operates by continuously monitoring the data traffic between clients and the central server,
analyzing patterns that deviate from expected behaviors. This
proactive monitoring helps in the early detection of both
passive and active attacks, which include but are not limited
to label flipping, model poisoning, and Sybil attacks. The
detection process is formalized by defining a threat model and
corresponding detection criteria:

1 if Δ Modeli,t > τ or Networki,t > ρ
(2)
Threati,t =
0 otherwise
where Δ Modeli,t represents the deviation of the uploaded
model from client i at time t from the expected model update
norm, and τ is the threshold for acceptable model variation.

Algorithm 2: IDS Integrated Security Checks in FL
Input : Model updates {ωi,t }X
i=1 , Network logs
{NetLogi,t }X
i=1
Output: Validated model updates, Security alerts
1 foreach client i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , X } do
2
ModelDeviationi ← ωi,t − ωprev ;
3
NetAnomalyi ← AnalyzeNetLogs(NetLogi,t );
4
if ModelDeviationi < τ and NetAnomalyi < ρ
then
5
Update Global Model with ωi,t ;
6
else
7
Raise Security Alert for client i;
8
Exclude ωi,t from current aggregation;

Networki , t measures the anomalous network traffic from
client i at time t, and ρ is the corresponding threshold for
network anomaly detection.
IDS Implementation: The IDS is implemented through a
series of checks integrated into the data aggregation and
model update phases of the training process. Algorithm 2
outlines the procedure of incorporating IDS into the FL cycle,
emphasizing how each step is validated for security and
integrity.
The IDS ensures that only contributions adhering to established security protocols influence the global model, enhancing
the overall robustness of the FL environment.
E. Generalization Model
As we previously described, the participating clients may
experience heterogeneous resource restrictions regarding bandwidth, memory, and battery life. The device may lose the
network connection for various reasons despite the proposed
protocol’s resourceful client selection using available system
parameters. Moreover, there is also a possibility that all
the participating clients have limited remaining resources;
therefore, selecting those clients for training would be the

3766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Algorithm 3: The Execution Process of CELP
Sample-based pruning: The cloud server receives a data
sample from a subset of clients to perform model
pruning.
2 Server Execution:
3 Initialize the pruned global model and send the task
requirements to TA
4 New clients send their interest in joining the training;
5 TA assigns the Gi to all clients;
6 Clients receive the task requirements from the TA;
Fig. 4. The representation of four heterogeneous clients considered for partial
7 initialize ω0 ;
amounts of tasks.
8 check resources of all interested clients;
9 for each round r = {1,2,3,. . . ,n} do
10
ECr = Check Resource f (ν, ξ, );
11
update EC with updated CES;
only choice. To this end, we considered allowing a partial 12
for each client i ∈ X in parallel do
number of tasks in the proposed CELP according to the client’s 13
ωri +1 ← ClientUpdate (i, ωr );
resources.
14
if i updates model within given t threshold then
To allow partial amounts of tasks to the resource-constrained 15
IDS Check: Perform security check on
clients, we perform generalization on the state-of-the-art
ωri +1 and NetLogi ;
FedAvg algorithm and re-parameterize it to deal with the
16
if IDS confirms ωri +1 is secure then
variable performance of clients. In particular, we use the
ωr +1 ← ωr +1 + iDr ωri +1 ;
“Resource-aware Clients’ Selection Model” mentioned above 17
else
and select a subset of the most resourceful clients. The server 18
19
Raise Security Alert for client i;
performs sample-based model pruning using the collected data
samples from those selected clients and reduces the model 20
Exclude ωri +1 from current aggregation;
size. The reduced global model is then sent to all the participatUpdate CES;
ing clients. Unlike FedAvg, the proposed CELP doesn’t force 21
1

the clients to uniform local iterations. Instead, the TA assigns
the local iterations to the participating clients, and the clients
train their models to match their resource capabilities. The
trained models are then sent back to the cloud server, where
the aggregation is performed asynchronously. This results in
maximum participation in model training, including straggler
clients. Previously, in [7], the authors considered a similar scenario of partial participation of clients; however, their design
doesn’t perform practically in the later iterations as they had to
choose the clients with minimum resources; hence, the model
update deviates and results in lower accuracy. In contrast, the
proposed CELP leverages the resource-aware clients’ selection
to tackle the straggler clients and further allow partial amounts
of tasks. To consider the ϑri -inexactness for the resource-aware
participating client i at the training round r, we define as
follows:
Definition 1 (ϑri -inexactness): Let us consider a function
Ψi (ω; ωr ) = Fi (ω) + γ2 ω − ωr 2 , and ϑ ∈ [0, 1], we call ω ∗
is a ϑri -inexactness of minω Ψi (ω; ωr ) if ∇Ψi (ω ∗ ; ωr ) ≤
ϑri ∇Ψi (ωr ; ωr ) where ∇Ψi (ω; ωr ) = ∇Fi (ω)+γ(ω−ωr ).
where ϑri is a representation of variable local iteration that
shows the required local computation for a particular client i
in a global round r to achieve a given FL task. In particular,
by relaxing the (ϑir − inexactness), we can achieve the
system heterogeneity close to the optimal solution. We use
this (ϑir − inexactness) solution because it allows for an
approximate solution to be obtained without the need for
a computationally expensive exact solution. In Figure 4, we
show the overview of considered clients for partial amounts
of tasks.

Client Update: (client i );
Client i finds a ωri +1 which is an ϑri -inexactness of
Ψi (ω; ωr ) = Fi (ω) + γ2 ω − ωr 2 to find the optimal
number of iterations.
24 B ← (split Hi into batches of size B );
25 for each iteration e do
26
for batch b ∈ B do
27
ω ← −ηΔ (ω; b);
22
23

28

return ω to the cloud server;

V. E XECUTION OF CELP
We present the complete execution procedure of the
proposed CELP in Algorithm 3. The execution begins with
the cloud server performing sample-based model pruning,
using data samples received from a subset of clients (Line
1). The server then initializes the pruned global model and
communicates the task requirements to the TA (Lines 3-6).
The TA assesses the clients’ interest in training and assigns an
initial score Gi to all clients, along with the task requirements
and system parameters (Lines 4-8). Each round of the process
checks the resources of interested clients and updates the
eligible clients list based on the CES (Lines 9-11).
During each round of training, the protocol ensures security
through an integrated IDS that performs checks on model
updates and network logs. If the IDS detects a threat, it raises
an alert and the affected client’s update is excluded from
the current aggregation (Lines 14-20). This security measure

ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE

3767

denotes the number of total data samples in the network, and
ni denotes the local data samples of a client i. Under the
bounded dissimilarity, if we have > 0, there is a possibility
of a B , i.e., for all the data samples in the network. However,
due to the diverse data distributions across the FL environment,
one can easily observe B (ω) > 1, where a larger value of
B (ω) denotes a greater degree of dissimilarity between the
local functions of the clients.
A. Convex Scenario
We assume that Fi (·) is convex and ϑri = 0 for any client
i and round r, such that all the participating clients in the
training are able to solve their local problems exactly. The
other assertions are satisfied in the non-convex scenario.
B. Non-Convex Scenario

Fig. 5.

The execution flow of the proposed CELP.

is crucial for maintaining the integrity of the FL process.
Following security checks, clients conduct local training, split
their data into batches, and optimize using SGD (Lines 23-28).
The cloud server collects the local models’ parameters from
the clients and aggregates them to update the global model,
ensuring that only verified and secure updates are used (Lines
14-21).
Finally, the TA updates the CES based on each client’s
response to the training requirements and their timely submission of the updated model (Line 21). The updated CES
then informs the selection of clients for subsequent training
rounds. This comprehensive approach, encapsulated in CELP,
leverages asynchronous FL to accommodate varying data sizes
and client capabilities, optimizing resource allocation and
maintaining data security across the network. The complete
flow of the proposed CELP is depicted in Figure 5.
VI. C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
To prove the convergence analysis, we first measure the
local batch B-dissimilarity of the proposed CELP. In particular,
B-dissimilarity defines a bounded dissimilarity by allowing statistical heterogeneity in independent and identical distribution
(IID) scenarios.
Definition 2 (B-Dissimilarity): the local functions of the
participating clients in FL training are B-dissimilar at ω if
Zi [∇Fi (ω)2 ] ≤ ∇f (ω)2 B 2 . So now we can define the
value of B (ω), i.e., B (ω) = 1 when Zi [∇Fi (ω)2 ] =
∇f (ω)2 . Here, all clients’ local functions must agree on ω,
or 
all clients must have the same local functions, and B (ω)
=

Zi [∇Fi (ω)2 ]

∇f (ω)2

, when ∇f (ω) = 0.

The Z[ · ] presents the expectationon FL the participating
N
clients with masses Si = nni and
i=1 , Si = 1, where n

Here, we assume non-convex and L-Lipschitz smooth for the
local functions Fi [49]. We assume that in the local functions
there exists L > 0, such that ∇2 Fi ≥ −Li , γ̄:γ − L > 0
and B (ω r ) ≤ V . Now, considering the formulations from
Algorithm 2, we obtain

√
B (1 + ϑ) 2 L, B (1 + ϑ)
1 ϑB
√
−
−
λ=
−
γ
γ
γ̄γ
γ̄ i
−


L, B 2 (1 + ϑ)2  √
L(1 + ϑ)2 B 2
2
−
2i
+
2
2γ̄ 2
γ̄ 2 i
(3)

Considering the equation above, we observe that in the
iteration r for the local function, there is an expected loss,
which is demonstrated as follows:


(4)
Zv f ω r +1 ≤ f (ω r ) − λ∇f (ω r )2
where v denotes the subset of i devices selected in the iteration
r. Similarly, we have the same assumptions for variable ϑ’s,
and we again consider the formulations from Algorithm 2, and
we obtain

√
B (1 + ϑr ) 2 L, B (1 + ϑr )
1 ϑr B
r
√
λ =
−
−
−
γ
γ
γ̄γ
γ̄ i

L, B 2 (1 + ϑr )2  √
L(1 + ϑr )2 B 2
2
−
2i
+
2
−
2γ̄ 2
γ̄ 2 i
>0

(5)

Similarly, here we observe an expected loss in the global
function in the iteration r, which is expressed as follows:


(6)
Zv f ω r +1 ≤ f (ω r ) − λr ∇f (ω r )2
where v denotes the subset of i devices selected in the iteration
r and ϑr = maxi∈v ϑri .
VII. S IMULATION S ETTINGS
This section shows the implementation criteria and then
discusses the simulation setup and dataset representation.
Finally, we show the simulation results of the proposed CELP.

3768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

A. Implementation

TABLE II
N ETWORK M ODEL A RCHITECTURES

For the implementation, we use a sample-based model
pruning that helps reduce the model size. To distribute the
task, we grouped the image sample of clients as batches for
input, and then we set the TensorFlow variables to construct
the model. To make prediction and loss computations using
those variables and model parameters. A distributed function
is defined for the clients to send their local metrics to the
cloud server for aggregation. After the aggregation, we use
TensorFlow Federated [50] for model representation.
TABLE III
H YPER -PARAMETERS

B. Network Configuration
In the network configuration, we build a resource-bounded
edge FL environment with multiple clients that can follow
the instructions. For a real-time heterogeneous environment,
we set the variant configurations of memory, processor, and
battery for each client. To keep the FL process simple, we consider similar transmission rates for all the clients. In particular,
we consider 50 clients, assuming that twenty are unreliable,
four clients have resource shortages, and four deliver lowquality models. Considering variant clients’ configuration, we
simulate the straggled and computation-capable clients with
different resource constraints. We assess the proposed CELP
framework using well-known datasets to better understand the
effects of statistical heterogeneity.

and 64 GB of RAM. The proposed lightweight protocol is
simulated by TensorFlow in Python.

C. Dataset and CNN Models

E. Evaluation Schemes

In the simulation experiments, we use two different
Convolution Neural Network (CNN) models, namely, LeNet,
and AlexNet. The LeNet is trained with the MNIST, a handwriting dataset. The MNIST dataset contains 60,000 training
samples, and each sample is based on handwritten digits
ranging from 0-9. The AlexNet is trained with the CIFAR10, an image-based dataset. The CIFAR-10 dataset contains
50,000 training samples and 10,000 testing samples, where
each sample consists of images with the size of 32 × 32 pixels.
In the case of IDS, we consider the UNSW-NB15 [51], and
CICIDS2018 [52] datasets. The two datasets are popular tools
for evaluating the performance of an IDS for FL networks.
In particular, the UNSW-NB15 dataset is used for network
security attacks and normal activities collected by the Centre
for Computer Security Research of the Australian Defence
Force Academy. It contains 49 features, such as IP addresses,
protocol types, packet sizes, etc. This dataset provides a benchmark for testing the accuracy of anomaly detection systems for
NIDS. On the other hand, the CICIDS2018 dataset is designed
by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity to capture network
traffic. It contains 81 features, such as flow duration, protocol
type, source, destination IP addresses, etc. This dataset is
useful for testing and validating FL algorithms for detecting
and classifying cyber-attacks. For all these datasets, we employ
the CNNs commonly used in the relevant literature. We present
the architecture of those CNN models in Table II.

To better understand the performance of the proposed
CELP, we consider the state-of-art approaches FedAvg [2]
and FedProx [55]. We consider the same settings while
executing all three approaches. In order to highlight CELP’s
distinctiveness, we emphasize its historical analysis aspect in
client selection, setting it apart from FedAvg and FedProx.
This historical perspective in CELP, taking into account past
client interactions, ensures more informed and effective client
selection, enhancing the robustness and efficiency of the
learning model. To bring fairness to the results, we use SGD
as a local optimizer, which is also considered in both existing
approaches. Moreover, we maintain the same hyper-parameters
for all the approaches in all experiments; the details of those
hyper-parameters are shown in Table III.

D. System Environment
We run all our experiments on the server with an Apple M1
Pro with a 10-core CPU, 16-core GPU, 16-core Neural Engine,

VIII. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
In this section, we show the performance of the proposed
CELP. In particular, we first show the performance of the
pruned updates and then the performance of resource-aware
clients’ selection. Finally, we present convergence accuracy
and the expected loss compared to the existing schemes on
both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.
A. Pruned Updates
As the central aim of the proposed protocol is to support
resource-constrained FL networks, it is crucial to develop a
lightweight model that prioritizes essential features to expedite training time. Our approach incorporates sample-based
model pruning, leveraging TensorFlow’s model-optimization

ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE

Fig. 6. Accuracy of pruned updates on variant data samples collected from
the clients for training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.

classes to selectively prune low-magnitude classes from
the Keras framework. The resulting model parameters are
managed through classes like PolynomialDecay and prune
low-magnitude, which facilitate efficient model updates.
To demonstrate the efficacy of our approach, we assess
the performance of pruned model updates across different
network architectures, including LeNet and AlexNet, as shown
in Figure 6. We explore various sample sizes, i.e., 5%,
15%, 25%, 40%, and 50%, to identify the optimal balance
between model performance and resource efficiency. Our
findings reveal that smaller sample sizes often lead to less
accurate models due to the potential exclusion of some classes.
In contrast, larger sample sizes, such as 50%, significantly
enhance model accuracy by ensuring a more representative
sample across all classes, thereby mitigating class omission.
This strategy, although seemingly counter to the typical FL
paradigm of minimal data usage, is justified by the need for
robust model accuracy in resource-constrained environments
where each training iteration is costly. The increased sample
size ensures that the model training is as comprehensive as
possible within the fewest number of rounds, aligning with the
ultimate goal of efficiency in FL networks.
B. Partial Participation of Clients
To allow partial amounts of tasks to the participating clients,
we consider system heterogeneity to measure the performance
of the proposed CELP. When the cloud server assigns the
task, the TA measures the resource capabilities of each client
and allows only resourceful clients to train using the resourceaware clients’ selection model. However, there is a possibility
that we may have only resource-constrained clients in the
network; therefore, we must allow clients to perform partial
tasks. To this end, a participating client i estimates the number
of tasks it needs to accomplish on iteration r as a function
of its available resource restrictions in a global round R. The
global rounds must be performed by all the clients, and the
clients who cannot perform up to the E rounds, then those
clients are allowed to perform fewer iterations based on their
resource capabilities. Here, i represents the participating client,
r represents the local iteration, R denotes the single global
round, and E denotes the complete global rounds.
In addition to system heterogeneity, the scalability of CELP
is critically assessed to ensure its efficacy across varying
numbers of clients. Scalability testing involves analyzing the

3769

Fig. 7. Comparison of accuracy on a variant number of straggler clients for
training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.

Fig. 8. Comparison of loss on a variant number of straggler clients for
training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.

protocol’s performance as the number of participating clients
increases. This is vital as the increase in client numbers
could potentially exacerbate the straggler effect, impacting
the overall system’s convergence rates and accuracy. Our
scalability investigations help identify any potential constraints, such as the increased coordination overhead and
resource allocation challenges in larger networks, ensuring that
CELP maintains reliable performance even as network size
expands.
In Figure 7 and Figure 8, we show the performance of the
straggler effect. In particular, we experimented with training
accuracy and loss, respectively, on both LeNet and AlexNet
by considering a variant number of straggler clients in the
network. We consider three different scenarios of straggler
clients, i.e., 20, 50, and 90, where 20 means that 80% of
the participated clients can perform up to E rounds, and
90 means that only 10% of the participated clients can
perform up to E rounds. From the results, we can observe
that system heterogeneity negatively impacts the convergence
performance, and a higher number of heterogeneity results
in poor convergence. Moreover, it is clear that considering
the straggler clients can achieve significant performance rather
than dropping them in the first place. This means that allowing
partial amounts of tasks to the straggling clients does not affect
the overall performance. The results in Figures 6-8 indicate
that sample-based model pruning may result in some accuracy
loss; however, if we choose the clients efficiently, we can still
obtain significant convergence while suffering from a minimal
loss.

3770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

TABLE IV
C OMMUNICATION B ITS R EQUIRED FOR U PLOAD AND D OWNLOAD TO ACHIEVE THE TARGETED ACCURACY IN THE
P RESENCE OF S TRAGGLER C LIENTS FOR T HREE D IFFERENT S CENARIOS , I . E ., 20, 50, AND 90

number of iterations while ensuring robust convergence. In
Particular, in Figure 9, we consider the same hyper-parameters
as mentioned in Table II and measure the performance of
the proposed CELP compared to the FedProx and FedAvg
algorithms in terms of global accuracy and loss. It can be seen
that the proposed CELP handles the statistical heterogeneity
effectively, obtains higher accuracy, and faces lower expected
loss compared to the state-of-the-art FedProx and FedAvg.
D. Communication Costs

Fig. 9. Comparison of statistical heterogeneity in terms of accuracy and loss
for training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.

C. Statistical Heterogeneity
To check whether the proposed CELP can handle the
statistical heterogeneity or not, we eliminated the proximal
term from the clients’ objective functions and performed a simulation experiment. By allowing heterogeneity in the dataset,
the clients’ performance drops significantly. In Figure 9, we
show the statistical heterogeneity of the proposed CELP on the
MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets. In this experiment, we didn’t
consider any system heterogeneity, and we assume that all the
participating clients’ have enough resources to train their models up to E iterations. The authors in [2] state that tuning the
number of iterations helps reach the desired convergence level.
However, more iterations require more computational tasks
from the clients’ resulting in faster convergence but reducing
the communication efficiency. Moreover, in a realistic FL
network, setting up a higher number of iterations may increase
the possibility that a participating client cannot perform a
computational task. Therefore, it is crucial to set a sufficient

In addition to evaluating CELP’s performance in terms
of accuracy and loss, we have also examined its efficiency
in communication costs. This is a crucial aspect, especially
in FL environments with straggler clients. We compare the
communication costs required to achieve targeted accuracy
levels in CELP with those in FedAvg and FedProx. Our
analysis, presented in Table IV, shows the upload and download communication bits required for LeNet using the MNIST
dataset and AlexNet using the CIFAR-10 dataset under different straggler scenarios (20, 50, and 90). These scenarios
represent varying proportions of clients that can perform up
to the complete global rounds. The results indicate that CELP
significantly reduces the communication overhead compared
to both FedAvg and FedProx, especially as the proportion of
straggler clients increases. This reduction in communication
costs is instrumental in enhancing the efficiency of FL,
particularly in networks with resource-constrained clients.
E. IDS-Use Case
In the training process of FL, the malicious clients tend
to launch malicious activities, and because the central server
cannot access the local data, therefore, FL cannot control the
poisoning attacks [56]. In such attacks, the malicious clients
disturb the FL model and try to weaken the security protection
of local training data by injecting poisoned traffic data. To
this end, we consider two poisoning attacks, namely, label
flipping and clean label attacks, in our proposed CELP-based
IDS case. In particular, in a label-flipping attack, an adversary
manipulates the training data labels, such as flipping benign
samples to malicious labels or malicious samples to benign

ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE

labels. This can introduce noise into the training data and
lead to a misclassification of test data. On the other hand,
clean label attacks involve attacking a model by using carefully
crafted samples that are correctly labeled with the correct
labels. This may involve an adversary crafting malicious data,
which is labeled as benign, or benign data, which is labeled
as malicious. These samples will be fed into the model during
training, potentially resulting in the misclassification of both
benign and malicious data.
In the proposed experiments, we explore two different
distributed data settings for FL-based NIDS: IID and Non-IID.
As mentioned above, we consider two datasets, UNSWNB15 and CICIDS2018. For the case of IID, we consider
the UNSW-NB15 dataset and conduct a binary classification
(anomaly detection) task because it allows all the clients to
collect malicious and benign traffic. For the case of Non-IID,
we consider the CICIDS2018 dataset and perform a multiclassification (intrusion detection) task that asks all clients
to collect several types of traffic data while performing the
local training. In the experiment, we considered 50 clients for
model training; among them, 20 were malicious clients who
launched poisoning attacks. We adopt the model poisoning
strategy from [57] that maximizes the success of those attacks.
Attack Scenarios: We consider two attack scenarios: single
and multi-round. In particular, single rounds indicate that a
client injects a poisoning attack in one round, e.g., an attack
is launched in a second round, then it is represented as (Λ2 ).
In the experiment, we consider single round attack in three
different rounds Λ5 , Λ10 , and Λ20 . On the other hand, a
scenario of a multi-round attack means the poisoning attack is
launched in multiple rounds. In this scenario, we continuously
injected poisoning attacks.
Benchmarks: The performance of CELP defensive mechanisms is compared against the state-of-the-art method, namely,
VAE [58]. VAE is based on the random selection of model
parameters and requires a pre-trained offline model on the
server side to detect and reject anomalous local models. Its
implementation is similar to that described in [58].
Evaluation: We consider the effectiveness of NIDS in the
proposed lightweight protocol by launching the single-round
attack scenario. As the proposed model relies on the TA, which
is connected to the clients throughout the training process.
Thus, we compare it with the existing offline detection-based
method, VAE, for single-round attacks. Figure 10 shows the
detection accuracy of both methods. It is evident that the
proposed CELP outperforms VAE in both datasets, demonstrating its superior capability of detecting poisoned models.
In Figures 11 and 12, the efficacy of CELP in a NIDS
context is showcased, particularly under the strain of multiround poisoning attacks. The accuracy curves presented in
Figure 11 for the UNSW-NB15 dataset indicate that CELP
maintains higher accuracy compared to both FedAvg and VAE,
demonstrating its resilience to label-flipping and clean label
attacks. Specifically, CELP’s consistent performance across
multiple rounds of attacks can be attributed to the dynamic
adaptation of its pruning and client selection mechanisms,
which effectively mitigate the impact of poisoned updates on
the global model.

3771

Fig. 10. Comparison of poisoned model detection (PMD) accuracy with
state-of-the-art offline detection method (VAE).

Fig. 11. Performance comparison of accuracy on multi-round attack scenario
with state-of-the-art FedAvg and VAE on UNSW-NB15 dataset.

Fig. 12. Performance comparison of accuracy on multi-round attack scenario
with state-of-the-art FedAvg and VAE on CICIDS2018 dataset.

Figure 12 depicts CELP’s performance on the CICIDS2018
dataset, further illustrating its robustness against complex
attack patterns. The fluctuation observed in accuracy, particularly in the presence of Non-IID data, highlights the challenge
of model distribution shifts a common occurrence in realworld scenarios where data across clients is not identically
distributed. CELP’s design counters this instability through its
eligibility-based client selection, which ensures that a broader
and more representative set of client updates are aggregated,
thus enhancing the overall stability and accuracy of the

3772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

model. The comparison with FedAvg and VAE in this figure
underscores CELP’s superior defense mechanism, enabled by
the continuous monitoring capabilities of the integrated TA.
Such monitoring is crucial for recognizing and neutralizing the
subtle and evolving strategies employed in poisoning attacks.
These results collectively affirm CELP’s advanced capabilities in maintaining model integrity and learning accuracy in
the face of sophisticated multi-round attacks, setting a new
benchmark for security in FL systems.
IX. C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide a detailed comparison of
CELP with existing solutions that are also designed for
resource-constrained environments. The primary focus is on
demonstrating how CELP not only meets but exceeds the
capabilities of these alternatives through innovative features
and efficient execution.
Comparison Metrics:
• Model Efficiency: CELP uses sample-based pruning to
reduce model size effectively, which is crucial in environments with limited computational resources. We compare
this with other methods that may not prioritize model
size reduction, resulting in slower processing times and
higher resource consumption.
• Resource Allocation: Unlike many FL protocols that
assume uniform resource distribution among clients,
CELP uniquely incorporates a CES that assesses and
selects clients based on their actual resource availability,
ensuring more efficient resource utilization.
• System Adaptability: CELP’s re-parameterization of the
FedAvg algorithm allows for partial task completion,
which adapts to the heterogeneous capabilities of network
clients more flexibly than traditional FL models.
• Security Measures: With an integrated IDS, CELP
enhances security and trust in the system by monitoring
and countering potential threats, a feature that is often
overlooked in similar protocols.
Empirical Validation: We conducted several experiments
to compare the performance of CELP with other leading
solutions in this domain. The results, as illustrated in above
Figures 6-12, show that CELP achieves superior convergence
rates and maintains high accuracy levels even under stringent
resource constraints. Detailed performance metrics and benchmarks are provided, highlighting areas where CELP provides
significant improvements over alternatives such as FedAvg,
FedProx, and VAE. This comparative analysis not only
underscores the advantages of CELP in handling resourceconstrained environments but also showcases its broader
applicability and effectiveness in real-world FL scenarios.
X. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduced the Client Eligibility-based
Lightweight Protocol (CELP), a novel approach tailored for
federated FL in resource-constrained environments. CELP
effectively integrates a re-parameterized client objective
function with a model pruning mechanism and resource-aware
client selection, specifically designed to manage heterogeneous

networks. Additionally, CELP accommodates partial task
completion by resource-constrained clients, enabling robust
convergence even under challenging conditions. Our
simulation experiments demonstrate that CELP significantly
enhances performance metrics: it achieves up to 93% accuracy
on the MNIST dataset and 83% accuracy on CIFAR-10,
markedly improving over existing approaches. Furthermore,
CELP reduces communication costs by up to 81.01%
compared to FedAvg and 72.54% compared to FedProx,
effectively handling high proportions of straggler clients.
The integration of a NIDS also plays a crucial role in
enhancing security, effectively identifying and mitigating
malicious activities, and contributing to the superior accuracy
and performance of the system. These results underscore
CELP’s potential to transform FL applications by ensuring
high efficiency and robust security in diverse operational
scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Asad, S. Otoum, and O. Al Fandi, “Edge computing for the
metaverse: Balancing security and privacy concerns,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Intell. Metaverse Technol. Appl. (iMETA), 2023, pp. 1–8.
[2] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[3] Z. Chen, D. Li, R. Ni, J. Zhu, and S. Zhang, “FedSeq: A hybrid federated
learning framework based on sequential in-cluster training,” IEEE Syst.
J., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 4038–4049, Sep. 2023.
[4] A. Taik, A. Abouaomar, and S. Cherkaoui, “Green federated learningbased models and protocols,” in Green Machine Learning Protocols for
Future Communication Networks. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
2024, pp. 63–102.
[5] O. Shamir, N. Srebro, and T. Zhang, “Communication-efficient distributed optimization using an approximate Newton-type method,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2014, pp. 1000–1008.
[6] Z. Li and P. Richtárik, “A unified analysis of stochastic gradient methods
for nonconvex federated optimization,” 2020, arXiv:2006.07013.
[7] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
“Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. Mach.
Learn. Syst., 2020, pp. 429–450.
[8] A. Imteaj, U. Thakker, S. Wang, J. Li, and M. H. Amini, “Federated
learning for resource-constrained IoT devices: Panoramas and state-ofthe-art,” 2020, arXiv:2002.10610.
[9] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gursoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning
attacks against federated learning systems,” in Proc. 25th Eur. Symp.
Res. Comput. Secur. (ESORICS), Guildford, U.K., 2020, pp. 480–501.
[10] M. Asad and S. Otoum, “Integrative federated learning and zero-trust
approach for secure wireless communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 14–20, Apr. 2024.
[11] S. Wang, F. Roosta, P. Xu, and M. W. Mahoney, “Giant: Globally
improved approximate Newton method for distributed optimization,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 1–11.
[12] Y. Arjevani and O. Shamir, “Communication complexity of distributed
convex learning and optimization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2015, pp. 1–9.
[13] C. Battiloro, P. Di Lorenzo, M. Merluzzi, and S. Barbarossa, “Lyapunovbased optimization of edge resources for energy-efficient adaptive
federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 265–280, Mar. 2023.
[14] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
Concept and applications,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10,
no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
[15] M. Asad, A. Moustafa, F. A. Rabhi, and M. Aslam, “THF: 3-way
hierarchical framework for efficient client selection and resource management in federated learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 13,
pp. 11085–11097, Jul. 2022.
[16] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed
optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method
R Mach. Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122,
of multipliers,” Found. Trends
2011.

ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE

[17] O. Dekel, R. Gilad-Bachrach, O. Shamir, and L. Xiao, “Optimal
distributed online prediction using mini-batches,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 165–202, 2012.
[18] C. T. Dinh, N. Tran, and J. Nguyen, “Personalized federated learning
with Moreau envelopes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
pp. 21394–21405.
[19] W. Huang, M. Ye, and B. Du, “Learn from others and be yourself in
heterogeneous federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 10143–10153.
[20] V. Smith, C.-K. Chiang, M. Sanjabi, and A. S. Talwalkar, “Federated
multi-task learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
pp. 1–11.
[21] A. Khaled, K. Mishchenko, and P. Richtárik, “Better communication
complexity for local SGD,” 2019, Preprint.
[22] G. Malinovskiy, D. Kovalev, E. Gasanov, L. Condat, and P. Richtarik,
“From local SGD to local fixed-point methods for federated learning,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 6692–6701.
[23] B. Woodworth et al., “Is local SGD better than minibatch SGD?” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 10334–10343.
[24] D. Li and W. Fedmd, “Heterogenous federated learning via model
distillation,” in Proc. NeurIPS Workshop Feder. Learn. Data Privacy
Confident., 2019, p. 8.
[25] M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, C. Yin, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “A joint
learning and communications framework for federated learning over
wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 1,
pp. 269–283, Jan. 2021.
[26] Z. Yang, M. Chen, W. Saad, C. S. Hong, and M. Shikh-Bahaei, “Energy
efficient federated learning over wireless communication networks,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1935–1949,
Mar. 2021.
[27] F. Haddadpour and M. Mahdavi, “On the convergence of local descent
methods in federated learning,” 2019, arXiv:1910.14425.
[28] H. T. Nguyen, V. Sehwag, S. Hosseinalipour, C. G. Brinton, M. Chiang,
and H. V. Poor, “Fast-convergent federated learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 201–218, Jan. 2021.
[29] H. Guo, A. Liu, and V. K. Lau, “Analog gradient aggregation for
federated learning over wireless networks: Customized design and convergence analysis,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 197–210,
Jan. 2021.
[30] E. Jeong, S. Oh, H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S.-L. Kim,
“Communication-efficient on-device machine learning: Federated distillation and augmentation under non-IID private data,” 2018,
arXiv:1811.11479.
[31] L. Huang, Y. Yin, Z. Fu, S. Zhang, H. Deng, and D. Liu, “LoAdaBoost:
Loss-based AdaBoost federated machine learning with reduced computational complexity on IID and non-IID intensive care data,” Plos one,
vol. 15, no. 4, 2020, Art. no. e0230706.
[32] M. Asad and S. Otoum, “Towards privacy-aware federated learning for
user-sensitive data,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Blockchain Comput. Appl.
(BCCA), 2023, pp. 343–350.
[33] J. Dong, D. Zhang, Y. Cong, W. Cong, H. Ding, and D. Dai, “Federated
incremental semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 3934–3943.
[34] J. Dong et al., “Federated class-incremental learning,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022,
pp. 10164–10173.
[35] J. Le, D. Zhang, X. Lei, L. Jiao, K. Zeng, and X. Liao,
“Privacy-preserving federated learning with malicious clients and
honest-but-curious servers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 4329–4344, 2023.
[36] A. E. Cinà et al., “Wild patterns reloaded: A survey of machine learning
security against training data poisoning,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55,
no. 13, pp. 1–39, 2023.
[37] A. K. Singh, A. Blanco-Justicia, and J. Domingo-Ferrer, “Fair detection
of poisoning attacks in federated learning on non-IID data,” Data Min.
Knowl. Discovery, vol. 37, pp. 1998–2023, Sep. 2023.
[38] M. Anisetti, C. A. Ardagna, A. Balestrucci, N. Bena, E. Damiani, and
C. Y. Yeun, “On the robustness of random forest against untargeted
data poisoning: An ensemble-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Sustain.
Comput., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 540–554, Dec. 2023.
[39] C. Fung, C. J. Yoon, and I. Beschastnikh, “Mitigating sybils in federated
learning poisoning,” 2018, arXiv:1808.04866.
[40] M. A. Önsü, B. Kantarci, and A. Boukerche, “On the impact of malicious
and cooperative clients on validation score-based model aggregation for
federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2023,
pp. 1634–1639.

3773

[41] M. Asad et al., “Limitations and future aspects of communication costs
in federated learning: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 17, p. 7358, 2023.
[42] M. Gecer and B. Garbinato, “Federated learning for mobility applications,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1–28, 2024.
[43] M. Asad, S. Shaukat, E. Javanmardi, J. Nakazato, N. Bao, and
M. Tsukada, “Secure and efficient blockchain-based federated learning
approach for VANETs,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5,
pp. 9047–9055, Mar. 2024.
[44] M. Aslam et al., “Adaptive machine learning based distributed denial-ofservices attacks detection and mitigation system for SDN-enabled IoT,”
Sensors, vol. 22, no. 7, p. 2697, 2022.
[45] Z. Wang, J. Nakazato, M. Asad, E. Javanmardi, and M. Tsukada,
“Overcoming environmental challenges in CAVs through MEC-based
federated learning,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Future Netw.
(ICUFN), 2023, pp. 151–156.
[46] Y. Jiang et al., “Model pruning enables efficient federated learning on
edge devices,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 12,
pp. 10374–10386, Dec. 2023.
[47] W. Xu, W. Fang, Y. Ding, M. Zou, and N. Xiong, “Accelerating federated
learning for IoT in big data analytics with pruning, quantization and
selective updating,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 38457–38466, 2021.
[48] H. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Jia, Y. Zhou, H. Dai, and D. Dou, “FedDUAP:
Federated learning with dynamic update and adaptive pruning using
shared data on the server,” 2022, arXiv:2204.11536.
[49] Ş. Cobzaş, R. Miculescu, and A. Nicolae, Lipschitz Functions, vol. 10.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019.
[50] “TensorFlow federated.” Accessed: Sep. 22, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tensorflow.org/federated
[51] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), 2015, pp. 1–6.
[52] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. ICISSp, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[53] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11,
pp. 2278–2324, Nov. 1998.
[54] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6,
pp. 84–90, 2017.
[55] A. K. Sahu, T. Li, M. Sanjabi, M. Zaheer, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
“On the convergence of federated optimization in heterogeneous
networks,” 2018, arXiv:1812.06127.
[56] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Poisoning
attacks on federated learning-based IoT intrusion detection system,” in
Proc. Workshop Decentralized IoT Syst. Secur.(DISS), 2020, pp. 1–7.
[57] W. Liu et al., “D2MIF: A malicious model detection mechanism for
federated-learning-empowered Artificial Intelligence of Things,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2141–2151, Feb. 2023.
[58] S. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Wang, Y. Liu, and T. Chen, “Learning to detect
malicious clients for robust federated learning,” 2020, arXiv:2002.00211.
[59] S. M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, “A deep learning method with wrapper based
feature extraction for wireless intrusion detection system,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 92, May 2020, Art. no. 101752.

Muhammad Asad (Member, IEEE) received
the bachelor’s degree in telecommunication and
networking from COMSATS University Islamabad,
Pakistan, the master’s degree in computer science
from the Dalian University of Technology, China,
and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
the Nagoya Institute of Technology, Japan. He is
currently working as a Postdoctoral Researcher with
Zayed University, Abu Dhabi, UAE. He also works
as a Visiting Researcher with the University of
Tokyo, Japan. Prior to these roles, he worked as a
Project Researcher with the Department of Creative Informatics, University
of Tokyo. His research primarily focuses on federated learning, deep learning,
and a range of advanced networking technologies, including VANETs,
ITS, WSNs, SDN, and IoT, showcasing his deep expertise and ongoing
contributions to the field of computer science. He received the prestigious
President’s Award from the Nagoya Institute of Technology in 2021–2022 for
his outstanding research achievements.

3774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Safa Otoum (Member, IEEE) received the M.A.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering from
the University of Ottawa, Canada, in 2015 and
2019, respectively. She is an Assistant Professor
of Computer Engineering with the College of
Technological Innovation (CTI), Zayed University,
UAE, and a Researcher in the field of communications and network security. Prior to joining CTI,
she was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the University of
Ottawa and has been a Data Scientist with Cheetah
Networks Inc., Ottawa, since 2019. Her research
interests include network security, blockchain applications, applications of
ML and Aim, IoT, intrusion detection, and prevention systems. She received
several academic and research scholarships, including the prestigious NSERC
Canada Graduate Scholarships-Doctoral, the NSERC FSS, and the RIF-Zayed
University Grant. She is actively working on several reputable events within
IEEE and ACM. She is currently a Professional Engineer Ontario.

Saima Shaukat received the bachelor’s degree in
computer science from the Department of Computer
Science, The University of Lahore, Pakistan, in
2016, and the master’s degree in computer science from the Department of Computer Science,
COMSATS University Islamabad (Lahore Campus),
Pakistan, in September 2020. She is currently working as a Technical Researcher with the Graduate
School of Information Science and Technology, The
University of Tokyo, Japan. Previously, she worked
as a Junior Lecturer with Superior University,
Lahore, and a Lecturer with Lahore Garrison University. Her research interests
include distributed machine learning, natural language processing, and Internet
of Things.