IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

10231

Contrasting Estimation of Pattern Prototypes for
Anomaly Detection in Urban Crowd Flow
Yupeng Wang , Xiling Luo , and Zequan Zhou

Abstract— Crowd flow anomaly detection (CFAD) plays a vital
role in ensuring public safety due to its capability to distinguish
abnormal crowd movement behaviors from the norm. However,
the influence of coexisting spatiotemporal factors presents a
substantial challenge in capturing the dynamic normal pattern.
Moreover, the inherent similarities within the original crowd
flow data necessitate the creation of a discriminative feature
space. To address this, we propose ProtoDetect, a novel method
that learns distinguishable representations (named as prototypes)
of the influencing factors. It subsequently identifies anomalous
samples by comparing them with their normal counterparts,
estimated based on the prototypes. Experimental evaluations on
three real-world datasets demonstrate ProtoDetect’s consistent
superior performance in CFAD. The source code is available at
https://github.com/yupwang/ProtoDetect.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, crowd management, urban
transportation systems, contrastive learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

C

ROWD management plays a crucial role in enhancing urban transportation systems, traveler information
systems, and promoting sustainable urban development [1],
[2], [3], [4]. With the advancement of urban transportation
infrastructures, large volumes of traffic data is being collected
from sources such as vehicle trajectories, trip records, mobile
phone call logs, social media posts, and surveillance camera
signals [4], [5], [6]. This data provides valuable insights into
individual movement within urban environments and has expedited the development of efficient crowd management in areas
such as crowd simulation [1], [7], [8] and crowd flow prediction [4], [9], [10]. Nonetheless, further investigation is required
to address the field of anomaly detection within crowd flow.
Crowd flow anomaly detection (CFAD) involves identifying
uncommon or abnormal patterns in the movement of individuals within urban environments. Crowd flow refers to the
count of people entering (inflow) or exiting (outflow) specific
urban regions during specific times, as shown in Figure 1.
Anomalies in crowd flow arise from exceptional events. For
example, occurrences such as sports competitions, festivals,
Manuscript received 17 July 2023; revised 6 November 2023 and 8 January
2024; accepted 12 January 2024. Date of publication 31 January 2024; date
of current version 1 August 2024. This work was supported by the Zhejiang
“Jianbing” Research and Development Project under Grant 2022C01055.
The Associate Editor for this article was F. Xia. (Corresponding author:
Xiling Luo.)
The authors are with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and also with the Hangzhou
Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou 310000, China (e-mail:
wangyup@buaa.edu.cn; luoxiling@buaa.edu.cn; zhouzequan@buaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3355143

Fig. 1. (a) Illustration of inflow and outflow of Region A. (b) Crowd flow
variation from Wednesday to Sunday (eight-week average).

and concerts often result in increased crowd flow. Conversely,
extreme weather conditions typically lead to a decrease in
crowd flow. Street closures, on the other hand, result in a
decrease in the crowd flow of the closed street and an increase
in neighboring streets [11]. Recognizing anomalies in crowd
flow is essential as it helps identify these issues and is crucial
for enhancing public safety and improving urban planning.
Performing CFAD encounters two main difficulties. Firstly,
due to the complex impact of anomalies on crowd flow,
simply recognizing decreases or increases in the original crowd
inflow and outflow struggles in real-world environments.
To illustrate this challenge, we examine the inflow and
outflow of an urban region encompassing Millennium Park
and Grant Park in Chicago during the period from August
16th, 2019, to September 1st, 2019, as depicted in Figure 2.
We estimate crowd flow dynamics by aggregating taxi and
bike trip records arriving at or leaving the region every hour
(as detailed in Section V-A). Real-world anomalies happened
in the two parks, including Grant Park Music Festival (16th,
17th), Summer Dance Celebration (24th), and Chicago Jazz
Festival (29th, 30th), are indicated by light red shading. The
observation from the figure reveals the considerable challenge
in discerning a distinct and intuitive difference in crowd flow
patterns in the presence or absence of anomalies.
Secondly, modeling the normal patterns that represent
the expected crowd behavior poses a difficulty. In anomaly
detection, it is common to compute the deviation of observed
data from their expected normal pattern. However, estimating
the normal pattern is complex as it involves contributions
from various spatial and temporal factors. Temporal factors
include considerations like the time of day and day of
the week. For example, crowd flow tends to peak during
morning and evening hours while significantly decreasing
during nighttime. Similarly, crowd flow in office buildings may
be much more active on workdays and quieter on weekends.
Holidays introduce additional temporal factors, leading to

1558-0016 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

10232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 2. Crowd flow of the region encompassing Millennium Park and Grant
Park, Chicago, from August 16th to September 1st, 2019. Light red shading
highlights real-world anomalies in the two parks, including the Grant Park
Music Festival on the 16th and 17th, the Summer Dance Celebration on the
24th, and the Chicago Jazz Festival on the 29th and 30th, emphasizing the
challenge in distinguishing crowd flow patterns in the presence of anomalies.

Fig. 3. Eight-week averaged total crowd flow (sum of inflow and outflow)
of regions with different functional properties. Various factors contribute
distinctively to the normal pattern.

increased crowd flow in tourist areas and decreased flow in
work-related regions. Spatial factors, such as the presence
of public functional places, also contribute to diverse crowd
flow patterns. To illustrate this, we present the eight-week
averaged total crowd flow (sum of inflow and outflow) of two
urban regions in Figure 3. These regions are categorized as
residential and commercial based on the number of functional
places within them. It is evident that the peak hours of the two
regions exhibit noticeable differences. Additionally, the crowd
flow in the residential area experiences a substantial decrease
on weekends, whereas the flow in the commercial region is
more evenly distributed throughout the week.
Existing approaches for CFAD, including general traffic
anomaly detection methods, typically adopt a two-step
approach. Firstly, they transform the original traffic data
into a feature space. These features encompass direct traffic
dynamics such as vehicle speed, travel distance, and traffic
flow volume [12], [13], as well as handcrafted statistics derived
from the dynamics [14], [15], [16]. Advanced techniques like
tensor factorization [17] or neural networks [11], [18] can also
be employed for feature extraction. In the second step, general
anomaly detection algorithms widely used in data science are
applied to the extracted features to identify anomalous data
points. However, despite the effectiveness of these approaches,
they fail to adequately address the two difficulties mentioned
previously. Here we summarize the aspects that have not been
adequately considered:
1) Homogeneity of the feature space: As discussed in
Figure 2, the original features (inflow and outflow)
tend to exhibit similarities, making it challenging to
identify anomalies. Existing approaches address this
issue by utilizing handcrafted statistics derived from the
original features [14], [15], [16], [19], or by employing
embedding features obtained through tensor factorization [17] or neural networks [11], [18]. However,
these feature generating processes often overlook the

spatiotemporal dependencies of data points and do
not prioritize enhancing feature discriminability. The
homogeneity among features makes it difficult to
effectively distinguish anomalies from normal data
points.
2) Coexistence of spatiotemporal factors: Capturing the
expected crowd behavior necessitates modeling the
spatial and temporal factors and how they contribute
to normal patterns. However, existing approaches often
rely on general anomaly detection algorithms that are
not specifically designed to handle the simultaneous
occurrences of influencing factors. This oversight leads
to inaccurate estimations of normal patterns and can
hinder the detection of anomalies.
In this paper, we leverage contrastive representation learning
to obtain a discriminative feature space, and to represent
distinguishable influencing factors. Contrastive representation
learning has garnered significant attention in recent years,
primarily due to its outstanding performance across diverse
domains, including computer vision [20], [21], [22], time
series analysis [23], [24], [25], and graph learning [26],
[27]. This approach, executed in an unsupervised manner,
aims to foster a representation that effectively distinguishes
one instance from others. Specifically, to overcome the
homogeneity challenge in the feature space, we introduce the
Instance Contrast Module (IC) to obtain an informative
and discriminative feature space. This module captures spatiotemporal dependencies by contrastively encoding local and
global views of crowd flow data. Furthermore, by comparing
the encoded samples with their augmented counterparts,
it effectively disperses the samples in the feature space, thereby
enhancing their discriminability. Additionally, we propose the
Prototype Contribution Contrast Module (PCC) to estimate
representations of the influencing factors in the feature
space. These representations are referred to as prototypes.
Instead of directly modeling the prototypes themselves,
we focus on modeling their contribution to the observed
crowd flows. To achieve this, we train a projection head
that estimates the contributions by contrasting contribution
vectors between the local and global views. This process
aligns vectors from the same prototype and repels vectors
from different prototypes, leading to distinguishable prototype
distributions, as demonstrated in our experiment section VD.3. These contribution vectors are then used to iteratively
update the randomly initialized prototypes through a crossview prediction task. In the anomaly degree scoring stage,
we measure the degree of anomaly by computing the deviation
between incoming crowd flow features and their corresponding
normal features, which are estimated based on the prototypes.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
1) We present the ProtoDetect model for CFAD. It introduces the IC module to acquire an informative
and discriminative representation of crowd flow data,
enabling accurate differentiation between abnormal and
normal crowd flow. It introduces the PCC module
to facilitate the estimation of prototypes and their
contributions to crowd flow, providing a new means of
modeling the normal pattern.

WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

2) We conduct extensive experiments on three sets of realworld crowd flow anomalies. The result demonstrates
our ProtoDetect method surpasses baseline approaches,
showcasing a significant enhancement in precision.
Additionally, we conduct case studies to examine the
evolution of anomaly scores during the occurrence and
conclusion of anomalies. This analysis offers insights
into the behavior of the proposed method and its
effectiveness in detecting anomalies in real-world traffic
environments.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. We first
present the related work regarding traffic anomaly detection
and contrastive learning in Section II. We then clarify the
definitions of key terms used in the paper in Section III.
In Section IV we introduce details of our ProtoDetect method.
The experiment results are discussed in Section V. Finally,
we conclude our work in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we introduce the existing works in traffic
anomaly detection and contrastive learning.
A. Traffic Anomaly Detection
General traffic anomaly detection approaches can be broadly
categorized into three types: handcrafted feature-based, tensorbased, and deep learning-based.
Handcrafted feature-based methods involve the creation
of features according to predefined rules from traffic data,
followed by the application of general anomaly detection
algorithms to these features. Commonly employed anomaly
detection algorithms in this category include the elliptic
envelope (EE) [28], isolation forest (IF) [29], local outlier
factor (LOF) [30], and One-Class SVM (OCSVM) [31]. These
features may have physical interpretations, such as vehicle
speed, travel distances, and movement direction [12], [13],
[32]. They can also be manually defined statistics, encompassing aspects like spatial similarity, temporal similarity,
and traffic flow distribution [14], [15], [16]. While these
features provide valuable insights into real-world implications
and are easily interpretable, they often lack high-dimensional
spatiotemporal characteristics and rely heavily on, and are
limited by, human knowledge.
Tensor-based methods are employed to learn normal patterns in traffic data by utilizing restricted tensor factorization.
In this approach, traffic data is represented as a regionfeature-time tensor [17], [33], [34], [35]. For instance, [17]
utilize nonnegative CP decomposition to estimate normal
patterns and their distribution across temporal and spatial
dimensions. To identify anomalous regions that display
distributions distinct from their past behavior, the LOF
algorithm is subsequently employed. Similarly, [33] employ
nonnegative tensor cofactorization, incorporating the social
activity check-in tensor. However, it is important to note that
tensor-based methods model regions independently, neglecting
spatial correlations between them.
Deep learning-based methods have demonstrated their
efficacy in modeling traffic data [36], [37], [38] and are
also used in traffic anomaly detection [11], [18], [39].

10233

Neural networks can operate in two key modes: first,
by generating spatiotemporal features that are subsequently
fed into general anomaly detection algorithms, as exemplified
by ST_decomp [18], which employs fully connected layers to
capture spatial and temporal patterns and feeds the deviation
from normal patterns into the LOF algorithm for anomaly
detection. Second, neural networks can be tailored for endto-end anomaly detection, as seen in STGAN [11], which
employs a generator to produce synthetic traffic data slices and
a discriminator to assess the degree of anomaly. By training
a generator to produce synthetic slices, it can be argued
that STGAN essentially models a single abnormal pattern.
However, although these deep learning-based methods are
capable of modeling single normal or abnormal patterns, they
often overlook the complexity of traffic data. Different times of
the day, regions with varying social properties, and weekdays
versus weekends can exhibit different normal patterns.
The connections between our work and existing research,
as well as our improvements, can be outlined as follows.
Like existing feature-based methods, we propose the IC
module to generate high-dimensional crowd flow features.
However, we go beyond existing approaches by utilizing
instance contrastive learning. This enables us to capture
spatiotemporal dependencies and obtain a discriminative
feature space that improves the detection of anomalies. In our
PCC module, we adopt the idea of estimating normal patterns,
which is commonly used in tensor-based methods. However,
we enhance this concept by estimating prototypes and
utilizing the learned prototypes to predict normal components.
Additionally, we introduce a scoring method that evaluates
the deviation between incoming crowd flow features and their
corresponding normal features, which are estimated based on
the prototypes. This scoring method is particularly well-suited
for the urban traffic environment.
B. Contrastive Learning
In our study, we employ contrastive learning as a
technique to acquire discriminative high-dimensional features
and prototype contribution vectors. Contrastive learning,
a popular approach in deep learning, facilitates unsupervised
representation learning by repelling negative pairs while
attracting positive pairs [21], [22], [23], [40].
The representations learned through contrastive learning
have proven to be effective in various domains such
as computer vision (image classification, object detection)
[20], time series analysis (human activity recognition, fault
diagnosis) [23], and graph learning (node classification, graph
classification) [26]. To facilitate effective contrastive learning,
data augmentation techniques are commonly employed to
create positive and negative pairs. These techniques involve
generating different views of the original data, where samples
from the same data points are considered positive pairs, while
samples from different data points are treated as negative pairs.
For image data, common augmentation techniques include
cropping, resizing, rotating, or blurring the images [21], [22].
In the case of time series data, transformations in the time
and frequency domains are applied [23], [41], [42]. In graph
learning, graph diffusion is often utilized to create a global
view for contrastive learning [26], [27], [43].

10234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

TABLE I
D ESCRIPTION OF M ATHEMATICAL S YMBOLS

In our study, as we represent crowd flow data as a sequence
of attributed graphs, we propose a combination of time series
augmentation and graph augmentation techniques to create
two views of the original data. We construct instances that
incorporate spatiotemporal neighboring information from both
views and encode them into discriminative feature vectors by
contrasting positive and negative instance pairs. Additionally,
we model the contribution of prototypes by contrasting
contribution vectors from both views.
III. P RELIMINARY
The definitions of key terms used in the paper are shown
as follows. Table I lists the mathematical symbols used in the
paper.
Definition 1 (Urban Region): Urban regions are denoted by
partitioning the bounding box of the urban boundary into a grid
of cells, based on longitude and latitude. Each grid cell has
uniform dimensions and corresponds to a distinct region. Note
that grid cells falling outside the urban boundary are excluded.
Formally, we denote the urban region set with symbol V =
{v1 , v2 , . . . , vn }.
Definition 2 (Time Slot): We denote a set of timestamps as
{γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γl+1 }, with each consecutive pair of timestamps
satisfying the condition γi+1 − γi = 1hour. The time slot set
is formally defined as T = {t | ti = (γi , γi+1 ) , i ≤ l}, where
each time slot represents a 1-hour time interval.
Definition 3 (Urban Region Network): Viewing
urban
regions as nodes in a graph, we construct the urban region
network represented by an undirected graph G = (V, E, A).
This graph describes the interrelationships between urban
regions, where E denotes the set of edges indicating the

connectivity between these regions, and A ∈ Rn×n represents
the adjacency matrix of G.
Definition 4 (Crowd Flow Dynamics): We
model
the
crowd flow dynamics by aggregating trip records, which
detail the initiation and termination times and locations of
individual movements. For instance, a trip record can be
represented as {(−73.99, 40.73), (−73.98, 40.73), 2014-01-09
20:45, 2014-01-09 21:12}, signifying the starting location,
ending location, starting time, and ending time of a specific
trip.
We formally define the collection of trip records as
trip trip trip trip
trip
 = {ω | ωi = (vsi , vei , tsi , tei )}. In this context, vs ∈
trip
V and ve ∈ V represent the starting and ending regions of the
trip
trip
trip, respectively. Similarly, ts ∈ T and te ∈ T represent
the time slots during which the trip commences and concludes.
Crowd flow dynamics are represented as a tensor
X ∈ Rl×n×2 . The inflow and outflow are defined as:
o
n
trip
trip
(1)
X i, j,1 = ω | ωk ∈  ∧ tek = ti ∧ vek = v j
o
n
trip
trip
(2)
X i, j,2 = ω | ωk ∈  ∧ tsk = ti ∧ vsk = v j
where X i, j,1 and X i, j,2 denote the inflow and the outflow,
respectively.
Definition 5 (Problem: Crowd Flow Anomaly Detection):
We represent
expert-labeled
anomaly


 events using the
 symbol
U =
ts1 , te1 , vr1 , ts2 , te2 , vr2 , . . . , tsk , tek , vrk . Each
individual anomaly event is denoted by a tuple (ts , te , vr ),
where ts ∈ T represents the starting time slot of the event,
te ∈ T indicates the ending time slot of the event, and vr ∈ V
specifies the region in which the event takes place.
Given crowd flow dynamics denoted as X ∈ Rl×n×2 , our
objective is to derive the anomaly status matrix O ∈ Rl×n ,
wherein Oi, j ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether a data point at position
(i, j) is normal (0) or anomalous (1). The ideal anomaly status
matrix O∗ is labeled by anomaly events U, thereby serving as
a reference for assessing the accuracy of anomaly detection
algorithms, i.e.,

 if ∃ (ts , te , vr ) ∈ U,
1
such that ts ≤ i ≤ te and vr = j;
Oi,∗ j =
(3)

0 otherwise.
IV. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
The proposed ProtoDetect model consists of two main
modules: the IC module and the PCC module, as depicted in
Figure 4. The IC module encodes spatiotemporal information
of crowd flow in a contrastive manner, enabling it to learn
discriminative features from the original data. The PCC
module estimates prototypes within the feature space and
leverages them to model the normal component of crowd flow.
The anomaly degree of incoming data points is determined
by measuring their deviation from the estimated normal
component, computed using the prototypes.
A. Instance Contrast Module
The IC module utilizes unsupervised contrastive learning
to create a discriminative feature space. It achieves this by
employing both temporal and spatial augmentation techniques

WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

10235

Fig. 4. The proposed ProtoDetect model comprises two modules: the Instance Contrast Module (IC) and the Prototype Contribution Contrast Module (PCC).
By utilizing spatiotemporal contrastive learning, the IC module extracts discriminative features from the original crowd flow data. Specifically, it generates
local and global views by applying temporal and spatial augmentation techniques, respectively. Instances in each view are encoded and projected into features,
denoted as h, using a pre-trained spatiotemporal encoder and a feature projection head. The instance contrasting loss Lic is defined to compare positive feature
pairs from the same data point and negative pairs from different data points, thereby enhancing the discriminability of the feature space. Subsequently, in the
feature space, the PCC module estimates prototypes P contributing to the normal crowd flow patterns. Instead of directly modeling the prototypes, it estimates
the contribution of prototypes to the observed crowd flow by contrasting contribution vectors z between the local and global views. This involves training a
contribution projection head with the prototype contribution contrasting loss L pc . Moreover, to achieve the estimation of the prototypes, the model employs
a cross-view prediction task that updates the randomly initialized prototypes. During the inference stage, the incoming data point x(i) is mapped into feature
h(i) and subsequently compared with its corresponding normal feature ĥ(i) estimated with prototypes. The deviation between h(i) and ĥ(i) is computed as
the anomaly degree score w(i) .

to generate local and global views of the crowd flow
data. From these views, instances that capture spatial and
temporal neighboring information of the original data points
are constructed. By maximizing the agreement between the
representations of these instances from the two views for
each data point, the IC module effectively encodes its
comprehensive local and global information. Meanwhile,
it enhances the discriminability of the feature space by
minimizing the similarity between the representations of
different data points.
1) Instance Construction: In our approach, the comparison
between positive and negative pairs is vital to the acquisition
of the discriminative features. As it is hard to directly compose
positive and negative data point pairs without prior knowledge,
we employ temporal and spatial augmentation techniques
to generate two diverse yet related data views. In the two
views, samples from the same data point are defined as
positive, and samples from different data points are defined
as negative. Subsequently, we construct the spatiotemporal
instances carrying both spatial and temporal neighboring
information in the two augmented views.
Temporal Augmentation: To enable the model to learn
consistent representations from various augmented signals in a
contrastive manner, we rely on the approach of simultaneously
applying weak and strong augmentation and conducting crossview tasks. This approach has proven effective in domains
such as computer vision [44], [45] and time series [23], [46]
representation learning. It is known to promote consistency
in representations and enhance the model’s generalization

capabilities. Specifically, we use weak temporal augmentation
to introduce minor variations that do not significantly alter
the data’s characteristics, and strong temporal augmentation
to introduce more pronounced perturbations.
In our method, the weak augmentation method relies on a
jitter-and-scale strategy [23], which involves adding Gaussian
noise to the time series and applying magnitude changes
to each time step using a value drawn from a Gaussian
distribution with a mean of 1 and a standard deviation of σ ,
a hyperparameter. On the other hand, the strong augmentation
method uses window warping [42], which has demonstrated
effectiveness in time series representation [41]. This strategy
involves selecting a random window of the time series and
stretching it by a factor of β or contracting it by a factor of
1/β, where β is a parameter. We discuss details about the
temporal augmentation selection in Section V-D.4.
Spatial Augmentation: We employ the graph diffusion as
the spatial augmentation, which effectively captures the global
structure information [26], [27], [47]. By performing graph
diffusion, we obtain a global view of the original graph
topology. Specifically, we leverage the heat kernel [27], [48]
as the instantiation of generalized graph diffusion to power the
graph diffusion process. Given an adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n ,
the global view graph topology can be formulated as:




S = exp λ ⊙ AD−1 − λ
(4)
where λ denotes diffusion time; ⊙ represents element-wise
multiplication; D ∈ Rn×n denotes the diagonal degree matrix

10236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

of A; λ is subtracted element-wise from each element in the
resulting matrix.
Instance Sampling: In our method, the strong temporal
augmentation creates the local view, while the combination of
weak temporal augmentation and graph diffusion generates the
global view. These choices are made based on the observed
performance of the augmentation techniques in the context
of CFAD (detailed in Section V-D.4). For each data point,
we sample two sequences of attributed graphs from both local
and global views, forming an instance pair. The instance pair is
sampled by performing fixed-length sliding window sampling
on the temporal dimension, and subgraph sampling on the
spatial dimension, and represented as a tuple containing a time
series and an adjacency matrix. We employ the subgraph (·)
function for spatial sampling. Specifically, given a region vi ,
this function identifies the eight nearest regions to vi in the
graph G and returns nine indices (one for vi and eight for the
neighboring regions):
subgraph (vi ) = {k | vk ∈

arg min

X

V ′ ⊂V ,|V ′ |=9 v ∈V


d vi , v j }

(5)

j

where V ′ represents the set comprising
the eight nearest

regions to vi and vi itself; d vi , v j denotes the Euclidean
distance between the center point coordinates of region vi and
vj.
Given a data point Xi, j,: , the corresponding spatiotemporal
instances y local from the local view and y global from the global
view are constructed as:

nodes = subgraph v j
(6)


local
y
= str ong Xi−T :i,nodes , Anodes,nodes
(7)


global
y
= weak Xi−T :i,nodes , Snodes,nodes
(8)
where weak (·) is the weak temporal augmentation function;
str ong (·) is the strong temporal augmentation function; T is
the sequence length.
2) Instance Contrasting: In our approach, we use contrastive learning to derive discriminative representations of
spatiotemporal instances. Since each instance consists of
a time series and a subgraph adjacency matrix, applying
contrastive learning directly is challenging. To address this,
we first encode each instance into a vector, which we call
a code, that captures both spatial and temporal information.
Then we perform contrastive learning on the codes to acquire
discriminative representations.
Instance Encoding: As instances are temporal graph signals,
we use pre-trained temporal graph encoders that can learn
spatial and temporal dependencies effectively [36], [37], [49].
For each view, we train an autoencoder consisting of two
GCGRU layers [36] to compress and reconstruct temporal
graph signals. The encoder layers of the GCGRU-autoencoder
are then utilized to map the instances into codes.
Instance Contrasting: Contrastive learning is then applied
to learn the discriminative instance representations. As the
two independent GCGRU-encoders encodes instances into
different feature spaces, we then apply the feature projection
heads to project the codes into an unified feature space, where
instance-level contrastive learning is conducted.

In particular, for each view, we construct an MLP with two
linear layers and ReLU non-linearity, forming two projection
heads. We use f local (·) and f global (·) to denote the steps
for mapping instances into codes and projecting codes into
features within the local and global views, respectively. Codes
are mapped into feature h ∈ R H via hlocal = f local y local
and hglobal = f global y global , on which contrastive learning is
conducted, where H is the length of feature vector.
Given a batch of N data points x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(N ) , 2N
spatiotemporal instances are constructed from its two augmented views. These instances are thenencoded and projected
into features, resulting in a feature set h(1) , h(2) , . . . , h(2N ) .
Notably, the first N instances correspond to the local view,
while the subsequent N instances pertain to the global view.
For feature h(i) (i ≤ N ), its corresponding feature h(i+N )
from the other view is considered as its positive feature
sample, and other features negative. We then employ instancelevel contrastive loss to maximize the similarity between the
positive feature pairs while minimizing the similarity between
the negative feature pairs. In this work, we adopt cosine
similarity, i.e.,
sim (a, b) = a · b/ max (∥a∥2 · ∥b∥2 , ϵ)

(9)

where ϵ is a small value to avoid division by zero. This choice
is consistent with its common usage in various applications,
particularly in the context of contrastive loss computation [21],
[22], [23], [40]. We adopt InfoNCE loss [40] to compute
instance contrasting loss Lic , i.e.,


N
X
exp sim h(i) , h(i+N ) /τic
log P2N
Lic = −


(i) ( j) /τ
ic
j=1 1[ j̸ =i+N ] exp sim h , h
i=1
(10)
where 1condition represents an indicator function, which takes
on the value 1 when the condition is true and 0 otherwise.
The parameter τic controls the temperature, influencing the
concentration level of the feature distribution [20].
B. Prototype Contribution Contrast Module
To estimate prototypes coexisting simultaneously in the realworld crowd flow, the PCC module employs a contribution
projection head learning the contribution of each prototype
to the observed data point. This involves contrasting the
contribution vectors between the local and global views.
Furthermore, the PCC module employs a cross-view prediction
task to iteratively update the randomly initialized prototypes,
ultimately leading to an estimation of the prototypes.
Prototype Contribution Contrasting: Contrastive learning in
computer vision involves projecting an instance into a feature
space with a dimensionality equal to the number of clusters,
allowing the feature vector’s i-th element to represent the
instance’s probability of belonging to the i-th cluster [50].
However, the semantic information of crowd flow data used in
our work varies relatively mildly, in contrast to images where
two distinct pictures (e.g., a dog and a plane) would exhibit
significant visual differences. As a result, we do not assign
instances to specific clusters, but rather use the i-th element to
indicate the relative contribution of the i-th pattern prototype.

WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

To map the features obtained in Section IV-A.2 into
contribution vectors, we employ a contribution projection head
constructed with two linear layers and ReLU non-linearity,
similar to the instance projection head. However, given that
the projected vector elements represent the contributions of
prototypes, we apply a softmax layer to the MLP. Features are
M
local = g hlocal
mapped into contribution
 vectors z ∈ R via z
global
global
and z
=g h
, where M is the number of prototypes,
g (·) denotes the contribution projection head.
We concatenate the contribution vectors into matrix form,
resulting in Zlocal ∈ R N ×M and Zglobal ∈ R N ×M . Each
row of Z represents the contribution vectors of features,
while each column of Z denotes the contributions of
a single prototype through all the features. We conduct
prototype contribution contrastive learning on the column
vectors. Formally, we denote the prototype contribution
vectors
of Z) with symbol c, forming
 (1) (2)(column(M)vectors
c , c , . . . , c , c(M+1) , . . . , c(2M) where c(i) = Zlocal
∈
:,i
global
N
(i+M)
N
R and c
= Z:,i
∈ R (i ≤ M) become a positive
pair. For instance, c(1) represents the contributions of the first
prototype to all the features in the local view, and c(1+M)
represents the contributions in the global view. The prototype
contribution contrasting loss L pc is computed as Eq. (11).

10237

C. Anomaly Degree Scoring
In the scoring process, we use symbol Xtest ∈ Rltest ×n×2
to denote the test dataset. For a data point x = Xtesti, j,: ,
we employ Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) to construct spatiotemporal
instances y local and y global . Subsequently, we obtain
 h via
global = f global y global , and z
hlocal = f local y local
and
h


via zlocal = g hlocal and zglobal = g hglobal .
We estimate the normal component of h by a linear
combination of prototypes, with the weights indicated by z, i.e.
zT P. The anomaly score is denoted as Wi, j , and we measure
the deviation of h from the estimated normal component using
the square distance, as defined in Eq. (15).

2
w = hlocal + hglobal − (zlocal )T P − (zglobal )T P
(15)
We represent the anomaly scores of Xtest with W ∈ Rltest ×n .
Aligning with previous works [51], [52], [53], we incorporate a 1-D Gaussian filter to mitigate false positive rates by
smoothing anomaly scores, i.e.,
 2
k
1
(16)
G (k) = √ exp −
2
2π
e i,: =
W

T /2
X

G (k) ⊙ Wi−k,:

(17)

k=−T /2



exp sim c(i) , c(i+M) /τ pc
log P2M
L pc = −


(i) ( j) /τ
pc
j=1 1[ j̸=i+M] exp sim c , c
i=1
M
X

(11)
where τ pc denotes the temperature parameter.
Through prototype contribution contrastive learning,
we align the prototype contributions for each prototype in
the two views while separating the contributions for different
prototypes. This process enhances the distinguishable
distribution of prototype contribution vectors, thereby
indirectly improving the diversity of the learned prototypes.
Pattern Prototype Estimation: We define the prototypes as
a learnable parameter P ∈ R M×H , and perform a cross-view
feature prediction task to learn it. Specifically, we predict the
feature h with a weighted sum of prototypes, i.e. ĥ = zT P.
To predict the feature of one view, the contribution vector z of
the other view is adopted as weights, and the prediction loss
is defined as Eq. (13).
n

1X
(ai − bi )2
n
i=1
N 


1 X
L pr ed =
MSE h(i) , (z(i+N ) )T P
N
i=1


(i+N )
(i) T
+ MSE h
, (z ) P

MSE (a, b) =

(12)

(13)

By training the neural network with L pr ed , the learnable
parameter P is iteratively updated.
The overall self-supervised loss of our ProtoDetect model
is defined as follows.

e is the
where G (k) denotes the discrete Gaussian kernel; W
smoothed anomaly scores. During computation, we extend
Wi,: by replicating the nearest value on its boundaries.
Utilizing the smoothed anomaly scores, a hyperparameter
threshold η is employed to classify points as anomalies (1)
or non-anomalies (0). This classification is determined by the
condition:
(
ei, j ≥ η
1 W
Oi, j =
(18)
ei, j < η
0 W
In our subsequent evaluation, the threshold η is set as the K th highest anomaly score, where the value of K is tailored to
align with the evaluation metrics.
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate our ProtoDetect method using
real-world datasets and compare it with existing works.
A. Datasets and Evaluation Metric
Datasets: We conduct experiments on data from two cities:
New York City (NYC) and Chicago. To model the crowd flow
dynamics, we utilize taxi trip records and bike trip records,
namely NYC Yellow Taxi Trip Records,1 NYC Citi Bike Trip
Records,2 Chicago Taxi Trip Records3 and Chicago Divvy
Bike Trip Records.4 By aggregating the trip records every
1 hour, we generate the inflow and outflow features. These
crowd flow features are transformed into range [0, 1] by a
min-max scaler. To test the performance of CFAD approaches
in an online way, we split the dataset into a training set and
a testing set.
1 https://www.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page
2 https://citibikenyc.com/system-data
3 https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Taxi-Trips-2019/h4cq-z3dy

L = Lic + L pc + L pr ed

(14)

4 https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Divvy-Trips/fg6s-gzvg

10238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Preprocessing: Given that the trip records do not encompass
the entire city, as observed in previous works [14], [17], [54],
our approach centers on a bounding box area that encapsulates
both the starting and ending locations of recorded trips.
Subsequently, we partition this area into urban regions using a
grid system. Specifically, for NYC, we establish 161 regions,
each measuring 500 square meters, and for Chicago, we create
87 regions, each with a size of 1000 square meters, as shown
in Figure 5.
Following previous works [11], [37], we construct the urban
region network by computing the adjacency matrix with a
Gaussian kernel. The weighted adjacency matrix A can be
formed as Eq. (19).

2 !

 exp − d vi , v j
, i ̸ = j and ei j = 1
(19)
Ai j =
σ2


0,
otherwise.

where d vi , v j denotes the Euclidean distance between center
point coordinates of region vi and v j ; σ is the standard
deviation of distances; ei j indicates the edge between node
vi and v j , ei j = 1 if region vi and v j are adjacent.
Ground Truth: Acquiring a comprehensive set of ground
truths that records all crowd flow anomalies in a city
presents significant challenges. Therefore, in line with previous
research [11], [14], [18], [33], [55], [56], we rely on expertlabeled anomaly events to label anomalies for detection.
To evaluate the performance of CFAD algorithms in detecting
long-term and short-term anomalies, we investigate two sets
of events with different durations in NYC and one set of
events in Chicago, as depicted in Figure 5 and detailed in
Table II. Specifically, the NYC long-term anomalies (NYCL), previously collected by [55] and utilized as the anomaly
ground truth in subsequent studies [11], [14], [18], comprises
20 events with an average duration of 40.4 hours. These events
were originally reported by nycinsiderguide.com between
November 1 and November 30, 2014. In contrast, we adopt the
NYC Parks Events5 as NYC short-term anomalies (NYCS), which provides event information displayed on the Parks
website, nyc.gov/parks. The average duration of NYC shortterm events is 5.5 hours. Regarding Chicago, we collect
Twitter posts posted by ChicagoAlerts,6 an official source that
provides notifications on a range of events including sports
competitions, festivals, street closures, concerts, parades, and
extreme weather. All the posts from August 2019 are gathered
to form a relatively objective anomaly set. We refer to this
collection as the Chicago short-term anomalies (Chicago-S),
encompassing 59 events with an average duration of 5.5 hours.
In the anomaly detection stage, if an event persists in region
v j during the time slot ti , the corresponding data point xi, j is
labeled as anomalous.
Evaluation Metric: Anomaly detection algorithms inherently perform binary classification, distinguishing outliers
from inliers. Therefore, we adopt Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) and recall as evaluation metrics, in alignment
with prior research [11], [18], [51], [56], [57]. To construct
5 https://data.cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/NYC-Parks-EventsListing-Event-Listing/fudw-fgrp
6 https://twitter.com/chicagoalerts

TABLE II
E VENT S AMPLES F ROM C ROWD G ATHERING E VENT DATASETS

the ROC curve, we incrementally vary K from zero to 100%
of the total number of data points. The Area Under the Curve
(AUC) is then computed to assess the performance of different
algorithms. A higher AUC value indicates superior anomaly
detection performance. To assess the recall metric, we employ
K values at 10%, 20%, 30% and 40% of the total number of
data points.
B. Baselines
In our evaluation, we contrast our proposed method
against several baseline approaches. These baselines comprise
individual methods that exclusively detect anomalies on
isolated data point x, as well as spatiotemporal methods that
incorporate the spatial and temporal neighbors of x into the
detection process. The details of these baselines are presented
below.

WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

10239

graph sequences, while the discriminator distinguishes
between them from real sequences. Any sequence that
is discriminated as fake is considered anomalous.
• DCdetector, as detailed in [25], stands as a stateof-the-art model for time series anomaly detection.
This model employs a multi-scale dual attention contrastive representation learning process, resulting in a
permutation-invariant representation with discriminatory
capabilities. Given its original design for time series data,
we employ one instance of DCdetector for each region
in order to conduct spatiotemporal anomaly detection.
C. Implementation Details
Fig. 5. The urban regions of NYC and Chicago, together with the locations
of three sets of anomaly events used in evaluating CFAD algorithms.

Individual methods:
• Elliptic envelope (EE) [28] employs an elliptic envelope
to fit the data points and utilizes Mahalanobis distances
to quantify the degree of outlyingness.
• Isolation forest (IF) [29] randomly selects features and
split values to isolate observations in a tree-like structure.
Anomalies tend to have shorter path lengths, and a forest
of such random trees that produce shorter paths for
specific samples is indicative of anomalies.
• Local outlier factor (LOF) [30] measures the deviation
of the density of a given sample in comparison to
its neighbors and identifies outliers as samples with
substantially lower density than their neighbors.
• One-Class SVM (OCSVM) [31] is an unsupervised
learning algorithm that maps the input data into a highdimensional space and learns a boundary around the
normal data points. Any points outside this boundary are
considered to be anomalies.
Spatiotemporal methods:
• Spatiotemporal Autoencoder (STAE) is a neural network
that compresses signals through a bottleneck structure and subsequently reconstructs the original signal
from the compressed features. We utilize STAE with
GCGRU [36] layers to represent reconstruction-based
anomaly detection methods and capture the spatial and
temporal information of the data. The reconstruction error
is utilized as the anomaly score.
• STGCN [37] is the first study to utilize purely
convolutional structures to extract spatiotemporal features
concurrently from graph-structured time series in a traffic
prediction study. We employ STGCN as a representative
example of prediction-based anomaly detection methods
and utilize the prediction error as the anomaly score.
• ST_decomp [18] is a neural network designed specifically
for detecting anomalies in urban traffic. It models normal
urban dynamics using both spatial and temporal features
and subsequently adopts a LOF anomaly detector to
detect outliers of abnormal dynamics.
• STGAN [11] is a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
employed to detect anomalies in traffic speed data
and crowd flow data. The generator produces fake

In relation to temporal augmentations, we utilize the default
parameters for jitter-and-scale and window warping functions
as provided by Iwana and Uchida [41].7 Specifically, our weak
temporal augmentation involves the introduction of Gaussian
noise with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 0.03,
along with changes in magnitude sourced from a Gaussian
distribution with a mean of one and a standard deviation of
0.1. For strong temporal augmentation, we set the value of β
to 2. In the context of graph diffusion time (λ), we choose a
value of 5, consistent with the approach detailed in [26].
To construct instances, we employ a time series sampling
with T = 12, ensuring a temporal range that encompasses
sufficient neighboring information. The pre-trained spatiotemporal encoders are designed to map instances into tensors
with dimensions of 9 × 16, where each 16-dimensional vector
represents an individual region. For feature projection heads,
we adopt a Concat-Linear-ReLU-Linear form, featuring two
linear layers with 72 and 32 units, respectively, facilitating an
effective compression workflow. Similarly, we employ a stack
of Linear-ReLU-Linear-Softmax layers for the contribution
projection head. The first linear layer consists of 32 units,
and the second linear layer accommodates M units.
Based on the findings of our hyperparameter sensitivity
analysis as presented in Section V-D.5, we determine the
hyperparameters M = 9, τic = 0.1 and τ pc = 0.1.
D. Results and Discussion
1) Anomaly Detection Performance: The evaluation results
are presented in Figure 6 and Figure 7. Our ProtoDetect
method outperforms the baseline methods with AUC metrics
of 0.85, 0.83 and 0.84 on the three anomaly sets, respectively.
Remarkably, the curve of our method almost completely
encompasses all other curves, indicating its superior performance across all sensitivity configurations. The STAE method
demonstrates suboptimal performance. It is important to note
that during both the training and inference processes of STAE,
we utilize instances constructed from the original crowd
flow data view, employing the same instance construction
strategy of ProtoDetect. The suboptimal performance of
STAE underscores the advantage of learning spatiotemporal
dependencies from instances.
As depicted in Table III, when assessing performance using
the recall metric, ProtoDetect consistently attains either the
7 https://github.com/uchidalab/time_series_augmentation

10240

Fig. 6.

Fig. 7.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

ROC curves on NYC-L.

ROC curves on NYC-S.

highest or the second-highest results across different evaluation
settings.

Fig. 8.

ROC curves on Chicago-S.

2) Ablation Study: In this section, we aim to examine
the individual contributions of our IC and PCC modules to
the overall model. To assess the impact of the IC module,
we conduct a direct training of the PCC module on the
original data using the loss functions L pc and L pr ed . We then
detect anomalies based on the deviation from prototypebased predictions. Similarly, to evaluate the contribution of
the PCC module, we train the IC module solely with Lic .
Afterward, we employ general anomaly detection algorithms
on the extracted features h.
The results of the ablation study are presented in Table IV.
When the IC module is removed, the AUC value decreases by
0.09, 0.10 and 0.09 on the three anomaly sets, respectively.
Similarly, when the PCC module is removed, the AUC value
decreases by at least 0.05, 0.05 and 0.04 on the three anomaly
sets, respectively
It is worth highlighting that the utilization of the IC
module leads to improved performance compared to directly
employing general anomaly detection algorithms on the
original data. As shown in Table V, serving as a front module,
IC enhances the AUC metrics of EE, IF, LOF, and OCSVM.
This improvement underscores the discriminative nature of the
feature space generated by IC, emphasizing its effectiveness in
enhancing the detection capabilities of the subsequent anomaly
detection algorithms.
3) Effectiveness of Prototype Contribution Contrasting: In
this subsection, we investigate the effectiveness of prototype
contribution contrasting, i.e. L pc . Specifically, we assess how
the inclusion of L pc impacts CFAD performance in terms of
AUC and the diversity of the learned prototypes. To measure
prototype diversity, we calculate the standard deviation of

WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

10241

TABLE III
R ECALL @K%

TABLE IV

TABLE VI

A BLATION S TUDY ON M ODEL C OMPONENTS

E FFECT OF THE P ROTOTYPE C ONTRIBUTION C ONTRASTING
I MPROVING THE D IVERSITY OF E STIMATED P ROTOTYPES

TABLE V
E FFECT OF THE IC M ODULE I MPROVING THE P ERFORMANCE
OF G ENERAL A NOMALY D ETECTION A LGORITHMS

TABLE VII
CFAD P ERFORMANCES W ITH D IFFERENT C OMBINATIONS OF
S PATIAL AND T EMPORAL AUGMENTATION T ECHNIQUES

pair-wise similarities between prototypes using the similarity
matrix Q, as expressed by:

Qi, j = sim Pi , P j
(20)
v
u
M
M
u
X
X
2
1
u
Qi, j − Q̄
(21)
Diversity = t
M (M − 1)
i=1 j=1, j̸=i

where Q denotes the similarity matrix of P, and Q̄ denotes
the mean similarity in the similarity matrix.
Table VI demonstrates that prototype contribution contrasting enhances CFAD performance. Moreover, the prototypes
learned with L pc exhibit greater diversity, aligning with our
objective of using prototypes to represent various influencing
factors.
4) Temporal Augmentation Selection: Since the appropriate
selection of temporal augmentations remains an ongoing
challenge, as highlighted in a previous study [58], and
the exploration of the combination of temporal and spatial
augmentations is relatively uncharted territory, we conduct
experiments to investigate these issues in CFAD context.
Our initial investigation centers on the combination of
temporal and spatial augmentations within the CFAD framework. As illustrated in Table VII, the optimal performance is

Fig. 9. AUC scores on three anomaly sets, trained with feature dimensions
H in {8, 16, 32, 48, 64, 128}.

Fig. 10. AUC scores on three anomaly sets, trained with prototype numbers
M in {3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 30}.

observed when the strong temporal augmentation is applied to
the local view, and the weak augmentation is applied to the
global view. It is important to note that the absence of temporal

10242

Fig. 11.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

AUC scores on three anomaly sets, with τic and τ pc in {0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}.
TABLE VIII
CFAD P ERFORMANCES W ITH D IFFERENT S TRONG
T EMPORAL AUGMENTATION T ECHNIQUES

augmentations, as well as the absence of strong augmentations,
can result in a significant decline in the AUC metric.
Moreover, we explore the impact of various strong augmentation techniques that introduce significant perturbations.
As detailed in Table VIII, our experiments indicate that
window warping provides the best performance. Nevertheless,
alternative techniques such as time warping, window slicing,
and magnitude warping also yield acceptable AUC values.
This suggests that while window warping is our preferred
choice, the selection of the strong temporal augmentation
algorithm is not rigidly fixed. It is worth noting that the
permutation algorithm, which shuffles segments of the signal,
is not suitable for CFAD, as it severely disrupts the data’s
fundamental characteristics.
5) Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis: We perform sensitivity analysis to study the impacts of several hyperparameters
namely, the feature dimensions H , the number of prototypes
M, and the two temperature parameters τic and τ pc .
Figure 9 illustrates the impact of the feature dimension H on
CFAD performance. Results indicate that shorter features offer
insufficient information, leading to decreased performance.
Optimal performance is achieved when feature lengths are set
at 32. Notably, the performance remains stable with increasing
feature sizes exceeding 32.
Figure 10 illustrates the relationship between the number of
prototypes M and the performance of CFAD. The results show
that optimal performance is achieved at M = 9 for NYC-L
and NYC-S, while for Chicago-S, the optimal performance
is observed at M = 11. Notably, when M is lower, the
performance deteriorates, underscoring the importance of an
adequate number of prototypes in capturing the factors that

influence normal crowd flows. Additionally, the performance
remains stable as M increases beyond the respective optimal
values of 9 and 11 for the three sets.
Figure 11 illustrates how the temperature parameters τic and
τ pc impact the anomaly detection performance. For all the
three anomaly sets, as τic increases from 0.1 to 0.9, the AUC
value decreases significantly, indicating that the feature space
becomes less discriminative. However, the varying τ pc does
not noticeably affect performance.
6) Case Study: Figure 12 displays individual anomaly score
curves for single regions which change over time, particularly
during events. When events occur, the background is colored
red to signify an anomaly.
We first investigate the anomaly score curves influenced
by single events. Figure 12a depicts the anomaly score curve
during the Big Apple Film Festival that occurred at 54 Varick
St between November 5th, 2014 at 6:00 pm and November 9th,
2014 at 11:00 pm. Figure 12b illustrates the anomaly score
curve in Chicago, specifically during the three-day Retro on
Roscoe event held at Roscoe Village. This event occurred from
5:00 pm to 10:00 pm on August 9th, 2019, and from 12:00
pm to 10:00 pm on both August 10th and August 11th, 2019.
These figures demonstrate a significant increase in anomaly
scores during event occurrences. Notably, the anomaly score
begins to rise several hours before the events commence,
in agreement with the principle of events attracting crowds
in anticipation. As the events unfold, the anomaly scores
gradually decline to their normal level, suggesting a decrease
in the event’s attraction.
Additionally, we investigate how a recurring event influences the anomaly score curve. Here we focus on the
Exhibition George Boorujy Taxonomy held at the Arsenal
Gallary situated at 830 Fifth Avenue, NYC, from 9:00 am
to 5:00 pm on October 31st, November 3rd, November 4th,
November 5th, and November 6th in 2014. Represented in
Figure 12c, the anomaly score curve pertains to the recurring
event. As with the other curves, the anomaly score follows
a pattern of increasing during event. Notably, a significant
decrease in anomaly scores is observed on November 1st and
November 2nd, when the periodic event did not occur.
7) Effectiveness of the Prototypes: To demonstrate the
effectiveness of the PCC module in our method, and to
highlight the coexistence of influencing factors in real-world
crowd flows, we present the timeline-averaged prototype

WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 14.

10243

Number of trainable parameters of deep learning models.

Fig. 15.
Number of theoretical multiply-add operations for processing
1000 samples.

Fig. 12. Single region anomaly scores evolved over time. Light red shaded
background represent anomaly events happening in the urban region. The
captions of each subfigure reveal the event names.

Fig. 13. Average prototype contribution vector of each region. Regions are
colored with their major prototypes. Both single (region 0, 160) and mixed
(region 28, 67, 68, 107) patterns are observed.

contribution vector of each region of NYC in Figure 13. For
clarity in depicting prototype contributions, we set M = 5 and
use colors to represent the primary contributing prototype
of each region. We label the contribution vectors of several
representative regions in the format v : (z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z 5 ), where
z i denotes the contribution of the i-th prototype.
The prototype contributions exhibit distinct geographical
characteristics, aligning with the reasonable expectation that
neighboring regions will share similarities. Notably, the

Fig. 16. Empirical runtime performance of baseline models inferring 30-day
period anomaly scores of NYC.

top-right regions predominantly correspond to Prototype 4,
while the bottom-left regions mostly belong to Prototype 3,
creating a noticeable boundary along Central Park North
street. Furthermore, we observe that regions farther from
these borders generally display a single pattern (e.g., region
0 and region 160), while those closer to the borders exhibit
mixed patterns (e.g., region 28, 67, 68, 107), indicating the
co-contribution effect from spatial factors. These findings
suggest that multiple prototypes simultaneously contribute to
the observed crowd flow data.
8) Efficiency Study: In this subsection, we conduct a comparative analysis of our ProtoDetect model’s computational
efficiency and runtime performance in relation to baseline
models.
Figure 14 provides a visual representation of the number
of trainable parameters in various deep learning models.
Figure 15 offers an illustration of the theoretical count of
multiply-add operations necessary for processing a batch of
1000 samples across different deep learning models. Notably,
our ProtoDetect model is characterized by 197,361 trainable
parameters and demands 3.84 billion multiply-add operations
in this specific context. This positions ProtoDetect within a
moderate range when compared to the baseline models.
In Figure 16, we provide empirical data illustrating the
runtime performance of the baseline models when inferring
anomaly scores over a 30-day period for NYC. The experiment
is executed on a workstation equipped with an Intel Xeon
Gold 5218 CPU and an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. Notably,
our proposed method achieves this task within a remarkable

10244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

5.86 milliseconds, signifying its potential practical utility in
real-world applications.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present ProtoDetect, a novel CFAD
framework that learns discriminative crowd flow features
and models pattern prototypes in the feature space. These
prototypes are subsequently employed to estimate normal
crowd flow, providing a baseline for identifying abnormal
crowd behaviors. We introduce the IC module to encode
spatiotemporal information of crowd flow, improving feature
expressiveness and discriminability through contrasting local
and global views. Then in the feature space, we propose
the PCC module to model prototypes and utilize them to
estimate the normal component of crowd flow. Anomaly
degree scores are computed by measuring the deviations
between incoming crowd flow features and their corresponding
normal features. Experimental evaluations on real-world crowd
flow anomalies demonstrate the superior performance of
ProtoDetect compared to baseline methods, with improved
precision in anomaly detection. Ablation studies further
validate the effectiveness of both the IC and PCC modules
in enhancing the overall performance of the framework.
While ProtoDetect exhibits superior performance compared
to baseline methods, it currently relies on the pre-training
of spatiotemporal encoders, which may introduce practical
inconveniences in real-world applications. In our future
research endeavors, we aim to enhance ProtoDetect’s adaptability for real-world scenarios. This may involve streamlining
the workflow, reducing model complexity, and exploring
incremental deployment strategies.
R EFERENCES
[1] X.-C. Liao, W.-N. Chen, X.-Q. Guo, J. Zhong, and X.-M. Hu, “Crowd
management through optimal layout of fences: An ant colony approach
based on crowd simulation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
no. 9, pp. 9137–9149, Sep. 2023.
[2] A. Boukerche and R. W. L. Coutinho, “Crowd management: The
overlooked component of smart transportation systems,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 48–53, Apr. 2019.
[3] R. Zhao et al., “Dynamic crowd accident-risk assessment based on
internal energy and information entropy for large-scale crowd flow
considering COVID-19 epidemic,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 17466–17478, Oct. 2022.
[4] Y. Xie, J. Niu, Y. Zhang, and F. Ren, “Multisize patched spatial–temporal
transformer network for short- and long-term crowd flow prediction,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 21548–21568,
Nov. 2022.
[5] M. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Li, P. Hui, and Y. Zheng, “Urban anomaly
analytics: Description, detection, and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Big Data,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 809–826, Jun. 2022.
[6] Z. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Li, K. Yu, C. Ding, and Y. Yang, “Spatio-temporal
feature encoding for traffic accident detection in VANET environment,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19772–19781,
Oct. 2022.
[7] R. Zhao, Q. Hu, Q. Liu, C. Li, D. Dong, and Y. Ma, “Panic propagation
dynamics of high-density crowd based on information entropy and
aw-rascle model,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 10,
pp. 4425–4434, Oct. 2020.
[8] Q. Wang, H. Dong, B. Ning, L. Y. Wang, and G. Yin, “Two-time-scale
hybrid traffic models for pedestrian crowds,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 3449–3460, Nov. 2018.
[9] C. H. Liu et al., “Modeling citywide crowd flows using attentive
convolutional LSTM,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE),
Apr. 2021, pp. 217–228.

[10] Z. Lin, J. Feng, Z. Lu, Y. Li, and D. Jin, “DeepSTN+: Contextaware spatial–temporal neural network for crowd flow prediction in
metropolis,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 1020–1027.
[11] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional
adversarial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
[12] Y. Wang, J. Xu, M. Xu, N. Zheng, J. Jiang, and K. Kong, “A
feature-based method for traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. 2nd ACM
SIGSPATIAL Workshop Smart Cities Urban Anal., 2016, pp. 1–8.
[13] M.-F. Chiang, E.-P. Lim, W.-C. Lee, and A. T. Kwee, “BTCI: A new
framework for identifying congestion cascades using bus trajectory
data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2017,
pp. 1133–1142.
[14] H. Zhang, Y. Zheng, and Y. Yu, “Detecting urban anomalies using
multiple spatio-temporal data sources,” Proc. ACM Interact., Mobile,
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2018.
[15] Y. Dong, F. Pinelli, Y. Gkoufas, Z. Nabi, F. Calabrese, and
N. V. Chawla, “Inferring unusual crowd events from mobile phone
call detail records,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl.
Discovery Databases (ECML PKDD). Porto, Portugal: Springer, 2015,
pp. 474–492.
[16] Y. Djenouri, A. Zimek, and M. Chiarandini, “Outlier detection in urban
traffic flow distributions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2018, pp. 935–940.
[17] C. Lin, Q. Zhu, S. Guo, Z. Jin, Y.-R. Lin, and N. Cao, “Anomaly
detection in spatiotemporal data via regularized non-negative tensor
analysis,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 32, pp. 1056–1073,
Mar. 2018.
[18] M. Zhang, T. Li, H. Shi, Y. Li, and P. Hui, “A decomposition approach
for urban anomaly detection across spatiotemporal data,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2019, pp. 6043–6049.
[19] X. Li, Z. Li, J. Han, and J.-G. Lee, “Temporal outlier detection in vehicle
traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Data Eng., Mar./Apr. 2009,
pp. 1319–1322.
[20] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning
via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3733–3742.
[21] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[22] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021,
pp. 15750–15758.
[23] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
Aug. 2021, pp. 2352–2359.
[24] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. Hoi, “CoST: Contrastive
learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations for time series
forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–18.
[25] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[26] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view representation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML),
2020, pp. 4116–4126.
[27] N. Liu, X. Wang, D. Bo, C. Shi, and J. Pei, “Revisiting graph contrastive
learning from the perspective of graph spectrum,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 2972–2983.
[28] P. J. Rousseeuw and K. V. Driessen, “A fast algorithm for the
minimum covariance determinant estimator,” Technometrics, vol. 41,
no. 3, pp. 212–223, Aug. 1999.
[29] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly
detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–39,
2012.
[30] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[31] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt,
“Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 12, 1999, pp. 582–588.
[32] G. Raja et al., “AI-empowered trajectory anomaly detection and
classification in 6G-V2X,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 4599–4607, Apr. 2023.

WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

[33] L. Chen, J. Jakubowicz, D. Yang, D. Zhang, and G. Pan, “Finegrained urban event detection and characterization based on tensor
cofactorization,” IEEE Trans. Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 47, no. 3,
pp. 380–391, Jun. 2017.
[34] J. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wang, F. Gao, and Z. Xiong, “Understanding
urban dynamics via context-aware tensor factorization with neighboring
regularization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 11,
pp. 2269–2283, Nov. 2020.
[35] L. Sun and K. W. Axhausen, “Understanding urban mobility patterns
with a probabilistic tensor factorization framework,” Transp. Res.
B, Methodol., vol. 91, pp. 511–524, Sep. 2016.
[36] Y. Seo, M. Defferrard, P. Vandergheynst, and X. Bresson, “Structured
sequence modeling with graph convolutional recurrent networks,” in
Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. (ICONIP). Siem Reap,
Cambodia: Springer, 2018, pp. 362–373.
[37] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional
networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc.
27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
[38] C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wan, J. Luan, and Q. Pei, “Traffic flow prediction
based on deep learning in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3776–3789, Jun. 2021.
[39] A. R. Javed, M. Usman, S. U. Rehman, M. U. Khan, and M. S. Haghighi,
“Anomaly detection in automated vehicles using multistage attentionbased convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4291–4300, Jul. 2021.
[40] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[41] B. K. Iwana and S. Uchida, “An empirical survey of data augmentation
for time series classification with neural networks,” PLoS ONE, vol. 16,
no. 7, Jul. 2021, Art. no. e0254841.
[42] A. Le Guennec, S. Malinowski, and R. Tavenard, “Data augmentation
for time series classification using convolutional neural networks,” in
Proc. ECML/PKDD Workshop Adv. Anal. Learn. Temporal Data, 2016,
pp. 1–9.
[43] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2376–2382.
[44] K. Sohn et al., “FixMatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with
consistency and confidence,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 33, 2020, pp. 596–608.
[45] Q. Xie, Z. Dai, E. Hovy, T. Luong, and Q. Le, “Unsupervised data
augmentation for consistency training,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6256–6268.
[46] E. Eldele et al., “Self-supervised contrastive representation learning for
semi-supervised time-series classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 15604–15618, Dec. 2023.
[47] J. Gasteiger, S. Weißenberger, and S. Günnemann, “Diffusion improves
graph learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
pp. 13366–13378.
[48] R. I. Kondor and J. Lafferty, “Diffusion kernels on graphs and other
discrete structures,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2002,
pp. 315–322.
[49] H. Lin, R. Bai, W. Jia, X. Yang, and Y. You, “Preserving dynamic
attention for long-term spatial–temporal prediction,” in Proc. 26th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2020, pp. 36–46.
[50] Y. Li, M. Yang, D. Peng, T. Li, J. Huang, and X. Peng, “Twin contrastive
learning for online clustering,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 9,
pp. 2205–2221, Sep. 2022.
[51] Z. Wang, Y. Zou, and Z. Zhang, “Cluster attention contrast for video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020,
pp. 2463–2471.
[52] S. Sheng, J. Jing, X. Jiao, Y. Wang, and Z. Dong, “MÆIDM: Multi-scale
anomaly embedding inpainting and discrimination for surface anomaly
detection,” Mach. Vis. Appl., vol. 34, no. 4, p. 66, 2023.

10245

[53] L. Wong, D. Liu, L. Berti-Equille, S. Alnegheimish, and
K. Veeramachaneni, “AER: Auto-encoder with regression for time
series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big
Data), Dec. 2022, pp. 1152–1161.
[54] S. Wang, H. Miao, J. Li, and J. Cao, “Spatio-temporal knowledge
transfer for urban crowd flow prediction via deep attentive adaptation
networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5,
pp. 4695–4705, May 2022.
[55] Y. Zheng, H. Zhang, and Y. Yu, “Detecting collective anomalies
from multiple spatio-temporal datasets across different domains,” in
Proc. 23rd SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2015,
pp. 1–10.
[56] S. E. Sofuoglu and S. Aviyente, “GLOSS: Tensor-based anomaly
detection in spatiotemporal urban traffic data,” Signal Process., vol. 192,
Mar. 2022, Art. no. 108370.
[57] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed
network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Advances in
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2022, pp. 444–457.
[58] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A
survey,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), Z.-H. Zhou,
Ed. 2021, pp. 4653–4660, doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/631.

Yupeng Wang received the B.S. degree in electronic
and information engineering and the M.S. degree in
transportation information engineering from Beihang
University in 2018 and 2021, respectively, where
he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Electronics and Information Engineering.
His research interests include urban computing and
spatiotemporal data mining.

Xiling Luo received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electronic and information engineering. He is currently a Professor with Beihang University, Beijing,
China. His research interests include intelligent
transportation systems, spatiotemporal data mining,
and urban computing.

Zequan Zhou received the M.S. degree in electronic and information engineering from Beihang
University, Beijing, China, in 2020, where he is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School
of Electronics and Information Engineering. His
research interests include cloud security and data
mining.