IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

5053

Contrastive Time-Series Anomaly Detection
HyunGi Kim , Siwon Kim , Seonwoo Min , and Byunghan Lee , Member, IEEE

Abstract—In addition to its success in representation learning,
contrastive learning is effective in image anomaly detection. Although contrastive learning depends significantly on data augmentation methods, time-series data augmentation for time-series
anomaly detection is not investigated sufficiently. Additionally,
although time-series data share a temporal context, the existing
contrastive loss contrasts temporally related samples, in which
deteriorated anomaly detection performance is observed on timeseries data. Herein, we propose contrastive multivariate time-series
anomaly detection (CTAD), a multivariate time-series anomaly
detection framework that addresses these challenges by incorporating a one-class learning scheme into the contrastive loss based on
meticulously designed time-series data augmentations. Specifically,
we propose seven types of general time-series data augmentations
to be applied variable- and point-wise, and provide guidance on
data augmentation methods for contrastive time-series anomaly
detection. The superiority of the one-class contrastive loss and the
appropriate selection of time-series data augmentation allow CTAD
to achieve outstanding performance in multiple datasets, even
using a simple long short-term memory network. Furthermore,
CTAD is robust to noise as it trains a noise-invariant network.
This enables up to 47× faster and 20× more memory-efficient
anomaly detection performance compared with existing methods
while affording robustness, which are essential considerations in
real-world applications.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, contrastive
multivariate time-series, one-class classification.

learning,

I. INTRODUCTION
NOMALY detection aims to detect anomalous behaviors
that deviate from normal behaviors. As cyber-physical systems (CPS) become more complex, more sensors and actuators
are used to operate the system [1], [2], [3]. This complexity
renders anomaly detection in CPS more challenging, and unexpected behaviors can result in monetary damage or total system

A

Manuscript received 21 December 2021; revised 31 January 2023; accepted 10
November 2023. Date of publication 22 November 2023; date of current version
4 October 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT under Grant
NRF-2022R1C1C1006511, in part by the Information Technology Research
Center (ITRC) support program under Grant IITP-2023-RS-2022-00156295, in
part by the BK21 FOUR program of the Education and Research Program for
Future ICT Pioneers , Seoul National University in 2023, and in part by Hyundai
Motor Company. Recommended for acceptance by X. Zhu. (Corresponding
author: Byunghan Lee.)
HyunGi Kim and Siwon Kim are with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea
(e-mail: rlagusrl0128@snu.ac.kr; tuslkkk@snu.ac.kr).
Seonwoo Min is with the LG AI Research, Seoul 07796, South Korea (e-mail:
seonwoo.min@gmail.com).
Byunghan Lee is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Seoul
National University of Science and Technology, Seoul 01811, South Korea
(e-mail: bhlee@seoultech.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3335317

failure. Advances in deep learning methods for anomaly detection have enabled accurate detections of anomalies in multivariate time-series [4], [5], [6], [7]. Moreover, deep-learning-based
anomaly detection has shown remarkable adaptability across
various practical scenarios, including medical diagnosis [8],
gesture recognition [9], visitation prediction [10], and other
applications [11], [12]. Nonetheless, a more accurate, fast, and
robust multivariate time-series anomaly detection framework
that is applicable to real-world scenarios is necessitated.
Contrastive learning has received attention owing to its
anomaly detection performance in the field of computer vision [13], [14], [15]. For an encoder trained using contrastive
learning, unseen anomalies or out-of-distribution samples are
assumed to be encoded at a distance from the normal samples
in the embedding space. Thus, the anomaly score for an unseen
sample is defined based on the distance between the unseen
sample and training samples, which are normal or in-distribution
samples. Existing contrastive learning-based anomaly detection
methods in the image domain rely on instance discrimination by
exploiting contrastive loss.
Owing to the successful incorporation of data augmentation
into contrastive learning frameworks, data augmentation has
become the core component of contrastive learning frameworks.
Existing approaches are typically based on instance discrimination [16], where representations from different instances
are discriminated in the embedding space. However, instance
discrimination can degrade the representation quality because
semantically related samples (e.g., multiple dog images) in a
mini-batch or queue can be regarded as negatives [17], [18].
In this study, we focus on some challenges in applying an
instance discrimination-based contrastive learning framework to
unsupervised multivariate time-series anomaly detection. First,
for multivariate time-series data, one continuous signal is segmented with a sliding window, and each segment serves as
an instance. Therefore, a temporal correlation exists between
different instances, and treating them as negatives separates the
representations of related instances. Second, suitable data augmentation for contrastive time-series anomaly detection must be
investigated. Although data augmentations in image contrastive
learning (e.g., cropping, color jittering, and rotation) have been
investigated [13], [19], these spatial or image-specific augmentations are not applicable to time-series data. Because the appropriate data augmentation method is vital to anomaly detection
performance [19], [20], extensive research for determining the
optimal composition is indispensable.
A contrastive learning framework for multivariate time series
anomaly detection, called contrastive multivariate time-series
anomaly detection (CTAD), is proposed herein. CTAD differs

1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

from previous contrastive methods for anomaly detection in that
the contrastive learning loss is based on one-class discrimination
instead of instance discrimination. The proposed one-class discrimination considers all instances within the training distribution as positives, whereas the negatives are sampled solely from
the augmented out-of-distribution. To contrast the negatives,
CTAD generates synthetic anomalies through negative data
augmentation, which intentionally generates out-of-distribution
data and has been effectively leveraged in the image domain [13],
[15], [21]. We categorize time-series data augmentations into
three types: scale perturbation, temporality perturbation, and
noise interference. We empirically show that scale-perturbing
augmentations are effective as negative data augmentation for
contrastive time-series anomaly detection.
CTAD exhibits remarkable performance even with a simple
encoder architecture. With one layer LSTM [22], followed
by projection layers consisting of two multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) layers with batch normalization, CTAD outperforms
other alternatives that adopt complex architectures. Its simple
network enables fast and memory-efficient inferences. Our main
contributions are summarized as follows:
r To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to adopt
one-class learning to a contrastive learning framework for
multivariate time-series anomaly detection. We propose a
one-class contrastive learning loss scheme that combines
contrastive learning loss and a one-class learning scheme.
r We propose a time-series data augmentation strategy for
contrastive time-series anomaly detection that is generalizable, generates various samples by increasing randomness,
and generates hard-negative samples.
r We inspect seven general time-series data augmentation
methods and provide a guideline for selecting the appropriate data augmentation method in contrastive time-series
anomaly detection, based on experiments and ablation
studies.
r We empirically demonstrate the validity of our proposed
framework using multiple real-world datasets and show
that it outperforms the compared methods even with a
simple LSTM-based architecture.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is a self-supervised representation learning framework that encodes the semantic information of data
without hand-labeled supervision. It causes the representation
of semantically related samples (i.e., positives) to be attracted
while being repelled from the others (i.e., negatives). Recent
works define a positive sample as an augmented view from the
same instance (e.g., image) and define a negative sample as an
augmented view from all other instances in a mini-batch [19]
or dictionary queue [23]. Recent contrastive learning methods
depend significantly on data augmentation to generate semantically related samples [19], [20], [23]. Determining effective
augmentation is critical to the performance of contrastive learning and depends on the data domain. For instance, color jittering
is applicable to image data, but not applicable to time-series data.

B. Contrastive Learning for Time-Series
Owing to the superior performance of contrastive learning in
image representation learning across many downstream tasks
and multiple domains [24], [25], researchers have leveraged the
contrastive learning framework for time-series representation
learning. SeqCLR [26] proposed channel recombination preprocessing and time-series data augmentations for the contrastive
representation learning of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals.
However, this approach is only meaningful for bio-signals, such
as EEG signals, and data augmentation is particularly suitable
for EEG signals. CLOCS [27] learns a patient-specific representation of electrocardiogram (ECG) signals via contrastive
learning. In this regard, a data augmentation method that considers domain-specific knowledge of ECG signals is designed.
The transformed ECG segments originating from the same
patient are regarded as a positive pair. GATE [28] proposed a
self-supervised learning method to classify neuro-disease using
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). To extract informative features from fMRI, GATE uses a domain-specific
augmentation strategy to effectively augment the population
graph, which is an input to the graph convolutional network.
Similar to the image domain, appropriately designed data augmentation is crucial to the contrastive learning of time-series
data. However, existing data augmentation strategies typically
require data-specific knowledge [26], [27], [28], rendering them
incompatible with other time-series data. Therefore, we aim
to identify the general time-series data augmentation methods
for contrastive learning that do not require domain-specific
background knowledge. Moreover, we focus on effective data
augmentations for time-series anomaly detection instead of representation learning.

C. Contrastive Learning for Anomaly Detection
Contrastive learning demonstrates high representation quality
that is applicable to many downstream tasks and transfer learning [29]; recently, it has been shown to be effective in detecting
out-of-distribution data in the image domain [13], [14], [15].
CSI [13] exploits undesirable augmentations for standard contrastive representation learning (e.g., rotations). It additionally
generates instances from those augmentations and trains the
encoder with existing instance discrimination-based contrastive
loss and an auxiliary classifier to predict data augmentation.
SSD [14] proposed an anomaly score based on the clusterconditioned Mahalanobis distance in the embedding space; however, the encoder network was trained with the existing instance
discrimination-based contrastive loss. In another study [15], a
one-class classifier was trained on a learned representation in a
two-stage manner. This is different from our study in that we
trained the one-class contrastive loss in an end-to-end manner.
These contrastive anomaly detection approaches are typically
based on instance-discrimination-based contrastive learning.
However, instance discrimination is unsuitable for time-series
anomaly detection because it contrasts with temporally related
data. We address this concern by proposing one-class contrastive
loss, which is introduced in the following section. Table I

KIM et al.: CONTRASTIVE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

5055

TABLE I
SUMMARY AND COMPARISON OF RELATED WORKS AND OUR WORK

Fig. 1. Overview of CTAD framework. (a) Construction of window-sliced batch and generation of synthetic anomalies via negative augmentation. (b) Encoder
network and schematic of proposed one-class contrastive loss.

summarizes methods associated with our proposed contrastive
time-series anomaly detection framework.

III. METHODS
Fig. 1 illustrates the overall training process of the CTAD
framework. CTAD attracts all window samples augmented from
the training data because they share temporal context and repels synthetic anomalies, which are generated via an augmentation function named negative augmentation. In the following subsections, each component of CTAD is elaborated. In
Section III-A, we first formulate unsupervised multivariate
time-series anomaly detection problems and notations. In
Section III-B, we introduce a contrastive representation and its
limitations in time-series anomaly detection. In Section III-C,
we explain the inspected time-series data augmentations for
CTAD. Finally, we introduce a one-class contrastive loss that
complements the limitations of the existing contrastive loss in
Section III-D and an anomaly score in Section III-E.

A. Problem Formulation
In unsupervised multivariate time-series anomaly detection,
the unlabeled train dataset X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } := {xt }Tt=1
is assumed to be composed of normal observations for T time
steps. It should be noted that xt ∈ Rd , where d denotes the number of variables. During training, a contiguous series X is sliced

with a window size s to construct the window-sliced batch W =
−s+1
, where W t = {xt , xt+1 , . . . , xt+s−1 } ∈ Rd×s .
{W t }Tt=1
At the inference time, a window-sliced test batch W  =

−s+1
is constructed from the labeled test dataset
{(W t , yt )}Tt=1



(X , Y ) = {(xt , yt )}Tt=1 . The test dataset is composed of normal and anomalous observations for T  time steps, and a binary
label yt ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether xt is an anomalous observation (yt = 1) or not (yt = 0). An anomaly score S is defined for
a specified unseen window W t . If the anomaly score is above
the selected threshold, then the observation at the final time step
of the window is predicted to be an anomaly (ŷt+s−1 = 1).
B. Contrastive Representation Learning
Using stochastic data augmentation, we generate two semantically related “views” of the window segments. First, from W ,
−1
mini-batch B = {W t }N
t=0 with batch size N is constructed.
Inspired by recent representative works on contrastive learning [19], [23], we introduce an augmentation random variable
A whose state space is a set of augmentation functions. Using
two augmentation functions T1 and T2 , which are the realizations
of augmentation random variable A, a multi-viewed mini-batch
B̃ is constructed as follows:
−1
B̃ = {W̃ t }2N
t=0 ,
−1
2N −1
{W̃ t }N
t=0 = T1 (B), {W̃ t }t=N = T2 (B)

(1)

5056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

where T1 (B) is a set of augmented samples obtained by applying T1 on each element of mini-batch B, i.e., T1 (B) :=
−1
{T1 (W t )}N
t=0 .
Before introducing the proposed one-class contrastive loss,
we first elaborate on the contrastive loss of SimCLR [19] to highlight its limitations in time-series anomaly detection. SimCLR
follows instance discrimination [16], in which a view originating
from the same instance is considered positive, whereas views
from other instances are considered negatives. Based on the
notations above and the formulation of instance discrimination,
one can define the index of the positive sample for the anchor
W̃ i as i+ = (i + N ) mod 2N , and the index set of the negative samples as i− = {0, 1, . . . , 2N − 1} \ {i, i+ }. It should be
noted that one positive sample exists, and all the other 2N − 2
samples except for the anchor are negative samples.
Let zi = fθ (W̃ i ) be the encoded vector of W̃ i by encoder
fθ , and sim(zi , zj ) be the cosine similarity between two vectors
zi and zj :
sim(zi , zj ) =

zi zj
.
zi  zj 

(2)

The contrastive loss of SimCLR, which is termed as NT-Xent
(the normalized temperature-scaled cross entropy loss), is expressed as follows:
L=−

1
2N

2N
−1

i=0

log 

exp(sim(zi , zi+ )/τ )
,
exp(sim(zi , zj )/τ )

(3)

j∈i− ∪{i+ }

where τ is the temperature-scaling hyper-parameter. When NTXent is used as a training objective, the similarity of the encoded
vector between the anchor and positive sample increases (maximizing the numerator inside the logarithm). By contrast, the
similarities between the anchor and negative samples decrease
(minimizing the denominator inside the logarithm).
NT-Xent is based on instance discrimination; therefore, only
one positive sample exists for each instance. However, because
of the temporal characteristics of the time-series data, other semantically related samples within the same mini-batch can exist.
Thus, regarding these samples as negatives generates false negatives; they degrade the quality of the learned representation [17],
which can be more severe in time-series data that share temporal
relations. Hence, we first devise time-series data augmentation
methods and then propose a one-class contrastive loss based on
the proposed time-series data augmentation methods.
C. Time-Series Data Augmentation
In this subsection, we propose a general time-series data
augmentation method to generate positive and negative samples. We inspected seven general time-series data augmentation
methods to generate semantic-preserving views and synthetic
anomalies: amplification, additive bias, dropout, permutation,
masking, reversing, and additive Gaussian noise. We categorized
these time-series data augmentations into three types based on
the augmentation characteristics: scale perturbation, temporality
perturbation, and noise interference. Fig. 2 and Algorithm 1
show each type of time-series data augmentation.

Fig. 2. Three types of time-series data augmentations. Colored squares represent randomly selected observations to be augmented. In all three cases, s = 6,
d = 4, and nv = 2. It should be noted that (c) does not require p, whereas
p = 0.5 in both (a) and (b). Best visualized in color.

Scale-perturbing data augmentation changes the scale of the
time-series. We designed these augmentations such that they
operate point-wise. For a specified W t , the variables and time
steps to apply augmentation were randomly and independently
selected (lines 2–5). For the selected points across the selected
variables, the deterministic point-wise operation was applied to
augment W t (line 7).
Scale-perturbing data augmentation comprises amplifying
(Tamplify ), biasing (Tbias ), and dropping out (T dropout ) time series,
as follows:
Tamplify (xt ; a) = a × xt

(4)

Tbias (xt ; b) = xt + b

(5)

T dropout (xt ) = 0.

(6)

The diversity and strength of the augmentations are controlled
by two parameters: the number of variables nv to select, and
the percent p of selected points per variable. In the case of
amplification and additive bias, the augmentation strength can
also be represented by an amplification factor a and a bias scale b.
Temporality perturbing data augmentations use a continuous
univariate time-series as input to change the temporal information of the time-series. These include reversing (Treverse ),
permuting, (Tpermute ) or masking (Tmask ) time-series:
Treverse ([x1 , . . . , xt ]) = [xt , . . ., x1 ]

(7)

Tpermute ([x1 , . . . , xt ]) = π([x1 , . . ., xt ])

(8)

Tmask ([x1 , . . . , xt ]) = [0, . . ., 0].

(9)

The temporality perturbing augmentations involve two parameters, nv and p, as well as scale-perturbing augmentations.
For a multivariate time-series to be augmented, nv variables
are randomly selected. For each selected variable, continuous
t = s × p time steps are selected from a randomly selected
starting point.
Noise interference data augmentation augments the timeseries by injecting additive white Gaussian noise, which is
independent and identically distributed Gaussian noise with zero
mean and variance σ 2 :
TGaussian ([x1 , . . . , xt ]; σ) = [x1 , . . . , xt ] + w,
where w ∼ N (0, σ 2 I).

(10)

The interference is applied in a variable-wise manner using
 
nv . This simple variation diversifies randomness because ndv

KIM et al.: CONTRASTIVE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Algorithm 1: Time-Series Data Augmentation.

TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF CTAD WITH NT-XENT

variable combinations are possible. Moreover, the strength of
the augmentation can be controlled not only by σ, but also nv .

5057

normal class, and trained an encoder that attracts their representations simultaneously. Hence, we constructed a contrastive loss
such that all augmented views from the window segment in W
are regarded as positive to each other. However, no negatives for
contrast exist if we consider every augmented normal segment
to be positive.
To generate negative samples for contrast, we introduced
a negative data augmentation random variable A− . Negative
data augmentation has been effectively used in the image domain [13], [15], [21], [30]. Window segments augmented via
negative augmentation are regarded as synthetic anomalies,
and thus their representations are repelled from the anchor
representation. In other words, for normal window segments,
negative time-series data augmentation generates negative window segments that deviate from the normal distribution. The
intentionally generated negative samples function as negatives
and are repelled from every normal window segment because
every normal window is regarded as positive. In terms of the
difference between A and A− , both of which are random
variables of one of the proposed seven general time-series data
augmentation methods, A aims to generate semantically related
samples, whereas A− aims to generate synthetic anomalies.
The experimental analysis and a guideline for selecting both
augmentation variables are introduced in Section IV-F.
−1
Specifically, for a mini-batch B = {W t }N
t=0 ⊆ W comprising N normal window segments, a negative mini-batch B − =
T − (B) is constructed, where T − is the realization of A− . Based
on semantic-preserving data augmentations T1 , T2 ∼ A and two
types of mini-batches B and B − , a multi-viewed mini-batch B̃
is constructed as follows:
−1
B̃ = {W̃ t }4N
t=0 ,

−1
=
Ti (B),
where {W̃ t }2N
t=0

D. One-Class Contrastive Loss
In this subsection, we describe the process to exploit the proposed time-series data augmentations and address the limitations
of the existing contrastive loss in time-series anomaly detection using a one-class approach. Unlike contrastive learning in
the image domain, multivariate time-series anomaly detection
presents two clear differences. First, training data are potentially
overlapped across time and time steps are shared between them.
For example, W t and W t+1 share every observation except
for one time step. Second, temporal dynamics exist across time
steps, and the training data share a common context in that they
are continuously operated under normal behavior.
In addition to these differences, we observed that merely
using the NT-Xent loss significantly degrades the multivariate time-series anomaly detection performance, as shown in
Table II. This observation empirically demonstrates the limitation of the instance discriminating contrastive loss in multivariate time-series anomaly detection. Instance discrimination
contrasts views from different window segments; however, every
window segment exhibits normal behavior and can exhibit the
same temporal dynamics.
Hence, we incorporated contrastive loss with one-class classification for time-series anomaly detection. Because a training
batch W comprises normal segments that share a temporal
context, we regarded the training segments as one-class, i.e., the

i=1,2
−1
{W̃ t }4N
t=2 N =



Ti (B − ).

(11)

i=1,2

As mentioned above, our one-class contrastive loss considers
instances from the training normal distribution and augmented
negative distribution as positives and negatives, respectively.
Therefore, for each anchor window segment 2N − 1 positive
and 2N negative samples exist in B̃. The loss function is expressed as follows:
2N −1

Loc = −

1  1 
exp(sim(zi , zk )/τ )
,
log 
+
2N i=0 |i | +
j∈i− ∪i+ exp(sim(zi , zj )/τ )
k∈i

+

where i = {0, . . . , 2N − 1} \ {i}, i− = {2N, . . . , 4N − 1}.
(12)
Fig. 3 illustrates a comparison between CTAD and other
types of contrastive learning frameworks. SimCLR generates instances from only the training data and discriminates instances at
the instance level. CSI uses the concept of negative augmentation
to generate distributionally shifted instances but discriminates
instances at the instance level. Although a supervised variant of
CSI exists, it is only applicable in a labeled multi-class setting.

5058

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Comparison of the one-class contrastive learning framework of CTAD with SimCLR and CSI.

The proposed CTAD discriminates instances at the class level,
where negative samples are generated solely through negative
data augmentation.

TABLE III
STATISTICS OF THE EXPERIMENTAL DATASETS

E. Anomaly Score
By contrasting the generated anomalous window segments
against the normal window segments, we expect unseen anomalous window segments to be clustered far from the normal
cluster. Hence, the distance between the centroid of the normal
cluster and the embedding of the unseen window sample can be
considered as the extent to which the unseen window sample
deviates from the normal behavior. We defined the anomaly
score S of unseen window W t as follows:
S(W t ; fθ , zcent ) = D(fθ (W t ), zcent ),
zcent =

T
−s+1
1
fθ (W i )
T − s + 1 i=1

(13)
(14)

where zcent is the centroid of the embeddings of training batch W
and D(·, ·) can be any type of the distance function such as the L2
distance or cosine distance. Because zcent can be pre-computed
and stored after the training ends, fast inference is enabled by
computing only fθ (W t ) during the inference time.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Dataset Description
We conducted experiments on four widely used public
datasets: Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) [31], WAter DIstribution (WADI) [32], Mars Science Laboratory rover (MSL) [33],
and Soil Moisture Active Passive satellite (SMAP) [33].
SWaT 1 represents a scaled-down version of the real-world industry water treatment plant. Each time step consisted of values
obtained from 51 sensors and actuators. 11 days of continuous
operations are split into training and test sets. For the first 7 days,
the system is under normal operation (training set). During the
following 4 days, 41 cyber and physical attacks are launched
(test set).
WADI testbed is an extension of the SWaT testbed. It consists
of 16 days of continuous operation. The system is in normal
1 We used version 1 dataset. In version 1, the first 30 minutes of data are
removed from version 0 which is not considered a normal operation.

operation during the first 14 days, and 15 different attacks are
launched in the subsequent 2 days. The values of 123 sensors and
actuators are obtained during this period. The data characteristics
of the datasets are summarized in Table III.
MSL and SMAP are spacecraft telemetry datasets from
NASA. They contain multivariate data captured from multiple
telemetry channels across multiple entities. The MSL and SMAP
datasets contain 27 and 55 entities, respectively, and each entity
contains 55 and 25 telemetry channels, respectively. Similar to
SWaT and WADI, the training data contain behaviors under
normal operations. Therefore, spacecraft anomalies exist only
in the test data, which are labeled by expertise.
B. Model Architecture and Hyper-Parameters
The encoder network fθ consists of one LSTM layer, followed by a projection layer. The projection layer is known to
be important for contrastive learning [19], and we used the
sequential operation of MLP - Batch Normalization - ReLU MLP layers as the projection layer. The hidden state dimension
of the LSTM was set to 64 for SWaT and 128 for WADI, and
the hidden state vector of the last time step was used as the
input to the projection layer. Both MLP layers in the projection
layer had output dimensions of 128. Using this relatively simple
network, we show that CTAD consistently performs well on
various datasets. We optimized the network using the Adam
optimizer [34] with a learning rate of 0.001 and weight decay
of 0.0001. The learning rate gradually decayed to zero as the
training progressed, which involved the use of a cosine annealing
learning rate scheduler [35]. The network was trained for 100
epochs with a batch size of 1024 for SWaT, and 50 epochs with
the same batch size for WADI. The temperature parameter τ was
set to 0.1 in all experiments. For data augmentation, TGaussian
was used as augmentation A and Tbias was used as negative
augmentation A− . Detailed hyper-parameters of the window

KIM et al.: CONTRASTIVE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

5059

TABLE IV
HYPER-PARAMETER SETTINGS FOR WINDOW SIZE, DATA AUGMENTATION, AND DISTANCE FUNCTION

size, data augmentations, and distance function are presented in
Table IV.
C. Compared Anomaly Detection Methods
We compared our method with i) classical methods, ii) existing multivariate time-series anomaly detection methods, iii)
a one-class anomaly detection method, and iv) self-supervised
learning methods.
The compared classical methods include autoencoders (AE)
and Isolation Forests (IF). These methods can be summarized
as:
r The AE trains the encoder–decoder architecture that reconstructs the training data, and the reconstruction error of the
test data is defined as an anomaly score.
r The IF [36] isolates data in the form of a decision tree. The
anomaly score is defined based on the path length of the
tree.
The compared multivariate time-series anomaly detection
methods can be summarized as follows:
r The LSTM-VAE [37] constructs a VAE using LSTM layers
and a progress-based prior. The anomaly score is defined
based on the reconstruction probability of the data.
r DAGMM [38] learns the approximated density distribution
of the data by jointly optimizing a deep AE and a Gaussian
mixture model to evaluate the likelihood of the samples.
r OmniAnomaly [39] renders the VAE representation more
robust via a stochastic variable connection and a planar
normalizing flow.
r USAD [40] adversarially trains the AE in two phases. In
Phase 1, the standard AE is trained, and in Phase 2, the
reconstructed output is used as an input for the second AE.
The compared one-class anomaly detection method includes
one representative method, and we implemented an encoder
network similar to that for CTAD without using a projection
layer. The method is summarized as follows:
r Deep SVDD [41] minimizes the volume of a hypersphere
that encloses the training data representation. The anomaly
score is defined as the distance between the test representation and the center of the hypersphere.
Self-supervised learning methods include contrastive and
non-contrastive learning methods. These methods were initially
proposed in the image domain and thus used data augmentations
for the image. We implemented these methods using the proposed time-series data augmentation and encoder architecture
same as CTAD. The self-supervised learning methods are briefly
summarized as follows:

r SimCLR [19] uses randomized data augmentation to generate positive and negative samples and trains an encoder
to predict a positive sample.
r CSI [13] additionally generates negative samples via negative data augmentation using the SimCLR contrastive loss.
We exclude the auxiliary classifier of the CSI to perform
an unbiased comparison of the effectiveness of contrastive
loss.
r MoCo [23] uses the momentum encoder and dictionary
queue to increase the number of negative samples. The
representations of the negative samples are stored in a
queue.
r BYOL [42] is a non-contrastive learning method in which
the encoder is trained to predict the representation of the
augmented view from the same image.
For the comparison with classical methods and existing timeseries anomaly detection methods, the results in [40] were
referred to. It should be noted that we performed the same preprocessing as that reported in [40] for an unbiased comparison.
D. Experimental Setup
In all the experiments of the CTAD and compared methods,
the training set is min-max normalized in the range [0, 1]
before constructing the window-sliced batch W . Every test set
is normalized with the min and max values of the corresponding training set, i.e., xi,normalized = (xi − mintrain )/(maxtrain −
mintrain ), 1 ≤ i ≤ T  . It should be noted that normalizing the
test set with the min and max values of the test set can result in
a mismatch between the training and test sets (e.g., the overall
scale of the signal can be reduced by an unexpectedly high value
of anomalous observation). We downsampled all datasets at a
rate of 5 before normalization using the median values, following
the setting provided in [40]. When the test data had less than
1,200 time-steps for MSL and SMAP, we did not downsample
the data because downsampling erased anomalous observations.
For the evaluation metrics, we used the Area Under the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC), Area Under the
Precision-Recall curve (AUPR), and F1-score (F1). Most multivariate time-series anomaly detection methods use only F1
to evaluate the detection performance. Additionally, we report
the threshold-independent metrics (e.g., AUROC and AUPR),
which can be used to evaluate the model performance without
the effect of threshold selection.
In [43], F1 with point-adjust (PA) was proposed because
anomalous observations typically appear in segments (continuously in time) and correctly detecting at least once in the segment

5060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 4. Conditional probability distribution of anomaly score given normal
observation p(S|y  = 0) and anomalous observation p(S|y  = 1) (best viewed
in color).

is sufficient. Specifically, for each ground-truth anomalous segment, if any point in the segment is correctly detected as an
anomaly, then the entire segment is adjusted to be correctly
detected as an anomaly. Additionally, we adjusted F1 with
PA based on previous studies and reported the value herein.
F1, precision, and recall adjusted with PA are denoted herein
by F1PA , precisionPA , and recallPA , respectively. We report the
averaged AUROC and AUPR over the entities for MSL and
SMAP, which contain multiple entities. Similarly, we calculated
F1 and F1PA based on the averaged precision, recall, precisionPA ,
and recallPA based on the setting provided in [39].
All experiments were performed on a server with the following specifications: Ubuntu 20.04 OS, Intel i7-9800X CPU with
128 GB of RAM, NVIDIA GeForce GTX Titan X Pascal GPU
with 12 GB of VRAM, Python version 3.8.8, PyTorch version
1.7.1, and CUDA version 11.0.
E. Anomaly Detection Performance
Table V presents the anomaly detection performance of the
proposed method compared with those of other methods. For the
SWaT, WADI, and MSL datasets, CTAD exhibited the highest
performance in terms of the AUROC, AUPR, F1, and F1PA .
MoCo showed the second-best performance among contrastive
learning methods. This may be due to the momentum encoder
and dictionary queue. The enqueued normal embeddings at the
head of the queue are from the old version of the encoder.
Thus, they are more suitable as negative samples in the instance
discrimination setting. For BYOL, which is a non-contrastive
learning method that does not require negative samples, the
anomaly detection performance is low for the SWaT, WADI,
and MSL datasets.
The effectiveness of one-class contrastive loss is highlighted
in the comparison with SimCLR and CSI. Compared to SimCLR, CSI uses negative augmentation to generate additional
negative samples for contrast. Although this improves the
anomaly detection performance compared with SimCLR (i.e.,
AUPR from 0.127 to 0.384, and F1 score from 0.279 to 0.455 in
SWaT), the performance remained worse than the other multivariate time-series anomaly detection methods. Leveraged by
the one-class contrastive loss, CTAD improves the performance
compared with CSI (i.e., AUPR from 0.384 to 0.802 (2.08×
higher), and F1 score from 0.455 to 0.841 (1.85× higher)).
Fig. 4 shows the conditional probability distribution of the
anomaly scores of SimCLR, CSI, and CTAD. In CTAD, the

Fig. 5.

AUPR for augmentation compositions.

score distribution differs significantly between the normal and
anomalies, compared with those of SimCLR and CSI. Moreover,
the score distribution of the normal samples was concentrated
around 0, thus forming a sharp distribution. This implies that
the embeddings of the unseen normal samples were clustered
around the centroid of the normal training samples. Moreover,
the anomaly score scale was extremely large (from 15 to 20) for
the anomalous samples in CTAD. This shows the discriminative
ability of CTAD, and the embeddings of the anomalies are
clustered far from the centroid of the training normal samples.
F. Effect of Data Augmentation Composition
Fig. 5 shows the AUPR for each data augmentation composition using the SWaT dataset. For the seven designed data
augmentation methods, each row and column represents the data
augmentation used as negative augmentation A− and augmentation A, respectively. The last row and column represent the
averaged AUPR for each augmentation and negative augmentation, respectively. The numbers in parentheses indicate the
average AUPR rankings of each augmentation, when used as A
or A− . The results were sorted based on the ranking of A− .
We obtained three sets of important results. First, the anomaly
detection performance was primarily affected by the type of negative augmentation instead of the semantic-preserving augmentation. For example, when the negative augmentation A− is Tbias
or Treverse , the AUPR is consistently high regardless of A. In the
case of TGaussian or T dropout , however, the AUPR is consistently
low when they are used as negative augmentation. Second, the
augmentation that is not suitable for negative augmentation A−
is suitable for augmentation A. In fact, TGaussian and T dropout
are the two worst alternatives for negative augmentation, although they are the two best ones for augmentation. Finally,
scale-perturbing augmentation is typically preferred for negative
augmentation; however, perturbing to zero significantly deteriorates the performance. Meanwhile, both Tbias and Tamplify are
high-performing negative augmentation alternatives, whereas

KIM et al.: CONTRASTIVE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH COMPARED METHODS

5061

5062

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDIES ON COMPONENTS OF CTAD

Fig. 7. Ablation studies on various components of the CTAD such as batch
size, model size, temperature, learning rate, and augmentation parameters.

Fig. 6. AUPR for different augmentation strengths with and without batch
normalization (BN). Bias strength and noise strength are represented by b and
σ, respectively. (a) With BN, AUPR increased for weak negative augmentation.
(b) Without BN, weak negative augmentation resulted in mode collapse.

T dropout exhibits the worst performance. This is because perturbing to zero removes the information. Tmask exhibits inferior
performance, with zeros in the time steps. In summary, the type
of negative augmentation is the most important factor in contrastive time-series data augmentation, and Tbias is generally a
good option. These observations are crucial when designing and
selecting time-series data augmentation methods for contrastive
time-series anomaly detection.
G. Ablation Studies
We performed experimental analyses to determine components that are vital to CTAD. Table VI summarizes the AUPR
when each component of CTAD is eliminated. Most notably,
batch normalization (BN) is the key difference. When BN is
removed from the projection layer, the learned embeddings
collapse to a single point, resulting in a significant decrease in
the AUPR from 0.802 to 0.121.
Fig. 6 further analyzes this phenomenon. Herein, we report
the AUPR for different augmentation and negative augmentation
strengths. Additive bias is used as a negative augmentation A−
and the bias scale b is increased from 0.1 to 0.4 by 0.1. Additive
Gaussian noise is used as an augmentation A and the used
standard deviations σ are 0.03, 0.05, 0.1, and 0.15. When the
strength of the negative augmentation is weak, negative augmentation generates hard anomalous samples that are difficult
to distinguish from normal samples. If BN is not used, then
the encoder network cannot distinguish the hard anomalous
samples from normal samples. Therefore, the embeddings are
collapsed to a single point for the weak negative augmentation

strengths. BN appears to prevent collapse and thus enables the
utilization of near anomalous samples. The effective use of
hard negative samples allows the contrastive learning encoder
to be trained more effectively [44], [45], and the use of hard
anomalous samples is also effective for time-series anomaly
detection.
Because CTAD considers every normal window segment as
positive, multiple positives exist even without augmentation A
(i.e., N − 1 positives which are different normal window segments in the mini-batch). We denote augmentation A as positive
augmentation, and Table VI shows that the AUPR decreases
from 0.802 to 0.262 for the case without positive augmentation.
This implies that positive augmentation is important in CTAD.
Moreover, as each anchor contains 2N − 1 positive samples,
the exponential terms from the positive samples can be summed
inside the logarithm as:
2N −1

1 
log
2N i=0



1
k∈i+ exp (sim(zi , zk )/τ )
×
·
.
|i+ |
j∈i− ∪i+ exp (sim(zi , zj )/τ )

Loc = −

(15)

When (15) is used as a one-class contrastive loss, the AUPR
deteriorated to 0.384, as shown in Table VI. This tendency
was first observed in contrastive representation learning with
supervision in the image domain [18]; similarly, this is also
applicable to CTAD.
Cosine learning rate scheduling is another important factor
that improves contrastive representation learning [19]. We investigated whether this is applicable to multivariate time-series
anomaly detection. Table VI shows that the absence of cosine
learning rate scheduling decreased the AUPR from 0.802 to
0.772. In other words, cosine scheduling enhanced anomaly
detection performance, but the effect was insignificant compared
with those of other components.
We conducted ablation studies by changing the hyperparameters of several components of CTAD, such as the batch
size, number of LSTM layers, LSTM hidden state dimension,
projection layer dimension, temperature, learning rate, and augmentation parameters. The results are shown in Fig. 7. When the

KIM et al.: CONTRASTIVE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 8.

5063

Visualization of PCA results of SimCLR (left), CSI (middle), and CTAD (right).

number of layers was increased, the performance deteriorated
slightly but remained similar in general. This supports the idea
that simple networks are sufficient for achieving good performance in multivariate time-series anomaly detection. Existing
methods may be over-parameterized to fit multivariate timeseries datasets. The most appropriate hidden state dimension of
LSTM is 64, and a higher dimension degrades the performance.
This shows that a higher model capacity is not the best choice.
The performance improves when the number of variables to be
augmented is randomly selected (line 2 of Algorithm 1). Moreover, instead of augmenting the entire time-series of the selected
variables, providing additional randomness by augmenting only
a few percent of the time-series (line 5 of Algorithm 1) is more
effective. This is because the increased randomness provides
more variety to the generated samples and augmenting a small
portion, instead of the entire sample, can generate hard anomalies.
To summarize the important implications of the ablation
studies, BN is vital to the successful anomaly detection of
CTAD, and using various samples and hard-negative samples for
contrast is crucial. Thus, increasing randomness and generating
hard negative samples using the proposed augmentation strategy
improves the anomaly detection performance of CTAD.

H. Representation Separateness
To verify whether the normal and anomalous window segments were separated sufficiently in the embedding space, we
visualized the embeddings of the test data via principal component analysis in a three-dimensional space. Fig. 8 shows the
comparison of the visualizations of SimCLR, CSI, and CTAD.
In CTAD, anomalous segments were well clustered and separated from normal segments, and the embeddings of the normal
segments were highly clustered. Conversely, the embeddings
of SimCLR and CSI were not well separated between normal
and anomalous segments. Meanwhile, in CTAD, the scale of
most principal components (Component 1) was much larger
for the anomalous segments compared with the other methods.
This implies that CTAD performs well because the principal
component represents the degree of the anomaly.

TABLE VII
MODEL SIZE AND INFERENCE TIME

I. Model Size and Inference Time
Table VII presents the model size and inference time
compared with OmniAnomaly and USAD. Compared with
OmniAnomaly, CTAD has 47.96× fewer parameters and
demonstrates 20.21× faster inference. Compared with USAD,
CTAD has 1.54× fewer parameters and demonstrates 1.36×
faster inference. CTAD demonstrates fast and memory-efficient
performance, which is vital to time- and memory-critical tasks
such as real-time monitoring or anomaly detection in wearable
devices.

J. Noise Robustness
By incorporating additive Gaussian noise as the augmentation of the contrastive learning framework, we expect another
desirable property of the time-series anomaly detection model:
robustness to noise. Specifically, the “noise augmented view”
of the window segments are considered positive to each other,
resulting in invariance to noise. Robustness to noise is crucial
because signals can interfere with undesired noise. This can increase the number of false positives, i.e., noisy normal segments
can be predicted as anomalies.
To demonstrate that CTAD performs robustly, we considered
two scenarios where the training data are perturbed or the test
data are perturbed at a certain ratio. In both cases, perturbation
was injected with independent and identically distributed Gaussian noise sampled from N (0, (0.3)2 ). This setting is similar to
that presented in [40], however, in [40], noise was injected only
into the training data.
Table VIII shows the AUPR as the perturbation rate increased
from 0 to 0.3. When CTAD was trained with the perturbed

5064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

TABLE VIII
ROBUSTNESS TO NOISE FOR DIFFERENT PERTURBATION RATES

training data, the AUPR was consistently high with little degradation until a perturbation rate of 0.05. Specifically, the AUPR
decreased by only 1.6% at a perturbation rate of 0.05. Similarly, when the test data were perturbed, AUPR decreased only
slightly, i.e., 3.2%, at a perturbation rate of 0.05.
V. DISCUSSION
We designed three types of general time-series data augmentation methods, and these methods present the following advantages. First, compared with augmenting the entire time series, the
randomness of augmentation is significantly diversified by two
controlling parameters nv and p, which improves the detection
performance (bottom right of Fig. 7). Second, scale-perturbing
augmentation can generate point-wise anomalies, which can represent hard anomalies in real-world scenarios such as glitching
to only a few specific variables. The generated hard anomalies
enhance the detection performance when BN is applied, as
shown in Fig. 6. Finally, scale-perturbing augmentation can
minimize the hurt of temporality because the augmentation does
not occur in consecutive periods.
One potential limitation of the current augmentation method is
that the augmentation strength relies on pre-defined parameters,
such as b or σ. Adaptive time-series augmentation strategies,
such as determining the augmentation strength based on the signal power of the window or generating synthetic anomalies via
generative models, instead of negative augmentation, would be
an interesting future direction. Moreover, whereas our one-class
contrastive loss considers every window segment in the training
data to be positive, more closely related window segments may
exist, e.g., window segments that are closer in time can share a
more temporal context. We expect the positive sample mining
strategy, which quantifies the temporal context between window
segments, to further enhance multivariate time-series anomaly
detection performance. In addition, the application of our results
to other applications, such as anomaly detection in embedded
systems that require memory-critical service as well as the
anomaly detection of sequential data, would be an interesting
future investigation.
The model performs well even under a moderate amount
of noise because it is trained in similar situations, i.e., noisy
window segments are regarded as positives. Having prior knowledge regarding the potential noise would allow one to adjust
the robustness of the model by setting the appropriate noise
augmentation strength during training.
VI. CONCLUSION
Herein, we proposed a novel one-class contrastive learning
method that considers all data in the training data distribution as

positive samples and uses negative samples solely from negative
distributions generated via negative data augmentations. Moreover, we designed general time-series data augmentations for
time-series contrastive learning and empirically demonstrated
the effectiveness of the proposed data augmentations for timeseries anomaly detection. We identified the key role of BN
in enabling the exploitation of hard anomalous samples. The
simple yet effective modification of the contrastive loss and
the appropriate time-series data augmentation method enable
accurate, fast, memory-efficient, and robust multivariate timeseries anomaly detection. In future investigations, one-class
contrastive loss should be applied to other domain tasks and the
role of BN in contrastive anomaly detection should be analyzed
theoretically.

REFERENCES
[1] E. A. Lee, “Cyber physical systems: Design challenges,” in Proc. IEEE
11th Int. Symp. Object Compon.-Oriented Real-Time Distrib. Comput.,
2008, pp. 363–369.
[2] R. Baheti and H. Gill, “Cyber-physical systems,” Impact Control Technol.,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 161–166, 2011.
[3] J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao, “A cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems,” Manuf. Lett., vol. 3,
pp. 18–23, 2015.
[4] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly detection
in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
[5] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019,
pp. 703–716.
[6] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[7] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal
hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, pp. 13016–13026.
[8] R. Elakkiya, V. Subramaniyaswamy, V. Vijayakumar, and A. Mahanti,
“Cervical cancer diagnostics healthcare system using hybrid object detection adversarial networks,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 26, no. 4,
pp. 1464–1471, Apr. 2022.
[9] D. K. Jain, A. Mahanti, P. Shamsolmoali, and R. Manikandan, “Deep
neural learning techniques with long short-term memory for gesture
recognition,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, no. 20, pp. 16073–16089,
2020.
[10] N. Yap, M. Gong, R. K. Naha, and A. Mahanti, “Machine learning-based
modelling for museum visitations prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Netw. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–7.
[11] H. Chegini, F. Beltran, and A. Mahanti, “Fuzzy logic based pasture
assessment using weed and bare patch detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart
Sustain. Agriculture, 2021, pp. 1–18.
[12] R. Elakkiya et al., “Hybrid deep neural network for handling data
imbalance in precursor microrna,” Front. Public Health, vol. 9, 2021,
Art. no. 821410.
[13] J. Tack, S. Mo, J. Jeong, and J. Shin, “CSI: Novelty detection via contrastive
learning on distributionally shifted instances,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 11839–11852, 2020.

KIM et al.: CONTRASTIVE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

[14] V. Sehwag, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal, “SSD: A unified framework for selfsupervised outlier detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=v5gjXpmR8J
[15] K. Sohn, C.-L. Li, J. Yoon, M. Jin, and T. Pfister, “Learning and evaluating representations for deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=HCSgyPUfeDj
[16] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning
via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 3733–3742.
[17] C.-Y. Chuang, J. Robinson, Y.-C. Li, A. Torralba, and S. Jegelka, “Debiased
contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 8765–8775.
[18] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 18661–18673.
[19] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[20] X. Chen, H. Fan, R. Girshick, and K. He, “Improved baselines with
momentum contrastive learning,” 2020, arXiv:2003.04297.
[21] A. Sinha, K. Ayush, J. Song, B. Uzkent, H. Jin, and S. Ermon, “Negative
data augmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Ovp8dvB8IBH
[22] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[23] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[24] N. Zhao, Z. Wu, R. W. H. Lau, and S. Lin, “What makes instance
discrimination good for transfer learning?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
tC6iW2UUbJf
[25] M. Laskin, A. Srinivas, and P. Abbeel, “CURL: Contrastive unsupervised
representations for reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2020, pp. 5639–5650.
[26] M. N. Mohsenvand, M. R. Izadi, and P. Maes, “Contrastive representation
learning for electroencephalogram classification,” in Proc. Mach. Learn.
Health, 2020, pp. 238–253.
[27] D. Kiyasseh, T. Zhu, and D. A. Clifton, “Clocs: Contrastive learning of
cardiac signals across space, time, and patients,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2021, pp. 5606–5615.
[28] L. Peng, N. Wang, J. Xu, X. Zhu, and X. Li, “GATE: Graph CCA for
temporal self-supervised learning for label-efficient FMRI analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 391–402, Feb. 2023.
[29] L. Ericsson, H. Gouk, and T. M. Hospedales, “How well do self-supervised
models transfer?,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 5414–5423.
[30] C. Chen et al., “Novelty detection via contrastive learning with negative
data augmentation,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Z.-H.
Zhou, Ed., Aug. 2021, pp. 606–614. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.24963/ijcai.2021/84
[31] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur., 2016, pp. 88–99.
[32] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
pp. 25–28, doi: 10.1145/3055366.3055375.
[33] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[34] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, San Diega, CA, USA, 2015.
[35] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
warm restarts,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Skq89Scxx
[36] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 18th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[37] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[38] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018.

5065

[39] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[40] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.
[41] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[42] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
2020, pp. 21 271–21 284.
[43] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
2018, pp. 187–196.
[44] J. D Robinson, C.-Y. Chuang, S. Sra, and S. Jegelka, “Contrastive
learning with hard negative samples,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
CR1XOQ0UTh[45] Y. Kalantidis, M. B. Sariyildiz, N. Pion, P. Weinzaepfel, and D. Larlus,
“Hard negative mixing for contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 21798–21809.

HyunGi Kim received the BS degree in electrical and
computer engineering in 2020 from Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea, where he is currently
working toward the integrated MS/PhD degree in
electrical and computer engineering. His research
interests include deep learning, self-supervised learning, and anomaly detection.

Siwon Kim received the BS degree in electrical and
computer engineering in 2018 from Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea, where she is currently
working toward the integrated MS/PhD degree in
electrical and computer engineering. Her research
interests include deep learning, explainable AI, and
biomedical applications.

Seonwoo Min received the BS and PhD degrees
in electrical and computer engineering from Seoul
National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2015
and 2021, respectively. He is currently a research
scientist with Fundamental Research Laboratory, LG
AI Research. His research interests include machine
learning and bioinformatics. He was the recipient of
the Global PhD Fellowship in 2016, Microsoft Research Asia Fellowship Nomination Award in 2018,
Korea National Excellent Researcher Award in 2020,
and many other prestigious awards.

Byunghan Lee (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree in electrical engineering from Korea University,
South Korea, in 2011, and the PhD degree in electrical and computer engineering from Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2018. He is currently an assistant professor with the Department of
Electronic Engineering, Seoul National University of
Science and Technology, Seoul. His research interests
include machine learning, artificial intelligence, and
their biomedical applications.