11802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Correlation-Aware Spatial–Temporal Graph
Learning for Multivariate Time-Series
Anomaly Detection
Yu Zheng , Huan Yee Koh , Ming Jin , Lianhua Chi , Khoa T. Phan , Shirui Pan , Senior Member, IEEE,
Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, and Wei Xiang , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract— Multivariate time-series anomaly detection is critically important in many applications, including retail, transportation, power grid, and water treatment plants. Existing approaches
for this problem mostly employ either statistical models which
cannot capture the nonlinear relations well or conventional deep
learning (DL) models [e.g., convolutional neural network (CNN)
and long short-term memory (LSTM)] that do not explicitly
learn the pairwise correlations among variables. To overcome
these limitations, we propose a novel method, correlationaware spatial–temporal graph learning (termed CST-GL), for
time-series anomaly detection. CST-GL explicitly captures the
pairwise correlations via a multivariate time series correlation
learning (MTCL) module based on which a spatial–temporal
graph neural network (STGNN) can be developed. Then,
by employing a graph convolution network (GCN) that exploits
one- and multihop neighbor information, our STGNN component
can encode rich spatial information from complex pairwise
dependencies between variables. With a temporal module that
consists of dilated convolutional functions, the STGNN can further capture long-range dependence over time. A novel anomaly
scoring component is further integrated into CST-GL to estimate
the degree of an anomaly in a purely unsupervised manner.
Experimental results demonstrate that CST-GL can detect and
diagnose anomalies effectively in general settings as well as enable
early detection across different time delays. Our code is available
at https://github.com/huankoh/CST-GL.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, graph neural networks
(GNNs), multivariate time series.

I. I NTRODUCTION
APID developments in cyber–physical systems (CPSs)
have resulted in an explosive growth of time-series data
collected across industries. In many applications, the CPS
implemented generates time-series data from multiple devices

R

Manuscript received 13 February 2023; revised 17 July 2023 and 5 October
2023; accepted 15 October 2023. Date of publication 14 November 2023;
date of current version 4 September 2024. (Yu Zheng and Huan Yee Koh
contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Lianhua Chi.)
Yu Zheng, Lianhua Chi, Khoa T. Phan, Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen, and
Wei Xiang are with the Department of Computer Science and Information
Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail:
yu.zheng@latrobe.edu.au; l.chi@latrobe.edu.au; k.phan@latrobe.edu.au;
phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.au; w.xiang@latrobe.edu.au).
Huan Yee Koh and Ming Jin are with the Department of Data Science and
AI, Faculty of IT, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia (e-mail:
huan.koh@monash.edu; ming.jin@monash.edu).
Shirui Pan is with the School of Information and Communication
Technology, Griffith University, Southport, QLD 4215, Australia (e-mail:
s.pan@griffith.edu.au).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3325667, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3325667

or sensors, forming a complex multivariate time series. Importantly, an operator may have thousands to millions of CPSs,
recording a manually unmanageable amount of multivariate
time-series data. For example, each server of a cloud infrastructure provider generates multivariate time-series data and
many providers may have up to over millions of servers [1].
A similar scale in the CPS has also been observed in numerous commercial systems and critical infrastructures including
power systems, spacecraft [2], engines, transportation, cyber
networks [3], and water treatment plants [4]. Relying on
human labors to monitor these operations would thus be not
only impractical but also impossible.
To enable effective monitoring and warning of large-scale
system operations, multivariate time-series anomaly detection
has become an important topic. Successful implementation of
multivariate time-series anomaly detection model could bring
substantial economic and social benefits. For instance, in a
water treatment plant [5], hundreds of sensors are installed to
monitor water level, flow rates, and water quality. A malicious
attack may occur by simply turning on a single motorized
valve, causing a disastrous cascading effect on the entire water
distribution system. Automatically, monitoring and detecting
these abnormal behaviors can thus provide a fast response,
which helps rectify errors, reduce cost, and save lives.
Among the various implementation approaches for detecting
anomaly events, unsupervised anomaly detection is one of
which has attracted the most attention due to the difficulty of
obtaining ground-truth anomalies over time. Early approaches
typically employed either statistical unsupervised models such
as autoregressive integrated moving average/vector autoregressive (ARIMA/VAR) [6] or distance-based approaches [7],
[8]. Unfortunately, these methods cannot capture the nonlinear spatial and temporal relationship from the multivariate
time-series data well. More recently, with the flourish of
deep learning (DL), significant advances have been made.
For instance, Hundman et al. [2] proposed a long short-term
memory (LSTM) network together with a nonparametric
thresholding approach and Su et al. [3] proposed a representation learning-based stochastic recurrent neural network
(RNN) approach to improving the current ability to detect
multivariate time-series anomaly events. While the proposed
DL frameworks can efficiently scale through high-dimensional
multivariate time-series data, they did not explicitly model
the underlying pairwise interdependence among variable pairs,
weakening their capacity in detecting complex anomaly events.
The difficulty of detecting anomaly events in multivariate
time-series data lies in the fact that the variable pairs are
intricately related. Fig. 1 shows a real-world inspired example

2162-237X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 1.
Example of multivariate time-series data. Red span represents
anomaly events while gray span represents time event highlights that are
nonanomalous but form a reference to compare the behaviors of anomaly
events. The first three examples showcased are from the SMD [3], which
contains data from Internet servers, while the last three are drawn from the
WADI, a water treatment plant sensing dataset [5].

of multivariate time-series data with six variables where A, B,
and C represent closely related variable groups. A1 variable
is not closely related to other variables and the detection of
anomaly events can simply be a significant deviation from
past behaviors. B1 and B2 are two interrelated variables
that should go up and down together, a deviation from this
relationship is thus an anomaly event. On the other hand, C1
always increases with a lag after C2 is switched on (upward
spike). The exception to the C1-C2 relationship (gray span of
Fig. 1) is when C3 is also switched on as C3 decreases C1,
creating an offsetting effect on C2. The red span in the C
variable groups indicates that an anomaly event has occurred
because C1 does not increase despite C2 being switched on
and C3 being switched off. While variable pairs that form
the multivariate time series are naturally interdependent, the
degree of interdependence tells the full story of multivariate
time-series data. Further, as shown above, the complexity
increases exponentially with the increase in the number of
variables. It is thus crucial for an anomaly detection model
to not only assume the interdependent relationship but to
explicitly learn and capture the pairwise correlations (i.e.,
degree of spatial dependence) between the variables of a
multivariate time series.
To explicitly capture the pairwise correlations, a natural way
is to model multivariate time series as a graph. For example,
by treating each sensor as a node, a sensor graph can be constructed in which the node features are continuously changed
over time. With a representative graph, spatial–temporal graph
neural networks (STGNNs) can then be employed to tackle the
multivariate time series anomaly detection task by explicitly
modeling the pairwise correlations via a graph neural network
(GNN) module and temporal information via a convolutional
neural network (CNN) [9] or RNN [10] module. However,
generic STGNN models necessitate a predefined graph to
explicitly model pairwise correlations between variable pairs,
which is often absent in many multivariate time-series datasets.
Consequently, while previous STGNN methods are equipped
to capture spatial dependencies, their capacity to learn and
construct the relationship between the variables may not
always be optimized, especially in cases where a predefined
graph is not readily available in many multivariate time-series
data.
To address the limitations of generic STGNNs, graph deviation network (GDN) [11] employs a simple graph learning
layer to learn and construct the pairwise correlation relationship between the variable pairs. Then, a graph attention

11803

network (GAT) is used to propagate historical information
among the variables to forecast the next observation. Anomaly
events are subsequently detected based on the magnitude of
deviation between forecast and real observations. Nevertheless,
in this preliminary study, GDN only captures the spatial
dependency in the direct neighbors of each variable, which
may cause it to lose important information from high-order
(multihop) neighbors. Furthermore, it did not explicitly model
temporal relations within each univariate time series, which
are crucial for characterizing multivariate time series data [12]
and thus further compromises the effectiveness of GDN.
Based on the above observations, we summarize the challenges for multivariate time series anomaly detection from the
GNN perspective as follows.
1) Multivariate Time-Series Correlation Learning (MTCL)
(Challenge 1): The underlying correlations among the
time-series variable pairs are important for multivariate
time series anomaly detection task. How to explicitly
capture the pairwise relations among variables to enable
spatial–temporal analysis is the first challenge.
2) Spatial–Temporal Dependency Modeling (Challenge 2):
Multivariate time-series analysis requires a deep understanding of spatial–temporal dependence; how to simultaneously capture spatial and temporal dependency remains
a challenge for multivariate time series.
3) Anomaly Scoring (Challenge 3): How to estimate the
anomaly score in an unsupervised way is the ultimate
challenge for multivariate time series anomaly detection.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel algorithm
correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning (CST-GL)
in this article. Our theme is to model multivariate time series
as a graph and design an STGNN to perform forecasting.
Based on the forecasting results, the anomaly score can be
well estimated, and the anomalies can be detected accordingly. To be more specific, we propose an MTCL module
that can automatically infer the underlying correlation among
variables (for Challenge 1). Then, a well-designed STGNN is
presented to model both the spatial and temporal dependency
(for Challenge 2). The spatial dependence is modeled via a
graph convolution network (GCN) based on the gated mix-hop
feature propagation that exploits neighbors from both single
and multiple hops to better encode spatial information. The
temporal dependence is captured via a temporal convolutional network which incorporates a gating mechanism with
convolution functions for long dependence modeling. Based
on the forecast, we introduce a robust principal component
analysis (PCA)-based anomaly scoring module to compute
the anomaly scores, enabling effective anomaly detection and
diagnosis (for Challenge 3). Experimental results on real
datasets demonstrate the superb performance of our method.
The main contributions of this article are as follows.
1) We propose an integrated algorithm for multivariate time
series data analysis. Our method seamlessly integrates
correlation learning into a spatial–temporal network for
multivariate time series.
2) We propose a novel algorithm for multivariate time series
anomaly detection. Our method can automatically detect
anomalies from complex time series via autothresholding
and enable early detections effectively.
3) We compare our method with 11 baselines for both
general multivariate time series anomaly detection which
aims to evaluate the overall performance in a whole
dataset, as well as early detection of anomalies that needs

11804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

to detect anomaly as early as possible. Our experimental
results demonstrated that our method outperforms all
baselines in both settings.
4) We conduct a case study to demonstrate that our method
not only enables effective anomaly detection but also
provides interpretability in real-life applications.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section II
reviews the related work. Section III gives the definition of the
task. Section IV presents the proposed CST-GL. Section V
illustrates our experiments and conclusion in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we introduce the past work on multivariate
time-series anomaly detection and GNNs.
A. Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series
Detecting anomalies in time series is a challenging task
that has been perennially studied [13], [14], [15]. Historically, statistical models such as ARIMA/VAR [6], PCA
[16], and support vector machine (SVM) [17] have been
applied to detect anomalies in univariate and multivariate time
series. Traditional techniques involving wavelet analysis [18],
nonparametric [19], pattern-based [20], [21], and distancebased [7], [8] approaches have also been collaboratively
implemented. More recently, substantial efforts have been
made to advance DL approaches for anomaly detection in
multivariate time-series data across numerous domains [2],
[3], [22]. As argued by Wu et al. [23] and Garg et al.
[24], this phenomenon has arisen because: 1) DL frameworks
are free from stationary assumptions and can scale through
high-dimensional temporal data and 2) unlike pattern-based
approaches that only detect anomaly events by identifying
anomalous subsequences, DL frameworks can detect anomalous event timestamp-by-timestamp within sequences and are
thus well suited for the deployment of real-time streaming
anomaly detection systems.
DL models for multivariate time-series anomaly detection
are primarily designed using RNN that are combined either
with CNNs [22], [25], variational autoencoder (VAE) [3], [26],
or generative adversarial networks [27]. The RNN is employed
to capture temporal dependencies [2], [28], [29], while the
CNN, VAE, or GAN are incorporated to capture dependencies
among the multivariate variables. Any time-series observations
which unexpectedly deviate from the learned temporal and
relational dependencies would then be treated as anomalies.
However, since CNN, VAE, and GAN do not explicitly learn
the relationship between the multivariate variables and only
encapsulate interactions among variables into a global hidden
state, they cannot fully exploit the latent dependencies between
the variable pairs [30], [31]. For more research on DL for
time-series anomaly detection, we refer readers to the most
recent survey [32].
B. Graph Learning
Graph learning [33] is a new learning paradigm that enables
machine learning for graph data. A key component of this
paradigm, GNNs, have been widely studied to handle an array
of graph-structured data [34]. This includes a well-known
subset of methods, namely STGNNs, which are typically
applied to modeling multivariate time series [35]. In this
context, graph structure learning is often involved when prior

knowledge of the underlying graph topology is not readily
available.
1) Generic Graph Neural Networks: GNNs have recently
become de facto models to exploit graph data for graph
analytics [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41]. The core idea of
GNNs is to employ a message passing scheme, which iteratively updates the representation (embedding) of a target node
by propagating the representations of neighboring nodes. For
instance, GCN [36] updates its node embedding by assigning
a predefined weight to each message (embedding) from a
neighbor. GAT [37] automatically learns the weight of each
neighbor and performs a weighted aggregation to update the
target node’s representation. Due to the capacity of modeling
interrelationship of different entities in various domains, GNNs
have been widely used in domains and applications including
traffic [35], [42], recommender systems [43], drug discovery
[44], [45], and anomaly detection [46], [47].
2) Graph Structure Learning: Learning GNN models typically requires a predefined graph structure so that the message
passing can be performed along with the topological structure.
However, in many applications related to time series, the
graph structure may be not available and the GNN models are not directly applicable. To overcome this challenge,
graph structure learning [48], [49] recently has emerged to
automatically learn the graph structure from the data itself.
For instance, StrUcture Bootstrapping contrastive LearnIng
fraMEwork (SUBLIME) [49] presents a structure bootstrapping contrastive learning framework to infer the relationship
among data. However, these approaches can only be applied
to static data. For dynamic data such as time series considered
in this article, these methods cannot be directly applied.
3) Spatial–Temporal Graph Neural Networks: To extend
GNNs for handling dynamic graph-structured data, recent
research has delved into STGNNs [50]. These are especially
effective in situations where the underlying graph structure
remains static, but the features of the nodes undergo dynamic
changes over time. A prime example of STGNNs in action
is traffic forecasting, where the physical infrastructure such
as subway stations and tracks is constant, but the traffic
volume fluctuates continuously. Seo et al. [10] proposed a
recurrent STGNN which adopts the Long-LSTMs [51] and
GCN [36] as key components to capture temporal and spatial
dependencies. Instead, Li et al. [9] proposed a CNN-based
method (1-D convolution) to capture the capture temporal
dependencies and a GCN to capture spatial dependencies.
Wu et al. [23] propose a joint graph structure learning and
forecasting framework for spatial–temporal modeling. The
ability of STGNNs to handle dynamic graph-structured data
has spurred interest in various domains, including traffic management [52], infrastructure monitoring [53], cloud computing
[54], human activity analysis [55], and anomaly detection [56],
[57]. While the aforementioned STGNN methods concentrate
on graph learning and spatial–temporal pattern modeling,
CST-GL stands out by integrating two pivotal components:
first, it incorporates a graph learning module with STGNN to
accurately capture spatial–temporal dependencies; and second,
it introduces a robust anomaly scoring module. This scoring
module efficiently separates anomalous signals from the noise
in multivariate time series data forecast by CST-GL’s STGNN
module. By doing so, it maximizes the benefits of the relational
structures learned by CST-GL’s graph learning module, facilitating effective anomaly detection and diagnosis.

ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

11805

Fig. 2. Overall framework of CST-GL. (a) Multivariate time-series correlation learning (MTCL) starts with a randomly initialized node embedding for each
multivariate variable, and learn the underlying graph adjacency matrix, A, adaptatively with the entire model in an end-to-end manner. The adjacency matrix,
A, will be used by the GCNs in the STGNN module. (b) Spatial–temporal graph neural network’s (STGNN) 1 × 1 convolution layer projects the sliding
window input into the latent space. Then, the temporal and GCNs are interlaced to capture rich spatial and temporal dependencies, representing one layer of
STGNN. Skip connections, Z 0 + Z 1 + · · · + Z L , are incorporated to obtain hidden features that encapsulated the spatial–temporal patterns. Finally, the forecast
head module projects the hidden features into a one-step forecast output, x̂ T . (c) Anomaly detection and diagnosis (ADD). 1) Real-time anomaly indicator:
Takes in the current one-step forecast result and all observation-forecast pairs computed prior to timestamp T , computes normalized forecast deviation and
outputs an anomaly indicator score in real-time using PCA-based scorer. 2) Root cause anomaly diagnosis: Takes in result from real-time anomaly indicator
and learned pairwise correlation, A, from MTCL to enhance CST-GL’s interpretability and identify the root causes of anomaly events.

III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
A multivariate time series with T successive observations of equal-spaced samples as represented X =
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xT }, xt ∈ R N is composed of N number of
univariate time-series {xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtN }. In a real-time fashion,
the multivariate time-series anomaly detection task requires
learning of a scoring function, A(·), that outputs an anomaly
score to current observation T so that we have A(xA ) > A(xM )
where xA is anomalous observation and xM is not. Ideally, the
proposed framework should also output a binary label that
indicates whether a timestamp is anomalous or not, where
y T ∈ {0, 1} and y T = 1 if the observation xT is anomalous.
In this article, we tackle unsupervised real-time anomaly
detection. A model first learns normality from a nonanomalous
training set. Then, as it receives a stream of observations
containing both normal and anomalous data, it must detect
anomalies in real time, basing decisions solely on past data
and cannot reverse its previous decisions.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we present the overall framework of
CST-GL and its detailed designs to detect anomaly events
in a multivariate time series. As shown in Fig. 2(a)–(c), our
method mainly consists of three main constituents: 1) MTCL;
2) STGNN; and 3) anomaly detection and diagnosis module,
respectively.
Given a multivariate time series, we first propose to
exploit the latent associations (i.e., edges) between each
univariate time series (i.e., nodes) explicitly via a pairwise correlation learner, where the learned graph structure

together with the historical observations are then encoded by
a sandwich-structured STGNN to make reliable forecasting.
Specifically, we interlace the designed graph and temporal
convolutions to capture rich spatial and temporal dependencies, respectively. The underlying considerations are twofold.
First, the potential anomalies in a univariate time series can
be easily identified by referring to its historical observations.
For example, a sudden high CPU wattage is likely to trigger the system alert if compared with long-term historical
readings. Second, however, for multivariate time-series data,
the anomalies in a specific variable may not only associate
with its historical observations but also the readings of other
variables. A concrete example is traffic networks, where the
change of road conditions in a street may cause a serious
traffic jam in another one. Thus, it is crucial to model the
underlying spatial and temporal dependencies in historical
observations to perform precise and stable anomaly detection
at each time step. To accomplish this goal, we propose
an anomaly detection and diagnosis module on the top of
MTCL and STGNN, where the anomaly score at each time
point is derived from the forecasting errors. In other words,
we conjecture that time-series anomalies are typically reflected
as the mismatch between anomalous observations and the
forecasting results given by the well-trained spatial–temporal
model on nonanomalous data.
Further, we argue that for root cause of anomaly events
to be identified, pairwise correlations of variables have to be
learned and captured by a proposed model. This is because
univariates that deviate significantly from past spatial and
temporal behaviors may only be symptoms of the root cause
and the relationship of pairwise correlation can reveal the root

11806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

cause variables. As shown later in the experimental section,
CST-GL identifies root cause of an anomaly events using the
well-learned pairwise correlation graph that captures well the
interdependence relationship between the variable pairs.
In the rest of this section, we introduce the MTCL in
Section IV-A. Then, in Sections IV-B1 and IV-B2, we illustrate
the detailed designs of the proposed STGNN in capturing the
underlying spatial and temporal clues for accurate forecasting.
Finally, we discuss how the proposed anomaly detection and
diagnosis module can compute the real-time anomaly score in
Section IV-C1 and identify the root cause of an anomaly event
in Section IV-C2.
A. Multivariate Time-Series Correlation Learning
To explicitly enable the modeling of pairwise dependencies
among variables in a multivariate time series, we design a
correlation learning layer and propose to learn the underlying
unknown graph adjacency matrix A adaptively, where nodes
and edges denote variables and their connectivity. Specifically,
our detailed formulation is given as follows:

e
N1 = tanh(αN1 W1 )



e
(1)
N2 = tanh(αN2 W2 )




A = ReLU tanh α e
N1 e
NT2 − e
N2 e
NT1
where N1 , N2 ∈ R N ×d are two randomly initialized node
embedding matrices, and W1 , W2 ∈ Rd×d are two set of trainable parameters. The hyperparameter α denotes the nonlinear
activation saturation rate. Compared with our approach, many
existing works construct such adjacency matrix by measuring the pairwise distance or similarity between variables in
a multivariate time series, such as Euclidean distance [58]
and Cosine similarity [59], resulting in high time and space
complexity of O(N 2 ) [23]. Another significant drawback of
existing methods based on distance or similarity metrics is
that the learned pairwise dependencies are symmetric, which
is not desired in describing the relations between variables
in real-world multivariate time series. For example, the traffic
jam on a street may cause the jam on another street but may
not vice versa if there are alternative routes.
Thus, we expect the learned time-series dependencies to be
unidirectional. Let e
N1 and e
N2 be two transformed node embedding matrices, the unidirectional property can then be achieved
by the subtraction term e
N1 e
NT2 − e
N2 e
N and two nonlinear
activation functions, i.e., if Ai j is a positive number, then A ji
will be zero. The output adjacency matrix A will have all its
elements regularized between 0 and 1. To reduce the required
computational cost and ease the optimization, we further mask
elements with zeros in the learned graph adjacency matrix only
except for the top-k closest neighbors of each node to make
A sparse controlled by the hyperparameter k. Specifically, for
ith row in A, we have the following postprocessing:
(
topk = argmax(A[i, :], k)
(2)


A i, −topk = 0
where argmax(·, k) returns the indices of top-k largest values
in the input vector.
B. Spatial–Temporal Graph Neural Network
1) Graph Convolution Network: The spatial correlations
between variables play a vital role in reflecting the intrinsic
dynamics of multivariate time-series. Toward this, we design

a spatial graph convolution layer to effectively pass messages between variables and their neighbors to exploit the
underlying spatial patterns, allowing better encoding historical
observations to make more precise and stable predictions, thus
benefiting the downstream anomaly detection tasks. Similar
to simple graph convolution (SGC) [60] and the discrete of
multivariate time series with dynamic graph neural ordinary
differential equations (MTGODE) [12], given an adjacency
matrix A and the input (initial) states Hin , we may characterize
the graph propagation process as a combination of the feature
propagation and linear transformation steps
( k+1
H
=e
A Hk , k ∈ {0, . . . , K }
(3)
Hout = H K 2
where K denotes the graph propagation depth, and we have
H0 = Hin . Specifically, e
A in the above equation denotes the
normalized adjacency
matrix, i.e., e
A = e
D−1 (A + I) and
P
e
Dii = 1 +
j Ai j .
However, (3) suffers from two critical limitations. First,
although the above feature propagation design allows to recursively propagate latent node states along with a given graph
structure, it is inevitable to see that node latent states become
indistinguishable, i.e., converge to a single point, or known as
over-smoothing, with an increase in the propagation depth K
[12]. Second, only applying the linear transformation on the
last node latent states H K may be prone to errors [23], [61].
For example, if there are no correlations between variables in a
multivariate time series, the feature propagation step will introduce noises to latent node states by blindly aggregating the
neighboring information. Thus, merely considering the linear
transformation of the last propagated states hinders accurately
modeling the latent spatial dynamics of a multivariate time
series. To address these two limitations, we equipped the
vanilla feature propagation in (3) with a gating mechanism
and replaced the upcoming linear mapping with an attentive
transformation that mixes the information from multiple hops.
We have the proposed GCN defined as follows:
 k+1
H
= β Hin + (1 − β) e
A Hk , k ∈ {0, . . . , K }



K
(4)
X


Hk 2k
 Hout =
k=0

where β controls to retain how much original node information
to avoid the aforementioned over-smoothing issue. Regarding
the attentive transformation in (4), we can easily alleviate
the problem mentioned in the above example by assigning
a relevant large weight to the initial node states H0 and small
weights to Hk , where k ∈ {1, . . . , K }.
As mentioned in Section IV-A, the learned pairwise dependencies are unidirectional. Thus, we refactor the final output of
the GCN as the summation of two transformations described
in (4), where the input latent node states are both Hin but with
different adjacency matrices, i.e., A and AT , to incorporate
nodes’ inflow and outflow information, respectively.
2) Temporal Convolution Network: Solving (4) only allows
to model the spatial dynamics at a certain point of time,
where the rich temporal clues in multivariate time series are
neglected. To complete this missing information, we devise
a simple yet effective temporal convolution network together
with our GCN to capture the expressive spatial and temporal
patterns in historical observations.
We first introduce the composition of the proposed temporal convolution network, which consists of multiple residual

ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

dilated temporal convolution layers to extract and aggregate
high-level temporal features in a nonrecursive manner to avoid
the shortcomings of RNNs, such as time-consuming iteration
and gradient explosion [12], [23], [62]. Specifically, given a
sequence of historical observations X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT−1 },
we have the temporal convolution layer defined as follows:


Zl+1 = T Zl , Q l+1 + TCN Zl , 8l , l ∈ {0, . . . , L} (5)
where the outputs of network are Zout = Z L , the input states Z0
are obtained by applying a linear mapping on X, TCN(·, 8l )
is an temporal convolution function parameterized by 8l at
the lth layer, and T (Zl , Q l+1 ) denotes a truncate function
that takes the last Q l+1 elements from Zl along its sequence
length axis. The underlying consideration is that the residual
input Zl has to be truncated to the length of TCN(Zl , 8l )
before adding them together because the sequence length of
latent node states shrinks gradually as the underlying temporal
information is aggregated after each temporal convolution
layers. Specifically, we have Q l+1 = Q l − r l × (k − 1)
and Q 1 = R − k + 1, where k, r , and R are kernel size,
dilation factor, and receptive field [i.e., R = L(k − 1) + 1 and
R = 1 + (k − 1)(r L − 1)/(r − 1) when r = 1 and
r > 1]. In terms of the design of temporal convolution function
TCN(·, 8l ), we follow [23] and adopt a gating mechanism to
guide the information flow during the aggregation:



TCN Zl , 8l = f C Zl , 8lc ⊙ f G Zl , 8lg
(6)
where f C (·) and f G (·) are filtering and gating convolutions,
and ⊙ denotes the elementwise product. Specifically, we define
these two convolutions in below




 f C Zl , 8lc = tanh W1×n
⋆1 Zl + b1×n
8lc
8lc


(7)
 f Zl , 8l  = sigmoid W1×n ⋆ Zl + b1×n .
G
1
l
l
g
8
8
g

g

In the above equation, ⋆1 denotes the dilated convolution
operation, where the dilation 1 = r l . Specifically, to allow
the model exploring multigranular temporal clues and inspired
by Wu et al. [23], f C (Zl , 8lc ) and f G (Zl , 8lg ) consists of
) with width
and b1×n
multiple convolution filters (e.g., W1×n
8lc
8lc
n ∈ {2, 3, 6, 7}. Since most of multivariate time-series data
has some intrinsic periods [23], [62], such as 7, 14, 24, 28,
and 30, the combination of the aforementioned kernel widths
allows these common periods to be fully covered.
To simultaneously model spatial and temporal dynamics of
a sequence of historical observations in a multivariate time
series, we construct an STGNN by combining the proposed
spatial and temporal convolution networks, where the temporal
and spatial convolution layers are interlaced, as shown in
Fig. 2. More precisely, a layer of the proposed STGNN is
defined as follows by combining (4) and (5):
 

(8)
Zl+1 = T Zl , Q l+1 + GCN TCN Zl , 8l , 2
where GCN(·, 2) and TCN(·, 8l ) are defined in (4) and (6).
Finally, we take the output states Zout to make a singlestep-ahead forecasting via a multilayer perceptron, i.e., x̂T =
MLP(Zout , Wmlp ), which forms a critical evidence to detect
anomalies in a multivariate time series.
C. Anomaly Detection and Diagnosis
1) Real-Time Anomaly Indicator: With an effective joint
learning of spatial and temporal dependencies from the

11807

nonanomalous data, it is expected that the anomalous observations in the test set deviate significantly from the learned
patterns. Accordingly, to detect anomalous multivariate observations, we first compute the normalized forecasting deviation
for every univariate variable and take the sum of the reconstructed univariate deviations to be the anomalous score for
each multivariate observation.
Univariate variables within a multivariate time series often
possess vastly different attributes and scales. Consequently,
we independently normalize each univariate deviation to preclude any single variable from dominating the aggregate
multivariate deviation value. For every univariate variable, xiT ,
we compute the absolute forecasting error, given by eiT =
T
|xiT − x̂ i |, at the current timestamp T . This error is then
normalized
T

ẽi =

eiT − µiT
σ iT

where µiT and σ iT are the median and interquartile range
(IQR) value across error values, {eiT −Wa , eiT −Wa +1 , . . . , eiT } in
a sliding window where Wa represents the window length.
Our normalization approach is an extension of [11] where
we acquire the median and IQR values through a sliding
window rather than from the entire test set observations. This
modification allows us to detect anomalies in real time as
normalizing error at time T only relies on past observations
and does not require future information as in [11].
After the normalization of each univariate variable,
we obtain a multivariate normalized error vector, e
ET ∈ R1×N ,
for the current timestamp. Although prior research suggests
directly taking the summation [63] or maximum [11] to
summarize the error vector into a single anomaly score at
the current timestamp, we propose to leverage PCA as an
intermediate step before aggregating the normalized errors into
a final anomaly score.
In particular, after training the STGNN module, we compute the normalized errors in the validation set, e
Ev . We fit
a PCA on the validation normalized errors by finding the
validation mean vector Ev = mean(e
Ev ), their covariance
matrix, Cv = cov(e
Ev ), and the orthogonal eigenvectors, U.
U consists of N orthogonal eigenvectors associated with the
N largest eigenvalues in the diagonal matrix, 3, decomposed
from Cv = U3U−1 . With the fit PCA, we reconstruct the
normalized errors at current timestamp




P= e
ET − Ev UT



e
(9)
P, e
U = P[:, L], U[:, L]



e
ETPCA = e
Pe
UT + Ev .
In the above equation, we first apply zero-centering to the
normalized error at the current timestamp, e
ET , by subtracting
the mean validation error, Ev . We then project these results
using validation eigenvectors, U. Second, we keep only the
first L principal components. Finally, we reconstruct the
normalized errors, e
ETPCA , using the reduced L dimensions and
revert the zero-centering deduction by adding the validation
mean error. We set L as the number of components necessary to achieve a symmetric mean absolute percentage error
(sMAPE) of less than 10% on the validation set.
With the reconstructed normalized error, we compute the
final anomaly score at current timestamp by taking the L1

11808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

distance between the denoised and original normalized errors
as the final anomaly score
A(T ) = e
ETPCA − e
ET .
(10)

TABLE I
S TATISTICS OF THE DATASETS

1

The incorporation of PCA addresses the fundamental problem posed by anomalies: the anomalous node variables have
the potential to introduce bias into the learned embeddings
within a neural network module, inadvertently affecting the
forecast across all dimensions. This effect, corroborated by
previous research [64], often leads to an unwarranted increase
in forecast errors in variable nodes that are otherwise unaffected. Even in the absence of anomaly events, certain variable
nodes may sporadically experience an upsurge in errors due
to random fluctuations [11]. Such fluctuations can set off a
cascade of effects across all nodes, echoing the impact of
an actual anomalous event and potentially resulting in false
positives. This unintended effect contributes to the degradation
of accuracy in anomaly detection and diagnosis.
Previous methodologies have attempted to resolve this issue
with the utilization of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
imputation [1], [65]. This approach, however, is inefficient.
In contrast, we propose the application of PCA to resolve
these issues. PCA can efficiently project the normalized errors
at current timestamp, e
ET , onto the principal components
of the validation errors, and subsequently reconstruct them
as, e
ETPCA . This process effectively dampens common noise
variations and pinpoints variables that contribute significantly
to anomaly events. This identification is made possible because
the variables that cannot be accurately reconstructed are more
likely the true contributors to the anomaly events, thereby
offering a more accurate depiction of the anomaly event itself.
Though PCA is capable of mitigating the inherent noise for
more accurate representation, it is still the ability of STGNN
to capture spatial–temporal patterns that holds the key to a
comprehensive solution. The joint implementation of STGNN
and PCA is instrumental in detecting and diagnosis anomalies,
as we demonstrate in Section V.
Last but not least, an anomaly indicator that can well signify
the abnormality of a timestamp observation helps in informing
system operators and determining an appropriate threshold by
human experts to classify and detect anomalies. Nevertheless,
for industrial operations that involve over thousands of multivariate time series with distinct attributes such as warehousing
robots [66], this approach does not scale well. To automate the
threshold selection process, we classify current observation in
the test set as anomalous if A(T ) in test set observation exceed
the maximum A(t) of all observations in the validation set.
This nonparametric approach relies on CST-GL’s ability in
sufficiently capturing the spatial and temporal dependencies
of a multivariate time-series data, so that any observations
that exceeds the maximum anomaly score during normal time
period (i.e., validation data) are in fact anomalies while those
that do not exceed the maximum value are not anomalies.
2) Root Cause Anomaly Diagnosis: Since the final anomaly
score is calculated as the linear combination of reconstruction errors, we can identify the root cause of anomalous
events by ranking the univariate variables that contribute most
significantly to the anomaly score. In practical scenarios,
we determine the percentage contribution of each univariate
variable to the final anomaly score. This approach would
provide a more detailed perspective, allowing operators to
more effectively identify the root cause of anomalous events.

In some cases, the top ranked variables that most contribute
to the anomaly score may not be the root causes but are merely
the symptoms [11], [24]. When the top ranked contributors are
identified not to be the root cause, we further search for the
variables that are most related to the top ranked contributors
by aggregating the anomaly contribution scores of one-hop
distance neighbors
X
Ri (T ) =
Ai (T )
(11)
j∈N (i)

where Ai (T ) represents the absolute error for the univariate
node i as per (10). N (i) represents the neighbors of the
univariate node i, which is based on the learned relation
between variable pairs from the MTCL module.
As demonstrated in our experiments in Section V, this
two-pronged approach ensures the systematic identification
and diagnosis of: 1) variables that exhibit abnormal behavior
and 2) variables closely related to these abnormal variables,
as potential root causes of an anomaly event. The choice
between directly ranking the variables based on the error
contribution or based on the one-hop distance neighbors will
largely depend on the nature of the anomalies.
V. E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
In this section, we conduct experiments to explore
CST-GL’s capabilities by answering following questions.
1) Overall Detection Performance: Does our framework
outperform baseline methods in the unsupervised, realtime anomaly detection task? How do the individual
modules within CST-GL each contribute specifically to
its ability to achieve anomaly detection and diagnosis?
2) Early Detection Performance: Can CST-GL be adapted
and generalized to commercial systems where early
detection of anomaly events is often paramount?
3) Interpretability and Case Study: Would CST-GL benefit
system operators in detecting and diagnosing multivariate time-series anomaly events in an interpretable
manner?
A. Experimental Settings
Here, we detail our experimental setup, covering datasets,
baseline methods, and parameter configurations.
1) Datasets: We evaluated our method on three widely used
benchmark datasets: secure water treatment (SWaT), water
dIstribution (WADI), and server machine dataset (SMD). The
statistics are presented in Table I.
1) SWaT [4] is a scaled-down version of a real-world
industrial water treatment plant initiated by Singapore’s
Public Utility Board. The dataset comprises seven days
of normal operations (train data) and four days of attack
scenarios (test data). The anomaly labels represent the
attacks that are conducted at different intervals in the
test set.
2) WADI [5] is an extension of the SWaT dataset with a
larger number of water pipelines, storage, and treatment

ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

systems, representing a more complete and realistic
water treatment dataset [11]. The train set of WADI
is two weeks of normal operation, while the test set
is a two days attack scenario. Following the original
author’s implementation [11], we removed the first
21 600 samples and down-sampled SWaT and WADI
to one measurement every 10 s by taking the median
values.
3) SMD [3] is a real-world server machine dataset collected
by a large Internet company. SMD contains time-series
data of servers, each with 38 multivariate variables.
It is divided into train and test sets of equal size. The
original SMD dataset did not have any preprocessing
applied to remove servers experiencing concept drift.
This was subsequently addressed by Li et al. [1] to
remove servers suffering from concept drift. Following
the subsequent work, the reported results in this section
takes the average scores computed for the 12 servers that
do not suffer from concept drift.
2) Baselines: We compare our CST-GL with five standard multidimensional anomaly detection methods that do
not take temporal dependencies into consideration and six
recently proposed frameworks designed specifically for multivariate time-series anomaly detection. Baseline descriptions
and implementation details are provided in the Appendix, as
shown in the Supplementary Material.
The five standard multidimensional anomaly detection methods are Raw Signal [24], PCA, AutoEncoder,
Kmeans, and deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model
(DAGMM) [67]. Raw Signal is a simple baseline model that
reconstructs any signal to zero, resulting in an error equivalent
to the normalized signals themselves. Using the normalized
signals, a Gaussian scoring function is employed to compute
the negative log-likelihood of observing these signal values at
each timestamp. This model provides insights into the nature
and difficulty of the benchmark dataset.
The six state-of-the-art frameworks for multivariate
time-series anomaly detection are LSTM-VAE [26], OmniAnomaly [3], UnSupervised Anomaly Detection on multivariate time series (USAD) [68], multivariate time-series
anomaly detection via GAT (MTAD-GAT) [63], GDN [11],
and InterFusion [1]. Notably, InterFusion, an extension of
OmniAnomaly, is the state-of-the-art RNN framework, while
MTAD-GAT and GDN are the state-of-the-art GNN baselines
for the multivariate time-series anomaly detection task.
3) Parameter Settings: We train our model for 20 epochs
with a batch size of 64, Adam optimizer is applied to optimize
CST-GL with learning rate of 3 × 10−4 and (β1 , β2 ) =
(0.9, 0.999). Following previous works [1], [3], validation
set ratios for SWaT, WADI, and SMD are 0.1, 0.1 and 0.3,
respectively. We set sliding window length, w, to be 5, 5, and
100 for SWaT, WADI, and SMD as suggested by the original
papers [3], [11]. We define the hyperparameter search space
as shown in the Appendix, as shown in the Supplementary
Material, and select the hyperparameters that achieve lowest
average root-mean-square error (RMSE) in the validation set.
After hyperparameter search, the MTCL module has neighbor
size, k, set to be 15, 30, and 10 for SWaT, WADI, and
SMD, respectively. Across all datasets, the correlation learning
module has a node dimension of 256, the retain ratio of
0.1, and saturation rate of 20. The GCN and the temporal
convolution network modules both have 16 output dimensions.
The skip connection layers all have 32 output dimensions.
We use two graph and temporal module layers. Finally, for

11809

the number of principal components, we set it automatically
based on the number required to achieve less than 10% sMAPE
on the validation set. Computing infrastructures and empirical
computational complexity for all methods are detailed in the
Appendix, as shown in the Supplementary Material.
B. Overall Detection Performance
As many baseline methods do not incorporate a threshold
selection mechanism [1], [26], [67], [68], we compare model
performances using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
and precision-recall curve (PRC) area under the curve (AUC)
scores by treating every timestamp as an independent observation to be classified as an anomaly or not. Under this pointwise
approach, a model is required to predict the occurrence of
anomaly events across the entire time series, including when
they have started and ended. The closer the ROC and PRC
score is to 1, the better a model is at scoring and differentiating
anomalous and nonanomalous time points.
1) Baseline Comparison: The PRC and AUC results are
summarized in Table II and we observe the following.
1) Proposed Framework: CST-GL showed superior performances against all the other baselines with an average
outperformance of 7.16 and 8.30 percentage points
against the next best baseline for the ROC and PRC
scores, respectively. It also achieved high performance
with relatively low variability and, in the case of WADI’s
PRC values, the performance gain is greater than 45%
when compared to the next best result. The experimental result in Table II demonstrates CST-GL’s superior
performance in providing a representative anomaly indicator to inform and alert system operators. It also aids
experts in deciding on an appropriate threshold for
human intervention as the anomaly scores for anomalous
and nonanomalous timepoints are well separated.
2) Temporal Dependency: On average, baseline methods
that consider temporal information achieve higher ROC
and PRC results, validating that temporal information is
paramount for detecting anomalies in multivariate time
series. The importance of effective learning of temporal
cues is also evident by the performance of GDN, which
did not address the temporal dependencies between
time-series observations directly. Despite explicitly
learning spatial correlation between multivariate variable
pairs, the GDN model is less effective when adapted to
the unsupervised, real-time anomaly detection task.
3) Spatial Pairwise Correlation: As LSTM-VAE,
OmniAnomaly and USAD do not directly capture the
underlying pairwise interdependence among the multivariate time-series variables, they performed poorer than
InterFusion and CST-GL. Similar to our framework,
InterFusion directly addresses the spatial–temporal
dependencies by learning dual-view latent embeddings.
Nonetheless, as InterFusion’s latent embedding only
encapsulates spatial correlation within a global hidden
state, they do not explicitly model the relationships
between variable pairs. We conjuncture that successful
capturing of spatial correlation dependencies requires
an explicit graphical modeling of relationships between
the multivariate variables as it evidently improves the
effectiveness of a time-series anomaly detection model.
2) Ablation Study: We assessed the contributions of various
CST-GL modules to anomaly detection in a targeted ablation
study on SWaT and WADI. In this study, we examined
different variants of CST-GL. The results are presented in

11810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

TABLE II
AVERAGE AUC P ERFORMANCE (± S TANDARD D EVIATION ) OF F IVE E XPERIMENTAL RUNS ON T HREE B ENCHMARK DATASETS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND
B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN E ACH E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE III

TABLE IV

A BLATION S TUDY—AVERAGE AUC P ERFORMANCE
(± S TANDARD D EVIATION )

F1 S CORE OF AUTOMATIC T HRESHOLD V ERSUS O PTIMAL T HRESHOLD

Table III, with modifications across multiple modules detailed
as follows:
1) W/o MTCL: CST-GL without multivariate time-series
correlation learning. We replace the learned adjacency
matrix, A, with a complete digraph adjacency matrix
and remove MTCL.
2) W/o GCN: CST-GL without the graph convolution network. We remove the GCN module (including MTCL)
and replace it with a linear layer.
3) Mod. TCN: CST-GL with modified temporal convolution network. We modify TCN to nullify its ability in
capturing multigranular temporal clues by replacing the
multiconvolution filters with a single 1 × 1 filter.
4) W/o PCA: CST-GL without the PCA-based anomaly
scoring module. We replace our PCA module with
standard Gaussian scoring function [24]. The Gaussian
scoring function would correspond to the Raw Signal in
Table II, but the input for this function is the forecast
error from the STGNN in CST-GL.
5) W/o STGNN: CST-GL without the STGNN. This is
equivalent to the PCA model in Table II.
When we remove the MTCL module (w/o GCN) and instead
employ a complete digraph adjacency matrix to model the
interactions between variables, we notice a significant drop in
performance. Importantly, the degradation of performance is
notably more pronounced for the WADI dataset. We hypothesize that the noise from unimportant neighboring nodes is more
pronounced when the GCN propagate information among the
variables under the WADI with 127 number of multivariate
variables, as compared to SWaT that only has 51.
Next, we scrutinize the effects of modifications to the
STGNN. We observe that the exclusion of the GCN module (w/o GCN) significantly degrades the anomaly detection
results. This is consistent with previous studies [1], [11] as
modeling of the pairwise correlations among variables can
enable information flow among the interdependent univariate

variable nodes, thereby improving the performance of detecting anomaly events. Conversely, when we modify the TCN
(mod. TCN) within CST-GL, it also leads to decline in
performance. This can be attributed to the fact that the temporal dependency of the multivariate time-series data is less
effectively captured. When the PCA-based anomaly scoring
module is replaced by a Gaussian scoring function [24] (w/o
PCA), we note a reduction in performance in the WADI
dataset. This performance drop can be attributed to the Gaussian function’s lack of robust denoising capabilities, an area
where PCA excels. Despite this, the CST-GL still outperforms
the established baselines.
Finally, the removal of the STGNN (w/o STGNN), leaving
only PCA model, significantly reduces performance. This
underscores the crucial role of the STGNN. While PCA can
lessen inherent noise for improved representation, it is the
capacity of the STGNN to recognize spatial–temporal patterns
that forms a comprehensive solution for anomaly detection.
3) Automatic Thresholding Mechanism: Our framework
incorporates an automatic thresholding mechanism where the
maximum anomaly score in the validation set is taken as
the threshold without a need for human experts in determining
the optimal threshold. Table IV shows the best F1 score
achieved through an enumerative search of global optimal
threshold against the F1 score of our automatic thresholding
mechanism.
The nonparametric threshold selection of CST-GL, despite
its simplicity, effectively captures the spatial–temporal dependencies of multivariate time series during the normal period
(i.e., training set). This capability allows for a notable degree
of separation between anomalous and nonanomalous timepoints in the test set, as evidenced by promising F1 scores.
However, it is important to note that the effectiveness of the
automatic threshold is most pronounced on the SWaT dataset,
and exhibits some performance drops on WADI and SMD.
Moving forward, we aim to refine the thresholding process to
close the gap between the automatically determined threshold
and the threshold determined using best-F1 scores across a
broader range of scenarios.

ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

11811

TABLE V
SWAT—B EST F1 R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT D ELAYS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN
E ACH E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE VI
WADI—B EST F1 R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT D ELAYS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN E ACH
E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

C. Early Detection Performance
As time-series anomaly events usually form contiguous
anomaly segments, previous works have argued that detecting anomalies within any subset of a ground truth anomaly
segment is sufficient in real-world scenarios. Based on this
notion, they evaluated multivariate time-series anomaly detection models using point-adjusted (PA) approach [1], [3],
[68]. Under this approach, if any timestamp in a contiguous
anomaly segment with Ma timestamps is correctly detected
as an anomaly, the PA approach considers the entire anomaly
segment as correctly predicted with Ma true positives [64].
However, since any detection within a contiguous anomaly
segment is treated equally, the PA approach does not reward
early detections in an anomalous segment [24], [69], [70].
Nevertheless, early detection of anomaly events is often crucial
in a wide range of practical applications and a model which
can detect anomaly events early will have significant value in
real-world settings [71].
To evaluate early detection ability of CST-GL and baseline methods, we adopt the metric suggested by Ren et al.
[72], where detection of contiguous anomaly segment is only
treated as true positives, if and only if an anomaly point is
detected correctly and its timestamp is at most δ steps after
the first anomaly of the contiguous anomaly segment. For
example, δ = 0 would equate to identifying an anomaly
segment as early as possible without any delays and δ =
60 for a time series with second-interval would equate to
detecting anomaly segment within a minute after the first
anomaly timestamp. As δ becomes sufficiently large (i.e.,

the delay constraint is removed), the results of the early
detection PA approach will be the same as the original PA
approach.
In this work, we evaluate models’ early detection ability
with delay 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 60 min. Following previous
work [1], [3], [68] in computing model’s anomaly scoring
ability, we report the best F1 score for each delay. Based on
Tables V–VII, we observe the following.
1) Immediate Detection: CST-GL showed a substantial
advantage against the next baseline when δ = 0 where
the performance improvement is 86.27%, 43.44%, and
2.75% for SWaT, WADI, and SMD, respectively. This
indicates that our model significantly outperform the
simple and state-of-the-art baselines in early detection
of multivariate time-series anomaly events.
2) Practicality: On all three benchmark datasets, our proposed framework performed best across all delays, δ,
with the exception of 5 and 10 min under the SMD
dataset. While model performance gaps decrease as δ is
increased, our framework remains state-of-the-art even
when delay is set to be 60 min. These results suggest
that our anomaly detection model has the greatest ability
at detecting not only anomalous events that require
immediate attention but also anomalous events that is
less hurried. CST-GL can thus be potentially applied
across a wide range of practical applications and is
dependable in a diverse range of real-world operational
requirements.
3) Baseline Comparison: Consistently, InterFusion, which
learns temporal and intervariable dependencies, ranked

11812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

TABLE VII
SMD—B EST F1 R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT D ELAYS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN E ACH
E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

second in early anomaly detection. Other baselines, not
addressing both dependencies, showed greater variability
across delays and datasets. This validates the importance
of learning both temporal and interdependence for model
generalization across tasks and datasets.
D. Root Cause Anomaly Diagnosis
In accordance with the approach suggested by
Garg et al. [24], we gauge the anomaly diagnosis performance
of all models using the root-cause top three metric (RC-Top3).
The RC-Top3 measures instances where at least one of the
genuine causes is identified among the top three causes
as determined by the detection model. We provide the
mean performance along with its standard deviation. Since
InterFusion utilizes MCMC imputation on the original
reconstruction to diagnose root causes, we present results
both with and without MCMC imputation. As argued by
Li et al. [1], anomalous node variables have the potential
to introduce bias into the learned embeddings within
their network module, creating undesirable noise. MCMC
imputation can help to dampen this noise, similar to the role
of the PCA-based scorer in CST-GL.
For CST-GL, we report the diagnosis performance using
the ranking derived from the PCA-based method, as well as
the ranking obtained after aggregating the anomaly scores
from its one-hop neighbor (CST-GL + MTCL-Graph). The
latter approach leverages the learned relationships between
variables from the MTCL module to diagnose root causes.
This approach considers that anomalous behavior exhibited
by some variables may merely be symptomatic, while the
root cause could be attributed to closely related variables.
To further assess the benefits of MTCL, we also present
the diagnostic results of the raw signal using the MTCLGraph (Raw Signal+MTCL-Graph). This serves to evaluate
the effectiveness of MTCL in facilitating the diagnosis of
anomalies, even when the raw signal alone is used.
As evidenced in Table VIII, CST-GL excels in identifying
root causes of anomalies on SWaT and WADI, using MTCLGraph. It comes a close second to OmniAnomaly on SMD
without MTCL-Graph. As detailed in Section IV-C2, the decision to diagnose root cause based directly on error contribution
or one-hop distance neighbors using MTCL-Graph depends
on the anomaly characteristics. SWaT and WADI often have
symptomatic variables that exhibit abnormal behaviors but not
causative [11], [24]. These variables were influenced by true
root causes that exhibit normal behaviors. Thus, unearthing
the true root causes requires the explicit identification of

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE ON ROOT C AUSE DIAGNOSIS . AVERAGE
RC-T OP 3 (± S TANDARD DEVIATION )

variables closely associated with symptomatic variables. This
is effectively achieved with our MTCL module.
Contrastingly, in SMD, variables that display abnormal
behaviors are indeed the root causes themselves. As such,
the MTCL-Graph does not provide any added benefit; instead,
it is more advantageous to directly evaluate the anomaly score
from the PCA-based scorer. These observations align with
the diagnosis results of InterFusion. When MCMC imputation
is employed, the effects of anomalous noise are mitigated,
enabling InterFusion to accurately diagnose the root causes in
SMD. However, MCMC imputation does not enhance results
in SWaT and WADI, as it reduces the impacts of abnormal behaviors transferred to related variables. Consequently,
MCMC imputation softens the anomalous effects on the actual
root cause variables that do not themselves exhibit abnormal
behaviors. To consolidate, we show MTCL-Graph to improve
the ability in diagnosing the root cause directly from raw
signals alone in SWaT and WADI, but not in SMD.
On the whole, CST-GL with the aid of MTCL-Graph
provides a comprehensive and actionable tool for operators
in detecting and diagnosing anomaly events.
E. Case Study in Practice
To showcase CST-GL’s implementation under real-world
scenarios, we conduct time-series anomaly detection case
studies on WADI’s WADI System where the root cause of
the anomaly event is known.

ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

11813

Fig. 3. Root cause analysis of stealth attack on WADI system. Size of nodes represents the computed ranking of nodes as described in Section IV-C2.
Red node represents the highest ranked sensor and orange nodes represent the top five sensors that contributed the majority of anomaly score during the first
5 min of attack. Apart from the highest-ranked red node, four blue nodes indicate other potential sources of the anomaly, with their sizes signifying relative
importance. However, the primary node associated with the attack is the first red one, not the four blue nodes. The directed arrows represent the unidirectional
relationships that CST-GL has learned using the MTCL module and correspond to spatial dependencies between different sensors.

1) Background: The WADI process in WADI is segmented
into three subprocesses: P1, P2, and P3. P1 involves water
intake and water quality management, P2 takes in water
from P1 and supplies it to the consumers and P3 returns
excess water back to P1. To monitor and automate the system
effectively, 127 sensors are installed. The sensors within each
subprocess are intimately linked to monitor and automate
the WADI subprocess. Nonetheless, any attacks on a single
subprocess will have a cascading effect on the entire WADI
system. In this experimental setting, CST-GL is required to
detect malicious attacks by ill-intentioned parties that have
access to the system control from October 9, 2017 to October
11, 2017. CST-GL is provided with 14 days of normal
multisensors data from September 25, 2017 to October 9,
2017, to train the model. No labels or information related to
the attacks are given during training and CST-GL is required
to detect the anomalies in an unsupervised manner.
2) Stealth Attack: At 10:55 A . M . on December 10, 2017,
the attacker launch a 29-min stealthy attack on WADI to
drain an elevated reservoir by changing the reading seen
by water quality sensor, 1_AIT_001 (i.e., the root cause of
attack). Further, the attacker cleverly manipulates the root
cause sensor to make the event undetectable. Consequently,
determining the root cause of this attack is nontrivial given
that the attacker has extensive knowledge about the WADI
system and is deliberately hiding the root cause.
3) Proposed Framework in Action: The following describes
CST-GL’s real-time anomaly detection mechanisms.
1) Automated Early Detection: Relying on the automated
thresholding mechanism, CST-GL alerted the human
operators at 10:58 A . M . (less than 4 min after the
attack) that a possible anomaly event has occurred and
emergency intervention is required. During the attack
period, the anomaly score remained high, continuously
warning operators about the urgency of the attack event.

2) Root Cause Identification With Learned Relation: Looking at CST-GL’s system outputs, the human operators
see five sensors from subprocess P1 to contribute
the substantial majority of anomaly scores during this
period: 1_MV_002, 1_P_002, 1_P_006, 1_LS_001, and
1_LS_002. After inspecting all five sensors, it is found
that they are not the root cause but are merely the
symptoms of this attack. Nevertheless, they are very
likely to be related to the root cause of the stealthy attack
event. Thus, the sensors most closely related to the five
sensors are immediately ranked based on the CST-GL’s
learned relation between variable pairs. The aggregated
scores of one-hop distance neighbors in subprocess P1
ranks 1_AIT_001 as the sensor most associated with the
five aforementioned sensors, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The
root cause of the attack is thus successfully identified
after inspecting merely 6 out of 127 sensors.
3) Informativeness With Pointwise Detection: The original
WADI dataset assumes no human intervention and the
29-min stealth attack ended at 11:24 A . M . Consistently,
CST-GL confirms by 11:26 A . M . that the attack has
ceased, exhibiting a lag of less than 2 min. This not only
allows system operator to make decisions with informed
knowledge but also direct efforts on exploring the data
within the most relevant time frame to thoroughly understand the anomaly events that have already occurred.
In another WADI anomaly event, a flow sensor, 1_FIT_001,
is attacked via false readings. To detect the root cause of
this attack is again nontrivial because the false readings
are within the normal range of this sensor [11]. Following
the implementation above, CST-GL is able to alert system
operators that an anomalous event has occurred after just 10
s of the attack. Similarly, the top sensors that contributed to
the anomaly score are again found not to be the root cause.
Through aggregated scores of the learned relations between

11814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

sensors, CST-GL ranked the root cause sensor, 1_FIT_001,
as the third most possible sensor to be the root cause, correctly
identifying the root cause after inspecting 8 out of 127 sensors.
Finally, CST-GL informs that the anomaly event has ended
within the precision of ±1 min.
4) Summary: The case studies demonstrate CST-GL’s ability in 1) detecting anomalous event early; 2) significantly
reducing the search range for human operators to identify the root cause by localizing the relevant variables; and
3) informing operators about the duration of anomaly events
with reasonable precision. Importantly, it also illustrates that
joint learning of spatial–temporal and pairwise correlation
relational dependencies can help a multivariate time-series
anomaly detection model to detect and diagnose anomaly
events, significantly reduce the destructive impact of such
events on industrial systems.
Moving forward, we intend to enhance CST-GL’s robustness
and real-world applicability. As noted, anomalies can bias
the modeling process in GNNs. This challenge becomes even
more pronounced when anomalies introduce a long chain
of anomalous effects that propagate throughout large-scale
sensing networks, which are common in practice. Employing multiple GNN layers for k-hop neighbor aggregation to
address such long-term dependencies might expose the system
to issues like over-smoothing [73] and over-squashing [74].
While the incorporation of the gating mechanism in (4) of
CST-GL could alleviate the aforementioned issues, we plan to
fortify our framework further by incorporating recent advances
in the GNN field. Specifically, we aim to explore GNN
techniques known for their stability [75] and consider the
potentiality of including online adaptive rewiring for message
passing.
In addition, we aim to enhance CST-GL for a broader
range of applications by addressing the issues of concept
drift and missing values. In terms of concept drift, we plan
to implement mechanisms that can detect and quantify the
magnitude of data drift, thus facilitating necessary adjustments
to the model in line with evolving data distributions [76],
[77]. For handling missing values, we intend to assess the
robustness of CST-GL by employing standard interpolation and imputation algorithms [78]. Furthermore, we aspire
to incorporate spatial–temporal graph controlled differential
equations [12], inherently suited to scenarios involving missing
values.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a novel framework for multivariate time series anomaly detection. Our model, CST-GL,
explicitly learns pairwise correlations between variable pairs of
multivariate time-series data, jointly capture spatial–temporal
dependencies and effectively detect anomaly events when the
behavior of time-series data deviate from the nonanomalous
patterns. Experiments on three real-world datasets showed
that CST-GL outperformed 11 baselines in general and early
detection settings. CST-GL also enables interpretation and
root cause diagnosis of anomaly events in multivariate timeseries data, paving the way for STGNN-based methods to
be implemented in real-world applications. In the future,
we will study generalizability of CST-GL in dynamic and
missing values scenarios together with the trustworthiness of
our GNN model [34] through the perspectives of robustness
and explainability. We will also look into how large language

models can enhance graph learning [79], [80] for time-series
data.
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc.
27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
pp. 3220–3230.
[2] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[3] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[4] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop CyberPhys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016, pp. 31–36.
[5] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
systems,” in Proc. CySWATER, 2017, pp. 25–28.
[6] Q. Yu, L. Jibin, and L. Jiang, “An improved ARIMA-based traffic
anomaly detection algorithm for wireless sensor networks,” Int. J.
Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 12, no. 1, Jan. 2016, Art. no. 9653230.
[7] E. Keogh, J. Lin, and A. Fu, “HOT SAX: Efficiently finding the most
unusual time series subsequence,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Conf. Data
Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2005, pp. 1–8.
[8] X. Wang, J. Lin, N. Patel, and M. Braun, “Exact variable-length anomaly
detection algorithm for univariate and multivariate time series,” Data
Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1806–1844, Nov. 2018.
[9] B. Li, X. Li, Z. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Spatio-temporal graph routing for
skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc. AAAI, 2019, pp. 8561–8568.
[10] Y. Seo, M. Defferrard, P. Vandergheynst, and X. Bresson, “Structured
sequence modeling with graph convolutional recurrent networks,” in
Proc. ICONIP, 2018, pp. 362–373.
[11] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[12] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y.-F. Li, S. Chen, B. Yang, and S. Pan, “Multivariate
time series forecasting with dynamic graph neural ODEs,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 9168–9180, Sep. 2023.
[13] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.
[14] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
[15] A. Blázquez-Garcia, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
[16] S. Li and J. Wen, “A model-based fault detection and diagnostic
methodology based on PCA method and wavelet transform,” Energy
Buildings, vol. 68, pp. 63–71, Jan. 2014.
[17] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classification,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, pp. 139–154, Dec. 2001.
[18] W. Lu and A. A. Ghorbani, “Network anomaly detection based on
wavelet analysis,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2009, no. 1,
pp. 1–16, Dec. 2008.
[19] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[20] L. Feremans, V. Vercruyssen, B. Cule, W. Meert, and B. Goethals,
“Pattern-based anomaly detection in mixed-type time series,” in Proc.
ECML PKDD, 2019, pp. 240–256.
[21] C. M. Yeh et al., “Matrix profile I: All pairs similarity joins for time
series: A unifying view that includes motifs, discords and shapelets,”
in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Dec. 2016,
pp. 1317–1322.
[22] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI,
2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[23] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Connecting the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural
networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 753–763.

ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

[24] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An evaluation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
Jun. 2022.
[25] T. Tayeh, S. Aburakhia, R. Myers, and A. Shami, “An attention-based
ConvLSTM autoencoder with dynamic thresholding for unsupervised
anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” Mach. Learn. Knowl.
Extraction, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 350–370, Apr. 2022.
[26] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[27] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. ICANN, 2019, pp. 703–716.
[28] S. Chauhan and L. Vig, “Anomaly detection in ECG time signals via
deep long short-term memory networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data
Sci. Adv. Analytics (DSAA), Oct. 2015, pp. 1–7.
[29] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly
detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
[30] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time series
anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICML, vol. 162, 2022, pp. 3621–3633.
[31] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th
ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022,
pp. 2977–2986.
[32] Z. Z. Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi,
“Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,” 2022,
arXiv:2211.05244.
[33] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021.
[34] H. Zhang, B. Wu, X. Yuan, S. Pan, H. Tong, and J. Pei, “Trustworthy graph neural networks: Aspects, methods and trends,” 2022,
arXiv:2205.07424.
[35] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis:
Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” 2023, arXiv:2306.10125.
[36] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017, pp. 1–14.
[37] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–12.
[38] X. Liu et al., “Survey on graph neural network acceleration: An
algorithmic perspective,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
Jul. 2022, pp. 5521–5529.
[39] X. Zheng, Y. Liu, S. Pan, M. Zhang, D. Jin, and P. S. Yu,
“Graph neural networks for graphs with heterophily: A survey,” 2022,
arXiv:2202.07082.
[40] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y.-F. Li, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and S. Pan, “Multi-scale
contrastive Siamese networks for self-supervised graph representation
learning,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021, pp. 1–7.
[41] T. Huang et al., “You can have better graph neural networks by not
training weights at all: Finding untrained GNNs tickets,” in Proc. LoG,
2022, pp. 1–8.
[42] Z. Wu, D. Zheng, S. Pan, Q. Gan, G. Long, and G. Karypis, “TraverseNet: Unifying space and time in message passing for traffic
forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access,
Jul. 14, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3186103.
[43] M. Jin, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Neural temporal walks: Motif-aware
representation learning on continuous-time dynamic graphs,” in Proc.
NIPS, 2022, pp. 19874–19886.
[44] A. T. N. Nguyen et al., “The application of artificial intelligence to accelerate G protein-coupled receptor drug discovery,” Brit. J. Pharmacol.,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.16140
[45] H. Y. Koh, A. T. Nguyen, S. Pan, L. T. May, and G. I. Webb,
“PSICHIC: Physicochemical graph neural network for learning proteinligand interaction fingerprints from sequence data,” BioRxiv, 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.17.558145
[46] Y. Zheng et al., “From unsupervised to few-shot graph anomaly
detection: A multi-scale contrastive learning approach,” 2022,
arXiv:2202.05525.
[47] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 12, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TKDE.2021.3119326.

11815

[48] W. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Liu, X. Tang, S. Wang, and J. Tang, “Graph
structure learning for robust graph neural networks,” in Proc. KDD,
2020, pp. 66–74.
[49] Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, D. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Peng, and S. Pan, “Towards
unsupervised deep graph structure learning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf.,
Apr. 2022, pp. 1392–1403.
[50] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” 2023,
arXiv:2307.03759.
[51] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[52] L. Pei, Y. Cao, Y. Kang, Z. Xu, and Z. Zhao, “Self-supervised spatiotemporal clustering of vehicle emissions with graph convolutional network,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jul. 19, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3293463.
[53] W. Liang and W. Zhang, “Learning social relations and spatiotemporal
trajectories for next check-in inference,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1789–1799, Apr. 2023.
[54] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised
anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023.
[55] J. Yu, Y. Xu, H. Chen, and Z. Ju, “Versatile graph neural networks toward intuitive human activity understanding,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. 28, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3216084.
[56] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional
adversarial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
[57] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial networks for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., early access, Apr. 5, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3159538.
[58] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018,
pp. 1–16.
[59] Y. Li, N. Zhong, D. Taniar, and H. Zhang, “MCGNet+: An improved
motor imagery classification based on cosine similarity,” Brain Informat., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Dec. 2022.
[60] F. Wu, A. Souza, T. Zhang, C. Fifty, T. Yu, and K. Weinberger,
“Simplifying graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. ICML, 2019,
pp. 6861–6871.
[61] S. Abu-El-Haija et al., “MixHop: Higher-order graph convolutional
architectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing,” in Proc. ICML, 2019,
pp. 21–29.
[62] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph WaveNet for
deep spatial–temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. 29th Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 1907–1913.
[63] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
[64] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoencoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[65] D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and D. Wierstra, “Stochastic backpropagation and approximate inference in deep generative models,” in Proc.
ICML, 2014, pp. 1278–1286.
[66] T. Chen, X. Liu, B. Xia, W. Wang, and Y. Lai, “Unsupervised anomaly
detection of industrial robots using sliding-window convolutional variational autoencoder,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 47072–47081, 2020.
[67] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–19.
[68] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. KDD, 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
[69] S. Kim, K. Choi, H. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous
evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2022,
pp. 7194–7201.
[70] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection
benchmarks are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
[71] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised realtime anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262,
pp. 134–147, Nov. 2017.
[72] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at Microsoft,” in
Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Jul. 2019, pp. 3009–3017.

11816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

[73] Q. Li, Z. Han, and X.-M. Wu, “Deeper insights into graph convolutional
networks for semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2018, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 1–8.
[74] J. Topping, F. D. Giovanni, B. P. Chamberlain, X. Dong, and
M. M. Bronstein, “Understanding over-squashing and bottlenecks on
graphs via curvature,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022,
pp. 1–30.
[75] D. Tortorella and A. Micheli, “Leave graphs alone: Addressing oversquashing without rewiring,” in Proc. 1st Learn. Graphs Conf., 2022,
pp. 1–8.
[76] G. I. Webb, R. Hyde, H. Cao, H. L. Nguyen, and F. Petitjean, “Characterizing concept drift,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 30, no. 4,
pp. 964–994, Jul. 2016.
[77] I. Goldenberg and G. I. Webb, “PCA-based drift and shift quantification
framework for multidimensional data,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 62, no. 7,
pp. 2835–2854, Jul. 2020.
[78] L. Beretta and A. Santaniello, “Nearest neighbor imputation algorithms:
A critical evaluation,” BMC Med. Informat. Decis. Making, vol. 16,
pp. 197–208, Jul. 2016.
[79] S. Pan, L. Luo, Y. Wang, C. Chen, J. Wang, and X. Wu, “Unifying
large language models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap,” 2023,
arXiv:2306.08302.
[80] M. Jin et al., “Time-LLM: Time series forecasting by reprogramming
large language models,” 2023, arXiv:2310.01728.

Yu Zheng received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
computer science from Northwest A&F University,
Xianyang, China, in 2008 and 2011, respectively.
She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science with La Trobe University, Melbourne,
VIC, Australia.
Her research interests include image classification,
data mining, and machine learning.

Huan Yee Koh received the bachelor’s degree in
commerce and the master’s degree in data science
from Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia, in
2018 and 2021, respectively, where he is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in machine learning.
His research interests include graph neural networks (GNNs), time series analysis, drug discovery,
data mining, and machine learning.

Ming Jin received the B.Eng. degree from the Hebei
University of Technology, Tianjin, China, in 2017,
and the M.Inf.Tech. degree from The University
of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 2019.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science with Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
Australia.
His research interests include graph neural networks (GNNs), time series analysis, data mining,
and machine learning.

Lianhua Chi received the dual Ph.D. degrees in
computer science from the University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia, and the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, in 2015.
She was a Post-Doctoral Research Scientist with
IBM Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. She has
been a Lecturer with the Department of Computer
Science and Information Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, since 2018. Her current research
interests include data mining, machine learning, and
big data hashing.
Dr. Chi was a recipient of the Best Paper Award in PAKDD in 2013.

Khoa T. Phan received the B.Eng. degree (Hons.)
in telecommunications from the University of New
South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, NSW, Australia,
in 2006, the M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering
from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada, in 2008, and the California Institute of
Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, CA, USA, in 2009,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada, in 2017.
He is currently a Senior Lecturer and an Australia
Research Council (ARC) Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA)
Fellow with the Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. His current research
interests include design, control, optimization, and operation of 5G mobile
communications networks with applications in the Internet of Things (IoT),
satellite communications, machine-type communications (MTC), smart grids,
and cloud computing.
Shirui Pan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Ultimo, NSW,
Australia, in 2015.
He is currently a Professor and an ARC Future
Fellow (2022–2025) with the School of ICT, Griffith University, Southport, QLD, Australia. He has
authored over 130 research papers in top-tier journals and conferences, including the IEEE T RANS ACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE
I NTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS), International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), International World Wide
Web Conference (WWW), and International World Wide Web Conference
(ICDM). His research interests include data mining and machine learning.
Dr. Pan is a Senior Member of the ACM. He was a recipient of the Best
Student Paper Award of IEEE ICDM 2020. He was recognized as the one of
the AI 2000 AAAI/IJCAI Most Influential Scholars in Australia in 2021.
Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the B.Inf.Tech. (Hons.) and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science from The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia, in 1995 and 2000,
respectively.
She is currently a Professor and the Chair of the
Department of Computer Science and Information
Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia. She is also the Chief Investigator of
the ARC Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics,
Queensland. She has been involved in research on
bioinformatics, health informatics, multimedia, and artificial intelligence. She
has authored over 250 research papers, many of them appeared in top journals
and conferences.
Dr. Chen is the Steering Committee Chair for the Asia Pacific Bioinformatics
Conference (Founder) and Multimedia Modeling.
Wei Xiang (Senior Member, IEEE) was the Foundation Chair and the Head of the Discipline of IoT
Engineering, James Cook University, Cairns, QLD,
Australia. He is currently the Cisco Research Chair
of AI and IoT and the Director of the Cisco-La
Trobe Centre for AI and IoT, La Trobe University,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Due to his instrumental
leadership in establishing Australia’s first accredited Internet of Things Engineering degree program,
he was inducted into Pearcy Foundation’s Hall
of Fame in October 2018. He has authored over
300 peer-reviewed articles, including three books and 220 journal articles.
Dr. Xiang is a TEDx Speaker and an Elected Fellow of the IET, U.K., and
Engineers Australia. He received the TNQ Innovation Award in 2016 and the
Pearcey Entrepreneurship Award in 2017, and was recognized as an Engineers
Australia Cairns Engineer of the Year in 2017. He has served in a large number
of international conferences in the capacity of general co-chair, TPC co-chair,
and symposium chair.