IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

3537

Credible Link Flooding Attack Detection and
Mitigation: A Blockchain-Based Approach
Xiaofeng Jiang , Member, IEEE, Qianbao Shi, Hengkun Miao, Wanqin Cao , Huasen He , Member, IEEE,
Shuangwu Chen , Member, IEEE, and Jian Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Due to the concentrated distribution of network
traffic, the Internet is highly vulnerable to link flooding attack in
Distributed Denial-of-Service attacks (DDoS-LFA), which utilizes
the legitimate low-rate attack traffic to block the selected
network area. In recent years, building trusted networks has
been considered as a promising strategy to address the security
issues. Nevertheless, deploying a trusted link defense mechanism
in the attacked network area faces many challenges imposed by
the smart scheme and legitimate disguise of DDoS-LFA. In order
to overcome these challenges, we propose a blockchain-based
DDoS-LFA detection and mitigation scheme, named CREDIT,
to guarantee the security of attacked area, while existing works
only use blockchain to share the detection results of traditional
solutions. CREDIT uses blockchain to record and share the
information of links and flows in real time, which enables
routers in the protected area to easily trace the paths of all
active flows and capture the fragile links. On the basis of link
features, a credible deep learning method performed on randomly
selected nodes is proposed to detect DDoS-LFA against data
spoofing. When an attack alarm is raised, CREDIT performs
similarity analysis to locate attackers and migrate suspicious
traffic based on the flow features of alarm links. Experimental
results based on real implementation and attack testbed show
that, by integrating blockchain, CREDIT performs better than
traditional non-blockchain-based DDoS-LFA defense methods
when faced with data tampering.
Index Terms—DDoS-LFA, trusted link defense mechanism, blockchain, distributed attack detection, attack sources
identification.

I. I NTRODUCTION
UE TO the simple principles, diverse schemes and
significant effects [1], [2], Distributed Denial-of-Service
(DDoS) attack has long been one of the attack methods that

D

Manuscript received 20 April 2023; revised 30 November 2023; accepted
15 January 2024. Date of publication 23 January 2024; date of current
version 12 July 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundations of China (Grant No. 62341113, 62173315, 62101525,
62201543, 62021001 and U23A20275), by the Youth Innovation Promotion
Association CAS (Grant No. 2020450), by the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation (Grant No. 2023M733422), by Anhui Provincial Major Science
and Technology Project (Grant No. 202103a05020024), by the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities, and by the China Environment
for Network Innovations (CENI). The associate editor coordinating the
review of this article and approving it for publication was A. Veneris.
(Corresponding author: Huasen He.)
The authors are with the Department of Automation, University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China, and also with the Institute
of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center,
Hefei 230026, China (e-mail: jxf@ustc.edu.cn; shiqianbao@iai.ustc.edu.cn;
miaohengkun@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
lccwq@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
hehuasen@
ustc.edu.cn; chensw@ustc.edu.cn; jianyang@ustc.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3357660

threaten the normal network communications, such as the
1.35 Tbps attack against Github in 2018 [3], and the 2.3 Tbps
attack against Amazon cloud service in 2020 [4]. To avoid
being defended by anomaly detection measures [5], DDoS
attack has developed a Link Flooding Attack (DDoS-LFA)
mechanism, which can cut off the connection between selected
invasion area and the Internet by flooding specific upstream
links, and hence escape the inspection of end-hosts [6]. For
example, the Coremelt attack [7] can flood the backbone
links and cause the network to be paralyzed. The Crossfire
attack [8] can flood only a few network links to cut off network
connections of a large number of publicly accessible servers.
Since the flow density of the Internet follows a power-law
distribution [9], most of the Internet traffic are concentrated
on a small number of links, which will lead to serious
vulnerability to DDoS-LFA [10]. For instance, the attack
targeting NetEase resulted in a five-hour outage of service in
2015 [11], and the one targeting Spamhaus congested links
of four major Internet exchange points in Europe and Asia
in 2013 [12]. As DDoS-LFA attacks can easily cause huge
impacts such as long-time out of service (especially for large
corporations and important departments), proposing a trusted
link defense mechanism to protect the important area in the
network and mitigate the impact of the DDoS-LFA attacks
is a meaningful and attractive topic. In a protected area, link
information is recorded and shared among trusted nodes. The
aggregation of correlated abnormal traffic can be seen as an
expression of DDoS-LFA, and thus the defense mechanism
can detect attacks and identify suspicious sources.
However, designing a trusted link defense mechanism
against DDoS-LFA is confront with three main challenges.
The first challenge is to identify the potential target
links before DDoS-LFA occurs. The dynamic characteristics of DDoS-LFA make attack flows easily bypass the
countermeasures deployed in fixed network locations [13].
Woodpecker proposed by [14] can locate the congested
links and detect DDoS-LFA based on a judgment algorithm [15]. When the suspicious target links were identified,
Aydeger et al. [16] and Lee et al. [17] provided collaborative rerouting methods between several network regions
to cope with the elusiveness of target links, and mitigated
link congestion. However, the rerouting mechanism introduced
an additional server in each network region to maintain
routing control messages, which greatly increased the deployment cost and end-to-end latency. Therefore, it is critical
to identify the underlying target links before DDoS-LFA

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

occurs, so that the network can take defensive measures
promptly.
The second challenge is to capture the low-rate attack
flow of DDoS-LFA, which may be legitimate and does not
contain malicious packets. Hirayama et al. [18] utilized the
ChangeFinder scheme [19] to analyze the changing packet
patterns of different Autonomous Systems (ASes) suffering
from DDoS-LFA. Their experimental results showed that the
distinguish ability declined rapidly with the growth of network
scale. Kang et al. [20] performed a rate change test, which
temporarily increased the bandwidth of core links and then
observed the response to discern attack traffic. Nevertheless,
this scheme was designed against cost-sensitive attackers,
and failed to handle core links. Some other schemes used
the Software Defined Networking (SDN) to capture attack
flows [21], [22], while DDoS-LFA may isolate the switch
policy from other data plane devices, resulting in routing
inconsistencies [23].
Finally, it is challenging to identify the malicious sources,
when attackers of DDoS-LFA typically utilize real IP
addresses. Zargar et al. [24] proposed a route-based packet
filtering scheme to identify unexpected source addresses
(i.e., spoofed addresses) and drop relevant packets. However,
when an attacker used genuine IP addresses, the routers were
unable to filter such IP packets. To track attack flows using
genuine source addresses, Zheng et al. [22] proposed a SDNbased DDoS-LFA locator for networks enabled by OpenFlow
specification. The locator initially treated all addresses as
suspicious source addresses, and categorized them according
to their prefixes. After performing multiple rounds of prefix
analysis, the number of suspicious flows can be shrank and
the attacker can be finally located. However, this SDN-based
scheme will be ineffective when the control channel is blocked,
and the adaptive changes of target links will lead to failure
of prefix analysis. The comparison of existing systems is
summarized in TABLE I.
The blockchain technologies including both permissioned
and permissionless blockchain [25], [26] provide a promising
solution for handling DDoS-LFA, since information recorded
in blockchain is non-tampering, verifiable, traceable and
highly secure [27].
In order to overcome the above three challenges caused by
the elusiveness of DDoS-LFA, we develop a blockchain-based
DDoS-LFA detection scheme, called CREDIT, which builds
blockchain into the network to establish a trusted link defense
mechanism and protect the connectivity of the network. In
the built-in blockchain, the consensus processes are used to
monitor the fragile links and extract features to discover
abnormality, which are straightforwardly utilized to identify
suspicious sources and mitigate the congestion. The smart
contract writes the detection and identification results into
the blockchain to provide a decentralized secure, flexible and
low-cost collaboration among routers in the protected area.
By integrating the blockchain, CREDIT performs much better than traditional non-blockchain-based DDoS-LFA defense
methods.
The CREDIT solution presents an innovative approach
for mitigating DDoS-LFA attacks, surpassing the limitations

of conventional methods in the realm of network security.
By integrating blockchain technology into cybersecurity and
utilizing it for real-time recording and sharing of information
pertaining to links and traffic flows, it facilitates efficient
tracking and identification of network traffic while minimizing
the impact caused by DDoS-LFA. Thus, CREDIT offers
a dependable, adaptable, and cost-effective mechanism for
safeguarding the network. The fundamental contributions of
this work are summarized as follows.
1) Blockchain-based link information collection: CREDIT
leverages blockchain technology to document and disseminate
real-time information about connections and data movement.
This capability allows routers within a protected area to
effortlessly track the routes of all currently active data streams.
Hence, the suspicious target links and sources can be located
by conducting correlation analysis based on the reliable and
real-time record collection. To save computing and storage
resources of the routers, as well as minimizing the amount of
content stored in the blockchain, only a few nodes are selected
to deploy CREDIT by solving a Vertex Cover Problem (VCP).
Based on the real-time blockchain record, we can discover the
potential target links by calculating the flow density of every
link, and figure out the target links before the attack. Thus,
the attack detection will be more efficient.
To the best of our knowledge, it is the first work that
applies blockchain to detect sophisticated DDoS-LFA, while
the existing works only use blockchain to share the blacklisted
IP addresses provided by traditional detection schemes.
2) Credible intelligent DDoS-LFA detection and
mitigation: The artificial intelligence and blockchain are
combined to endow CREDIT with attack detection and
mitigation capabilities. The blockchain collects real-time link
information of the protected area to capture the attack patterns
and identify suspicious sources. Traditional intelligent attack
detection algorithm uses historical data and is vulnerable to
false past data, the developed credible deep learning attack
detection method can still predict normal data even if an
attack is occurring. The trustworthiness of the historical data
is evaluated via the deviation between the prediction and
actual value, and then the historical data is modified according
to its trustworthiness to improve the input of the detection
module.
Hence, CREDIT can overcome the attack destruction of
collected data, and locate attackers by identifying the hidden
attack features in suspicious flows.
3) Real implementation: The CREDIT prototype is implemented on China Environment for Network Innovations
(CENI) platform with Ethereum. Its performance is evaluated
on a typical DDoS-LFA testbed in terms of efficiency, security
and cost effectiveness. Our experimental results show that
CREDIT has a significant performance raise compared with
the traditional non-blockchain-based methods when facing
DDoS-LFA attacks. It produces a more sensitive detection of
attack links and a more accurate identification of the DDoS
attackers. Furthermore, if the data of our system is tempered by
mistake or maliciously, the performance of the system is still
stable without any huge decline. While achieving the benefits
above, the necessary resource for CREDIT’s algorithm is

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

3539

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF E XISTING S YSTEMS W ITH CREDIT

slight. Our system thus provides a solution which has excellent
performance for preventing and mitigating DDoS-LFA attacks
at a low network resource cost. It also provides a new mind
that combine blockchain with network attack detection and
mitigation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we give a brief description of blockchain and
our threat model, as well as present some existing work
of blockchain-based defense schemes against DDoS attack.
We detail the design and key technology of CREDIT in
Section III and Section IV, respectively. In Section V, we
conduct experiments to evaluate the efficiency and overhead
of CREDIT. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.

II. P RELIMINARY
A. Blockchain
Blockchain technology was first introduced in Bitcoin [28],
where it was used as a secure public ledger to achieve Bitcoin
transactions without a central authority. In blockchain, the
data stored by applications are confirmed by all the nodes
in the network to ensure authenticity and consistency. Since
blockchain is a decentralized system where each node stores
complete data, an attacker is unable to tamper with the
data unless it has more than 51% of the entire network’s
computing power [29]. Recently, through smart contract [30],
the application of blockchain is no longer limited to digital
cryptocurrency, but expands to other fields, such as decentralized Internet of Things (IoT) [31], smart healthcare [32], smart
grid [33], smart city [34], etc.
The consistency, immutability, traceability, and security of
blockchain mainly come from the chain structure. As shown
in Fig. 1, blockchain combines data blocks in chronological
order, and each block generally includes a block header and
a block body. The header encapsulates the hash value of the
parent block, timestamp, the current version number, difficulty,
the Merkle root [35] and a nonce value. The body includes
transactions between different entities and the Merkle tree
generated by these transactions through a double hash process.
In a blockchain network, all the nodes and devices are called
as miners, which are constantly competing with each other for
transaction-packaging rights through a consensus algorithm.
This process is called as mining. The node successfully
winning the right to package block is referred to as winning
miner. When a new block is generated by the winning miner,

Fig. 1.

Structure of blockchain.

other nodes will verify it and append the valid block to the
previous one to update the blockchain.
Except for Bitcoin, the merits of blockchain have promoted
the development of various blockchain systems, such as
Ethereum [36], a platform for developing decentralized applications using smart contract; Hyperledger [37], an architecture
for customizing networking rules. These systems provide us
with an opportunity to develop our distributed applications for
defending network attacks.
As for the consensus algorithms, PBFT [38] is a practical
Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT) solution for asynchronous
networks, used by Hyperledger Fabric as its consensus
protocol. However, PBFT has quadratic message complexity [39], which limits its scalability under many failures.
Several new BFT algorithms have been proposed to achieve
high-throughput and low-latency consensus under faults and
asynchrony. HotStuff [40] uses threshold signature to reduce
message complexity to linear, but it suffers from frequent
leader changes under failures. Prosecutor [41] penalizes
suspected faulty replicas to improve consensus efficiency,
avoiding performance degradation from repeated attacks by
faulty servers in HotStuff. Narwhal [42] adopts a DAG-based
consensus mechanism, which allows parallel processing of
transactions that are sequential in blockchain. It achieves
fully asynchronous consensus and significant improvement in
transaction efficiency compared with Hotstuff. However, we
did not employ BFT consensus algorithms because they tend
to be centralized, posing a risk of single-point attacks. In
contrast, Proof of Work (PoW) permissionless blockchains are
decentralized, comprising a network of numerous nodes, each
holding an identical copy of the data. This structure ensures
that if one node is compromised, the others can still function

3540

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Pattern of the Crossfire attack.
Fig. 3.

seamlessly. Furthermore, it’s difficult for attackers to focus
their efforts on a specific location or node in such a network.
To significantly disrupt the network, attackers would need
to target multiple nodes simultaneously, which is a complex
task. Considering the advantages in terms of tamper resistance
due to decentralization and distributed PoW consensus mechanisms, we select a PoW permissionless blockchain instead of
a permissioned blockchain.

B. Attack Model
In contrast to traditional DDoS attack, the target of DDoSLFA is not the selected servers, but specific links around the
selected area. We choose the Crossfire attack shown in Fig. 2
as an example. It mainly contains four elements: target area,
target link, public server (the victim of DDoS-LFA) and decoy
server, whose flows are imitated to ensure the rates of attack
flows are similar to these of legitimate flows. The attacker uses
Pay-Per Install services [18] to control bots (devices controlled
by the attacker and used in attack) to send a large amount of
low-rate traffic to decoy servers through the target links. As
a result, the target links are congested and the target area is
completely disconnected from the Internet.
The detailed attack procedure is as follows. Firstly, the
attacker will select two sets of servers as public servers and
decoy servers after determining the target area. The former
are located within the target area and denoted as Ps =
{Ps1 , Ps2 , . . . , PsN }, while the latter are located around the
target area and represented by Ds = {Ds1 , Ds2 , . . . , DsM }.
Next, the attacker instructs a set of bots, denoted as B =
{B1 , B2 , . . . , BO }, to run multiple traceroutes to find all paths
to Ps and Ds. Each path of a bot-server pair (i.e., (Bi , Psj )
or (Bi , Dsj )) includes a list of IP addresses assigned to the
interfaces of routers on this path, where the two IP addresses
of adjacent routers’ interfaces identify a link. With these IP
addresses and link information, the attacker then builds a link
map containing all the links between adjacent routers and
servers. After that, the attacker calculates the flow density and
selects target links with high flow density for flooding. We
denote the target links by L = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lK }. Finally, the
attacker assigns each bot a list of decoy servers, denoted as
Dsl ⊆ Ds, and the packet sending rates to the servers in
Dsl are denoted as Vsl . The bots ensure that the rates of
attack flows are similar to these of legitimate flows, and the
aggregated flow rates are slightly higher than the bandwidths.

Deployment strategy of CREDIT.

Three characteristics of DDoS-LFA [8] can be observed
from the above attack procedure. 1) The attacker selects links
with high flow density to flood, so as to congest the vital links
with the least cost. 2) The attacker controls bots to send much
low-rate traffic to congest target links, leading to a sudden
increase in the number of packets. 3) The attacker installs
the same attack program on bots, hence the sending rates
and packet size of bots are analogous. Taking these features
into account, we design the CREDIT system to discover the
potential target links of DDoS-LFA, detect attack with low-rate
traffic, identify suspected sources and mitigate the congestion.
C. Existing Blockchain-Based Works for DDoS Defence
There have been some studies [43], [44], [45], [46], [47],
[48] using blockchain to defend DDoS attack. Meng et al. [43]
have provided a review of blockchain-based intrusion detection, which indicated that these two technologies can
complement each other, and pointed out two challenges for
data sharing and trust computation. Alexopoulos et al. [44]
presented a collaborative defense mechanism, which utilized
blockchain to mitigate DDoS. Spathoulas et al. [49] proposed
a scheme of sharing malicious IP addresses in blockchain.
Essaid et al. [50] used blockchain and deep learning methods
to identify illegal traffic. The existing works were designed to
detect traditional DDoS attacks, such as Synchronize Sequence
Numbers (SYN) flooding and User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
flooding, by analyzing the traffic arriving at the end-hosts
and sharing blacklisted IP in blockchain. However, these
schemes failed to tackle DDoS-LFA, which utilizes legitimatelike flows and can not be detected at the end-hosts. Therefore,
it is in urgent need to propose a solution which can be easily
deployed and defend DDoS-LFA.
III. D ESIGN OF CREDIT
In this section, we give a system overview of CREDIT.
Since the attack flows of DDoS-LFA are always aggregated
in the links that are not far from the target area, it is feasible
to deploy CREDIT around the protected area to gain an
appropriate tradeoff between the security and efficiency. Fig. 3
shows the deployment strategy. As the number of blockchain
nodes increases, the number of transactions and the required
computing resources also increase. Thus, the deployment
of CREDIT should balance system efficiency and resource

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

Fig. 4.

3541

System overview.

consumption. Because the protected area (or target area) lies in
a local network, and the routing radius usually does not exceed
ten hops, we choose the public and decoy servers around the
protected area, and routers that are less than ten hops away
from the area to deploy CREDIT.
The CREDIT system consists of 7 modules as shown in
Fig. 4. The work flow is as follows: Firstly, the network
administrator conducts initialization process to generate the
status table, neighbour table and link table. Then, the

blockchain uses status table and neighbour table to select
CREDIT nodes, which are responsible for detecting and
mitigating attacks. Next, the CREDIT nodes analyze fragile
links and monitor these links to find a clue to DDoS-LFA.
They periodically extract features of fragile links and various
sources, and utilize these features to conduct attack detection
and source identification. At last, the CREDIT nodes mitigate
congestion caused by DDoS-LFA by exploiting the list of
identified bots. Once the system is set and started up properly,

3542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

it can detect the attacks and protect the devices and data
in the designated network area effectively. With the help of
blockchain technology which can provide highly reliable data,
the routers are able to trace the active flows, share real-time
data of the network status between each other, analyze the
data correlatedly and identify the attack links by their flow
density. The characteristic of the attacks can be captured and
the attacker can be precisely located from these data with
the participation of artificial intelligence, and the routers can
quickly restrict the flows and mitigate the impact of the attack
while not intercepting normal links and data flows. Experiment
results mentioned in the remainder will show that with the
combination of blockchain and AI, our system is significantly
more effective in attack detection and mitigation compared
with the traditional algorithms. As mentioned in the former
chapter of this paper, only part of the routers in the protected
area need to deploy the CREDIT algorithm, and the cost of the
system, including computing resource, storage and network
bandwidth, are slight.
A. Initialization Module
This module is used to initialize the whole system. Firstly,
the local network administrator selects the gateway router
and routers connected to servers as CREDIT nodes. The
CREDIT nodes locate at the edge of the local network, hence
providing a coverage of the target network. Next, the network
administrator initializes a status table on blockchain. The status
table containing C-NODE, N-NODE and U-NODE is used
to record the status of each node, where C-NODE denotes
CREDIT node responsible for fragile link monitoring and
information verification, N-NODE represents normal node,
and U-NODE refers to the node whose state is unknown. The
administrator also initializes an empty neighbour table and an
empty link table on blockchain. The neighbour table is used to
record neighbours of each node. The link table records weights
of different links, while each weight represents the number of
flows that may be transmitted through the corresponding link
and is initialized to 0. Then each node of the network uploads
its neighbors and the corresponding links to the neighbour
table and the link table, respectively.
Take Fig. 4(a) as an example, node 1 has 2 neighbours,
namely node 2 and node 3. Correspondingly, node 1 maintains
2 links, namely link e12 and link e13. Therefore, in the
neighbour table the neighbours of node 1 has 2 elements,
namely 2 and 3. The link table contains e12 and e13, which
are initialized to 0. The status table and neighbour table will be
used by the CREDIT Node Selection module to select nodes
to inspect links, while the link table will be used by the Fragile
Link Analysis module to obtain potential target links.
B. CREDIT Node Selection Module
This module aims to select minimun C-NODEs to monitor all links. C-NODEs upload important traffic information
to blockchain and participate in verifying the information
received from other C-NODEs, resulting in a great many
interactions between these nodes. Therefore, lessening the
number of C-NODEs can reduce network synchronization

overhead and improve data verification efficiency. In addition,
the selection of C-NODEs should ensure that each link
connects to at least 1 C-NODEs. The blockchain first picks
out the neighbours of all nodes except the gateway router and
routers connected to servers. Then, a greedy algorithm detailed
in Section IV-A is employed to select the C-NODEs, which
are responsible for monitoring the links and extracting features
to facilitate detecting and mitigating of DDoS-LFA. Then, the
C-NODE selection result will be synchronized to all nodes.
C. Fragile Link Analysis Module
This module aims to discern fragile links, which have high
flow density and are the most likely to be congested. In DDoSLFA, the adversary builds an accurate link map and flood the
fragile links. If the fragile links can be identified before DDoSLFA occurs, one just need to monitor certain links instead of
all links, thus increasing detection efficiency and reducing data
storage.
In this module, each C-NODE first initializes an empty
source space (SS) and an empty destination space (DS),
and then periodically reads packet information including the
source and destination IPs, followed by adding the IPs to
corresponding spaces. Next, each C-NODE calculates link
weights in the manner described in Section IV-B, and updates
their values on blockchain. The blockchain ranks them in a
decreasing order and picks a few links with the highest weights
as fragile links. This result is listened by all C-NODEs, then
they can deploy the detection and mitigation strategies.
D. Link Monitoring and Feature Extraction Module
In this module, C-NODEs monitor the fragile links and
extract features to discover abnormality and identify bots.
Although the traffic launched by the adversary resembles
legitimate traffic, the features of links and traffic sources are
still different from those in normal network environment. On
one hand, the link features of a local network are highly
time-dependent in normal environment. However, the attack is
sudden and unpredictable. To indicate whether the congestion
is caused by DDoS-LFA, we adopt 3 link features, including
Link Bandwidth Utilization (LBU), Packet Count (PKT) and
Round-Trip Time (RTT). When LBU, PKT and RTT unconventionally increase, it should be alert for attacks. On the other
hand, in normal network, the traffic triggered by a generic
source is ruleless. However, during the attack, the adversary
installs similar programs on bots, so the flows sent by those
bots are correlated. We use 4 standard deviations to identify
the bots: Standard Deviation of average Size of Packets sent
(SDSP), Standard Deviation of Packets sent (SDP), Standard
Deviation of Bytes sent (SDB) and Standard Deviation of
Time interval of packets sent (SDT). When the packets sent by
different sources show similar characteristics, we mark these
sources as bots.
To ensure the correctness of raw data mentioned above,
we use blockchain to store them. In the CREDIT network,
each record must be confirmed by all C-NODEs before being
written on blockchain. The consensus algorithm picks out a
C-NODE to package all transactions and generate the next

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

3543

block. This is a decentralized process, since the node chosen
as the bookkeeping node is completely random in each round,
making it challenging for an attacker to tamper data.
E. Attack Detection Module
This module is used to detect DDoS-LFA. The traffic
features change in an irregular way during DDoS-LFA, which
is quite different from features in normal network. Therefore,
we can find abnormality through detecting the change point.
The selected features are shown below:
• LBU: When congestion occurs, LBU increases sharply,
which can be easily calculated through dividing the receiving/sending packet rate by link bandwidth.
• PKT: PKT can be easily obtained from receiving/sending
interface. It will rise when the attack occurs.
• RTT: By sending ping packets to neighbors periodically,
RTT can be obtained. It will increase when links are blocked.
Since the ping packet size is small, it won’t affect the link
bandwidth.
The running process of this module is divided into the startup and smooth-running phases. In start-up, the C-NODE uses
the LBU (or PKT) obtained from blockchain to train a credible
prediction model, so that it can predict the link features of
a normal network. In smooth-running, the C-NODE utilizes
the well-trained model to make prediction. Once the extracted
LBU (or PKT) is significantly different from the predicted
data, an LBU (or PKT) alarm will be raised. If both the LBU
and PKT alarms are raised and the RTT value goes up, an
attack alarm is triggered. The detection and prediction process
is elaborated in Section IV-C.
F. Source Identification Module
This module is used to identify suspicious bots. The packet
sending rates, receiving interval and bandwidth consumption are semblable during DDoS-LFA, because the adversary
launches traffic at a constant rate with an army of bots. Since
standard deviation measures the dispersion of a set of values,
a low standard deviation indicates that the values tend to be
close to the average value, while a high standard deviation
indicates that the values are spread out over a wide range.
Bots will show similar characteristics, which means they have
similar standard deviations and the values of these standard
deviations are small. Therefore, we choose standard deviation
to facilitate the identification of bots.
When an attack alarm is triggered, each C-NODE calculates
the SDSP, SDP, SDB and SDT of all sources. Then, the
potential bot list can be obtained by analyzing the similarity
of pairwise sources. After that, each C-NODE uploads its list
to the blockchain, and the blockchain will take the intersection
of all source lists as the final result. The calculation process
is elaborated in Section IV-D.
G. Attack Mitigation Module
Given the final list of suspicious sources, the blockchain
delivers it to all C-NODEs, which will mitigate congestion
according to the following rules: If the C-NODE linked to the
congested link has an alternate link with low LBU, it reroutes

Fig. 5.

Vertex Cover Problem and Set Cover Problem.

the traffic sent by the suspicious sources to the alternative
link. Otherwise, it drop the packets. By employing these rules,
the congestion can be controlled without affecting the packets
from normal sources.
IV. K EY A LGORITHMS OF CREDIT
A. Node Selection Algorithm Based on Greedy Strategy
1) Problem Definition: Recalling Section III-B, we aim to
select a few nodes as C-NODEs, so as to save computing and
storage resources of routers, as well as minimize the amount of
content stored in the blockchain. The selection strategy must
guarantee that each link is connected to at least 1 C-NODE.
The selection problem is a Vertex Cover Problem (VCP). Take
Fig. 5(a) as an example, there are 5 vertexes and 5 edges. The
goal of VCP is to find out the minimum set of nodes that can
cover all links. It is observed that choosing b and d is the
optimal solution.
A VCP can be solved by formulating it into a Set
Cover Problem (SCP), which contains a set of elements,
E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , en }, and a set of subsets of E, S =
{S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm }, where Si = {ek , ek +1 , . . .} and the union
of Si will give E. The SCP is to find a collection C, which
is the smallest subset of S and covers all elements in E. To
translate VCP into SCP, each vertex n is regarded as a subset
Sn , and the edge en linked to n is added to the corresponding
subsets Sn . For example, as shown in Fig. 5, the vertex a
and b are regarded as subset Sa and Sb , respectively. Both of
them have an edge e1 , hence the element 1 is added to Sa
and Sb . Repeat the above steps until all the edges are added
to the corresponding subsets. At last, Fig. 5(a) is transferred
to Fig. 5(b).
2) Selection Strategy: The SCP has a greedy solution,
i.e., if E contains elements not covered by C, the set Sn which
contains the largest number of elements should be obtained
and added to C. We apply this solution to our node selection
scheme.
The solution is illustrated based on a more complicated
example in Fig. 6. Firstly, the edge nodes of the local network
are marked as C-NODEs (n3 , n15 , n16 and n17 ), which make
up the initial CREDIT network and will participate in the
later consensus process. Then, the smart contract calculates
the number of neighbors of the remaining nodes (hereinafter

3544

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

C-NODE selection strategy.

referred to as degree, e.g., the degree of n11 is 8), and
ranks them in a decreasing order based on their degrees.
Next, the smart contract marks the node with the highest
degree as C-NODE if its status is U-NODE, or ignores it
otherwise (e.g., n11 is marked as C-NODE). Later, check
C-NODE’s neighbours from neighbour table. If the status of
a neighbouring node is U-NODE and that node has at least
one other neighbour with the status of C-NODE, then mark
it as N-NODE (n5 is a neighbour of n11 and is adjacent to
another C-NODE n3 , hence n5 is categorized as an N-NODE).
Similarly, if the status of a neighbour is C-NODE and it has
only one neighbour which is a C-NODE, also classify it as an
N-NODE (when both n4 and n7 are labeled as C-NODE, n4
will be updated to a N-NODE). In other cases, the neighbour
node is ignored, with its original status unchanged. Repeat
the process until all remaining nodes have been selected and
marked as C-NODE or N-NODE. Thus, no U-NODE will be
left. Then, all the selected nodes have a connection to every
link. We detail the strategy in Algorithm 1. Note that once a
node is marked as C-NODE, it gets involved in the consensus
process.
The consensus process consists of two steps. First, all the
edge nodes, which are the initial C-NODEs, use Proof of Stake
(PoS) for consensus. PoS is a widely used consensus mechanism in blockchain, which allocates the block creation rights
based on stakes of the nodes rather than their computational
power. Next, the smart contract selects new C-NODEs, and
the selected nodes participate in the consensus process. After
the selection process is finished, all the C-NODEs that have
passed the consensus verification are obtained.
It has been proved that the greedy algorithm has a polynomial time complexity [51]. In the topology shown in Fig. 6,
it only takes about 1 second to select C-NODEs.
B. Fragile Link Analysis Algorithm Based on Traffic Density
Since the links with high flow density are more likely to
be attacked, the potential target links can be identified by
calculating the flow density of all links. Then, monitoring
module can be deployed on these links. The flow density of
a link is defined as the number of flows that can be created
through that link. It can be computed as follows.
In the time slot t, when a C-NODE n sends a flow to a port
(i.e., to a link) or receives a flow from a port (i.e., from a link),
it checks whether the destination IP matches the IPs of our
protected zone. If it matches, go to the next step, which can

Algorithm 1 C-NODE Selection Strategy
Input:
Status Table (ST );
Neighbour Table (NT );
Output:
Final Status Table (FST ): A table indicating the final
status of all nodes;
1: ST ← Edge nodes marked as C-NODEs;
2: Calculate degree of all nodes except for edge nodes;
3: Rank the nodes in a decreasing order based on their
degree, pick the top one node n;
4: if ST (n) == U-NODE then
5:
ST ← n marked as C-NODE;
6: end if
7: Check n  s neighbours list NLn ← NT ;
8: for each node m in NLn do
9:
check m  s neighbours list NLm ← NT ;
10:
if ST (m) == U-NODE then
11:
for each node q in NLm do
12:
if ST (q) == C-NODE then
13:
ST ← m marked as N-NODE;
14:
break;
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
else if ST (m) == C-NODE then
18:
if NLm has only one element and ST (e) == CNODE then
19:
ST ← m marked as N-NODE;
20:
end if
21:
end if
22: end for
23: Repeat above process until all links are involved;
24: Return Final Status Table.

be divided into two cases. In one case, n is the sender. It will
check whether the next-hop is a C-NODE. If not, it records the
source IP and destination IP of the flow; Otherwise, it ignores
it. In the other case, n is the receiver. It records the source IP
and destination IP. Then the C-NODE adds those IPs to the
Source Space (called SSi , where i means link number) and
Destination Space (called DSi ) respectively. At the end of this
time slot, the weight of linki is calculated by
Wi = |SSi | × |DSi |,

(1)

where |SSi | represents the cardinality of SSi . Consider the
example in Fig. 6, n8 has three links, linkn3 −n8 , linkn6 −n8
and linkn8 −n11 . In time slot t, n8 receives three flows from
linkn3 −n8 , the flows’ IP space is as follows:
SSn3 −n8 = {32.0.0.25, 32.0.0.181},
DSn3 −n8 = {240.0.0.9, 240.0.0.41},
hence the weight of linkn3 −n8 is 4. The greater the weight
value of a link, the more likely it is to be a target link. We
detail the strategy in Algorithm 2. By analyzing the flows,
the potential target links can be quickly identified before the
attack, hence improving attack detection efficiency.

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

Algorithm 2 Fragile Link Analysis Strategy
Input:
Link Table (LT );
C-NODE Table (CT ): A table indicating all C-NODEs;
Flow Table (FT ): A table indicating flows recorded by
each C-NODE;
Output:
Fragile Link List (FL): A list of potential target links;
1: for each C-NODE n in CT do
2:
for each flow f in FT do
3:
n sends f to linki or receives f from linki ;
4:
if f .destination == protected zone then
5:
if n is the sender then
6:
if ST (n.next_hop) = C-NODE then
7:
SSi ← f .source;
8:
DSi ← f .destination;
9:
end if
10:
else
11:
SSi ← f .source;
12:
DSi ← f .destination;
13:
end if
14:
end if
15:
end for
16: end for
17: for each link i in LT do
18:
Wi = |SSi | × |DSi |;
19:
LT ← Wi ;
20: end for
21: Ranks LT in decreasing order based on W;
22: FL ← LT (top_l );
23: Return Fragile Link List.

3545

divided into two phases: start-up and smooth running. In the
following paragraph, we take the prediction process of LBU
as an example.
1) Start-Up: In this phase, we collect the real-time data
to train the model parameter of the prediction module.
The training process is running based on the data batch
denoted by X = [X1 , X2 , . . . , XN ], where the element Xt =
[LBUt , LBUt+1 , . . . , LBUt+τ −1 ] is a data sample of the
actual LBU values from the time slot t to t + τ − 1, N is the
number of samples used in each iteration, and τ is the length of
a sample. Further, we define the label Y = [Y1 , Y2 , . . . , YN ],
where the element Yt = [LBUt+1 , LBUt+2 , . . . , LBUt+τ ]
represents the actual values from the time slot t + 1 to t + τ .
It is expected that the output value of the C-LSTM-based
prediction module is approximately equal to the label value,
their difference thus can be used to reflect the accuracy of the
prediction.
LBUt is the input of C-LSTM, yt = f (LBUt , W ) is the
output value, where W is the model parameter that should
be optimized in each iteration, and f (·) is the function of
a C-LSTM cell. The closer yt value is to the actual value
LBUt+1 , the better C-LSTM is trained. Therefore, the goal
of the training process is to reduce the difference between yt
and LBUt+1 , and the loss function (also acts as the objective
function) can be defined as follows,
N

F (W ) =

1 
L(f (Xt , W ), Yt ),
N

(2)

t=1

where
L(f (Xt , W ), Yt ) =

t+τ −1
1 
(f (LBUi , W ) − LBUi+1 )2 .
τ
i=t

(3)
After calculating link weights, the C-NODE uploads them
to the blockchain, and the smart contract pick out the top_l
links as potential target links for monitoring. This result is
achieved by consensus algorithm among all C-NODEs, which
is credible and tamper-resistant.
C. LFA Detection Algorithm Based on Link Features
We develops a credible deep learning method, called
Credible Long Short-Term Memory (C-LSTM), to predict the
LBU (link bandwidth utilization) and PKT (packet count)
value of next time slot. Traditional LSTM is a kind of
recurrent neural network [52], which performs well with timevarying sequences by selectively remember or forget some
information. However, since LSTM uses historical data to
predict the future, it is vulnerable to false past data. To
guarantee that the module can still predict normal data even
if an attack is occurring, we make certain modifications to
improve the credibility of the input. We first define some
symbols about LBU and PKT:
• LBUi / PKTi : Real value of the time slot i;
• LBU  / PKT  : Predicted value of the time slot i;
i
i
• LBU ∗ / PKT ∗ : Modified value of the time slot i.
i
i
The symbols are stored on the blockchain to ensure the
correctness. The prediction process based on C-LSTM can be

We use the same way to train model for PKT prediction.
Note that in the CREDIT network, all the nodes should share
the same model so that the prediction result will not be affected
no matter which node is selected to conduct prediction.
2) Smooth Running: With successfully trained C-LSTM,
CREDIT system starts the attack detection in this phase. The
prediction performance of C-LSTM is greatly affected by the
input data. Using the real LBU as input during DDoS-LFA
will lead to an unfaithful result. To guarantee that the model
can make correct prediction when the attack occurs, we make
modification to the real LBU. In the time slot t, the winning
C-NODE first calculates LBUt , and then fetches the predicted
value LBUt from the block of the time slot t −1. The modified
value is calculated by
LBU ∗t = ηLBU t + (1 − η)LBUt ,

(4)

where η ∈ [0, 1] represents the trustworthiness of LBUt . If
the network is more likely to be normal and LBUt is thus
credible, η should be set larger. When the attack is occurring
and LBUt is no longer trustworthy, η should be set smaller.
The value of η is adaptively updated as follows,

δt
1
if LBU
 ≤ μ,
t
η=
(5)
LBUt
μ × δt
otherwise,

3546

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Algorithm 3 LFA Detection and Link Feature Prediction
(LBU) Strategy
Input:
LBUt ;
∗ , ..., LBU ∗
[LBUt−1
t−τ +1 ];
Fragile Link List (FL);
μ: Control factor of sensitive degree;
t : Number of times the abnormality occurs;
ε: Threshold of whether an attack occurs;
Output:
blockt : Latest block;
ALBU : Attack alarm of LBU;
1: All C-NODEs compete for packaging right. The winning
C-NODE will do:
2:
for each link l in FL do
3:
Calculate LBU t of l;
4:
δt = |LBU t − LBUt |
δt
5:
if LBU
 ≤ μ then
t
6:
η ← 1;
7:
t ← 0;
8:
else
LBU 
9:
η ← μ × δt t ;
10:
t ← t + 1;
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
if t ≥ ε then
14:
Raise an attack alarm ALBU ;
15:
t ← 0;
16:
end if
17:
LBUt∗ ← ηLBU t + (1 − η)LBUt ;
∗ , ..., LBU ∗
X̃t ← [LBUt∗ , LBUt−1
18:
t−τ +1 ]

19:
LBUt+1 ← clstm(X̃t , W ) ;
 .
20:
blockt ← LBUt , LUBt∗ , LBUt+1
where δt = |LBU t − LBUt | is the deviation and μ ∈ [0, 1]
is an attack threshold. The value of δt is used to determine
whether an attack is occurring, since LBUt approximately
δt
≤ μ, the
equals LBUt in a normal network. If LBU

t
network is secure and η is set as 1. Otherwise, η is inversely
proportional to δt . With LBU ∗t , we can guarantee the correct
input of C-LSTM, so that it can continue making right
prediction.
The winning C-NODE takes the τ modified values X̃t =
∗ , . . . , LBU ∗
[LBUt∗ , LBUt−1
t−τ +1 ] as the input of C-LSTM to

predict LBU t+1 . The process can be defined by



= clstm X̃t , W .
(6)
LBUt+1
To improve the fault tolerance, an indicator t is used to keep
track of the number of times that δt exceeds the threshold.
When δt exceeds the threshold consecutively, CREDIT will
regard this phenomenon as the omen of attack.
Algorithm 3 describes the LBU prediction process in detail.
When t exceeds the threshold ε, it raises an attack alarm of
LBU. Note that we use the same way to predict PKT. When
CREDIT raises both LBU alarms and PKT alarms, it checks
the RTT value. If the RTT value rises abnormally, CREDIT

determines that an attack is in progress. There is not a central
node in CREDIT. In each time slot, the bookkeeping node
selected by the consensus algorithm implements the detection
mechanism. This process is completely random. Therefore,
unless the attacker has the ability to know the selected node or
has enough computing power to control the majority of nodes
in the network, it is difficult to destroy the detection system.
D. Bots Identification Algorithm Based on Source Features
When the C-NODE raises the attack alarm, DDoS-LFA
Mitigation is triggered. In Section III we elaborate that the
packets sent by botnets have similar size and rates. If two
hosts send traffic with similar characteristics, they’re probably
controlled bots. Therefore, we can estimate the randomness
of traffic sent by various sources and identify the DDoS-LFA
bots.
For each source, we select 4 standard deviations to analyze.
The symbols used are as follows.
• bytesi : bytes sent by a source during the time slot i;
• pakcetsi : packets sent by a source during the time slot i;
• timei : time interval of 2 packets sent by a source.
SDSP (standard deviation of average size of packets sent):
Bots continually send packets with similar size, hence result
in a small SDSP. Its computational formula is as follows,
t

AVGsp =

1  bytesi
,
t
packetsi
i=1


2

bytes
 t
 i=1 packetsi i − AVGsp

(7)

.
(8)
t −1
SDP (standard deviation of packets sent): Bots continually
send traffic with the similar amount of packets in time
intervals, thus result in a small SDP. Its computational formula
is as follows,
SDSP =

t

AVGp =

1
packetsi ,
t

(9)

i=1

2
t
i=1 packetsi − AVGp

SDP =

.
(10)
t −1
SDB (standard deviation of bytes sent): Bots continually
send traffic with the similar size in time intervals, thus result
in a small SDB. Its computational formula is as follows,
t

AVGb =

1
bytesi ,
t

SDB =

(11)

i=1

t
2
i=1 (packetsi − AVGb ) .

t −1

(12)

SDT (standard deviation of time interval of packets sent):
Bots continually send traffic with a fixed period, thus result in
a small SDT. Different from the first three metrics, it does not
count the packets or bytes, but uses the sending time interval
of several packets. Its computational formula is as follows,
N

AVGt =

1 
timei ,
N
i=1

(13)

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

Algorithm 4 Suspicious Source Identification Strategy
Input:
SD List: [SDSP, SDP, SDB, SDT], calculated standard
deviations of various sources;
μ: Threshold of whether 2 sources are bots;
Output:
Suspicious Source List (SL): A list of suspicious sources;
1: Gap List ← ∅;
2: for each item in SD List do
3:
if item.SDs in range (G1, G7) then
4:
Gap List ← item;
5:
end if
6: end for
7: for each element e1 in Gap List do
8:
for each element e2 in Gap List do
9:
if e1 = e2 then
10:
Calculate Se1 ,e2 ;
11:
if Se1 ,e2 ≤ μ then
12:
SL ← e1 ;
13:
SL ← e2 ;
14:
end if
15:
end if
16:
end for
17: end for
18: Return Suspicious Source List.

SDT =

N
2
i=1 (timei − AVGt ) .

N −1

(14)

The four metrics are normalized to the range of [0,
1]. To make it easier to obtain the similarity of different sources, we divide the range into 10 Gaps, which are
[0,0.1), [0.1, 0.2), . . . , [0.9, 1], respectively, and mark them as
(G1, G2, . . . , G10). Then put the metric to the appropriate
Gap. For example, if a source’s four metrics are (0.15, 0.22,
0.67, 0.8), its metrics are marked as (G1, G2, G6, G8).
After calculating the 4 metrics, each C-NODE first seeks out
the sources whose 4 metrics are between G1 and G7 because
the randomness of these sources is small. Then it calculates
the similarity of pairwise sources by

Sx1 ,x2 =

x1
x2 2
4
i=1 Gapi − Gapi

4

,

(15)

where Gapix means the x-th source’s i-th metric. If S is
less than the threshold, the two sources x1 and x2 are
likely to be bots. To save the calculation time, it no longer
calculates Sx1 ,x3 if both Sx1 ,x2 and Sx2 ,x3 are small, which
means that if x1 and x2 are alike, x2 and x3 are alike, it
estimates that x1 and x3 are alike. The detailed calculation
scheme is shown in Algorithm 4. After each C-NODE finishes
calculation and gets the suspicious sources, the smart contract
will take the intersection of all the sources, which ensures that
some legitimate sources will not be mistakenly identified as
malicious ones.

Fig. 7.

3547

Network topology for our experiments.

V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the
performance of CREDIT. First, we introduce our experimental
environment, including building test range, generating normal
traffic and attack traffic, as well as displaying the result of
CREDIT Node Selection and Fragile Link Analysis. Then,
we evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms and
compare them with some existing works. At last, we interpret
the overhead of the CREDIT system.
A. Experimental Environment
1) Testbed: Fig. 7 is the topology of our testbed, which
is the campus network topology of the University of Science
and Technology of China (USTC). In Fig. 7, the green nodes
are routers that are connected to other terminals or network
devices. For example, the node of New Campus denotes the
core router in the New Campus of USTC, which is connected
to thousands of personal computers and cell phones. In our
experiment, this node is re-built via a virtual machine using
the system of ubuntu 16.04 with 8-core CPU, 16GB memory,
and 40GB disk space. The connected devices are simulated
by the captured traffic shown in ns4.ustc.edu.cn. The white
nodes are primary routers that gather traffic, and router 3 is
the gateway directly connected to the Internet. The gray nodes
are hosts that send traffic to the campus network, where n = 6
and hosts 1, 2, . . . , 6 are CREATE2(IPv6), CREATE(IPv4),
ChinaTelCom, ChinaUnionCom, ChinaMobileCom and
CSTNET, respectively.
We build the blockchain system based on Ethereum in
CENI platform. On this platform, users can create real nodes
(virtual machines or VSR routers) located on different regional
servers. They can configure system settings, CPUs, storage,
network segments, and establish connections between nodes
by configuring bandwidth, packet loss rate, latency, and other
parameters. Tcpdump and “/proc/net/dev” are used for nodes
to monitor network traffic. Tcpdump is a packet capture and
analysis tool that can capture packets in real-time, providing
information about the time, type, and length of the received
packets on the network interface. “/proc/net/dev” is a tool
for reading network statistics information, allowing real-time
monitoring of traffic and providing information about the
number of packets received, bytes transferred, and packet loss
of the network within a certain period. The iptables is used to
filter packets. When a packet enters the network card, iptables

3548

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

The LBU and PKT of some links.

will processes the packet based on the method defined by the
rules.
2) Generation of Traffic: We extract the real world traffic
of USTC campus network and apply it as the normal traffic
in the testbed. The LBU and PKT of some links are shown
in Fig. 8. We also generate attack traffic to flood the link.
We define 2 variables, host-server pair (pair for short)
to characterize the scale of the attack, λ to represent the
incremental speed at which each host sends packets to the
server, that is, each host will increase the sending traffic at
the speed of λ until the aggregated flows are slightly higher
than the link bandwidth. For example, if pair = 100, λ = 4, it
means that there are 100 host-server pairs in total. Each host
sends traffic at the rate of 4 Kbps until the target link congests.
3) CREDIT Node Selection Result: In our testbed, the
green nodes, Router 1 and Router 3 are C-NODEs, who are
responsible for detecting and mitigating the attack.
4) Fragile Link Analysis Result: In our testbed, L1 and L2
are recognized as fragile links. Router 1 and Router 3 will
conduct detection and mitigation schemes in these 2 links.
5) Other Parameters: The learning rate and epoch of
LSTM are set as 0.006 and 500 respectively. The difficulty
in the genesis block is set as 0x400000. When configuring
a private blockchain, the difficulty value can be adjusted
according to the needs.
6) Workflow: The CREDIT deployed on our testbed works
as follows: Firstly, the network administrator performs initialization process, selects the edge nodes marked in green in
Fig. 7 as C-NODEs, and generate the status table, neighbour
table and link table on smart contract of the blockchain.
Then, with the help of CREDIT Node Selection module,
the blockchain selects Router 1 and Router 3 to add them

to the CREDIT nodes, which are responsible for detecting
and mitigating attacks. Next, the CREDIT nodes conduct
Fragile Links Analysis module, pick out L1 and L2 as fragile
links to be monitored. Afterwards, all C-NODEs periodically
extract features of L1 and L2, upload them to blockchain
and utilize these features to identify potential attacks. Once
DDos-LFA attacks from identified bots are detected on L1
and L2, the CREDIT nodes connected to them (i.e., Router
1 and Router 3) mitigate congestion by reroute or drop
packets.
B. Existing Work
We compare the performance of CREDIT with
Balance [53], Woodpecker [14] and LFADefender [54]. The
existing algorithms are introduced as follows:
1) Balance: It uses SDN switches to collect 9 metrics
of each source and calculates the Shannon’s entropy. If the
entropy is lower than the attack threshold, Balance determines
that the congestion is due to DDoS-LFA. Then Balance selects
the sources with similar characteristics and records them as
bots.
2) Woodpecker: It evaluates the importance of links on
the current flow path, and calculates the weight of each link
when congestion occurs. If the weight is greater than the
attack threshold, Woodpecker decides that there is an attack.
Then Woodpecker identifies the IP addresses which appear on
several congested links as bots.
3) LFADefender: It first analyzes the links that may be
regarded as targets, then records the number of traceroute
packets sent by each source and determines whether the source
is a bot based on the attack threshold.

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

Fig. 9.

3549

Precision, false positive rate, recall and F measure varying with λ and pair.

C. Performance of CREDIT
1) Result of DDoS-LFA Detection: We adopt the precision
(P), false positive rate (FPR), recall (R) and F measure (F) to
measure the detection accuracy of CREDIT. The formulas are
as follows:
TP
,
TP + FP
FP
,
FPR =
FP + TN
TP
,
R=
TP + FN
2 × TP
,
F =
2 × TP + FP + FN
P =

(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)

where TP means the system correctly discerns an abnormal
event as attack, FP means the system misjudges a legal event
as attack, TN means the system accurately recognizes an
abnormal event as legitimate traffic, and FN means the system
falsely recognizes an abnormal event as legitimate traffic.
We use different (λ, pair) to test the 4 metrics of CREDIT.
Fig. 9(a) shows the change pattern in precision over λ and
pair. When the λ value is settled, the precision rises with
the increase of the pair value. This is because the larger
the pair value is, the more attack flows there are. Hence
the traffic will increase in a short period of time, making
it easier to detect the attack. Analogously, when the pair
value is settled, the larger the λ value is, the larger the traffic
sent by each pair is, making it easier to find out exceptions.
In addition, precision eventually approaches 100%, indicating

that the CREDIT detection algorithm has a high accuracy.
Fig. 9(b) is false positive rate varying with λ and pair. A high
FPR means that the system is likely to mistakenly identify a
normal flow as an attacked one. When the pair value is low,
FPR is high when λ = 4. This is because when the number
of hosts is small, link congestion occurs after a long period
of time. However, CREDIT misjudges the traffic as an attack
before congestion, resulting in a high FPR. Fig. 9(c) is the
change in recall over λ and pair. A low recall indicates that
the system is unresponsive, which means that it takes longer
to detect the attack. As can be seen from the result, when the
λ value is small, the recall is very high. The reason is that
the abnormal traffic lasts for a long time, so CREDIT can
quickly detect attacks. In addition, even if the λ value is large,
recall can maintain 90% and above, indicating that CREDIT
system is sensitive to attacks. Fig. 9(d) is F measure varying
with λ and pair. F value goes up with the increase of the
pair value, and finally tends to 100%. Similar to precision,
when the pair and λ value is large, the traffic is more likely
to appear abnormal, so it is easier to be detected by CREDIT.
LFA adversary uses many bots to send low-rate traffic to
flood target links, which means that the λ value is small while
the pair value is large in the attack. As can be seen from the
experimental results, the CREDIT system has high precision,
recall and F1 measure, as well as low false positive rate.
We test the detection performance between CREDIT,
Balance and Woodpecker. Since the traffic rate sent by the
DDoS-LFA attacker is low, we set the λ value to 4kbps in
this experiment, and evaluate the influence of the pair value

3550

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 10.

Comparison of precision, false positive rate, recall and F measure between CREDIT, Balance and Woodpecker.

Fig. 11.

Identification rate and false identification rate between CREDIT, Balance, Woodpecker and LFADefender.

on the 3 mechanisms. In addition, a small amount of data
used by Balance and Woodpecker is tampered randomly in
this experiment to evaluate the effect of data reliability on the
detection mechanism.
Fig. 10(a) shows the comparison of precision. When the
pair value is small, the effect of Balance and Woodpecker
is slightly better than that of CREDIT. However, when
the pair value increases, the precision of CREDIT is significantly higher than that of Balance and Woodpecker.
Besides, when we randomly tamper with the data used by
Balance and Woodpecker, their precision drop dramatically.

Fig. 10(b) shows the comparison of false positive rate. FPR
of CREDIT is higher than any other schemes when the
pair value is small. When the pair value increases, the
FPR of CREDIT tends to 0, while that of Balance and
Woodpecker keep large. Besides, if the data is tampered
with, the FPR of Balance has a sharp increase, and the
FPR of Woodpecker keeps large too, which indicates that the
2 mechanisms have a high demand for data reliability, while
the CREDIT is not affected by tampering due to the use of
blockchain. Fig. 10(c) and Fig. 10(d) show the comparison
between recall and F measure, and it can be seen that the

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

Fig. 12.

3551

Time cost of functions in each module.

detection effect of CREDIT is superior than Balance and
Woodpecker.
2) Result of Source Identification: We adopt the attack
source identification rate (IR) and false identification rate
(FIR) to evaluate the performance. High IR and low FIR
indicate that the system has good attack source identification
performance and can discard attack traffic in time to alleviate
congestion. The calculation formulas are as follows:
IB
,
TB
MIH
,
FIR =
TH
IR =

(20)
(21)

where IB means the number of identified bots, TB means the
total number of bots, MIH means the number of normal hosts
misjudged as bots, and TH means the total number of normal
hosts.

Fig. 11(a) and Fig. 11(b) show the comparison results
of attack source identification between CREDIT, Balance,
Woodpecker and LFADefender. It can be seen from the results
that the IR of 4 schemes reach over 80%, and the performance
of CREDIT is better than that of Balance and LFADefender,
but is worse than that of Woodpecker when pair value is large.
The reasons are as follows: Balance extracts nine features,
analyzes the possible attack sources for each feature, and takes
intersection of the suspicious sources to obtain the bots list.
This method may omit some bots. Because there may be a
malicious source that exhibits the characteristics of a bot under
one feature, and display the characteristics of a normal host
under another. LFADefender uses the number of traceroute
packet to identify attack sources. While the adversary can
deliberately reduce the number of packets to avoid being found
out. Therefore, this method is hard to achieve 100% accuracy.
Woodpecker recognizes the IP addresses that simultaneously

3552

Fig. 13.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Extra traffic generated by blockchain.

appears in many congested links as bots. This method is
effective when there are numerous sources. Hence the result
of Woodpecker shows a significant rise. Although the IR of
Woodpecker is higher than that of CREDIT, its FIR shows a
bad performance, which means Woodpecker is likely to regard
legitimate users as bots. Based on the 2 results, we conclude
that CREDIT has a good effect on identifying bots.
3) Overhead: We test the execution delay of each function of algorithm, as illustrated in Fig. 12. Execution time
of each algorithm is primarily consumed by functions that
involve multiple iterations of loops or complex computations,
such as the select_node function in the node deployment
module, which consumes 774 milliseconds of latency, the
sort_link function in the link analysis module with a delay
of 442 milliseconds, and the identify_link function taking
657 milliseconds. Additionally, the attack_judge function in
the attack detection module and bot_judge function in the
attack source identification module consume 370 milliseconds
and 713 milliseconds respectively. These functions require
numerous steps to execute and consequently result in longer
processing times. Another significant factor contributing to
execution time is data writing operations performed by set
functions depicted in the figure; for instance, set_status within
the node deployment module incurs a delay of 45 milliseconds.
Such functions necessitate modification of contract variables
which adds additional processing time. Conversely, simple
data reading tasks take minimal time as observed with get
functions illustrated in this figure; for example, get_RTT
within the attack detection module only requires 7 milliseconds for completion. These types of functions do not modify
contract variables nor involve complex operations hence their
shorter execution times are evident. Overall results demonstrate that even for highly time-consuming functions, they
only require a few hundred milliseconds indicating efficiency
achieved through our proposed algorithm.
The extra traffic introduced by blockchain is shown in
Fig. 13. The synchronization of transactions and blocks
imposes a small amount of traffic to the network, which
is about 3kbps averagely, demonstrating that the impact on
bandwidth is negligible. Moreover, during a scheme execution,
145 transactions are used to upload data to blockchain. The

Fig. 14. Comparison of TPS and blocks forming latency between CREDIT
and BiLSTM.

size of a block is around 640 bytes. The memory consumption
for a scheme execution is approximately 90kb. For a machine
with 1GB of memory, ideally, its memory can support over
ten thousand detections. Therefore, the influence of the block
size is negligible.
4) Performance of Blockchain: We compare the TPS of
blockchain and latency in forming blocks between CREDIT
and BiLSTM [55], as illustrated in Fig. 14. TPS means
transactions per second which is an important metric for
measuring the throughput of a blockchain. Latency indicates
the time it takes for a block to be confirmed and added to the
blockchain. It can be seen that the two algorithm have similar
performance, the maximum TPS of blockchain is about 60
and the latency of forming blocks ranges from 1 second to
7 seconds.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we propose a link flooding attack defense
scheme, CREDIT, that leverages blockchain and LSTM to
perform target-link analysis, DDoS-LFA detection, dangerous
source identification and DDoS-LFA mitigation. By exploiting the fact of DDoS-LFA that the adversary will control
multiple bots to send legitimate-like flows, leading to a sudden
increase of LBU and PKT, we design the LSTM model
so that all computing nodes in the CREDIT network can
conduct detection schemes. Moreover, we use correlation
analysis to infer the potential target links and suspected
sources, so that the protected region can take timely precautions and mitigate the congestion. CREDIT is the first
application of blockchain to the detection of complex DDoSLFA, which can both detect and migrate suspicious traffic
based on the blockchain, even in the presence of deceptive
attackers. CREDIT is more reliable, flexible, effective and
low-cost than traditional non-blockchain-based DDoS-LFA
defense methods, which demonstrates the huge potential of the
combination of blockchain and AI in the field of cybersecurity
defense. We implement CREDIT in CENI with Ethereum to
evaluate its efficiency and overhead. The result demonstrates
that CREDIT can effectively detect DDoS-LFA with a low
false positive rate and high detection rate, as well as low
overhead.

JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH

R EFERENCES
[1] H. Luo, Z. Liu, and S. Zhang, “Preventing DDoS flooding attacks with
cryptographic path identifiers in future Internet,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1690–1704, Jun. 2022.
[2] A. Praseed and P. S. Thilagam, “Multiplexed asymmetric attacks: Nextgeneration DDoS on HTTP/2 servers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 15, pp. 1790–1800, 2019.
[3] S. Kottler. “February 28th DDoS incident report.” 2018. [Online].
Available: https://github.blog/2018-03-01-DDoS-incident-report/
[4] C. Cimpanu. “AWS said it mitigated a 2.3 Tbps DDoS attack, the
largest ever.” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.zdnet.com/article/
aws-said-it-mitigated-a-2-3-tbps-ddos-attack-the-largest-ever
[5] M. Geva, A. Herzberg, and Y. Gev, “Bandwidth distributed denial of
service: Attacks and defenses,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 54–61, Feb. 2014.
[6] J. Xing, J. Cai, B. Zhou, and C. Wu, “A deep ConvNet-based countermeasure to mitigate link flooding attacks using software-defined
networks,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[7] A. Studer and A. Perrig, “The coremelt attack,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res.
Comput. Security, 2009, pp. 37–52.
[8] M. S. Kang, S. B. Lee, and V. D. Gligor, “The crossfire attack,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Security Privacy, 2013, pp. 127–141.
[9] M. S. Kang and V. D. Gligor, “Routing bottlenecks in the Internet:
Causes, exploits, and countermeasures,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Security, 2014, pp. 321–333.
[10] C. Liaskos, V. Kotronis, and X. Dimitropoulos, “A novel framework for
modeling and mitigating distributed link flooding attacks,” in Proc. 35th
IEEE INFOCOM, 2016, pp. 1–9.
[11] “DDoS impact survey reveals the actual cost of DDoS attacks.”
2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.freebuf.com/articles/network/
67107.html
[12] M. Prince. “The DDoS that knocked spamhaus offline (and how we
mitigated it).” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://blog.cloudflare.com/theDDoS-that-knocked-Spamhaus-offline-and-ho/
[13] L. Xue, X. Ma, X. Luo, E. W. W. Chan, T. T. N. Miu, and G. Gu,
“LinkScope: Toward detecting target link flooding attacks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, pp. 2423–2438, 2018.
[14] L. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Jia, and J. Wu, “Woodpecker: Detecting
and mitigating link-flooding attacks via SDN,” Comput. Netw., vol. 147,
pp. 1–13, Dec. 2018.
[15] L. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Jiang, and J. Wu, “Towards mitigating link flooding
attack via incremental SDN deployment,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Comput.
Commun. (ISCC), 2016, pp. 397–402.
[16] A. Aydeger, N. Saputro, K. Akkaya, and M. Rahman, “Mitigating
crossfire attacks using SDN-based moving target defense,” in Proc. 41st
Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN), 2016, pp. 627–630.
[17] S. B. Lee, M. S. Kang, and V. D. Gligor, “CoDef: Collaborative defense
against large-scale link-flooding attacks,” in Proc. 9th ACM Int. Conf.
Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol., 2013, pp. 417–428.
[18] T. Hirayama, K. Toyoda, and I. Sasase, “Fast target link flooding attack
detection scheme by analyzing traceroute packets flow,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Workshop Inf. Forensics Security, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[19] J. Takeuchi and K. Yamanishi, “A unifying framework for detecting
outliers and change points from time series,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 482–492, Apr. 2006.
[20] M. S. Kang, V. D. Gligor, and V. Sekar, “SPIFFY: Inducing costdetectability tradeoffs for persistent link-flooding attacks,” in Proc. 23rd
Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp. (NDSS), 2016, pp. 53–55.
[21] P. Xiao, Z. Li, H. Qi, W. Qu, and H. Yu, “An efficient DDoS detection
with bloom filter in SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Security Priv.
Comput. Commun., 2016, pp. 1–6.
[22] J. Zheng, Q. Li, G. Gu, J. Cao, D. K. Y. Yau, and J. Wu “Realtime DDoS
defense using COTS SDN switches via adaptive correlation analysis,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, pp. 1838–1853, 2018.
[23] W. Rafique, X. He, Z. Liu, Y. Sun, and W. Dou, “CFADefense: A
security solution to detect and mitigate crossfire attacks in softwaredefined IoT-edge infrastructure,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. High Perform.
Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 500–509.
[24] S. T. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper, “A survey of defense mechanisms
against distributed denial of service (DDoS) flooding attacks,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2046–2069, 4th Quart., 2013.
[25] M. N. M. Bhutta et al., “A survey on blockchain technology: Evolution,
architecture and security,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 61048–61073, 2021.
[26] M. Ul Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Anomaly detection in
blockchain networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Survey
Tut., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 289–318, 1st Quart., 2023.

3553

[27] D. Puthal, N. Malik, S. P. Mohanty, E. Kougianos, and G. Das,
“Everything you wanted to know about the blockchain: Its promise,
components, processes, and problems,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag.,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 6–14, Jul. 2018.
[28] S. Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.” 2008.
[Online]. Available: https://git.dhimmel.com/bitcoin-whitepaper/
[29] H. Hellani, A. E. Samhat, M. Chamoun, H. El Ghor, and A. Serhrouchni,
“On blockchain technology: Overview of bitcoin and future insights,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Multidiscip. Conf. Eng. Technol. (IMCET), 2018,
pp. 1–8.
[30] C. K. Frantz and M. Nowostawski, “From institutions to code: Towards
automated generation of smart contracts,” in Proc. 1st Int. Workshops
Found. Appl. Self-Syst., 2016, pp. 210–215.
[31] J. Zhou, G. Feng, and Y. Wang, “Optimal deployment mechanism of
blockchain in resource-constrained IoT systems,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8168–8177, Jun. 2022.
[32] P. P. Ray, D. Dash, K. Salah, and N. Kumar, “Blockchain for IoT-based
healthcare: Background, consensus, platforms, and use cases,” IEEE
Syst. J., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 85–94, Mar. 2021.
[33] M. Baza, M. Nabil, M. Ismail, M. Mahmoud, E. Serpedin, and
M. Ashiqur Rahman, “Blockchain-based charging coordination mechanism for smart grid energy storage units,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Blockchain, 2019, pp. 504–509.
[34] O. B. Mora, R. Rivera, V. M. Larios, J. R. Beltrán-Ramírez, R. Maciel,
and A. Ochoa, “A use case in Cybersecurity based in blockchain
to deal with the security and privacy of citizens and smart cities
Cyberinfrastructures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Smart Cities Conf. (ISC), 2018,
pp. 1–4.
[35] H. Li, R. Lu, L. Zhou, B. Yang, and X. Shen, “An efficient Merkletree-based authentication scheme for smart grid,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 655–663, Jun. 2014.
[36] G. Wood, “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction
ledger,” Ethereum, Zug, Switzerland, Yellow Paper, 2013. [Online].
Available: http://gavwood.com/paper.pdf
[37] E. Androulaki et al., “Hyperledger fabric: A distributed operating system
for permissioned blockchains,” 2018, arXiv:1801.10228.
[38] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance,” in Proc.
OSDI, 1999, pp. 173–186.
[39] G. Zhang et al., “Reaching consensus in the Byzantine empire:
A comprehensive review of BFT consensus algorithms,” 2022,
arXiv:2204.03181.
[40] M. Yin, D. Malkhi, M. K. Reiter, G. G. Gueta, and I. Abraham,
“HotStuff: BFT consensus with linearity and responsiveness,” in Proc.
ACM Symp. Princ. Distrib. Comput., 2019, pp. 347–356.
[41] G. Zhang and H.-A. Jacobsen, “Prosecutor: An efficient BFT consensus
algorithm with behavior-aware penalization against Byzantine attacks,”
in Proc. 22nd Int. Middleware Conf., 2021, pp. 52–63.
[42] G. Danezis, L. Kokoris-Kogias, A. Sonnino, and A. Spiegelman,
“Narwhal and tusk: A DAG-based mempool and efficient BFT consensus,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Conf. Comput. Syst., 2022, pp. 34–50.
[43] W. Meng, E. W. Tischhauser, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, and J. Han, “When
intrusion detection meets blockchain technology: A review,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 10179–10188, 2018.
[44] N. Alexopoulos, E. Vasilomanolakis, R. N. Ivánkó et al., “Towards
blockchain-based collaborative intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastruct. Security, 2017, pp. 107–118.
[45] B. Rodrigues, T. Bocek, A. Lareida, D. Hausheer, S. Rafati, and
B. Stiller, “A blockchain-based architecture for collaborative DDoS
mitigation with smart contracts,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Auton. Infrastruct.,
Manage. Security, 2017, pp. 16–29.
[46] L.-Y. Yeh, J.-L. Huang, T.-Y. Yen, and J.-W. Hu, “A collaborative DDoS
defense platform based on blockchain technology,” in Proc. 12th Int.
Conf. Ubi Media Comput., 2019, pp. 1–6.
[47] A. E. Z. Houda, S. A. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “Cochain-SC: An intraand inter-domain DDoS mitigation scheme based on blockchain using
SDN and smart contract,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 98893–98907, 2019.
[48] Z. Abou El Houda, A. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “Co-IoT: A collaborative
DDoS mitigation scheme in IoT environment based on blockchain using
SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6.
[49] G. Spathoulas et al., “Towards reliable integrity in blacklisting: Facing
malicious IPs in GHOST smart contracts,” in Proc. IEEE (SMC) Int.
Conf. Innov. Intell. Syst. Appl. (INISTA), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[50] M. Essaid, D. Kim, S. H. Maeng, S. Park, and H. T. Ju, “A collaborative
DDoS mitigation solution based on Ethereum smart contract and RNNLSTM,” in Proc. Asia Pac. Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., Manag. Cyber
Phys. World (APNOMS), 2019, pp. 1–6.

3554

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

[51] B. Augustin, T. Friedman, and R. Teixeira, “Measuring load-balanced
paths in the Internet,” in Proc. 7th ACM SIGCOMM Internet Meas. Conf.
(IMC), 2007, pp. 149–160.
[52] Y. Li and Y. Lu, “LSTM-BA: DDoS detection approach combining
LSTM and Bayes,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Adv. Cloud Big Data (CBD),
2019, pp. 180–185.
[53] N. Ravi, S. M. Shalinie, and D. D. J. Theres, “BALANCE: Link flooding
attack detection and mitigation via hybrid-SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1715–1729, Sep. 2020.
[54] J. Wang, R. Wen, J. Li, F. Yan, B. Zhao, and F. Yu, “Detecting and
mitigating target link-flooding attacks using SDN,” IEEE Trans. Depend.
Secure Comput., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 944–956, Dec. 2019.
[55] O. Alkadi, N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A deep
blockchain framework-enabled collaborative intrusion detection for protecting IoT and cloud networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12,
pp. 9463–9472, Jun. 2021.

Xiaofeng Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in information science
and technology from the University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in
2008 and 2013, respectively, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the School of
Information Science and Technology. He is also
with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei
Comprehensive National Science Center. His recent
research interests include discrete event dynamic
system, tensor analysis and big data, future network,
and cognitive communications.

Qianbao Shi received the M.S. degree in
information science and technology from the
University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China, in 2013, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. She is with the Department
of Automation, USTC and the Institute of Artificial
Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science
Center, Hefei. Her research interests include aod hoc
networks and unmanned aerial vehicle networks.

Hengkun Miao received the B.S. degree in
aircraft manufacturing engineering from the
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing
the M.S. degree in electronic and information
engineering with the University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei, China. He is
also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.
His research interests include edge computing,
blockchain, space-air-ground network, computation
offloading, and resource allocation.

Wanqin Cao received the M.S. degree in
information science and technology from the
University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China, in 2022. Her research interests include
the blockchain technology and networks security.

Huasen He (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in automation from the University of Science
and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
in 2013, and the M.S. degree in signal processing
and communications and the Ph.D. degree in digital
communications from the University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, U.K., in 2014 and 2018, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Research Fellow with
the School of Information Science and Technology,
USTC. He is also with the Institute of Artificial
Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science
Center. His research interests include future networks, network modeling, and
optimization.

Shuangwu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
in 2011 and 2016, respectively, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the School
of Information Science and Technology. He is
also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center. His
research interests include multimedia communications, future network, and stochastic optimization.

Jian Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
in 2001 and 2006, respectively, where he is currently a Professor with the School of Information
Science and Technology. He is also with the Institute
of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive
National Science Center. His research interests
include future network, distributed system design,
modeling and optimization, multimedia over wired
and wireless, and stochastic optimization. Dr. Yang
received the Lu Jia-Xi Young Talent Award from the Chinese Academy of
Sciences in 2009.