Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for fine-grained
encrypted traffic classification
Xinbo Han a,b , Guizhong Xu c , Meng Zhang a,b , Zheng Yang a,b , Ziyang Yu a,b , Weiqing Huang a,b ,
Chen Meng a ,∗
a

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

b School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
c Information Science Academy of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, Beijing, China

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Encrypted traffic classification
Deep learning
Graph neural networks
Dual-embedding
Traffic interaction graph

ABSTRACT
Nowadays, most network traffic is encrypted, which protects user privacy but complicates the task of analyzing
and classifying encrypted traffic. Identifying the specific categories of encrypted traffic, such as application
type or even the specific application, is of great significance for advanced network services and network
security management. Many existing methods for encrypted traffic classification rely on machine learning
and deep learning techniques, but they exhibit certain shortcomings. A considerable number of these methods
rely on statistical features, which may lose their relevance as networks evolve and lead to the loss of important
information. Additionally, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) face
limitations in extracting features from encrypted traffic, specifically, their inability to learn traffic interaction
information within a network flow.
To address these challenges, we propose a model called Dual Embedding with Graph Neural Networks
(DE-GNN) for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification. Based on the byte-packet-flow structure of network
traffic, we present a dual embedding layer that encodes the packet header and payload separately using raw
bytes, which allows subsequent processes to run separately and in parallel. Then, we develop the PacketCNN
to extract packet-level features from both the header and payload. Afterwards, we construct a network
flow as a Traffic Interaction Graphs (TIG) and utilize Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to extract flow-level
features. Finally, an adaptive deep feature fusion process is applied to combine flow-level features from the
header and payload, creating a robust representation for classification. Extensive experiments are conducted
on two well-known datasets, ISCX-VPN2016 and ISCX-Tor2016, to verify our approach. The experimental
results demonstrate that DE-GNN effectively identifies the type of encrypted traffic, outperforming baselines
significantly.

1. Introduction
Identifying traffic types is a fundamental and critical ability for
network research. Traffic classification, the categorization of network
traffic into appropriate classes, is important to many applications, such
as quality of service (QoS) control, pricing, resource usage planning,
malware detection, and intrusion detection [1]. In recent times, to
protect user privacy and anonymity, various encryption techniques
are used to encrypt the transmission of network traffic [2]. While
this ensures the privacy and anonymity for users, it complicates the
task of analyzing and classifying network traffic. Furthermore, privacyenhanced tools, such as VPN and Tor [3], are employed to circumvent
Internet censorship measures, which further increase the difficulty of

classifying encrypted traffic. Consequently, the task of extracting valuable information from encrypted traffic presents a formidable challenge
in the pursuit of accurate classification.
Early traffic classification methods included port-based techniques
and Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) [4–6]. However, with the proliferation of applications utilizing non-standard interfaces or dynamically
assigned ports, the effectiveness of port-based methods has significantly
waned. The Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) method involves a thorough
examination and analysis of network packets to detect and identify specific protocols, applications, content, or behaviors within network traffic. While DPI has outperformed port-based detection methods, it does

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: hanxinbo@iie.ac.cn (X. Han), xuguizhong@cetc.com.cn (G. Xu), zhangmeng@iie.ac.cn (M. Zhang), yangzheng@iie.ac.cn (Z. Yang),
yuziyang@iie.ac.cn (Z. Yu), huangweiqing@iie.ac.cn (W. Huang), mengchen@iie.ac.cn (C. Meng).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110372
Received 21 November 2023; Received in revised form 26 February 2024; Accepted 25 March 2024
Available online 27 March 2024
1389-1286/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.

• We utilize a CNN structure to learn packet-level representations
from raw bytes, reducing the impact of noise and redundant data
compared to using the original byte vectors directly.
• We construct network flows in the form of a Traffic Interaction Graph, incorporating information on behavioral patterns and
packet-level features, and leverage Graph Neural Networks to
acquire flow-level features.
• To assess the effectiveness of our model, we perform a series of
experiments. The experimental results affirm the efficacy of our
approach.

incur substantial computational overhead and faces certain limitations
when dealing with encrypted traffic [7]. To address these challenges,
some have proposed a two-step approach, combining traffic decryption
with DPI [8–11]. Nevertheless, this approach undeniably amplifies the
computational load and raises concerns about privacy implications,
which contradicts the original purpose of traffic encryption.
The advancement of artificial intelligence technology has ushered
in a new era of traffic classification methods, primarily centered on the
utilization of machine learning and deep learning algorithms. Machine
learning approaches employing statistical features have shown promising outcomes for both encrypted and non-encrypted traffic [12–14].
However, these algorithms heavily rely on manually crafted features by
domain experts. As network dynamics evolve, previously designed features may lose their effectiveness, thus imposing significant constraints
on machine learning-based traffic classification methods. Additionally,
statistical features often necessitate observing the entire network flow,
making them incapable of classifying traffic during the initial stages
of network traffic generation [1]. As a branch of machine learning,
deep learning has demonstrated substantial potential in the realm of
encrypted traffic classification [15–17]. Deep learning techniques no
longer depend on manual feature engineering, as they can automatically extract relevant features from raw data. Embracing an end-to-end
learning paradigm, deep learning directly learns from the original input
data to produce the desired output, bypassing traditional practices of
decomposing the problem into smaller subproblems such as feature
selection and classification. This characteristic empowers deep learning
algorithms to comprehensively tackle the complexities associated with
traffic classification tasks [1]. In light of the instability of statistical
features, we use raw bytes as the input of the model in this paper.
The current encrypted traffic classification methods based on deep
learning have demonstrated remarkable capabilities. Many of these
methods harness the power of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to capture spatial and temporal
features within traffic data. Nevertheless, two primary flaws persist
in current deep learning-based approaches: (1) Limited information
capture. Due to the encryption of information, CNN and RNN exhibit constraints in effectively extracting data from encrypted traffic.
Additionally, CNN and RNN focus on temporal and spatial characteristics, often overlooking traffic interaction mode. (2) Mix usage of
the header and payload. Approaches employing packet bytes consider the header and payload as a unified entity for learning, without
differentiating their distinct representations and functions.
In this paper, we propose a model called Dual Embedding with
Graph Neural Network (DE-GNN) for encrypted traffic classification.
DE-GNN primarily comprises four main components, as illustrated
in Fig. 1: Dual Embedding, Packet-level Traffic Learning, Flow-level
Graph Construction and Learning, and Adaptive Deep Feature Fusion.
Based on the byte-packet-flow structure of network traffic, the dual
embedding treats the header and payload bytes of a packet separately
and encodes them using one-hot encoding. Subsequently, two separate
PacketCNNs are employed to extract packet-level features for both the
header and payload. Following this, flow-level features are obtained
through the construction of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) and
learning from GNN. The flow-level features of the header and payload
are then integrated into a comprehensive vector for the entire flow using adaptive deep feature fusion, which is used for traffic classification.
In the experimental section, we employ two publicly available datasets,
namely, ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor, to conduct a series of experiments
aimed at demonstrating the validity and effectiveness of our model.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
the task description and the related works on encrypted traffic classification; Section 3 describes our model in detail; Section 4 introduces
relevant experiments and analyzes the results; We discuss limitations
and future works in Section 5 and conclude the paper in Section 6.
2. Task description and related works
At present, a significant volume of research in the field of encrypted
traffic classification centers on the utilization of machine learning
and deep learning models. In the subsequent section, we describe the
encrypted traffic classification task and briefly review existing studies.
2.1. Task description
The encrypted traffic classification task aims to differentiate the
traffic generated from various sources (e.g., applications, web pages,
or services) by using the information of traffic packets captured by
professional software or programs. In this paper, our focus is on classifying in-app traffic behavior, distinguishing fine-grained encrypted
traffic actions such as video, chat, and file transfer.
We define a flow as an sample, a common practice in many traffic
classification studies [18–21]. A flow comprises request and response
packets exchanged between two communicating entities in a network,
sharing the same quintuple (src_ip, src_port, dst_ip, dst_port, protocol)
over a specific period. Assume that there are 𝑀 training samples and
𝑁 categories in total, let a flow sample be a sequence 𝑙 = [𝑝1 , 𝑝2 , … , 𝑝𝑛 ],
where n is the packet sequence length and 𝑝𝑖 is the 𝑖th packet of the
flow. The 𝑖th packet is represented as 𝑝𝑖 = [𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , … , 𝑏𝑚 ], where m is the
byte sequence length and 𝑏𝑗 is the 𝑗th byte value of 𝑖th packet. In other
words, network traffic exhibits a hierarchical structure: byte-packetflow. According to the definition above, the encrypted classification
task can be described formally as predicting the category 𝐶𝑠 of an
unseen test sample 𝑓𝑠 with a designed and well-trained end-to-end
model 𝐹 (𝑓𝑠 ) on M training samples, where 𝐶𝑠 = 0, 1, … , 𝑁 − 1.
2.2. Related works
Machine learning based encrypted traffic classification. Numerous
methods within the realm of encrypted traffic classification leverage
statistical features to characterize packet or flow properties, employing
classical machine learning models for the task of traffic classification.
Taylor et al. [22] introduced AppScanner, a classification model that
utilizes the random forest algorithm to distinguish mobile apps based
on statistical features extracted from flow data. Liu et al. [23] proposed
a multi-attribute Markov probability model, which integrates message
type sequence and packet length, to classify traffic applications. Ede
et al. [24] provided a method called FlowPrint for identifying mobile applications, which combines destination-based clustering, browser
isolation, and pattern recognition in a semi-supervised manner to perform application fingerprinting. Taylor et al. [25] explored how a
passive eavesdropper can discern smartphone apps by analyzing the
network traffic they transmit. The authors employ machine learning
techniques to identify smartphone apps based on side-channel data,
including packet size and direction, despite the payload of packets

• We propose DE-GNN, a model that separately processes packet
headers and payloads and employs a hierarchical structure for a
comprehensive study of fine-grained encrypted traffic classification.
2

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.

(2) Separate learning of packet headers and payloads: Most methods
overlook the distinction between packet headers and payloads. Our
method independently learns both headers and payloads.
(3) Traffic behavioral patterns: In addition to utilizing CNN for
learning information from raw bytes, we also focus on the interaction
behavior between both parties. We construct a Traffic Interaction Graph
and apply GNN for graph learning.

being concealed by SSL/TLS encryption. Shen et al. [20] introduced
a webpage fingerprinting method called FineWP, which involves the
accumulation of packet lengths and extraction of block, sequence, and
statistical features. These features are subsequently input into machine
learning algorithms such as random forest, decision tree, and k-nearest
neighbors to create webpage fingerprints. Saber et al. [26] proposed
a combination of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and support
vector machines for traffic classification, focusing exclusively on timebased flow features. Anderson et al. [27] proposed the utilization of
the logistic regression algorithm to jointly analyze flow-level features,
header information, and additional features for the purpose of classifying encrypted traffic into either malicious or normal traffic categories.
These methods typically necessitate manual feature selection and face
challenges due to feature instability.

3. Methodology
In this section, we will provide a comprehensive description of
our model. The overall model is shown in Fig. 1, which mainly includes dual embedding, packet-level traffic learning, flow-level graph
construction and learning, and adaptive deep feature fusion.

Deep learning based encrypted traffic classification. Deep learning
has gained extensive prominence in traffic classification tasks owing to
its inherent capability for automated feature extraction. Liu et al. [28]
introduced FS-Net, a framework designed for encrypted traffic classification via deep neural networks. FS-Net takes the packet length
sequence as its input, employs bi-directional GRU [24] for feature
encoding, and incorporates a reconstruction mechanism within an AutoEncoder to guarantee the validity of the learned features. Shapira
et al. [29] proposed a novel approach for encrypted Internet traffic
classification and application identification by transforming basic flow
data into an intuitive picture, a FlowPic, and then using Convolutional
Neural Networks to identify the flow category and the application in
use. Liu et al. [30] introduced a model named BGRUA to identify the
web services running on HTTPS connections. BGRUA employs a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (GRU) to capture both forward and backward features from the byte sequences within a session. Additionally,
an attention mechanism is utilized to assign weights to features based
on their respective contributions to the classification task. Lin et al. [31]
proposed a new traffic representation model called Encrypted Traffic
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformer (ET-BERT),
which pre-trains deep contextualized datagram-level representation
from large-scale unlabeled data. They proposed two pre-training tasks
capture the contextual relationship between traffic bytes by predicting the masked token as well as the correct transmission order by
predicting the Same-origin BURST. Mohammad et al. [32] proposed
a deep learning-based approach called ‘‘Deep Packet’’ for encrypted
traffic classification, which utilizes two deep neural network structures,
stacked autoencoder (SAE) and convolution neural network (CNN) for
application identification tasks. Aceto et al. [33] proposed a multimodal deep learning method called MIMETIC. They exploited CNN
and GRU respectively to learn two different modalities, the first 576
bytes of payload and informative protocol fields, for mobile encrypted
traffic classification. Wang et al. [34] also introduced a similar model
called App-Net, which use LSTM and CNN to learn sequence of packet
lengths and payload bytes of the initial packet respectively. Graph neural networks (GNN) have strong potential in processing unstructured
data and demonstrate promising performance in many fields. Shen
et al. [35] proposed GraphDApp, which can identify encrypted traffic
of Decentralized Applications (DApps) using GNNs. They constructed
the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) of encrypted flows based on the
packet length and packet direction and turned the DApp identification
into a graph classification problem. Huoh et al. [36] proposed a graph
construction method, which directly create edges based on the chronological relationship of packets among a flow and leverage the geometric
learning model [37] to learn the node, edge, and global features.
We summarize related deep learning based works in Table 1 and list
our main novelty compared with these methods:
(1) Hierarchical structure: Previous research commonly utilizes statistical features or raw bytes directly to represent network traffic and
employs various learning models. In this paper, we conduct hierarchical learning on raw bytes, exploring rich information following the
sequence of byte-packet-flow.

3.1. Dual embedding
In our classification task, we focus on network flows. We opt for
raw bytes to represent packets rather than employing statistical features
because raw bytes contain richer and more comprehensive information.
In general, distinct byte values convey distinct meanings. Two bytes
with different values correspond to two distinct embedding vectors.
However, in the context of encrypted traffic, the interpretation of a byte
is not solely contingent upon its value but also its position within the
packet, specifically, whether it belongs to the header or payload.
Encrypted traffic exhibits notable disparities between the header
and payload. These differences manifest in several ways. Different
representations: The header of a packet is typically plaintext information that remains unencrypted, whereas the payload contains ciphertext
information resulting from encryption. Different functions: Packet
headers primarily include information such as the five-tuple and protocol type, serving a control and descriptive role during transmission.
In contrast, payloads predominantly carry user data, constituting the
specific content of communication between both parties. Given these
distinctions, it becomes apparent that identical byte values in the
header and payload carry different meanings. If we were to mix the
header and payload and learn together, it would introduce difficulties
for a model to converge to optimal values. This is due to the ambiguity
in the meaning associated with these bytes when they have identical
representations. For the aforementioned reasons, we opt to learn the
header and payload separately, with the aim of reducing confusion
throughout the data learning process.
One-hot encoding. While each byte can be quantified as a numerical value, it is essential to note that these values within network traffic
lack specific numeric meaning or continuity. Consequently, we employ
one-hot encoding to represent each byte. One-hot encoding generates a
unique vector representation for each byte value, where only a single
bit in the vector is set to 1, while all other bits are set to 0. This
encoding technique is widely utilized in machine learning to represent
discrete values. Given that there are 256 possible values for a byte, we
represent each byte as a vector with a dimensionality of 256.
Dual embedding layer. For the packet header, we select the first
𝐾ℎ bytes from each packet header and employ one-hot encoding to
represent it, denoted as 𝐸ℎ ∈ R𝐾ℎ ×256 . Concerning the packet payload,
we choose 𝐾𝑝 bytes and obtain its representation, denoted as 𝐸𝑝 ∈
R𝐾𝑝 ×256 . To address situations where the length is insufficient, we apply
zero-padding, and in cases where the length exceeds the expected value,
we perform truncation. Consequently, we have now obtained the dual
embedding of the header and payload, represented as 𝐸ℎ and 𝐸𝑝 , where
each row signifies an individual byte.
Since we process the header and payload separately, all subsequent modules are likewise treated independently. While the network
structures are the same, they do not share parameters and can be
concurrently processed in parallel.
3

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.
Table 1
Comparison with recent related works.
Reference

Algorithm

Network Input

Raw
bytes

Separate learning of
header and payload

Liu et al. [28]
Shapira et al. [29]
Liu et al. [30]
Lin et al. [31]
Mohammad et al. [32]
Aceto et al. [33]
Wang et al. [34]
Shen et al. [35]
Huoh et al. [36]
This paper

AE+GRU
CNN
GRU
Bert
SAE+CNN
CNN+GRU
CNN+LSTM
GNN
GNN
GNN+CNN

Packet length
IP packet length, time of arrival
Payload bytes
Packet bytes
Packet bytes
Payload bytes, protocol fields
Payload of the initial packet, packet length
Packet length, packet direction
Raw bytes, inter-arrival time, meta features of a flow
Header raw bytes, payload raw bytes

–
–
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
–
✔
✔

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
✔

Fig. 1. DE-GNN model architecture. (a) Dual embedding: Encode packet header and payload separately using raw bytes; (b) Packet-level traffic learning: Learn package-level
features using PacketCNN; (c) Flow-level graph construction and learning: Build traffic interaction graphs and learn flow-level features using GNN; (d) Adaptive deep feature fusion:
Fuse the packet header and payload features; (e) Traffic classification: Obtain the label of encrypted traffic.

3.2. Packet-level traffic learning
Given the hierarchical structure inherent in network flow data
(i.e., byte-packet-flow), our objective is to perform a deep analysis
of the rich content within network traffic flow. To achieve this, we
commence by learning network traffic at the packet level.
Network traffic packets are composed of bytes, and We have successfully represented the packet using bytes. To extract abstract features within a packet, we employ a byte extraction model, enabling us
to learn the packet-level representation of network traffic. At this stage,
every byte within the packet is represented in a word-like manner.
Drawing inspiration from the TextCNN model [38], we design a similar
structure, PacketCNN, to process each packet. The model’s architecture
is visually depicted in Fig. 2.
We employ three different convolutional kernels to extract the
underlying content within each packet respectively. Each convolution
operation consists of a convolutional layer, the ReLU activation functional, and a max pooling layer. To illustrate, let us consider the
payload 𝐸𝑝 as an example:
h(1)
𝑝 = MaxPool(ReLU(Conv(𝐸𝑝 )))

Fig. 2. The structure of PacketCNN. PacketCNN uses three different convolution
operations to extract information from packets.

cessing of the header follows a similar approach.
As of now, we have obtained packet-level representations for both
the packet header and payload, denoted as 𝐹ℎ𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 and 𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 , each
with dimensions of (M, 1). M is the dimension of the obtained packetlevel representation from PacketCNN learning. These acquired packetlevel representations will subsequently serve as the feature representations for nodes within the Graph.

(1)

Using three convolution kernels, we obtain three vectors, denoted as
(2) (3)
𝑑
ℎ(1)
𝑝 , ℎ𝑝 , ℎ𝑝 ∈ R . Subsequently, we utilize the concatenation operation and a fully connected layer for amalgamating the outcomes from
three convolutional kernels, with the ReLU activation function applied.
(2) (3)
h𝑓𝑝 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 = CONCAT(h(1)
𝑝 , h𝑝 , h𝑝 )

(2)

𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 = ReLU(FC(ℎ𝑓𝑝 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 ))

(3)

In contrast to directly utilizing the original byte values to represent
the header and payload, this method enables us to delve deeper into
the effective characteristics of the packet. As a result, it mitigates the
influence of noise and redundant information, culminating in a more
robust and informative representation. This is further supported by the
results of the ablation experiment.

where 𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 is the packet-level representation of payload. The pro4

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.

vertex 𝑎 and vertex 𝑑, as well as between vertex 𝑐 and vertex 𝑑. It is
worth noting that as burst 𝑛 comprises only one vertex, both its first and
last vertices are represented by vertex 𝑑. It is important to emphasize
that in order to facilitate bidirectional information propagation, we
employ undirected edges within the Graph.
Below, we provide the symbol definitions and algorithm descriptions for TIG.
Definition 1 (Traffic Interaction Graph). A TIG is defined by a fourtuple (𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙):
– 𝑉 is a set of vertices, where each vertex 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 represents an
individual packet within the network flow.
– 𝐸 is a set of edges used to depict the connectivity relationships
among vertices, including two kinds of edges: intra-burst edges
and inter-burst edges. Each edge 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 can be categorized into
one of these two types.
– 𝐹 represents the set of vertex features, which constitutes the
packet-level representations that we previously obtained.
– 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙 stands for the label of the TIG, which corresponds to the
category assigned to the network flow.

Fig. 3. Construction of traffic interaction graph. Fig. 3(a) illustrates the communication
process between parties A and B. Each line represents a packet, and the arrow indicates
the direction of transmission. Fig. 3(b) depicts the traffic interaction graph constructed
based on (a), where each node represents a packet. Different boxes represent different
bursts.

3.3. TIG construction and flow-level traffic learning
Algorithm 1 Construction of Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG)
3.3.1. Traffic interaction graph (TIG) construction
Due to the reduction in effective features within encrypted traffic,
traditional traffic classification methods reliant on plaintext content
have experienced a decline in performance. However, it is imperative
to recognize that while encryption protocols secure the content of
traffic, they do not alter the interaction mode of the communicating
parties. Each type of traffic retains its distinct interaction pattern. Each
traffic flow, consisting of a series of packets resulting from client–
server interactions, can be represented by an information-rich graph
structure named Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) [35]. Through the
construction of the TIG, we can effectively depict the traffic interaction
mode between the two communicating parties.
As depicted in Fig. 3(a), it provides a schematic representation
of communication between the two sides of the network. In this depiction, each line within the graph symbolizes a traffic packet, with
the direction of the arrow indicating the transmission direction of the
packet. This depiction is further transformed into a graph structure,
as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). First, we introduce the concept of burst. A
burst is defined as a sequence of consecutive packets transmitted along
the same direction during a short time interval [39], and the current
packet occurs within a threshold of time, the burst threshold, of the
previous packet [25]. As shown in Fig. 3(a), each box represents a burst.
Although burst-a and burst-b are the same continuous packet sequence,
their temporal distance exceeds the burst threshold, so they are divided
into two bursts.
TIG is represented by vertices and edges:
Vertices: In a network flow, each packet is treated as an individual entity. Consequently, each vertex in the graph signifies a packet.
Specifically, we consistently utilize the previously acquired packet-level
representation to signify each packet, i.e., 𝐹ℎ𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 or 𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 .
Edges: TIG involves segmenting a network flow into multiple bursts
and then employing the relationships between these bursts to represent
the connections of vertices. There are two types of edges: (1) IntraBurst Edges. This type of edge is used to link multiple vertices within
the same burst. It establishes connections between these vertices in
chronological order according to their respective timestamps. For example, in burst 𝑚, there exist two intra-burst edges, connecting vertices
𝑎 and 𝑏, as well as vertices 𝑏 and 𝑐. (2) Inter-Burst Edges. These edges
are employed to establish connections between two consecutive bursts.
More specifically, the first and last vertices in each burst are linked
to the corresponding first and last vertices in its preceding burst. For
instance, between burst 𝑚 and burst 𝑛, there is a connection between

Input: The sequence of packet direction 𝐷 = {𝑑1 , 𝑑2 , … , 𝑑𝑁 }, packet
arrival time 𝑆 = {𝑠1 , 𝑠2 , … , 𝑠𝑁 }, packet-level feature representation
𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 = {𝑓1 , 𝑓2 , … , 𝑓𝑁 } and 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
Output: The traffic interaction graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝐹 )
1: Initialize 𝑉 , 𝐸, and 𝐹 as empty sets
{Add vertices and corresponding node features}
2: for all 𝑑𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, 𝑓𝑖 ∈ 𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 do
3:
Add a vertex 𝑑𝑖 in V and configure its node feature 𝑓𝑖 in F
4: end for
{Separate V into bursts set 𝐵 = {𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , … , 𝑏𝐾 } according to packet
direction and timestamp}
5: Create an empty burst, denoted as 𝑏, and add vertex 𝑑1 to it. Set
both the first and last vertices of 𝑏 to 𝑑1 .
6: for 𝑖 = 2 to 𝑁 do
7:
if 𝑑𝑖 == 𝑑𝑖−1 and (𝑠𝑖 − 𝑠𝑖−1 ) < 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 then
8:
Add vertex 𝑑𝑖 to burst 𝑏 and update the last vertex to 𝑑𝑖
9:
else
10:
Burst 𝑏 is complete and add it to 𝐵
11:
Create a new empty burst and add vertex 𝑑𝑖 to it. Set both the
first and last vertices to 𝑑𝑖
12:
end if
13: end for
{Add intra-burst edges and inter-burst edges}
14: for all 𝑏𝑖 ∈ 𝐵 do
15:
Add intra-burst edges inside 𝑏𝑖 and inter-burst edges between 𝑏𝑖
and 𝑏𝑖+1 in 𝐸
16: end for
17: return 𝐺

The construction of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) follows the
outlined procedure as presented in Algorithm 1. The packet direction
sequence 𝐷 = {𝑑1 , 𝑑2 , … , 𝑑𝑁 }, where 𝑑𝑖 ∈ {1, −1} (1 indicating the
sending direction and −1 indicating the receiving direction), packet
arrival time 𝑆 = {𝑠1 , 𝑠2 , … , 𝑠𝑁 }, where 𝑠𝑖 indicates the packet arrival
time in a flow, the previously obtained packet-level features 𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 ,
along with 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 serves as the input. The algorithm proceeds
to build the vertex set and configure vertex features using 𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 (lines
2–4). Subsequently, it segments the network flow into multiple bursts
(lines 5–13) and introduces two types of edges connecting the vertices:
intra-burst edges and inter-burst edges (lines 14–16).
TIG encapsulates two critical types of information:
5

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.

Behavioral pattern information: Each category of encrypted traffic exhibits unique behavioral patterns. TIG effectively represents the
interaction behavior between both parties engaged in network communication. This includes behavioral details such as packet burst characteristics and packet sequence information. These patterns are amenable
to extraction and analysis using graph neural networks to derive effective features. Packet-level traffic information: This involves using
the previously acquired packet-level features as vertex features. These
features encapsulate valuable information gleaned from the packets. In
contrast to using packet length and packet direction as vertex attributes,
this approach offers a more comprehensive and information-rich representation.

Fig. 4. Structure of GNN. We stack 4 GAT layers, with each GAT layer generating a
graph feature vector. These 4 graph feature vectors are concatenated together to form
the flow-level features.

3.3.2. Learning flow-level features using graph neural network
We leverage TIG to characterize the behavioral patterns of network traffic and employ Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for feature
extraction. In contrast to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), which predominantly focus on
spatial and temporal features, GNNs offer the advantage of more effectively capturing structural information from graphs. Additionally,
CNNs and RNNs often necessitate alignment in the number of packets, which can lead to the introduction of redundant zero elements
when handling short flows, potentially obscuring valuable information.
In contrast, graph-based representations do not require such packet
number completion, thereby reducing the introduction of noise.
More specifically, we utilize the Graph Attention Network (GAT)
[40] for information extraction from the TIG. Given that each vertex
in the TIG represents a packet and holds varying significance within
the overall graph structure, GAT leverages the attention mechanism
to assign distinct weights to different nodes in the neighborhood. This
enables neighboring nodes to carry varying degrees of importance during the message propagation process, thereby accentuating information
from critical nodes while dampening the influence of less relevant
nodes.
Given a TIG, its node features are 𝐡 = {ℎ1 , ℎ2 , … , ℎ𝑁 }, ℎ𝑖 ∈ R𝑀 ,
with 𝑁 as the number of nodes and 𝑀 as the dimension of features in
each node. Firstly, an attentional mechanism, 𝑎, is used to calculate the
attention coefficients:
𝑒𝑖𝑗 = 𝑎(𝐖ℎ𝑖 , 𝐖ℎ𝑗 )

Fig. 5. Adaptive-weighted sum for packet header.

Fig. 4. Following each layer, we apply the ReLu activation function and
BatchNorm. We acquire four graph feature vectors: 𝑔 (1) , 𝑔 (2) , 𝑔 (3) , 𝑔 (4) ,
and subsequently concatenate them as the flow-level features:
F𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 = CONCAT(𝑔 (1) , 𝑔 (2) , 𝑔 (3) , 𝑔 (4) )

At this point, we have obtained flow-level representations for both
the packet header and payload, denoted as 𝐹ℎ𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 and 𝐹𝑝𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , with dimensions of (𝑆, 1) both. 𝑆 is the dimension of flow-level representation
from GNN learning.
3.4. Adaptive deep feature fusion

(4)

Via the construction of TIG and the learning of GNN, we have
acquired the flow-level feature representations for both the packet
header and payload. These features are subsequently employed for
traffic classification. While header and payload contribute differently
to the classification, it is necessary to use a feature fusion strategy to
jointly learn the features from them to accurately and robustly classify
traffic. However, most of the existing feature fusion strategies are based
on fixed combination weights, including direct concatenation [41],
and weighted concatenation [42]. To combine the features from the
packet header and payload, we employ adaptive deep feature fusion
(ADFF) [43].
Let us take the header as an example. As shown in Fig. 5, the ADFF
mechanism first calculates a query vector 𝑄𝑖 = 𝐹𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ×𝑊𝑄𝑖 , a key vector
𝐾𝑖 = 𝐹𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 × 𝑊𝐾𝑖 , and a value vector 𝑉𝑖 = 𝐹𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 × 𝑊𝑉𝑖 for each feature
(i = {h, p}, denoted as header and payload). Then, ADFF calculates the
dot products of 𝑄ℎ (representing the query vector of header) with all
keys 𝐾𝑖 to generate two corresponding scores, labeled as 𝑆1 and 𝑆2 . To
obtain a normalized weight score, ADFF applies the softmax function
to the scores. Finally, ADFF computes the dot products of the value
vectors with their respective weights and then sums them to obtain the
weighted header feature vector, denoted as 𝐴𝑊 𝐹ℎ :
∑
𝐴𝑊 𝐹ℎ =
Sof tmax(𝑄ℎ ⋅ 𝐾𝑖 )𝑉𝑖
(9)

that indicate the importance of node 𝑗’s features to node 𝑖, where 𝐖
is a learnable weight matrix. We only compute 𝑒𝑖𝑗 for nodes 𝑗 ∈ 𝑖 ,
where 𝑖 represents all neighbors of node 𝑖 in the graph.
To ensure that coefficients are easily comparable across different
nodes, GAT normalizes them across all possible choices of 𝑗 using the
softmax function:
𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑒𝑖𝑗 )
𝛼𝑖𝑗 = 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑗 (𝑒𝑖𝑗 ) = ∑
(5)
𝑘∈𝑖 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑒𝑖𝑘 )
Subsequently, the obtained attention coefficients are employed to
update the node features.
∑
ℎ(1)
𝛼𝑖𝑗 𝐖ℎ𝑗 )
(6)
𝑖 = 𝜎(
𝑗∈𝑖

where 𝜎 is the activation function, and 𝑊 is a learnable weight matrix.
Furthermore, the utilization of multi-head attention mechanisms can
contribute to the stabilization of the learning process.
The GAT layer produces a new set of node features (of potentially
𝑀′ .
different cardinality 𝑀 ′ ), 𝐡(𝟏) = {ℎ(1)
, ℎ(1)
, … , ℎ(1)
}, ℎ(1)
𝑖 ∈R
𝑁
1
2
Finally, we apply mean pooling on all nodes to get a graph feature
vector 𝑔:
𝑔 (1) =

(8)

ℎ(1)
⊕ ℎ(1)
⊕ ⋯ ⊕ ℎ(1)
𝑁
1
2

(7)
𝑁
To thoroughly extract information from the TIG, we employ a stack
of multiple GAT layers (in this paper, 4 layers are utilized), as shown in

𝑖={ℎ,𝑝}

Similarly, we get the weighted payload feature vector 𝐴𝑊 𝐹𝑝 . Finally,
as demonstrated in Fig. 6, the fused feature vector 𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 is obtained by
6

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.

Table 2
Labeled ISCX-VPN2016 and ISCX-Tor2016 datasets. This table illustrates the traffic
types we divide the datasets into and the content contained in different categories.

Fig. 6. Adaptive deep feature fusion. We utilize adaptive deep feature fusion to merge
the header and payload.

Dataset

Traffic type

Content

ISCX-VPN

VPN-Email
VPN-Chat
VPN-Streaming
VPN-File transfer
VPN-VoIP
VPN-P2P

Email, Gmail(SMTP, POP3,IMAP)
ICQ, AIM, Skype, Facebook, Hangouts
Vimeo, Youtube, Netflix, Spotify
Skype, FTPS, SFTP
Facebook, Skype, Hangouts, Voipbuster
uTorrent, Bittorrent

ISCX-nonVPN

Email
Chat
Streaming
File transfer
VoIP
P2P

Email, Gmail(SMTP, POP3,IMAP)
ICQ, AIM, Skype, Facebook, Hangouts
Vimeo, Youtube, Netflix, Spotify
Skype, FTPS, SFTP
Facebook, Skype, Hangouts, Voipbuster
uTorrent, Bittorrent

ISCX-Tor

Tor-Browsing
Tor-Email
Tor-Chat
Tor-Audio
Tor-Video
Tor-FTP
Tor-VoIP
Tor-P2P

Firefox, Chrome
Thunderbird (SMTP/S, POP3/SSL, IMAP/SSL)
Facebook, Hangouts, Skype, IAM, ICQ
Spotify
YouTube, Vimeo
Skype, SFTP and FTPS
Facebook, Hangouts, Skype
Bittorrent

concatenation of the two weighted feature vectors:
𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 = CONCAT(𝐴𝑊 𝐹ℎ , 𝐴𝑊 𝐹𝑝 )

(10)

3.5. Classification
We obtain the final flow representation, denoted as 𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 , and
employ it for multiple classification tasks. We conduct a fully connected
layer followed by a softmax operation on it to obtain the predicted
results. Subsequently, we utilize cross-entropy as the loss function to
calculate the loss, which is subsequently employed for the backward
pass during training.
𝑦̂ = Sof tmax(𝑊 ⋅ 𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 + 𝑏)
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 = −

𝐾
∑

𝑦𝑖 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑦̂𝑖

nonTor dataset utilizes traffic from the VPN project, and detailed label
allocation instructions are lacking. To ensure experimental rigor, we
only use the Tor dataset, which is subdivided into 8 distinct category
labels. The labels are shown in Table 2.

(11)

4.1.2. Pre-processing
The datasets provide original traffic files (Pcap format). We need
to preprocess the Pcap files in the datasets. Our operations on the
dataset can be mainly summarized as: (1) PCAP segmentation. The
traffic classification task is finally carried out on the unit of flow,
so we split the Pcap files into bi-flows using a flow segmentation
tool (such as Splitcap) according to the quintuple information (source
IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, protocol). Following
segmentation, data cleaning is carried out to remove duplicates and
invalid samples [41]. (2) Header and payload extraction. We extract
the header and payload of each packet separately and convert each byte
into one-hot encoding. The purpose is to process flow into a pattern
acceptable to the neural network. (3) Labeling. We assign labels
to each sample by referring to the official instructions and previous
research.
During this process, we exclude the Ethernet header, as it only
contains irrelevant information for classification purposes. Additionally, the source and destination IP addresses and ports are all removed
for the purpose of eliminating interference with sensitive information
deriving from them. Furthermore, we perform truncation on excessively
long data and apply zero-padding to data with an insufficient quantity.

(12)

𝑖=1

where {𝑊 , 𝑏} are the parameters of the corresponding fully connected
layer, 𝑦̂ is the predicted probability values, and 𝐾 is the number of
traffic categories.
4. Experiments and analysis
In this section, we introduce our experimental setup, including
dataset, traffic pre-processing, and evaluation metrics. Then, we conduct a series of experiments, including model sensitivity analysis, comparison experiments, ablation experiments, GNN architecture variants
study, TIG structure study, and model complexity analysis which evaluate the performance of DE-GNN fully and specifically.
4.1. Experimental setup
4.1.1. Dataset
To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of our model, we
utilize multiple public datasets, namely ISCX-VPN2016 [44] and ISCXTor2016 [45].
ISCX-VPN2016 contains encrypted traffic encompassing various
types, including VoIP, P2P, and more. It is divided into two parts:
ISCX-VPN and ISCX-nonVPN datasets. The ISCX-VPN dataset comprises traffic collected over virtual private networks (VPNs), which are
commonly used to access blocked websites or services. Recognizing
VPN traffic can be challenging due to obfuscation technologies. In
contrast, the ISCX-nonVPN dataset consists of regular encrypted traffic
not collected over VPNs. It is worth noting that due to label confusion
of traffic files, we categorize both VPN and nonVPN datasets into 6
distinct category labels as referenced in [46]. The labels are shown in
Table 2.
Similarly, ISCX-Tor2016 is another public dataset, comprising ISCXTor and ISCX-nonTor datasets. The ISCX-Tor dataset contains traffic
collected over the onion router (Tor), which can be difficult to trace.
The ISCX-nonTor dataset consists of regular encrypted traffic not collected over Tor. Please note that, according to official instructions, the

4.1.3. Implementation details
There are some critical hyperparameters that need to be set in
the model. Table 3 shows our hyperparameter values for the best
classification performance. We use a grid search and conduct the 5-fold
cross-validation on the training set to select the best hyperparameters.
During the model training, we use the EarlyStopping which ensures
that the learning is terminated without reaching the extreme fit of the
model.
To conduct the 5-fold cross-validation, the training datasets are
randomly split into 5 equal-size subsets. In each fold of the crossvalidation, 4 subsets (80%) of the data are used for training a brand
new model, and the rest subset (20% of the data), different in each
fold, is used to evaluate the resultant model. For a particular set of
model parameters, when all 5 training-validation folds are finished, we
compute the final validation loss by averaging the 5 validation losses
7

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.
Table 3
Hyperparameter values of DE-GNN.
HyperParameter

Value

The convolution kernel sizes of PacketCNN
The number of convolution kernels of PacketCNN
The dimension of the resulting packet-level features, M
The layer number of GNN
The multi-head number of attention
The dimension of the resulting flow-level features, S
Burst-threshold

(2,3,4)
32
64
4
4
256
1 s

over the 5 folds. The final validation loss is treated as the score of this
model and is further used as the criterion for comparing with different
hyperparameter settings. Finally, we choose the best model with the
minimum average validation loss.
We use Adam optimizer to minimize the loss, with its initial learning
rate of 0.001, mini-batch size of 64, and decay rate of 0.01. We adopted
a 7:2:1 split ratio for training, validation, and test sets, respectively.
We implemented our model with Pytorch and run each experiment on
a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.

Fig. 7. The sensitivity analysis of packet number.

4.1.4. Evaluation metrics
In the classification task, commonly used evaluation indicators are
Accuracy (AC), Precision (PR), Recall (RC), and F1-score. We calculate
the number of true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN),
and false negative (FN) on the test set. The metrics are calculated as
follows:
𝐴𝐶 =

𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑁

(13)

𝑃𝑅 =

𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃

(14)

𝑅𝐶 =

𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁

(15)

𝐹1 = 2 ⋅

𝑃 𝑅 × 𝑅𝐶
𝑃 𝑅 + 𝑅𝐶

Fig. 8. The sensitivity analysis of byte number.

(16)

4.2. Model sensitivity analysis

4.3. Comparison experiments

The results of sensitivity analysis are shown in Figs. 7 and 8. We
choose F1-score, which takes into account both the precision and recall
of the classification model, as our observation metrics.
(1) The Impact of Packet Number.
The number of packets directly impacts the size of the constructed
Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG), i.e. the number of nodes in the graph.
The results are illustrated in Fig. 7. It can be observed that as the
number of packets increases, the model’s performance initially shows
an upward trend, followed by stabilization. Specifically, when the
number of packets exceeds 15, the model’s performance nearly reaches
an optimal point. We classify traffic by learning the structure of the
graph. Therefore, when the number of nodes in the graph reaches a
certain threshold, it contains sufficient information to support effective
learning.
(2) The Impact of Byte Number.
The number of bytes extracted from each packet primarily influences packet-level learning. While the number of bytes in the packet
header remains small and consistent, our attention is focused on assessing the impact of varying the number of bytes in the payload on the
model’s performance. It can be observed from Fig. 8 that when using
the first 400 bytes of a payload for modeling, the model’s performance
is better than with other settings. As the number of bytes continues
to increase, more noise is introduced, which can adversely affect the
model’s learning performance.

We use five traditonal deep learning models and two GNN models
as baselines:
(1) 1D-CNN: The raw packet bytes are transformed into grayscale
graphs, and a CNN model is used for learning. We followed the implementation from [46].
(2) LSTM: The packets within the network flow exhibit temporal
characteristics. We implemented an LSTM model with reference to [41]
for traffic classification.
(3) FS-Net: FS-Net [28] uses a packet length sequence as input.
It employs bi-directional GRU for feature encoding and introduces a
reconstruction mechanism within an AutoEncoder to ensure the validity
of the learned features.
(4) MIMETIC: MIMETIC [33] is a multimodal learning method
which uses CNN and GRU respectively to learn the first 576 bytes of
payload and informative protocol fields.
(5) App-Net: App-Net [34] is also a multimodal method which uses
LSTM and CNN to learn sequence of packet lengths and payload bytes
of the initial packet respectively.
(6) GraphDAPP: GraphDAPP [35] constructs the network flow as a
Traffic Interaction Graph, using packet direction and packet length as
node features to achieve traffic classification.
(7) FB-GNN: FB-GNN [36] proposed a graph construction method,
which directly create edges based on the chronological relationship of
packets among a flow and leverage the geometric learning model to
learn the node, edge, and global features.
8

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.
Table 4
Experimental results on ISCX datasets. The table presents the results of different models on three datasets.
Dataset

ISCX-VPN

Model

AC

PR

RC

F1

AC

ISCX-nonVPN
PR

RC

F1

ISCX-Tor
AC

PR

RC

F1

1D-CNN
LSTM
FS-Net
MIMETIC
App-Net
GraphDAPP
FB-GNN

0.8359
0.9336
0.9121
0.8047
0.9609
0.6585
0.8431

0.8604
0.9321
0.9117
0.8559
0.9464
0.5028
0.8293

0.8242
0.9172
0.9268
0.8352
0.9573
0.4148
0.8141

0.8308
0.9240
0.9179
0.8387
0.9495
0.4276
0.8184

0.7871
0.7539
0.7539
0.6406
0.8711
0.3809
0.6503

0.7927
0.7928
0.8021
0.7115
0.8779
0.3454
0.6558

0.7960
0.7070
0.7183
0.6015
0.8760
0.3363
0.6541

0.7919
0.7306
0.7413
0.6086
0.8760
0.2634
0.6391

0.5814
0.7442
0.8140
0.2857
0.7143
0.5272
0.4286

0.4608
0.7120
0.8574
0.0688
0.5192
0.3359
0.2381

0.4366
0.7036
0.8176
0.1578
0.5374
0.2370
0.3136

0.4349
0.7048
0.8187
0.0925
0.5168
0.2292
0.2581

DE-GNN

0.9688

0.9659

0.9594

0.9624

0.8984

0.9110

0.9007

0.9048

0.9872

0.9943

0.9939

0.9905

The comparison results on the ISCX datasets are presented in Table 4. Based on the results, we can draw the following conclusions: (1)
DE-GNN achieves the best performance compared to several baselines
across all four metrics. This comprehensive performance demonstrates
the effectiveness of our method. (2) Neither the 1D-CNN model nor
the LSTM model delivers satisfactory results. As previously mentioned,
encrypted traffic conceals the original content, resulting in limited
extraction of effective information by both CNN and RNN models. Furthermore, the LSTM outperforms the 1D-CNN, which can be attributed
to the LSTM’s capacity to capture temporal information within the
network flow, which plays a crucial role in the context of encrypted
traffic. (3) FS-Net employs the packet length sequence for end-toend classification and achieves performance similar to the LSTM. This
outcome can be attributed to the fact that both FS-Net and LSTM
focus on learning temporal information. (4) The multimodal methods
MIMETIC and App-Net utilize multiple modalities in their learning
processes. Their performance shows significant variability across different datasets, particularly on the Tor dataset. The limited number of
samples in the Tor dataset contributes to overfitting issues, impacting
performance outcomes. (5) Compared with the two GNN-based methods, our method outperforms both in all aspects. GraphDAPP also uses
the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) for classification but does not yield
satisfactory results. The main reason for this lies in its use of packet
length and packet direction as node features. However, the presence of
technologies such as packet fragmentation, VPN, and Tor introduces
significant interference with packet lengths, consequently leading to
performance degradation. FB-GNN is unstable on different datasets.
The main reason is that their graphs are constructed according to time
series, which means that graphs with the same number of nodes have
the same structure, significantly reducing performance stability.

Fig. 9. The result of different GNN architectures. The F1-score results for employing
different GNN architectures in the flow-level learning stage are presented in the figure.

payloads. Moreover, different datasets exhibit varying degrees of the
importance of headers and payloads. For example, when switching
from using headers to payloads, the F1-score decreases by 12.53% on
the ISCX-VPN dataset and by 0.19% on the ISCX-Tor dataset. Second,
the omission of packet-level learning has the most significant negative
impact on model performance. This is particularly noticeable in the
ISCX-Tor dataset, where the F1 score dropped by 47.38%. When using
the raw byte values directly as node features, the data contains considerable noise and redundant information, making it challenging for
the model to learn effectively. By subjecting the original byte data to
deep feature extraction through PacketCNN, packet-level information
can be more efficiently represented, facilitating further learning. Third,
TIG and GNN outperform CNN and LSTM in terms of performance
improvement. Constructing the traffic interaction graph allows for the
acquisition of not only information from the original bytes but also
information related to traffic interactions. Additionally, the application
of adaptive weight fusion proves to enhance model performance.
Analyzing the complexity of ablation models reveals that All-h,
All-p, All-packet, and All-adff effectively reduce both parameters and
FLOPS, as they only encompass a subset of the original model. Notably,
All-h achieves a notable reduction in model complexity while ensuring limited performance degradation. Conversely, the other models
increase complexity due to changing the structures, without yielding
any performance improvements.

4.4. Abaltion experiments
To investigate the effect of each component of the DE-GNN model,
we also perform the ablation test of DE-GNN in terms of:
(1) Dual-embedding: Instead of using both the header and payload,
we use only one of them. This method is denoted as All-h (only header)
and All-p (only payload), respectively.
(2) Packet-level learning: We discard the packet-level learning and
directly use the original byte value of the packet as the features of the
nodes in the graph. This method is denoted as All-packet (packet).
(3) Graph neural networks: To illustrate the effectiveness of the
Graph, instead of using TIG and GNN, we learn directly with CNN or
LSTM in the flow-level learning phase, called All-cnn and All-lstm,
respectively.
(4) Adaptive deep feature fusion: Instead of using ADFF for the
feature fusion of header and payload, we directly concatenate them,
denoted as All-adff (ADFF).
The results of the ablation tests are presented in Tables 5 and
6. Several key observations can be made. First, it is evident that
packet headers are more influential in classification compared to packet

4.5. GNN architecture variants study
To demonstrate the effectiveness of GAT for learning TIG, we select
some classical GNN architectures as variants (i.e., GCN [47], GIN [48],
GraphSAGE [49]) for comparison.
9

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.
Table 5
Ablation test results on ISCX datasets.
Dataset

ISCX-VPN

Model

AC

PR

RC

F1

ISCX-nonVPN
AC

PR

RC

F1

AC

ISCX-Tor
PR

RC

F1

All-h
All-p
All-packet
All-cnn
All-lstm
All-adff

0.9492
0.8438
0.8672
0.9219
0.9492
0.9531

0.9415
0.8329
0.8719
0.8999
0.9338
0.9475

0.9472
0.8544
0.8497
0.9171
0.9568
0.9508

0.9418
0.8165
0.8595
0.9017
0.9443
0.9482

0.8750
0.7402
0.7344
0.8887
0.8633
0.8730

0.8779
0.7572
0.7911
0.8998
0.8660
0.8736

0.8828
0.7158
0.6981
0.8875
0.8631
0.8963

0.8794
0.7258
0.7163
0.8918
0.8645
0.8831

0.9744
0.9487
0.6154
0.9487
0.9231
0.9744

0.9563
0.9593
0.5501
0.9583
0.9045
0.9631

0.9815
0.9762
0.5942
0.9696
0.9449
0.9815

0.9666
0.9647
0.5167
0.9588
0.9125
0.9696

All

0.9688

0.9659

0.9594

0.9624

0.8984

0.9110

0.9007

0.9048

0.9872

0.9943

0.9939

0.9905

Table 6
Model FLOPs and parameters of ablation test.
Model

FLOPS(M)

Parameters(M)

All-h
All-p
All-packet
All-cnn
All-lstm
All-adff

3.3e+1
4.4e+2
2.4e+0
4.8e+2
4.9e+2
4.7e+2

1.3e−1
1.3e−1
5.1e−1
1.4e+0
1.9e+0
2.6e−1

All

4.7e+2

6.2e−1

Fig. 11. The result of different graph structure.

Fig. 10. The fully connected variant of TIG. We connect all nodes between adjacent
bursts to each other.

hinder the network’s ability to extract meaningful features. (3) Complexity of Learning: The goal of using a graph neural network is to
understand the structure and relationships within the entire graph and
ultimately derive a comprehensive feature representation of the graph.
When the graph becomes excessively complex due to full connectivity,
the learning process also becomes intricate, making it more challenging
to capture essential patterns.

As shown in Fig. 9, our findings suggest that the Graph Attention
Network (GAT) outperformed other variants. This superiority is due to
the attention mechanism integrated into GAT. As previously explained,
GAT can evaluate the importance of different neighboring nodes near
a given node and utilize this information in node feature propagation.
This feature effectively reduces the influence of less important nodes
during the information transfer process within the graph.

4.7. Model complexity analysis
To comprehensively evaluate the trade-of between model performance and model complexity, we present the floating point operations
(FLOPs) and the model size of all baselines and our model. The result
is shown in Table 7.
From Tables 7 and 4, we can draw a conclusion that DE-GNN
achieves the most significant improvement on public datasets with
relatively slight model complexity increasing. It can be observed from
Table 7 that DE-GNN has the second-fewest number of parameters
among different methods. The significant advantage of having fewer
parameters is the lower cost for transferring the model for further
studies or deployment. However, conversely, DE-GNN requires more
floating-point computations. This is mainly due to the sophisticated
structure: (1) We use raw bytes as the input to the model and design
a multi-step information extraction process based on the hierarchical
structure, which increases the computation. By reducing the number of
input packets and bytes, we can effectively reduce FLOPS and obtain
an acceptable drop in accuracy. (2) We treat the packet header and the
payload separately, using two identical neural network structures to
learn them, which also leads to an increase in computation. However, it
should be noted that for the processing of packet headers and payloads,
we can handle them in parallel.

4.6. Structure of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG)
In the construction of the TIG, the process begins by segmenting
bursts and then establishing connections between nodes using intraburst and inter-burst mechanisms, as outlined in Algorithm 1. This
approach facilitates the exchange of node information within and between bursts during the graph neural network learning process. To
gain a deeper understanding of the rationale behind TIG’s structure, we
create a fully connected variant of TIG. In this version, the nodes of two
adjacent bursts are connected to each other, as opposed to connecting
the start and end nodes. This is illustrated in Fig. 10.
The results are depicted in Fig. 11. It is evident that employing a
fully connected graph does not yield improvement; in fact, it led to
a decrease in performance. This outcome can be attributed to several
reasons:
(1) Increased Computational Load: Connecting every node in the
graph results in a substantial increase in computational demands. This
additional load affects the efficiency of the learning process. (2) Redundancy of Information Transmission: In the learning process of a
multi-layer graph neural network, full connectivity can introduce redundancy in the transmission of information. This redundancy can
10

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.
Table 7
Model FLOPs and parameters.

Data availability

Model

FLOPS(M)

Parameters(M)

1D-CNN
LSTM
FS-NET
MIMETIC
App-Net
GraphDAPP
FB-GNN

1.9e+1
3.4e+1
1.0e+2
3.4e+1
5.6e+2
2.4e−2
5.0e+2

5.8e+0
2.4e+0
3.2e+0
2.3e+0
2.1e+0
2.5e−2
9.5e+0

DE-GNN

4.7e+2

6.2e−1

Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, Project 2021YFB2910110, and is supported by the University of Chinese Academy of Science.
References
[1] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An overview,
IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (5) (2019) 76–81, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/mcom.
2019.1800819.
[2] R. Sharma, S. Dangi, P. Mishra, A comprehensive review on encryption based
open source cyber security tools, in: 2021 6th International Conference on
Signal Processing, Computing and Control, ISPCC, IEEE, 2021, pp. 614–619,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ispcc53510.2021.9609369.
[3] E. Ramadhani, Anonymity communication VPN and Tor: a comparative study, in:
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 983, IOP Publishing, 2018, 012060,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/983/1/012060.
[4] T. Nelms, R. Perdisci, M. Ahamad, {ExecScent}: Mining for new {C&C} domains
in live networks with adaptive control protocol templates, in: 22nd USENIX
Security Symposium, USENIX Security 13, 2013, pp. 589–604, http://dx.doi.org/
10.5555/2534766.2534817.
[5] J. Su, S. Chen, B. Han, C. Xu, X. Wang, A 60Gbps DPI prototype based on
memory-centric FPGA, in: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference,
2016, pp. 627–628, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2959079.
[6] W. Melo, P. Lopes, R. Antonello, S. Fernandes, D. Sadok, On the performance
of DPI signature matching with dynamic priority, in: 2014 IEEE Symposium on
Computers and Communications, ISCC, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–6, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ISCC.2014.6912553.
[7] E. Papadogiannaki, S. Ioannidis, A survey on encrypted network traffic analysis
applications, techniques, and countermeasures, ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (6) (2021)
1–35, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3457904.
[8] J. Jarmoc, SSL/TLS interception proxies and transitive trust, 2012, URL https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9485779.
[9] J. Han, S. Kim, J. Ha, D. Han, Sgx-box: Enabling visibility on encrypted
traffic using a secure middlebox module, in: Proceedings of the First AsiaPacific Workshop on Networking, 2017, pp. 99–105, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
3106989.3106994.
[10] B. Trach, A. Krohmer, F. Gregor, S. Arnautov, P. Bhatotia, C. Fetzer, Shieldbox:
Secure middleboxes using shielded execution, in: Proceedings of the Symposium
on SDN Research, 2018, pp. 1–14, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3185467.3185469.
[11] D. Goltzsche, S. Rüsch, M. Nieke, S. Vaucher, N. Weichbrodt, V. Schiavoni,
P.-L. Aublin, P. Cosa, C. Fetzer, P. Felber, et al., Endbox: Scalable middlebox
functions using client-side trusted execution, in: 2018 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN, IEEE,
2018, pp. 386–397, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/dsn.2018.00048.
[12] O. Salman, I.H. Elhajj, A. Kayssi, A. Chehab, A review on machine learning–
based approaches for Internet traffic classification, Ann. Telecommun. 75 (2020)
673–710, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12243-020-00770-7.
[13] S. Dong, Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for network traffic
classification, Expert Syst. Appl. 176 (2021) 114885, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.eswa.2021.114885.
[14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, Toward effective mobile encrypted traffic classification through deep learning, Neurocomputing 409 (2020)
306–315, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.05.036.
[15] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, Z. Sun, A survey of techniques for mobile service
encrypted traffic classification using deep learning, IEEE Access 7 (2019)
54024–54033, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2912896.
[16] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, DISTILLER: Encrypted traffic
classification via multimodal multitask deep learning, J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
183 (2021) 102985, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2021.102985.
[17] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, T. Geng, DarknetSec: A novel self-attentive deep
learning method for darknet traffic classification and application identification, Comput. Secur. 116 (2022) 102663, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.
102663.
[18] H. Zhang, L. Yu, X. Xiao, Q. Li, F. Mercaldo, X. Luo, Q. Liu, TFE-GNN: A
temporal fusion encoder using graph neural networks for fine-grained encrypted
traffic classification, in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, 2023,
pp. 2066–2075, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3543507.3583227.
[19] X. Yun, J. Xie, S. Li, Y. Zhang, P. Sun, Detecting unknown HTTP-based malicious
communication behavior via generated adversarial flows and hierarchical traffic
features, Comput. Secur. 121 (2022) 102834, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.
2022.102834.

5. Limitations and future works
In this section, we further discuss the limitations as well as the
future work of our approach.
A restricted graph structure. In this paper, we employ the concept
of ‘‘burst’’ to segment network flows and build a Traffic Interaction
Graph (TIG) for network flow representation. While the TIG effectively
represents the interactive information within the network flow, it does
have some limitations in terms of information transmission within
the graph. Specifically, transferring information between non-adjacent
bursts requires multiple layers of graph neural networks and cannot be
achieved in a single learning step. We acknowledge these limitations
and intend to refine the graph structure in our future work.
Multiple flows detection. Although the main emphasis of this
paper is on classifying individual network flows, it is essential to
acknowledge that real-world activities frequently involve multiple network flows. In our future research, we plan to investigate methods
for leveraging the relationships between multiple network flows to
improve traffic classification in these intricate scenarios.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce DE-GNN, a deep learning-based model
designed for the fine-gained classification of encrypted network traffic.
Capitalizing on the inherent hierarchical structure of network traffic,
specifically, the byte-packet-flow hierarchy, DE-GNN delves deep into
encrypted traffic to extract meaningful information. Our approach commences by encoding the raw bytes and utilizes PacketCNN to acquire
packet-level representations of the traffic. Subsequently, we represent
network flows as Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) and employ Graph
Neural Networks (GNN) for flow-level learning. Given the distinction
between packet headers and payloads, we apply the same process
separately to both packet headers and payloads as described above.
Finally, the adaptive weighted feature fusion (ADFF) mechanism is
employed to combine the features extracted from packet headers and
payloads. Experimental results on two public datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of DE-GNN.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xinbo Han: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization. Guizhong Xu: Validation, Software,
Investigation. Meng Zhang: Resources, Methodology. Zheng Yang:
Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. Ziyang Yu: Resources.
Weiqing Huang: Validation. Chen Meng: Writing – review & editing,
Methodology.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
11

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.

[43] Y. Li, L. Liu, H. Qin, S. Deng, M.A. El-Yacoubi, G. Zhou, Adaptive deep feature
fusion for continuous authentication with data augmentation, IEEE Trans. Mob.
Comput. (2022) http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tmc.2022.3186614.
[44] G. Draper-Gil, A.H. Lashkari, M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, Characterization
of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related, in: Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, ICISSP,
2016, pp. 407–414, http://dx.doi.org/10.5220/0005740704070414.
[45] A.H. Lashkari, G.D. Gil, M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, Characterization of tor
traffic using time based features, in: International Conference on Information
Systems Security and Privacy, Vol. 2, SciTePress, 2017, pp. 253–262, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.5220/0006105602530262.
[46] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, End-to-end encrypted traffic
classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI, IEEE,
2017, pp. 43–48, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2017.8004872.
[47] T.N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
networks, 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1609.02907, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.02907.
[48] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, S. Jegelka, How powerful are graph neural
networks? 2018, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1810.00826, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.00826.
[49] W.L. Hamilton, R. Ying, J. Leskovec, Inductive representation learning on large
graphs, 2018, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.02216, arXiv:1706.02216.

[20] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, J. Hu, Fine-grained webpage fingerprinting using
only packet length information of encrypted traffic, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur. 16 (2020) 2046–2059, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2020.3046876.
[21] J. Xing, C. Wu, Detecting anomalies in encrypted traffic via deep dictionary
learning, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE, 2020, pp. 734–739, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS50562.2020.9162940.
[22] V.F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, I. Martinovic, Appscanner: Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic, in: 2016 IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy, EuroS&P, IEEE, 2016, pp.
439–454, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/eurosp.2016.40.
[23] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, L. He, Mampf: Encrypted traffic
classification based on multi-attribute markov probability fingerprints, in: 2018
IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–10, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iwqos.2018.8624124.
[24] T. Van Ede, R. Bortolameotti, A. Continella, J. Ren, D.J. Dubois, M. Lindorfer,
D. Choffnes, M. van Steen, A. Peter, Flowprint: Semi-supervised mobile-app
fingerprinting on encrypted network traffic, in: Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium, NDSS, Vol. 27, 2020, http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.
2020.24412.
[25] V.F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, I. Martinovic, Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.
13 (1) (2017) 63–78, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2017.2737970.
[26] A. Saber, B. Fergani, M. Abbas, Encrypted traffic classification: Combining overand under-sampling through a pca-svm, in: 2018 3rd International Conference
on Pattern Analysis and Intelligent Systems, PAIS, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/pais.2018.8598480.
[27] B. Anderson, S. Paul, D. McGrew, Deciphering malware’s use of TLS (without
decryption), J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Tech. 14 (2018) 195–211, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11416-017-0306-6.
[28] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, Z. Li, Fs-net: A flow sequence network for
encrypted traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1171–1179, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/infocom.2019.8737507.
[29] T. Shapira, Y. Shavitt, FlowPic: A generic representation for encrypted traffic
classification and applications identification, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 18
(2) (2021) 1218–1232, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tnsm.2021.3071441.
[30] X. Liu, J. You, Y. Wu, T. Li, L. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Ge, Attention-based bidirectional
GRU networks for efficient HTTPS traffic classification, Inform. Sci. 541 (2020)
297–315, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2020.05.035.
[31] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, J. Yu, Et-bert: A contextualized datagram
representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic classification,
in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, 2022, pp. 633–642, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1145/3485447.3512217.
[32] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, M. Saberian, Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,
Soft Comput. 24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00500-01904030-2.
[33] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapè, MIMETIC: Mobile encrypted
traffic classification using multimodal deep learning, Comput. Netw. 165 (2019)
106944, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2019.106944.
[34] X. Wang, S. Chen, J. Su, App-net: A hybrid neural network for encrypted mobile
traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE, 2020, pp. 424–429,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS50562.2020.9162891.
[35] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, Accurate decentralized application
identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph neural networks, IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16 (2021) 2367–2380, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
tifs.2021.3050608.
[36] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, T. Zhang, Flow-based encrypted network traffic
classification with graph neural networks, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. (2022)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2022.3227500.
[37] P.W. Battaglia, J.B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Zambaldi, M.
Malinowski, A. Tacchetti, D. Raposo, A. Santoro, R. Faulkner, et al., Relational
inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks, 2018, http://dx.doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.1806.01261, arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261.
[38] Y. Kim, Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification, 2014, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1408.5882, arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882.
[39] K. Al-Naami, S. Chandra, A. Mustafa, L. Khan, Z. Lin, K. Hamlen, B. Thuraisingham, Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi-directional dependence, in:
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference on Computer Security Applications,
2016, pp. 177–188, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2991079.2991123.
[40] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, Y. Bengio, et al.,
Graph attention networks, stat 1050 (20) (2017) 10–48550, http://dx.doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.1710.10903.
[41] K. Lin, X. Xu, F. Xiao, MFFusion: A multi-level features fusion model for
malicious traffic detection based on deep learning, Comput. Netw. 202 (2022)
108658, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108658.
[42] Q. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Sun, T. Tan, Deep feature fusion for iris and periocular
biometrics on mobile devices, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 13 (11) (2018)
2897–2912, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2018.2833033.

Xinbo Han received bachelor’s degree from Taiyuan University Of Technology, in 2020. He is presently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree at School of Cyber Security, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include network attack detection, encrypted traffic
classification and deep learning.

Guizhong Xu received master’s degree from Communication
University Of China. He is now an senior engineer in the Information Science Academy of China Electronics Technology
Group Corporation. His research interests include anomaly
detection and network traffic analysis.

Meng Zhang received Ph.D. degree from University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is a research professor,Ph.D.
supervisor of Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. His research interests include signal
processing theory and technology, electromagnetic acoustic
and optical detection and protection.

Zheng Yang received master’s degree from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
He is now an associate senior engineer in the institute of
information engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
research interests include moving target defense.

Ziyang Yu received bachelor’s degree from Huazhong University Of Science And Technology, in 2018. He is presently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree at School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research
interests include APT attack detection and investigation
based on provenance graph.

12

Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

X. Han et al.
Weiqing Huang is a research professor,Ph.D. supervisor
of Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy
of Sciences. He is also a professor in the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
His research interests include signal processing theory and
technology, electromagnetic acousto-optical detection and
protection.

Chen Meng received master’s degree from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. He is
now an engineer in the institute of information engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
encrypted traffic classification.

13