IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

3

Deep Contrastive Representation Learning
With Self-Distillation
Zhiwen Xiao , Member, IEEE, Huanlai Xing , Member, IEEE, Bowen Zhao , Rong Qu , Senior Member, IEEE,
Shouxi Luo , Member, IEEE, Penglin Dai , Member, IEEE, Ke Li , and Zonghai Zhu

Abstract—Recently, contrastive learning (CL) is a promising way
of learning discriminative representations from time series data.
In the representation hierarchy, semantic information extracted
from lower levels is the basis of that captured from higher levels.
Low-level semantic information is essential and should be considered in the CL process. However, the existing CL algorithms
mainly focus on the similarity of high-level semantic information.
Considering the similarity of low-level semantic information may
improve the performance of CL. To this end, we present a deep
contrastive representation learning with self-distillation (DCRLS)
for the time series domain. DCRLS gracefully combine data augmentation, deep contrastive learning, and self distillation. Our data
augmentation provides different views from the same sample as the
input of DCRLS. Unlike most CL algorithms that concentrate on
high-level semantic information only, our deep contrastive learning
also considers the contrast similarity of low-level semantic information between peer residual blocks. Our self distillation promotes
knowledge flow from high-level to low-level blocks to help regularize DCRLS in the knowledge transfer process. The experimental
results demonstrate that the DCRLS-based structures achieve excellent performance on classification and clustering on 36 UCR2018
datasets.
Index Terms—Contrastive learning, knowledge distillation,
representation learning, time series classification, time series
clustering.

I. INTRODUCTION
IME series data is of significant importance to various
areas in the real world, such as electroencephalogram
(EEG) analysis [1], cardiotocography (CTG) interpretation [2],
symbolic sequence classification [3], automated damage detection [4], anomaly detection [5], regime change detection [6],

T

Manuscript received 31 March 2023; revised 2 July 2023; accepted 4 August
2023. Date of publication 29 August 2023; date of current version 23 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 62172342 and 62202392, in part by the
Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province under Grant F2022105027,
in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province under Grants
2022NSFSC0568, 2022NSFSC0944, and 2023NSFSC0459, and in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China. (Corresponding author: Huanlai Xing.)
Zhiwen Xiao, Huanlai Xing, Bowen Zhao, Shouxi Luo, Penglin Dai, Ke Li,
and Zonghai Zhu are with the School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence,
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China, also with the Tangshan
Institute of Southwest Jiaotong University, Tangshan 063000, China, and also
with the Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Urban Intelligent Transportation, Ministry of Education, China (e-mail: xiao1994zw@163.com; hxx
@home.swjtu.edu.cn; cn16bz@icloud.com; sxluo@swjtu.edu.cn; penglindai
@swjtu.edu.cn; keli@swjtu.edu.cn; zzhu@swjtu.edu.cn).
Rong Qu is with the School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham,
NG7 2RD 455356 Nottingham, U.K. (e-mail: rong.qu@nottingham.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TETCI.2023.3304948

valvular heart diseases detection [7], colorectal polyp diagnosis [8] and motion detection [9]. To achieve accurate time
series classification, it is essential for an algorithm to effectively capture both local and global patterns of the input time
series [10].
Deep learning algorithms on time series classification have
achieved promising performance because they can discover the
intrinsic connections among representations by unfolding the
internal representation hierarchy of data. For instance, Wang
et al. [11] tested three deep learning architectures, including
fully convolutional network (FCN), residual network (ResNet),
and multilayer perceptron (MLP) for time series classification.
Fawaz et al. [12] proposed a multi-head neural network, called
InceptionTime, to extract multi-scaled features from the input.
Xiao et al. [13] presented a robust temporal feature network
integrating an LSTM-based attention network and a temporal
feature network for supervised classification and unsupervised
clustering. The algorithms above heavily rely on a massive
amount of labeled data, making it challenging to adapt them
to scenarios with limited labeled data.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in self-supervised
learning as a means of generating effective representations from
unlabelled data for use in downstream tasks. Among the most
popular trends in this area are algorithms that incorporate contrastive learning (CL) [14], [15], [16]. CL is a discriminative
approach to similar group samples closer. For instance, He
et al. [17] proposed MoCo using a momentum encoder to learn
representations of the negative pairs obtained from a memory
bank. Chen et al. [18] devised SimCLR to replace the momentum
encoder with a large batch of antagonistic pairs. Chen et al. [19]
developed SimSiam ignoring the negative samples for feature
extraction. Jin et al. [20] designed a multi-scale contrastive
approach with self-distillation that achieved decent performance
on a number of benchmark datasets. A self-supervised learning paradigm that utilizes single-stage online knowledge distillation to enhance the quality of model representations was
proposed [21]. Hu et al. [22] designed an unsupervised crossmodal hashing method to achieve decent retrieval performance.
Li et al. [23] put forward an online clustering approach for
instance- and cluster-level CL. Shu et al. [24] introduced an
anchor-contrastive representation learning approach for semisupervised skeleton-based action recognition. Xu et al. [25]
devised an X-invariant contrastive augmentation and representation learning method for skeleton-based action recognition.
Lin et al. [26] presented a contrastive matching method with

2471-285X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

momentum distillation to address the bi-level noisy correspondence problem in graph matching. Yu et al. [27] designed a
contrastive instance learning method with self-distillation for
audio-visual violence detection. Wang et al. [28] introduced
a CL-based transformer model with label-free distillation for
feature extraction in remote sensing.
CL has been applied to the time series field. For example,
Mohsenvand et al. [29] extended the SimCLR model [18] to capture representations from EEG data. Eldele et al. [30] introduced
an unsupervised time series representation learning framework
via temporal and contextual contrasting to learn representations from unlabeled data. Yue et al. [31] designed a universal
framework for understanding time series representations at an
arbitrary semantic level. Different from computer vision (CV),
CL in the time series domain develops slowly. The following
lists some notable limitations in this domain.
First, the time series domain lacks large-scale datasets, e.g.,
unlike ImageNet in CV, to provide models with rich semantic
features in the data [30], [31]. As a result, time series models
usually have little prior knowledge to help handle real-world
tasks, such as anomaly detection.
Second, data augmentation is crucial for CL to understand
the similarity of different views from the same sample and the
similarity with the views from different samples [14]. Unlike
image data, time series data is a series of time-ordered data points
associated with single or multiple time-dependent variables [13].
Typical augmentation methods for image data, such as crop,
are not directly applicable to time series domain. Meanwhile,
time series data augmentation has not received enough research
attention [29], [30], [31].
Third, a deep neural network aims at learning multiple levels
of feature representations with increasing abstraction. Its performance is dependent on high- and low-level semantic information
obtained from the data [32]. As known, the quality of the
obtained high-level semantic information is based on that of the
low-level semantic information already extracted. On the other
hand, most learning models update their parameters using the
backpropagation (BP) [33] method. High-level semantic information influences low-level semantic information to a certain
extent according to BP. Hence, low-level semantic information
is also important and should be considered in the CL process.
To the best of our knowledge, most of the existing CL-based
algorithms in the time series field, such as SimCLR on EEG [29]
and temporal and contextual contrasting [30], mainly focus
on the similarity of high-level semantic information. Ignoring
the similarity of low-level semantic information may lead to a
deteriorated CL performance. Unfortunately, this issue has not
been well studied in the literature.
To tackle the problems above, we propose a deep contrastive
representation learning with self-distillation (DCRLS). To
be specific, DCRLS gracefully integrates data augmentation,
deep contrastive learning, and self distillation to explore the
representations hidden in time series data. Data augmentation
provides different views from the same sample as the input of
DCRLS. The feature extractor for DCRLS is a residual network
(ResNet) containing three residual blocks. Deep contrastive
learning provides the contrast similarity of high-level semantic

information and that of low-level semantic information
between peer residual blocks to mine instance-level features
between different perspectives from the same sample. Inspired
by BYOT [34], self distillation transfers knowledge from
high-level to low-level blocks for self regularization purpose.
Unlike BYOT’s KL divergence-based knowledge distillation
(KD) loss function, DCRLS uses the L2 function to measure
the difference between high-level and low-level feature vectors.
Fig. 1 illustrates the overview of DCRLS.
Our major contributions are summarized as follows:
r We present DCRLS that ensembles data augmentation,
deep contrastive learning, and self distillation techniques,
to mine the intrinsic connections between the internal
representational hierarchy of data for downstream tasks.
r Unlike other CL-based algorithms, DCRLS considers the
contrast similarity of high-level semantic information and
that of low-level semantic information between peer residual blocks via deep contrastive learning.
r DCRLS is applied to time series classification and clustering with 36 UCR2018 datasets considered. On classification, DCRLS outperforms six existing classification
algorithms on 28 datasets in terms of mean accuracy,
‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure, and AVG_rank; on clustering,
DCRLS wins on 8 out of 36 datasets when compared with
13 clustering algorithms with respect to average rand index,
‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure, and AVG_rank.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In
Section II, we review related work on time series classification
and clustering. In Section III, we provide a detailed description
of the problem formulation and our proposed approach, DCRLS.
Section IV presents an analysis of our experimental results, and
finally, we draw our conclusion in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
This section reviews time series classification and clustering
algorithms.
A. Time Series Classification
Time series classification algorithms can be roughly classified
into two categories: traditional and deep-learning algorithms.
1) Traditional Algorithms: Distance- and feature-based algorithms are two main streams for time series classification.
Combining the nearest neighbor (NN) and dynamic time warping (DTW) is a commonly used as distance-based method.
This method focuses on calculating the similarities between
spatial features of data, e.g., DT WI , DT WA , DT WC and
DT WD [10]. Besides, researchers have devoted their effects
on ensemble approaches for time series classification. Lines
and Bagnall [35] introduced an elastic ensemble (EE) algorithm
hybridizing 11 1-NN-based elastic distances for various time
series classification tasks. Lines et al. [36] proposed a collective
of transformation-based ensemble (COTE) algorithm that used
multiple standard classifiers to achieve decent performance. The
hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based ensembles
(HIVE-COTE) [37], HIVE-COTE 2.0 [38], and local cascade
ensemble (LCE) [39] are also ensemble-based.

XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION

5

Fig. 1. Overview of DCRLS. The feature extractor is a residual network (ResNet) including three residual blocks, an average pooling layer, and two dense (i.e.,
fully-connected) layers. Each residual block consists of a 1-dimensional convolutional neural network (Conv), a batch normalization (BatchNorm) module, and a
rectified linear unit (ReLU) function, where “Conv 8x128” stands for a 1-dimensional Conv with a kernel size of 8 and a channel number of 128.

Feature-based algorithms aims at capturing representative
features from time series data. For example, Karlsson et al. [40]
designed a generalized random shapelet forest algorithm with
shapelets and bag-of-words methods used for feature extraction.
The learned pattern similarity [41], hidden state conditional
random field [42] and interpretable representation learning [43]
are feature-based as well.
2) Deep Learning Algorithms: Deep learning algorithms
learn the underlying relationships among data representations
by constructing an internal hierarchy of data representation.
Currently, there are two branches of work in the community: single-network-based and dual-network-based models.
A single-network-based model is based on one (usually hybridized) network that concentrates on the significant connections within the hierarchy. For example, Xiao et al. [44]
introduced a multi-process collaborative architecture using a
multi-head capsule network to extract multi-scale features from
the input. Other examples of single-network-based models include MLP, ResNet, FCN [11], InceptionTime [12], ResNet with
random vector functional link [45], residual channel attention
network [46], CNN-based federated distillation learning [47],
deep echo state network [48], ROCKET [49], MiniRocket [50],
and ConvTimeNet [51]. In contrast, dual-network-based models
typically consist of two parallel networks: one for local-feature
extraction and one for global-relation extraction. The former
typically uses CNNs to extract local features, while the latter focuses on capturing the connections among the extracted features.
Examples of dual-network-based models include RTFN [13],
robust neural temporal search [52], FCN-LSTM [53], ResNetTransformer [54], SelfMatch [55] and attentional prototype
network [56].
B. Time Series Clustering
Time series clustering algorithms are used to group similar
data together for better analysis of its structure [57]. Two main

streams in the time series clustering community are traditional
and deep learning algorithms. Traditional clustering algorithms
use dissimilarity measure or time series representation methods
to distinguish the differences in data structures. For example,
Yang et al. [58] introduced a combination of discriminative
analysis and l2,1 -norm minimization for unsupervised feature
selection. Li et al. [59] proposed an unsupervised feature selection algorithm for non-negative spectral analysis. The robust unsupervised feature selection [60], robust local learning
method [61], K-spectral centroid clustering [62], DTW-based
barycenter averaging method [63], K-shape [64], U-shape [64]
and fuzzy-based clustering [65] all belong to traditional clustering methods. On the contrary, deep learning clustering ones
provide rich representations for standard clustering, e.g., the
deep temporal clustering [66], unsupervised deep embedding
algorithm [67], improved deep embedding algorithm [67], deep
temporal clustering representation algorithm [68], and ClusterGAN [69].
III. THE PROPOSED DCRLS
First of all, the problem formulation is introduced. Then, the
three key components of DCRLS, namely data augmentation,
deep contrastive learning, and self distillation, are described. Finally, the DCRLS-based classification and clustering structures
are given.
A. Problem Formulation
Let an arbitrary time equidistant time series sequence denoted
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
by xi = {{x1,1 , . . ., x1,d }, . . ., {{xl,1 , . . ., xl,d }} ∈ X , where
X ⊆ Rl×d is the input space, and l and d are the length and
number of covariates of xi , respectively. xi is univariate if d
= 1, and xi is multivariate, otherwise. The goal is to learn a
nonlinear embedding function fθ , which maps xi ∈ X to its
representation ri that interprets itself for downstream tasks, e.g.,
time series classification.

6

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Example raw data and its jitter-and-scale and Cutout-modified data on the Wafer dataset.

B. Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is a widely-used regularization method in
deep learning that can significantly improve a model’s robustness. DCRLS leverages two augmentation methods to produce
different views from the same sample as the input. To be specific,
the first method is based on a jitter-and-scale strategy through
adding the Gaussian function to the raw data. The second method
is a variant of Cutout [70], where a small piece of the raw
data is randomly replaced without changing its overall trend.
Fig. 2 illustrates examples of the raw data and the resulting
jitter-and-scale and Cutout-modified data generated from the
Wafer dataset.
C. Deep Contrastive Learning (DeepCL)
DeepCL aims at understanding the contrast similarity of
high-level semantic information and that of low-level semantic
information between peer residual blocks to capture the discriminative representations from unlabeled data. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, there are four parts involving CL, including Residual
Block 1, Residual Block 2, Residual Block 3, and the output of
ResNet (i.e. the whole model).
CL understands the similarity of different views from the
same sample via a contrasting loss function [18]. To be specific,
it obtains two feature vectors for every sample from the two

augmented views above. Assume there are N input samples.
The DeepCL method thus obtains 2N feature vectors. Let zti be
+
the i-th feature vector, i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., 2N }. Let zti denote the
i
positive sample of zt that comes from the other augmented view
+
of the same input. (zti , zti ) is a positive pair. In the meanwhile,
we consider (2N − 2) feature vectors from other inputs within
the same batch as the negative samples of zti . In other words, zti
has (2N − 2) negative pairs with its negative samples. We use
the contrasting loss function in [18], [29], LCL , to maximize the
similarity between the positive pair and minimize that between
negative pairs, as defined in (1).




+
exp sim zti , zti /τCL
log 2 N
LCL = −


 i m
/τCL
m=1 1[m=i] exp sim zt , zt
i=1
(1)
uT v
represents the dot product between
where, sim(u, v) = ||u||||v||
l2 normalized u and v (i.e., cosine smilarity). 1[m=i] ∈ {0, 1}
is an indicator function, equal to 1 iff [m = i] and τCL is a
temperature parameter of LCL . In this article, we set τCL = 1.0
(more details are found in Section IV-C).
The loss function of DeepCL, LDCL , is defined in (2):
2N


LDCL = LResblk1
+ LResblk2
+ LResblk3
+ Loutput
CL
CL
CL
CL

(2)

XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION

where, LResblk1
, LResblk2
, LResblk3
and Loutput
are the conCL
CL
CL
CL
trasting loss functions of Residual Block 1, Residual Block 2,
Residual Block 3, and the output of ResNet, respectively.

7

the k-means loss in the overall loss function [66], [68], [73],
the DCRLS-based clustering method solely relies on the loss
function of DCRLS for parameter updating.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS

D. Self Distillation
Self-distillation, a special teacher-student model, transfers its
knowledge from high-level to low-level blocks [34]. Let V1 , V2 ,
V3 represent the output feature vectors of the first, second and
third residual block, respectively. To match each vector with
ResNet’s soft label (i.e., output feature vector), q, a temporal
classifier, ψ, is employed. This classifier comprises an average
pooling layer and a dense (i.e., fully-connected) layer. After
passing through the classifier, Vi ’s output is represented as qi ,
which is defined in (3).
qi = fsoftmax (ψ(Vi )/τSD )

i ∈ {1, 2, 3}

(3)

where, the activation function fsoftmax is used to compute the
probability distribution of a given matrix, and the temperature
parameter τSD is used for self-distillation. As the previous work
suggested [34], [71], we set τSD = 1.0.
The L2 loss function is utilized to quantify the disparity
between qi and q and is expressed as follows:
LiKD = ||qi − q||2

i ∈ {1, 2, 3}

(4)

The self-distillation loss for DCRLS, LKD , is the summation
of LiKD , shown in (5)
LKD =

3


LiKD

(5)

i=1

Based on LKD and LDCL , the loss function of DCRLS, L,
is written in (6).
L = LKD + LDCL + ||θ||2

(6)

where, θ stands for the parameters of DCRLS, and  the coefficient of ||θ||2 (i.e., L2 regularization). Following [12], [13], we
set  = 0.0005.
E. DCRLS-Based Classification
To reflect the effectiveness of the instance-level features
extracted by DCRLS for classification tasks, this article adds
a classifier behind the first dense (i.e., fully-connected) layer
in ResNet. Like most existing time series classification algorithms [29], [30], [31], [72], DCRLS-based classification uses
a two-step method. Firstly, unsupervised learning is applied to
extract informative features from the data. Subsequently, these
features are supplied to the classifier for classification. Following
the previous work in [72], we embed a one-nearest-neighbor (1NN) classifier into the DCRLS-based classification framework.
F. DCRLS-Based Clustering
To handle clustering tasks, this article adds a k-means algorithm behind the first dense layer in ResNet. The DCRLS-based
clustering extracts rich representations from data through unsupervised learning and then sends them to the k-means algorithm
for clustering. Unlike some previous approaches that include

This section first introduces the experimental setup and performance metrics. Then, it focuses on the hyper-parameter sensitivity and ablation study. Finally, the performance of DCRLS-based
classification and clustering is evaluated.
A. Experimental Setup
1) Data Description: In accordance with [66], [68], we evaluate the efficacy of DCRLS-based classification and clustering
on 36 commonly used datasets from the UCR2018 archive [74].
The number of categories varies from 2 to 25, and the length
of the time series varies from 65 to 637, encompassing various
domains such as ECG and motion. For additional information,
please refer to Table I.
2) Implementation Details: To prevent overfitting during
training, we apply L2 regularization and dropout techniques.
Additionally, we set the decay value of batch normalization to
0.9 to ensure the stability of the training process, following
the approach in [11], [13]. Meanwhile, we adopt the Adam
optimizer, where the momentum term is fixed to 0.9 and the
learning rate is initialized with 0.001 and tuned with a decay
value of 0.9. All experiments are run on a computer with Ubuntu
18.04 OS, an Nvidia GTX 1070Ti GPU with 8 GB, an Nvidia
GTX 1080Ti GPU with 11 GB, and an AMD R5 1400 CPU with
16 G RAM.
B. Performance Metrics
To compare the performance of various algorithms for time
series classification and clustering, we adopt a number of wellknown performance metrics.
1) Metrics for Classification: Based on the top-1 accuracy, three metrics, namely, ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’, mean accuracy
(MeanACC), and AVG_rank, are used to rank different supervised algorithms. To be specific, for an arbitrary algorithm, it
is associated with ‘win’, ‘tie’, and ‘lose’ values, revealing on
how many datasets it is better than, equivalent to, and worse
than the other algorithms, respectively. Its ‘best’ value is the
summation of the corresponding ‘win’ and ‘tie’ values. As
the previous work [11], [12], [13], [44], [52], [53], [56], we
use the AVG_rank score based on the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test with Holm’s alpha (5%) correction to ranking various classification algorithms.
2) Metrics for Clustering: We use a commonly adopted performance indicator, rand index (RI) [66], [68], as defined in (7).
RI =

PTP + NTP
S(S − 1)/2

(7)

where, P T P and N T P represent the numbers of positive and
negative time series pairs in the clustering, respectively, and S
is the dataset size. Note that AVG_RI is the average RI value of
a certain algorithm.

8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE I
DETAILS OF THE 36 UCR2018 DATASETS SELECTED

TABLE II
MEANACC RESULTS WITH DIFFERENT PARAMETER SETTINGS
ON 36 DATASETS

C. Hyper-Parameter Sensitivity
We use the 36 UCR2018 datasets above to study the impact
of hyper-parameter settings on DCRLS.
1) Effectiveness of τCL : τCL is a threshold value for DCRLS
to distinguish the similarity of different views from the same
sample. Tables II and III show the MeanACC results obtained
by DCRLS-based classification and AVG_RI results obtained
by DCRLS-based clustering with different τCL values, respectively. When τCL = 1, the DCRLS-based classification and

TABLE III
AVG_RI RESULTS WITH DIFFERENT PARAMETER SETTINGS ON 36 DATASETS

clustering result in 0.7565 and 0.6947, the highest MeanACC
score and highest AVG_RI value, respectively. It means τCL = 1
is suitable for DCRLS to capture representations from the input.
2) Effectiveness of KD Loss: A teacher-student model needs
to choose an appropriate KD loss to measure the difference
between high- and low-level features. Tables II and III also
show the impact of KD loss on DCRLS. One can observe that
self distillation improves the performance of DCRLS mainly
because supervising low-level semantics with high-level ones
helps regularize the model itself. Besides, L2 outperforms the
other losses in both classification and clustering. Therefore, we
choose L2 to promote the knowledge flow within the model.

XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION

9

TABLE IV
MEANACC AND AVG_RI RESULTS OBTAINED BY VARIOUS DEEPCL-BASED VARIANTS FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING VARIANTS ON 36 DATASETS

D. Ablation Study
We investigate the effectiveness of two important components
of DCRLS on 36 datasets.
1) Effectiveness of Deep Contrastive Learning (DeepCL):
As aforementioned, our DeepCL has four parts involving CL,
i.e. Residual Blocks 1, 2, and 3, and the output of ResNet,
i.e., the whole model, as shown in Fig. 1. Let ContrBlock1,
ContrBlock2, ContrBlock3, and ContrOutput denote the contrastive learning at the outputs of Residual Blocks 1, 2, 3, and
ResNet, respectively.
To evaluate the impact of low-level semantic information on
extraction of high-level semantic information, we compare a
number of DeepCL-based variants for classification and clustering variants on 36 datasets.
r Baseline: It uses the proposed ResNet structure (i.e. the
whole model) for feature extraction and enables CL at the
outputs of ResNet.
r Baseline-ContrBlock1: Baseline with extra CL enabled at
the outputs of Residual Block 1.
r Baseline-ContrBlock2: Baseline with extra CL enabled at
the outputs of Residual Block 2.
r Baseline-ContrBlock3: Baseline with extra CL enabled at
the outputs of Residual Block 3.
r Baseline-ContrBlock1-ContrBlock2: Baseline with extra
CL enabled at the outputs of Residual Blocks 1 and 2.
r Baseline-ContrBlock1-ContrBlock3: Baseline with extra
CL enabled at the outputs of Residual Blocks 1 and 3.
r Baseline-ContrBlock2-ContrBlock3: Baseline with extra
CL enabled at the outputs of Residual Blocks 2 and 3.
r DeepCL: Baseline with extra CL enabled at the outputs of
Residual Blocks 1, 2 and 3.
As shown in Table IV, with continuous addition of CL on
low-level outputs, the accuracy values of classification and clustering are both increasing. For example, the MeanACC value
of Baseline is 0.6674 while that of the Baseline-ContrBolck2 is
0.6882. This, to a certain extend, reflects the importance of low
level semantic information to representation learning. DeepCL
understands the contrast similarity of high-level semantic information and that of low-level semantic information between peer
Residual Blocks, enhancing the ability of representation learning
on DCRLS. This is why DeepCL achieves the best performance
among all compared variants.
2) Effectiveness of Self Distillation: To evaluate the proposed
self distillation method, we select four advanced self-distillation
methods for performance comparison, including BYOT, SAD,

TSD with KL, and TSD with L2 . These self distillation methods
are listed below.
r BYOT: the best your own teacher method with the Kullback Leibler (KL) function used to measure the difference
between high- and low-level feature vectors [34].
r SAD: the layer-wise attention self-distillation method
transferring knowledge from high levels to low levels [75].
r TSD with KL: the transitive self-distillation method with
the Kullback Leibler (KL) function as its loss function [76].
r TSD with L2 : the transitive self-distillation method with
the L2 function as its loss function [76].
r Self Distillation (Ours): using the L2 function to measure
the difference between high- and low-level feature vectors.
As shown in Fig. 1, DCRLS consists of DeepCL and the proposed self distillation. To validate the impact of self distillation
on DCRLS, we compare it with a number of DeepCL variants
listed below.
r DeepCL-BYOL: DeepCL with the best your own teacher
method.
r DeepCL-SAD: DeepCL with the layer-wise attention selfdistillation method.
r DeepCL-TSD with KL: DeepCL with the transitive selfdistillation method, where the KL function is adopted.
r DeepCL-TSD with L2 : DeepCL with the transitive selfdistillation method, where the L2 function is used.
r DCRLS: DeepCL with the proposed self distillation
method.
The MeanACC and AVG_RI results obtained by DeepCL
with various self distillation techniques for classification and
clustering on 36 datasets are shown in Table V. Clearly, DeepCL
results in the worst performance on both classification and clustering. This is because self distillation can effectively promotes
knowledge flow within the model, enhancing its robustness. In
addition, DCRLS outperforms DeepCL-BYOT, DeepCL-SAD,
DeepCL-TSD with KL, and DeepCL-TSD with L2 with respect to MeanACC and AVG_RI, which means the proposed
self distillation achieves better performance than a number of
well-known methods when working with DeepCL on time series
classification and clustering tasks.
E. Evaluation of DCRLS-Based Classification
To evaluate the performance of DCRLS-based classification,
we compare it with a number of existing CL-based classification algorithms against ‘win’/‘lose’/‘tie’, MeanACC, and
AVG_rank, as listed below.

10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE V
MEANACC AND AVG_RI RESULTS OBTAINED BY DEEPCL WITH VARIOUS SELF DISTILLATION TECHNIQUES FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING ON 36
DATASETS

r T-Loss: a method based on random sub-series technique
ResNet as its feature extractor [72].

r SimCLR: a modified version of SimCLR adapted to time
series classification with ResNet as its feature extractor [18].
r CRL with KL: a contrastive representation leaning method
with the Kullback Leibler (KL) function as its selfdistillation loss function and ResNet as its feature extractor [20].
r CRL with L2 : a contrastive representation leaning method
with the L2 function as its self-distillation loss function
and ResNet as its feature extractor [20].
r KNCRL with KL: a KD-based contrastive leaning method
with the KL function as its KD loss function and ResNet
as its feature extractor [21].
r KNCRL with L2 : a KD-based contrastive representation
leaning method with the L2 function as its KD loss function
and ResNet as its feature extractor [21].
Note that the algorithms above all take 1-NN as their classifier
for classification. The top-1 accuracy results obtained with different algorithms on 36 selected UCR2018 datasets are shown
in Table VI . The DCRLS-based classification is the best among
all algorithms as it obtains the highest MeanACC and ‘best’
values, 28 and 0.7565, and the smallest AVG_rank score, 1.7639.
Rather than focusing on the contrastive similarity of high-level
semantic information only, DCRLS-based classification considers the contrast similarity of multi-level semantic information,
especially that of low-level semantic information between peer
Residual Blocks, which is beneficial for mining instance-level
features between different perspectives from the same sample.
KNCRL with L2 takes advantage of CL and KD to distinguish
the similarity of different views from the same sample and the
similarity with the views from different samples. That brings it
second in terms of MeanACC and AVG_rank, namely 0.7009
and 3.7361. On the contrary, it is difficult for T-Loss to generate
proper random sub-series as positive samples when mining
discriminate shapelets from the input, resulting in its performing
the worst among all the algorithms.
To further study the performance of DCRLS on classification,
we compare it with a separate 1-NN algorithm on 36 datasets.
Fig. 3 depicts the accuracy plot of DCRLS-based classification against 1-NN for each dataset. The results indicate that
DCRLS-based classification outperforms 1-NN in 30 cases, ties
in one case, and underperforms in five cases, with a p-value
less than 0.5 (about 0.0034). The performance of DCRLS-based
classification outstrips significantly that of 1-NN. That is because the instance-level features extracted by DCRLS are more

Fig. 3. Accuracy plot showing the performance difference between DCRLSbased classification and 1-NN.

conducive for the 1-NN classifier to distinguish the similarity
between different samples.
F. Evaluation of DCRLS-Based Clustering
To evaluate the performance of DCRLS-based clustering,
we compare it with a number of existing clustering algorithms
against three performance metrics: ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’, AVG_RI,
and AVG_rank. These algorithms are listed blow:
r K-means: a simple yet elegant approach that partitions a
dataset into K distinct, non-overlapping clusters [68].
r UDFS: a combination of discriminative analysis and l2,1 norm minimization for unsupervised feature selection [58].
r NDFS: an unsupervised feature selection algorithm using
non-negative spectral analysis [59].
r RUFS: a robust unsupervised feature selection algorithm
using local learning regularized robust nonnegative matrix
factorization [60].
r RSFS: a robust local learning method for graph Laplacian
and spectral regression construction [61].
r KSC: a K-spectral centroid clustering algorithm to mine
patterns of temporal variation [62].
r KBDB: a dynamic time warping-based barycenter averaging method [63].
r K-shape: a domain-independent, highly accurate, and efficient clustering approach for partitional, hierarchical, and
spectral clustering [64].
r U-shapelet: a shapelet method for time series clustering [64].
r DTC: a deep temporal clustering algorithm that integrates
dimensionality reduction and temporal clustering into endto-end learning [66].

XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION

11

TABLE VI
THE TOP-1 ACCURACY RESULTS OF DIFFERENT CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS ON 36 DATASETS WHEN USING 1-NN

r DEC: an unsupervised deep embedding algorithm for clustering analysis that learns feature representations and clustering assignments using deep neural network [67].
r IDEC: an improved version of DEC [67].
r DTCR: a deep temporal clustering representation algorithm integrating the temporal reconstruction and K-means
objective into the seq2seq model [68].
Table VII shows the RI results of different clustering algorithms on 36 datasets. DTCR and DCRLS-based clustering
are the best and second-best among all compared algorithms.
DTCR integrates the temporal reconstruction and K-means into
the seq2seq model, jointly optimizing its parameters for cluster structure improvement and temporal representation mining.
However, DTCR is mainly used for addressing cluster-specific
problems and it has complicated model structure. On the other
hand, DCRLS-based clustering updates the model’s parameters
via self-supervised learning and it adopts a K-means algorithm
for feature classification. Despite its simple structure, DCRLSbased clustering achieves decent performance on the 36 datasets,
thanks to the DCRLS’s strong ability for feature extraction.

Fig. 4. RI plot showing the performance difference between DCRLS-based
clustering and K-means.

To further study the effectiveness of DCRLS in time series
clustering, we compare DCRLS-based clustering with a separate
K-means algorithm on 36 datasets. Fig. 4 depicts the RI plot of

12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE VII
THE RI RESULTS OF DIFFERENT CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS ON 36 DATASETS

DCRLS-based clustering against K-means for each dataset. The
results show that DCRLS-based clustering achieves ‘win’/‘tie’/
‘loss’ in 30/1/5 cases, respectively, with a p-value less than 0.5
(about 0.0048). The performance of DCRLS-based clustering is
significantly better than that of K-means. That is because the
DCRLS-based clustering is provided with sufficient features
captured by DCRLS, especially those hiding deeply in the
input data.

DCRLS-based classification and clustering result in significant
performance improvement when compared with separate 1-NN
and K-mean algorithms, respectively. Meanwhile, DCRLS is
generic and has potential to be applied to other domains.
Due to the limited GPU resources for training, this work
considered 36 out of 128 UCR2018 datasets for model evaluation and comparison. In the future, we will validate DCRLS
on all UCR2018 datasets in the time series domain and on larger
datasets in other domains, such as ImageNet.

V. CONCLUSION
In the proposed DCRLS, deep contrastive learning pays
attention to the contrast similarity of multi-level semantic
information to mine instance-level features between different
perspectives from the same sample, while self distillation
transfers knowledge from high-level to low-level blocks to
regularize DCRLS during knowledge transfer. Experimental results demonstrate that DCRLS obtains promising results in both
classification and clustering tasks. Specifically, DCRLS-based
classification wins on 28 datasets in terms of mean accuracy,
‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure, and AVG_rank, compared with six
classification algorithms. DCRLS-based clustering wins on 8
datasets and takes the second best position among 14 clustering
algorithms regarding AVG_RI, ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure,
and AVG_rank. on With 36 UCR2018 datasets considered,

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the editors and reviewers for their valuable
suggestions to improve the quality of this work.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Supriya, S. Siuly, H. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Eeg sleep stages analysis and
classification based on weighed complex network features,” IEEE Trans.
Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 236–246, Apr. 2021.
[2] P. Fergus, C. Chalmers, C. C. Montanez, D. Reilly, P. Lisboa, and B.
Pineles, “Modelling segmented cardiotocography time-series signals using
one-dimensional convolutional neural networks for the early detection of
abnormal birth outcomes,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 882–892, Dec. 2021.
[3] Y. Yao, H. Chen, and X. Yao, “Discriminative learning in the model space
for symbolic sequence classification,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
Intell., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 154–167, Apr. 2021.

XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION

[4] A. M. Roy and J. Bhaduri, “Densesph-yolov5: An automated damage
detection model based on densenet and swin-transformer prediction headenabled yolov5 with attention mechanism,” Adv. Eng. Inform., vol. 56,
pp. 1–16, 2023.
[5] P. Jain, S. Jain, O. R. Zaïane, and A. Srivastava, “Anomaly detection
in resource constrained environments with streaming data,” IEEE Trans.
Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 649–659, Jun. 2022.
[6] E. Tsang and J. Chen, “Regime change detection using directional change
indicators in the foreign exchange market to chart Brexit,” IEEE Trans.
Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 185–193, Jun. 2018.
[7] S. Jamil and A. M. Roy, “An efficient and robust phonocardiography
(PCG)-based valvular heart diseases (VHD) detection framework using
vision transformer (VIT),” Comput. Bio. Med., vol. 158, pp. 1–15, 2023.
[8] S. Wang, Y. Yin, D. Wang, Z. Lv, Y. Wang, and Y. Jin, “An interpretable
deep neural network for colorectal polyp diagnosis under colonoscopy,”
Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 234, pp. 1–14, 2022.
[9] A. R. Shirazi and Y. Jin, “A strategy for self-organized coordinated motion
of a swarm of minimalist robots,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
Intell., vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 326–338, Oct. 2017.
[10] H. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Muller, “Deep
learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining Knowl.
Discov., vol. 33, pp. 917–963, 2019.
[11] Z. Wang, W. Yan, and T. Oates, “Time series classification from scratch
with deep neural networks: A strong baseline,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint
Conf. Neural Netw., 2017, pp. 1578–1585.
[12] H. Fawaz et al., “Inceptiontime: Finding alexnet for time series classification,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, pp. 1936–1962, 2020.
[13] Z. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Xing, S. Luo, P. Dai, and D. Zhan, “Rtfn: A robust
temporal feature network for time series classification,” Inform. Sci.,
vol. 571, pp. 65–86, 2021.
[14] A. Jaiswal, A. R. Babu, M. Zadeh, D. Banerjee, and F. Makedon, “A
survey on contrastive self-supervised learning,” Technologies, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 1–22, 2021.
[15] Y. Lin, Y. Gou, X. Liu, J. Bai, J. Lv, and X. Peng, “Dual contrastive prediction for incomplete multi-view representation learning,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4447–4461, Apr. 2023.
[16] Y. Li, M. Yang, D. Peng, T. Li, J. Huang, and X. Peng, “Twin contrastive
learning for online clustering,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 9,
pp. 2205–2221, Sep. 2022.
[17] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[18] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[19] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple siamese representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
pp. 15745–15753.
[20] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y. Li, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and S. Pan, “Multi-scale
contrastive siamese networks for self-supervised graph representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1477–1483.
[21] P. Bhat, E. Arani, and B. Zonooz, “Distill on the go: Online knowledge
distillation in self-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2021, pp. 2672–2681.
[22] P. Hu, H. Zhu, J. Lin, D. Peng, Y.-P. Zhao, and X. Peng, “Unsupervised
contrastive cross-modal hashing,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 3877–3889, Mar. 2023.
[23] Y. Li, P. Hu, Z. Liu, D. Peng, J. Zhou, and X. Peng, “Contrastive clustering,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8547–8555.
[24] X. Shu, B. Xu, L. Zhang, and J. Tang, “Multi-granularity anchorcontrastive representation learning for semi-supervised skeleton-based action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 7559–7576,
Jun. 2023.
[25] B. Xu, X. Shu, and Y. Song, “X-invariant contrastive augmentation and
representation learning for semi-supervised skeleton-based action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 3852–3867, 2022.
[26] Y. Lin, M. Yang, J. Yu, P. Hu, C. Zhang, and X. Peng, “Graph matching
with bi-level noisy correspondence,” 2022, arXiv: 2212.04085.
[27] J. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, R. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Modality-aware contrastive
instance learning with self-distillation for weakly-supervised audio-visual
violence detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2022,
pp. 6278–6287.
[28] X. Wang et al., “LaST: Label-free self-distillation contrastive learning with
transformer architecture for remote sensing image scene classification,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 6512205.

13

[29] M. Mohsenvand, M. R. Izadi, and P. Maes, “Contrastive representation
learning for electroencephalogram classification,” in Proc. Mach. Learn.
Health NeurIPS Workshop, 2020, pp. 238–253.
[30] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
contextual contrasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 2352–2359.
[31] Z. Yue et al., “TS2VEC: Towards universal representation of time series,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, pp. 8980–8987.
[32] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A
review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, Aug. 2013.
[33] P. Munro, “Backpropagation,” in Encyclopedia of Machine Learning, C.
Sammut and G. I. Webb Eds., 2011, p. 73.
[34] L. Zhang, J. Song, A. Gao, J. Chen, C. Bao, and K. Ma, “Be your own
teacher: Improve the performance of convolutional neural networks via self
distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp. 3712–3721,
2019.
[35] J. Lines and A. Bagnall, “Time series classification with ensembles of elastic distance measures,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, pp. 565–592,
2015.
[36] J. Lines, S. Taylor, and A. Bagnall, “Time-series classification with COTE:
The collective of transformation-based ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 2522–2535, Sep. 2015.
[37] J. Lines et al., “Time series classification with HIVE-COTE: The hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based ensembles,” ACM Trans.
Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 21, no. 52, pp. 1–35, 2018.
[38] M. Middlehurst, J. Large, M. Flynn, J. Lines, A. Bostrom, and A. Bagnall,
“Hive cote 2.0: A new meta ensemble for time series classification,” Mach.
Learn., vol. 110, pp. 3211–3243, 2021.
[39] K. Fauvel, É. Fromont, V. Masson, P. Faverdin, and A. Termier,
“Local cascade ensemble for multivariate data classification,” 2020,
arXiv:2005.03645.
[40] I. Karlsson, P. Papapetrou, and H. Bostrôm, “Generalized random shapelet
forests,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1053–1083, 2016.
[41] M. G. Baydogan and G. Runger, “Time series representation and similarity
based on local autopatterns,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 30, no. 2,
pp. 476–509, 2016.
[42] A. Quattoni, S. Wang, L. Morency, M. Collins, and T. Darrell, “Hidden
conditional random fields,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal., vol. 29, no. 10,
pp. 1848–1852, Oct. 2007.
[43] F. Baldán and J. Benítez, “Multivariate times series classification through
an interpretable representation,” Inform. Sci., vol. 569, pp. 596–614, 2021.
[44] Z. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Zhang, and E. Szczerbicki, “A new multi-process
collaborative architecture for time series classification,” Knowl. Based
Syst., vol. 220, pp. 1–11, 2021.
[45] W. Cheng, P. Sunganthan, and R. Katuwal, “Time series classification
using diversified ensemble deep random vector functional link and resnet
features,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 112, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[46] H. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Cui, K. Wang, and Q. Tang, “TCRAN: Multivariate
time series classification using residual channel attention networks with
time correction,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 114, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[47] H. Xing, Z. X. R. Qu, Z. Zhu, and B. Zhao, “An efficient federated
distillation learning system for multi-task time series classification,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, 2022, Art. no. 2517012.
[48] Z. Huang et al., “Functional deep echo state network improved by a bi-level
optimization approach for multivariate time series classification,” Appl.
Soft Comput., vol. 106, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[49] A. Dempster, D. Petitjean, and G. Webb, “Rocket: Exceptionally fast and
accurate time series classification using random convolutional kernels,”
Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, pp. 1454–1495, 2020.
[50] A. Dempster et al., “Minirocket: A very fast (almost) deterministic transform for time series classification,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 248–257.
[51] K. Kashiparekh, J. Narwariya, P. Malhotra, L. Vig, and G. Shroff, “Convtimenet: A pre-trained deep convolutional neural network for time series
classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
[52] Z. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Xing, R. Qu, F. Song, and B. Zhao, “RNTS: Robust
neural temporal search for time series classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8.
[53] F. Karim, S. Majumdar, H. Darabi, and S. Harford, “Multivariate LSTMFCNS for time series classification,” Neural Netw., vol. 116, pp. 237–245,
2019.
[54] S. H. Huang, L. Xu, and C. Jiang, “Residual attention net for superior crossdomain time sequence modeling,” in Fintech With Artificial Intelligence,
Big Data, and Blockchain.Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2021.

14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

[55] H. Xing, Z. Xiao, D. Zhan, S. Luo, P. Dai, and K. Li, “Selfmatch: Robust
semisupervised time-series classification with self-distillation,” Int. J.
Intell. Syst., vol. 37, pp. 8583–8610, 2022.
[56] X. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. Lin, and C.-T. Lu, “Tapnet: Multivariate time series
classification with attentional prototypical network,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 1–8.
[57] B. Lafabregue, J. Weber, P. Gançarski, and G. Forestier, “End-to-end deep
representation learning for time series clustering: A comparative study,”
Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 36, pp. 29–81, 2022.
[58] Y. Yang, H. Shen, Z. Ma, Z. Huang, and X. Zhou, “L2, 1-norm regularized
discriminative feature selection for unsupervised,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2011, pp. 1589–1594.
[59] Z. Li, Y. Yang, J. Liu, X. Zhou, and H. Lu, “Unsupervised feature selection
using nonnegative spectral analysis,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2012, vol. 26, pp. 1026–1032.
[60] M. Qian and C. Zhai, “Robust unsupervised feature selection,” in Proc.
Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2013, pp. 1621–1627.
[61] L. Shi, L. Du, and Y. Shen, “Robust spectral learning for unsupervised feature selection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2014,
pp. 977–982.
[62] J. Yang and J. Leskovec, “Patterns of temporal variation in online media,”
in Proc. 4th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2011, pp. 177–186.
[63] F. Petitjean, A. Ketterlin, and P. Gancarski, “A global averaging method for dynamic time warping, with the applications
to clustering,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 678–693,
2011.
[64] J. Paparrizos and L. Gravano, “K-shape: Efficient and accurate clustering
of time series,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2015,
pp. 1855–1870.
[65] H. Kamalzadeh, A. Ahmadi, and S. Mansour, “Clustering time-series
by a novel slope-based similarity measure considering particle swarm
optimization,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 96, pp. 1–16, 2020.
[66] N. Madiraju, S. Sadat, D. Fisher, and H. Karimabadi, “Deep temporal
clustering: Fully unsupervised learning of time-domain features,” 2018,
arXiv:1802.01059.
[67] X. Guo, L. Gao, X. Liu, and J. Yin, “Improved deep embedded clustering
with local structure preservation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2017, pp. 1753–1759.
[68] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. Cottrell, “Learning representations for
time series clustering,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
pp. 3781–3791.
[69] K. Ghasedi, X. Wang, C. Deng, and H. Huang, “Balanced selfpaced learning for generative adversarial clustering network,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
pp. 4391–4400.
[70] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Improved regularization of convolutional
neural networks with cutout,” 2017, arXiv:1708.04552.
[71] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[72] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 4650–4661.
[73] X. Guo, L. Gao, X. Liu, and J. Yin, “Improved deep embedded clustering
with local structure preservation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
pp. 1753–1759, 2017.
[74] H. A. Dau et al., “The UCR time series archive,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica
Sinica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1293–1305, Nov. 2019.
[75] Y. Hou, Z. Ma, C. Liu, and C. C. Loy, “Learning lightweight lane detection
CNNs by self attention distillation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2019, pp. 1013–1021.
[76] L. Zhang, C. Bao, and K. Ma, “Self-distillation: Towards efficient and
compact neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal., vol. 44, no. 8,
pp. 4388–4403, Aug. 2022.

Zhiwen Xiao (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree in network engineering from the Chengdu
University of Information Technology, Chengdu,
China, and the M.Eng. degree in computer science
from the Northwest AF University, Yangling, China.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
computer science with Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu. His research interests include semantic
communication, federated learning (FL), representation learning, data mining, and computer vision.

Huanlai Xing (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the University of
Nottingham (Supervisor: Dr Rong Qu), Nottingham,
U.K., in 2013. During 2020–2021, he was a Visiting Scholar of computer science, The University of
Rhode Island (Supervisor: Dr. Haibo He), Kingston,
RI, USA. He is currently with the School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong
University (SWJTU), Chengdu, China, and Tangshan
Institute, SWJTU. He was on Editorial Board of Science China Information Sciences. He was a Member
of several international conference program and senior program committees,
such as ECML-PKDD, MobiMedia, ISCIT, ICCC, TrustCom, IJCNN, and
ICSINC. His research interests include semantic communication, representation learning, data mining, reinforcement learning, machine learning, network
function virtualization, and software defined networking.

Bowen Zhao received the B.Eng. degree in computer science and technology in 2020 from Southwest
Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, where he is
currently working toward the master’s degree with the
School of Information Science and Technology. His
research interests include deep reinforcement learning, cloud computing, and deep learning.

Rong Qu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
degree in computer science and its applications from
Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1996 and the
Ph.D. degree in computer Science from The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, U.K., in 2003. She
is currently an Associate Professor with the School
of Computer Science, University of Nottingham. Her
research interests include the modelling and optimisation for logistics transport scheduling, personnel
scheduling, network routing, portfolio optimization
and timetabling problems by using evolutionary algorithms, mathematical programming, constraint programming in operational
research and artificial intelligence. These computational techniques are integrated with knowledge discovery, machine learning and data mining to provide
intelligent decision support on logistic fleet operations at SMEs, workforce
scheduling at hospitals, policy making in education, and cyber security for connected and autonomous vehicles. Dr. Qu is an Associated Editor for Engineering
Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
MAGAZINE, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, Journal
of Operational Research Society, and PeerJ Computer Science. She has been
a Senior IEEE Member since 2012 and the Vice-Chair of Evolutionary Computation Task Committee since 2019 and Technical Committee on Intelligent
Systems Applications during 2015–2018 at IEEE Computational Intelligence
Society. She has guest edited special issues on the automated design of search
algorithms and machine learning at the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN
ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE and IEEE Computational Intelligence
Magazine.

XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION

Shouxi Luo (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s
degree in communication engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in communication and information systems
from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2011 and 2016,
respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu.
His research interests include data center networks,
software-defined networking, and networked systems.

Penglin Dai (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in mathematics and applied mathematics and the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
the School of Information Science and Technology,
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China. His
research interests include intelligent transportation
systems and vehicular cyber–physical systems.

15

Ke Li received the master’s degree from Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China, in 2008, and the Ph.D.
degree in communication and information systems
from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, in 2012. She is currently a Lecturer with the School of Information
Science and Technology, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu. Her research interests include network
optimization, network design, and future Internet.

Zonghai Zhu received the B.Sc. degree from the
Department of Information, Mechanical and Electrical Engineer, Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree from
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, in 2021. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the School of Computing and
Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China. His research interests include
imbalanced problems, kernel-based methods, and
graph-structured data.