IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

6871

ECNet: Robust Malicious Network Traffic
Detection With Multi-View Feature
and Confidence Mechanism
Xueying Han , Song Liu, Junrong Liu, Bo Jiang , Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu

Abstract— Malicious traffic detection in the real world faces the
challenge of dealing with a diverse mix of known, unknown, and
variant malicious traffic, requiring methods that are accurate,
generalizable, and reliable for identifying both known and
emerging threats. However, existing methods are unable to fully
meet these requirements. Supervised methods can accurately
detect known malicious traffic, but their performance declines
significantly when encountering unknown attacks. Additionally,
the misclassification is usually silent, leading to doubts about the
reliability and practicality. Unsupervised methods can deal with
unknown attacks, but their high false positive rate and inability
to utilize the knowledge of existing attack data constitute obvious
shortcomings. To overcome these limitations, we propose ECNet,
an end-to-end robust malicious network traffic detection method.
Particularly, ECNet incorporates multi-view features, including
content and pattern features, and employs a gated-based feature
fusion approach, providing an efficient and robust representation.
Moreover, ECNet introduces a confidence mechanism and combines category probability and confidence values during training
and detection; therefore, it can accurately detect both known
and unknown malicious traffic while ensuring the credibility
of results. To validate the performance of ECNet, we conduct
comprehensive experiments on six reorganized datasets and
compare ECNet with seven state-of-the-art methods. The results
demonstrate that ECNet outperforms others, particularly showing significant improvements in detecting unknown attacks, with
up to a 14.15% increase in F1 compared to the best-performing
method.
Index Terms— Malicious network traffic detection, deep learning, feature extraction, confidence mechanism, robustness.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the rapid developments of network technology,
the challenges faced by cybersecurity are becoming increasingly severe. Attack methods have become more
sophisticated and covert, including various advanced malware,
phishing attacks, and complex cyber espionage activities [1].
Manuscript received 10 January 2024; revised 30 May 2024; accepted 6 July
2024. Date of publication 10 July 2024; date of current version 18 July
2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFC2206402; in part by
the Youth Innovation Promotion Association Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS) under Grant 2021156; in part by the Program of Key Laboratory of
Network Assessment Technology, CAS; and in part by the Program of Beijing
Key Laboratory of Network Security and Protection Technology. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was Dr. Z. Berkay Celik. (Corresponding author: Bo Jiang.)
The authors are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China (e-mail: hanxueying@iie.ac.cn; liusong1106@iie.ac.cn; liujunrong@
iie.ac.cn; jiangbo@iie.ac.cn; luzhigang@iie.ac.cn; liubaoxu@iie.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3426304

The security of individuals, enterprises, and even nations is all
under serious threat. Identifying malicious traffic from a vast
amount of network traffic, while reducing false positives and
negatives, has become a key research area in network security.
Network traffic in real-world scenarios is diverse and
complex. As shown in Figure 1, the detection method will
encounter known, variant1 and unknown malicious traffic
when running in a real environment, which requires the
method to be robust and reliable. Firstly, they must be able
to accurately distinguish known normal and malicious traffic
while reducing false negatives and false positives. Secondly,
they need to exhibit a certain degree of generalizability,
enabling them to recognize variant and unknown malicious
traffic. Thirdly, the detection process should be credible to
ensure its reliable application in the real world. While ensuring
complete accuracy is challenging, the methods should at
least inform users when encountering traffic that they cannot
adequately address.
Machine learning and deep learning based malicious traffic
detection methods have been widely developed over the past
few decades. They detect malicious traffic using statistical
information, sequence information or raw packets through
supervised or unsupervised approaches. However, they are
unable to fully fulfill the aforementioned requirements. Current
supervised methods [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9] can
accurately detect known malicious traffic and possess a certain
degree of generalization, but are ineffective in identifying
unknown attacks. When the distribution of training and test
data differs, their performances decline severely. More critically, as shown in Figure 2, the failures are silent. The model
is over-confident and does not recognize whether they are
capable of processing a given input. The silent misclassification can leave systems in an unnoticed risk state, making
network administrators unable to trust these methods and
hindering their application in the real world. Current unsupervised methods [10], [11], [12], [13] can detect emerging
threats by identifying traffic that deviates from past normal
behaviors or the majority as malicious traffic. However, the
essence of unsupervised methods is detecting anomalies rather
than maliciousness specifically. When the difference between
normal and malicious traffic is not obvious, they may produce
1 Variant attacks can be considered as unknown attacks to some extent,
so in the following, we use the concept of unknown attacks interchangeably
for convenience and simplicity. In some cases, unknown attacks include both
variant attacks and truly unknown attacks.

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

6872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 1. Conceptual diagram of network traffic types during model training
and detection. During training, the model is exposed to normal traffic and
several specific types of malicious traffic (Dos-Goldeneye). However, in the
deployment of the model in real-world scenarios, not only known malicious
traffic (DoS-GoldenEye) is encountered, but also variants of these types
(DoS-Hulk) and previously unknown malicious traffic (such as Botnet). These
diverse and complex malicious traffic pose challenges for network security.

Fig. 2. The distribution of maximum class probability (MCP) of a supervised
method, GTID [7], on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III
dataset (right). “Normal - Malicious” indicates that normal traffic is classified
as malicious. The sum of the relative densities of bars of each color equals 1.
It can be seen a large portion of misclassified normal traffic (green bars) and
malicious traffic (orange bars) have MCP close to 1, indicating that GTID is
very confident about these results. So, users are unable to perceive potential
misclassifications by observing MCP, that’s to say, the failures are silent.

a high false positive rate. Besides, most unsupervised methods
are based solely on normal or unlabeled traffic, and cannot
directly utilize the resources of existing attack data, putting
them at a disadvantage in detecting known and variant attacks.
Furthermore, there are many methods that focus on
achieving robust malicious traffic detection from various perspectives, yet they still encounter several problems. Extracting
more robust features [14], [15], [16] that are less susceptible
to various changes is a common way to maintain the model’s
good performance in changing environments. Nevertheless,
their utility is limited to scenarios where only minor changes
in traffic occur, such as bandwidth fluctuations. When facing
unknown or variant malicious traffic, they still have the
problems of misclassification and overconfidence as previously
discussed. Other methods [17], [18] divide the malicious
traffic detection problem into multiple stages, progressively
performing unknown traffic detection and traffic classification to robustly detect complex malicious traffic, including
both known and unknown types. However, the separation
of multiple stages may prevent achieving a globally optimal
solution, and errors from the initial stage may propagate to
the subsequent stages.
To solve these problems, we propose a novel end-toend method ECNet, which achieves accurate, robust, and
reliable detection of both known and unknown malicious
traffic. ECNet mainly consists of two parts, one extracting
comprehensive multi-view features of network traffic and the

other utilizing a confidence mechanism for model training
and malicious traffic detection. Firstly, we extract content
features using PacketCNN and attention mechanisms based on
randomly selected raw packets, and pattern features through
a unique coding method that encodes packet length and
direction sequences, followed by SessionCNN. A gated-based
feature fusion method is also employed to integrate these
features flexibly. The comprehensive dimensions of features
and advanced extraction method ensure the accuracy of ECNet,
while the random packet selection and the applications of
CNN and Transformer grant ECNet generalization ability.
Secondly, we innovatively introduce a confidence mechanism
and integrate it into model training and malicious traffic
detection. For each session, ECNet not only outputs the
probability that it belongs to each category but also provides a
confidence value, which indicates the reliability of the result.
In a normally functioning network, the normal traffic does not
exhibit significant changes over a period of time. Based on
this, we identify traffic with low confidence as anomalous,
which enables the detection of unknown malicious traffic. For
known malicious traffic, it typically has higher confidence and
can be accurately classified through the maximum category
probability. Overall, ECNet integrates the advantages of both
supervised and unsupervised learning. It leverages labeled data
for training, facilitating the accurate and confident detection
of known malicious traffic. It employs confidence values
to evaluate the model’s degree of certainty with samples,
thus enabling users to trust the outcomes and to identify
unknown malicious traffic. Besides, ECNet adopts an endto-end approach that offers a new unified paradigm for the
detection of complex malicious traffic, demonstrating more
significant advantages compared to other multi-stage methods.
In conclusion, the main contributions of this paper include:
• We propose ECNet, an end-to-end robust malicious network traffic detection method. It incorporates multi-view
feature extraction and a confidence mechanism, and can
detect both known and unknown malicious traffic.
• We develop comprehensive features from multi-view to
fully represent traffic, including content and pattern features, and design a gated-based method for feature fusion,
ensuring the accuracy and generalizability of ECNet.
• We introduce a confidence mechanism that can assess the
certainty of the model’s results, and design a probability
branch and a confidence branch for ECNet. By integrating
these branches, ECNet can achieve accurate and reliable
detection of known and unknown malicious traffic.
• We conduct comprehensive experiments on six reorganized datasets that can reflect the complexity of malicious
traffic in the real world. The results demonstrate that
ECNet is superior to others. It improves F1 by 22.41%
compared to supervised methods and 14.15% to unsupervised methods in detecting unknown malicious traffic.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Supervised Malicious Network Traffic Detection
Supervised malicious network traffic detection methods rely
on pre-labeled data to train models, learning the features of

HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION

normal and malicious traffic to distinguish between them.
Depending on the models used, they can be categorized into
machine learning based and deep learning based methods.
Machine learning based methods first extract statistical
features from network traffic, such as duration and packet
count, and then train machine learning models like SVM and
Decision Trees based on these features. Gu et al. [2] used
Naive Bayes for feature embedding to obtain high-quality
features and then constructed a detection model with SVM.
Anderson and McGrew [3] extracted over 300 standard and
enhanced features from sessions, including metadata and byte
distribution, and used a Random Forest as a detector. These
methods are computationally efficient and easy to implement,
but the selection of features depends on expert knowledge, and
they are unable to capture complex malicious traffic patterns.
Deep learning based methods can solve the problem of
manual dependency in feature selection and improve detection
accuracy. They use CNNs, LSTMs, Transformers, and GNNs
to automatically learn latent features from sessions, such as
spatial, temporal and topological features. They mainly use
the sequential information of traffic or directly use raw traffic
as input.
Sequential information refers to a series of feature
sequences extracted from network traffic, such as packet
length sequences and packet direction sequences. They retain
the temporal order information of traffic and can capture
dynamic behavior patterns in network communications. The
packet length sequence is one of the most commonly used
features. Liu et al. [6] proposed an end-to-end detection model
called FS-Net. It introduced a reconstruction mechanism and
employed a GRU-based autoencoder to learn more distinctive
features from the packet length sequence for classification.
Hu et al. [19] modeled the packet length sequence and
direction sequence of a session as a graph. Then, they utilized
Graph2Vec to learn the representation of the graph.
Both statistical and sequential features involve some information loss during the feature extraction process. Raw traffic
provides complete information about network traffic, allowing
for a fine-grained analysis of packets. Yu et al. [5] used
two CNNs to successively learn packet-level and session-level
features of network traffic. They also used few-shot learning to improve the detection reliability of minor categories.
Zhang et al. [8] encoded each packet into a byte-level traffic
graph, and then utilized GNN to get an overall representation
vector for each packet. Han et al. [7] extracted packet-level features through n-gram and proposed a time-aware Transformer
to extract session-level features for classification. Using raw
network traffic can yield good performance, but it requires
more computational and storage resources.
These supervised methods show extremely high performance in detecting known malicious traffic. However, their
performance significantly decreases when facing unknown
attacks, along with issues of silent misclassification.
B. Unsupervised Malicious Network Traffic Detection
Unsupervised malicious network traffic detection methods
do not rely on pre-labeled data and can detect unknown

6873

attacks. They primarily detect malicious traffic by identifying
patterns that deviate from past normal traffic behaviors or the
majority of traffic.
Constructing a model that can perfectly reconstruct normal
traffic and considering traffic that cannot be reconstructed
as malicious is a common method. The autoencoder is the
most commonly used model for this purpose. Mirsky et al.
[10] proposed an online plug-and-play method called Kitsune.
It maintained a time window to dynamically extract the
contextual features of traffic, then trained an ensemble of
autoencoders to reconstruct these features, thereby learning
the patterns of normal traffic. Catillo et al. [11] proposed
CPS-Guard, which used an autoencoder to reconstruct session
features. They also designed an outlier-aware algorithm to
adaptively select thresholds for distinguishing normal and
malicious traffic.
Traffic that deviates significantly from the majority can be
considered malicious, and this can be achieved through clustering algorithms or isolation forests. Zhang et al. [13] employed
isolation forest to detect isolated malicious traffic. They also
proposed an on-demand evolution isolation forest to enable
the system to detect malicious traffic in real-time and adapt
to environmental changes. Fu et al. [12] constructed network
traffic into a flow interaction graph, and then sequentially
identified abnormal components and nodes using DBSCAN,
ultimately pinpointing the malicious traffic. In this process,
they analyzed the connectivity, sparsity, and statistical features
of the graph.
Unsupervised methods can detect unknown attacks, but their
performance generally does not reach the level of supervised
methods. Some malicious traffic has minimal differences from
normal traffic, making it difficult for unsupervised methods to
distinguish them, whereas supervised methods can accurately
identify them using existing knowledge. Additionally, unsupervised learning methods tend to have a higher false positive
rate for normal traffic.
C. Robust Malicious Network Traffic Detection
Conventional malicious network traffic detection methods
often experience performance degradation when faced with
variations in traffic. Consequently, there are some studies that
focus on robust malicious network traffic detection.
Most studies aim to design more robust features that remain
stable even when traffic changes due to environmental factors
or other conditions. Diallo and Patras [14] used cluster centers
as an extension of traffic features to address the challenge
of sensitivity to subtle changes in traffic features. Fu et al.
[16] extracted frequency domain features from the per-packet
feature sequences and then used statistical clustering to detect
malicious traffic. They claimed that frequency domain features
can represent fine-grained information and are not disturbed
by the injected noise packets, enabling accurate and robust
detection. Xie et al. [15] thoroughly analyzed the TCP mechanisms that may affect packet length sequences of flows, and
proposed a self-supervised learning-based traffic augmentation
mechanism capable of generating effective feature vectors that
robustly represent network traffic in diverse network environments. However, these methods still struggle to effectively

6874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

detect unknown malicious traffic that has not previously been
encountered during training.
Some methods can simultaneously identify both known and
unknown malicious traffic robustly. Yang et al. [17] formulated the problem as a two-stage minimization problem. They
first used Conditional Variational Auto-Encoder (CVAE) to
classify known malicious traffic by minimizing empirical risk,
then utilized Extreme Value Theory to model the distribution of reconstruction errors from the CVAE and identify
unknown attacks based on abnormal reconstruction errors.
Qiu et al. [18] also followed a similar staged approach. OpenMax was first used to detect some unknown malicious traffic,
then they identified unknown malicious traffic that has been
misclassified into known categories based on reconstruction
loss. This multi-staged approach involves independent training for each stage, which compared to end-to-end methods,
struggles to achieve a globally optimal solution. When separately carrying out anomaly detection and traffic classification,
it encounters issues common to conventional methods, such as
the silent misclassification of supervised methods and the high
false positive rates of unsupervised methods. Moreover, errors
in earlier stages can adversely affect subsequent stages.

Algorithm 1 Training ECNet
Input: Session S, label y
Output: Well-trained ECNet
1: Initialize the parameters of ECNet
2: for epoch do
3:
/* Content feature extraction */
▷ IV-B1
4:
Randomly select n p packets from S
5:
Perform content augmentation on packets
▷ IV-C3
6:
Extract content feature f c of S from augmented packets
/* Pattern feature extraction */
▷ IV-B2
Get length sequence L and direction sequence D of S
Encode L and D into vsq
Perform pattern augmentation on vsq
▷ IV-C3
Extract pattern feature f e of S from augmented vsq
12:
/* Gated-based feature fusion */
▷ IV-B3
13:
Fusion f c and f e to get overall representation f s of S
14:
/* Probability and Confidence generator */ ▷ IV-C1
15:
Get the probability p and confidence c
16:
/* Model training */
▷ IV-C2
17:
Calculate loss L and update the parameters of ECNet
18: end for
19: return Well-trained ECNet

7:
8:
9:
10:
11:

III. T HREAT M ODEL AND D ESIGN G OAL
Our objective is to propose a robust malicious network traffic detection method that can efficiently and accurately detect
traffic generated by known and emerging attacks. We use
sessions reassembled from traffic based on five-tuple (source
IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, protocol) as
inputs, and it contains bidirectional packets. Our approach can
be deployed at the network edge to analyze traffic between
devices in the local area network (LAN) and external Internet,
working in conjunction with firewalls and intrusion detection
systems. Additionally, our method can also monitor network
traffic between hosts within a LAN through the mirror ports
of switches.
The main goals of network attackers include disrupting
the availability of devices, stealing or altering sensitive information, and using compromised devices to conduct other
malicious activities. To achieve these goals, attackers may
employ external devices to perform attacks, such as brute
force, DDoS, and C&C communications. They can also
leverage devices within the LAN that have already been
compromised to initiate attacks like DoS, network scanning,
and lateral movements against other devices. Our method only
focuses on detecting active attacks that generate network traffic
and does not consider passive attacks that do not generate
traffic, such as privilege escalation [20], passive traffic analysis [21], or local exploitation of vulnerabilities.
IV. M ETHOD
A. Method Overview
The overall structure of ECNet is shown in Figure 3.
ECNet consists of two parts, namely Multi-view Session Feature Extraction and Confidence-based Training and Detection.
Firstly, ECNet learns sufficiently representative features from
content and pattern perspectives. Then, the extracted feature

Algorithm 2 Detecting Malicious Traffic With ECNet
Input: Session S, Well-trained ECNet
Output: prediction r
1: /* Content feature extraction */
▷ IV-B1
2: Randomly select n p packets from S
3: Extract content feature f c of S from packets
4: /* Pattern feature extraction */
▷ IV-B2
5: Get length sequence L and direction sequence D of S
6: Encode L and D into vsq
7: Extract pattern feature f e of S from vsq
8: /* Gated-based feature fusion */
▷ IV-B3
9: Fusion f c and f e to get overall representation f s of S
10: /* Probability and Confidence generator */
▷ IV-C1
11: Get the probability p and confidence c
12: /* Malicious traffic detection */
▷ IV-C4
13: Get predicted result r
14: return r

is used for model training and malicious traffic detection,
and a confidence mechanism is introduced in these processes.
Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 show the processes of training
ECNet and using ECNet to detect malicious traffic, respectively.
B. Multi-View Session Feature Extraction
To learn comprehensive session features that are representative enough to distinguish normal and malicious traffic,
we extract features from both the content of the session’s
transmissions and the interaction patterns between the communicating parties. Specifically, we randomly select a small
subset of packets from each session to learn content features.
At the same time, we extract the packet length and direction

HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION

6875

Fig. 3. The overall structure of ECNet. Firstly, ECNet separately extracts content features and pattern features from each session, and then uses a gated-based
feature fusion method to combine these features in the multi-view session feature extraction module. Next, the fused session features are used for model
training and malicious traffic detection. During training, traffic data augmentation is first performed on the sessions in training data. The session features
extracted from the augmented data are the inputs for the probability generator and confidence generator, resulting in p and c. At the same time, hints y also
need to be input into the trainer. During detection, data augmentation is not required. The results are obtained using p and c.

sequences of the session to learn pattern features from them.
We also design a gate-based feature fusion method to appropriately fuse these features together. Traffic data augmentation
is designed to optimize the training process, so it will be
introduced in detail in Section IV-C.
1) Content Feature Extraction: Raw packets carry rich
information, including header fields and payload, and can
better characterize network behaviors. They are useful for
detecting attacks with unusual signatures or attacks that deliver
malicious payload. Besides, it is highly challenging for attackers to evade detection by mimicking normal traffic through
modifying the raw packets while ensuring the quality of the
attack. Therefore, we choose to learn content features from
raw packets.
Although raw packets are useful in detecting malicious
traffic, it is noteworthy that different packets in a session
often contain much overlapping information. For example,
TCP traffic can be divided into those generated during the
connection establishment phase and those generated during
the data transmission phase.
So, it is unnecessary to use all available packets. Employing
all packets can result in increased storage and computational
overhead, and introduce noise. Besides, since we subsequently
extract pattern features from other perspective, we only need
to obtain the transmitted content information from the raw data
packets. Based on these, we randomly select n p packets from a
session and sort them by timestamps to learn content features.
In this paper, we set n p to 4 as a choice balancing performance
and complexity. We aim to have the randomly selected packets
include those from both forward and backward connection
establishment and data transmission processes. Setting n p to
4 ideally allows for the inclusion of packets representing these
scenarios.
For each packet, IP and MAC addresses are first removed.
Then, we convert the hexadecimal packets into decimal format
and represent each packet as a one-dimensional vector of size
200, denoted as f p . If the packet length exceeds 200, the
excess is removed, and if it is less than 200, zero vector is

padded. To learn the latent feature of each packet, we design
a PacketCNN. It consists of three layers of 1d-CNN and
two layers of linear layers. The process is formulated as
Equation (1), and f p′ is the extracted packet feature and FPC (·)
denotes the PacketCNN.
f p′ = FPC ( f p )

(1)

For different types of attacks or normal behaviors, different
packets play distinct roles. For example, in SQL injection
attacks, the data packets during transmission are often abnormal, whereas in flooding attacks, anomalies typically arise
during the handshake phase. To enable the model to focus
on the most crucial packets, we employ a multi-head attention
mechanism to extract content features based on the extracted
packet features.
The process of the attention mechanism is as show in
Equation (2). The query, key, and value vectors in this paper
are calculated as Q = f P W Q , K = f P W K and V = f P WV .
f P = [ f p′ 1 , . . . , f p′ n p ] is a vector consisting of packet features,
and we sort packet features by timestamp to align different
sessions. W Q , W K and WV are learnable weights.
QK T
Attention(Q, K , V ) = so f tmax( √ )V
dk

(2)

The multi-head attention mechanism allows the model to
focus on information at different levels, enhancing both the
model’s expressive power and robustness. The process is
formulated as follows, and headi is the attention value of i th
Q
head, Wh , WhK , WhV and Wh are learnable weights, concat (·)
denote the concatenate operation.
Multi Att = concat (head0 , . . . , head3 )Wh
Q
headi = Attention(QWh i , K WhK i , V WhV i )

(3)
(4)

Then, the multi-head attention values are averaged to obtain
the content feature f c of the session.
np

fc =

1 X
Multi Atti
np
i=1

(5)

6876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Algorithm 3 Sequence Encoding
Input: L = (l1 , . . . , l N ), D = (d1 , . . . , d N ), m
Output: vsq
1: Initialize vsq and vtmp as empty vectors
2: for li ∈ L, di ∈ D do
3:
if di equals to di−1 then
4:
if len(vtmp ) is divisible by m then
5:
Append m zeros to vtmp
6:
end if
7:
Append li to vtmp
8:
else
9:
Reshape vtmp into a 2D vector of m columns
10:
Append vtmp to vsq , and set vtmp as an empty vector
Append li to vtmp
12:
end if
13: end for
14: Reshape vtmp into a 2D vector and append it to vsq
15: return vsq
11:

Fig. 4.

An example of sequence encoding (m = 3).

one row, a burst with many packets is represented as adjacent
consecutive rows, and the initiation of each burst aligns in the
same column.
After obtaining vsq , we design a SessionCNN based on
CNN to learn pattern features. The spatial awareness of the
CNN structure aids in extracting features of traffic displayed
on the rows and columns of vsq . SessionCNN consists of two
layers of 2d-CNN and two layers of linear layer. As illustrated
in Equation (6), FSC (·) is SessionCNN, and f e denotes the
pattern feature.
f e = FSC (vsq )

2) Pattern Feature Extraction: For malicious traffic, besides
anomalies in content, there can also be abnormalities in
behavioral patterns. For instance, an attack might generate
a large amount of burst traffic or maintain long-term regular traffic. Besides, due to the shared use of attack tools
and methodologies, similar types of attacks may exhibit
similar behavior pattern [22]. Therefore, learning the behavioral patterns of sessions is vital for detecting malicious
traffic.
To learn the pattern feature of a session, we first extract
the length and direction of packets in a session, and combine
them as two sequences, noted as L = (l1 , . . . , l N ) and D =
(d1 , . . . , d N ). li ∈ N is the length of i th packet. di ∈ {1, −1}
is the direction of i th packet. Then, we encode these two
sequences into a two-dimensional vector, noted as vsq . The
process of sequence encoding is depicted in Algorithm 3,
and Figure 4 shows an example of sequence encoding. m
is the number of columns for vsq , and we set m to 3. For
normal traffic, aside from large file transfers and streaming
services, it is rare to encounter many consecutive packets
in the same direction. We use burst to represent a series of
contiguous packets sent in the same direction [23]. Bursts
with a size of less than or equal to 3 accounts for 80% of
all cases, therefore setting m to 3 maximizes the efficiency of
our encoding method and avoids creating too much redundant
data.
Our encoding method can effectively and robustly represent the communication pattern within a session. Firstly, the
encoded vector represents the direction well without using
signs. Forward and backward directions are relative concepts,
and directly using the signs can introduce noise when source
and destination hosts change. Our method is robust in this
situation and has better transferability across different environments. Secondly, our method can capture the sequence,
frequency, and burst of the content transmitted. Packet length
represents the content to some extent. Each burst appears in

(6)

3) Gated-Based Feature Fusion: The content feature and
pattern feature of a session are not mutually independent.
We propose a gated-based feature fusion method to integrate
them to get an overall representation of the session. The gating
mechanism provides a flexible, effective, and robust method
for feature fusion.
As shown in Equation (7) and (8), we first get two gate
vectors gc and ge . The content feature f c and pattern feature f e
are initially input to a bilinear function to obtain a temporary
vector, and then each element of the vector is scaled to [0, 1]
by a sigmoid function σ . Wcg , Weg , bcg and beg are learnable
weights and biases. These two gate functions do not share
parameters, thus considering different perspectives.
gc = σ ( f c T Wcg f e + bcg )

(7)

ge = σ ( f e Weg f c + beg )

(8)

T

Then, f c and f e are element-wise multiplied with their
respective gate vectors and are concatenated into the final
fused session feature f s .
f s = concat (gc ⊙ f c , ge ⊙ f e )

(9)

C. Confidence-Based Training and Detection
Existing methods cannot handle unknown malicious traffic
well and are prone to false negatives. They also tend to be
overly confident and assign high maximum category probabilities to their outcomes, leading silent misclassification. These
uncontrolled failures can damage user’s trust in the method.
We introduce a confidence mechanism to solve these problems.
In this section, we first introduce the probability generator and confidence generator, which are shared components
for training and detection. We then introduce the details of
model training and traffic data augmentation method and
finally describe the confidence-based malicious traffic detection method.

HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION

1) Probability and Confidence Generator: ECNet is different from traditional classifiers. It has two branches: a
probability branch and a confidence branch.
In the probability branch, the probability generator is the
same as traditional classifiers. The session feature f s is firstly
processed by a fully connected neural network FP G (·), and
then the output is converted into the probabilities p of belonging to each category by a softmax function.
p = so f tmax(FP G ( f s ))

(10)

In the confidence branch, f s is also first processed through
a fully connected neural network FC G (·) to obtain a value,
then it is scaled between 0 and 1 using a sigmoid function to
obtain the confidence value c.
c = σ (FC G ( f s ))

(11)

Both FP G and FC G are composed of two linear layers
and a dropout layer. The difference is that the last layer of
FP G has two neurons, representing normal and malicious,
while FC G has only one neuron. We use two independent
neural networks to process f s separately instead of using
one network directly. This is because the goals of obtaining
probabilities and confidence values are different. Employing
a single neural network necessitates a sufficiently complex
network structure and parameters to capture all the features
and relationships required for both targets. Such complexity
increases the training burden and affects model convergence.
2) Model Training: Inspired by Devries’s work [24] on
OOD image classification, we correlate the model’s confidence
with the hints needed in its decision-making process. The
model is allowed to ask for some hints, that is true labels,
to assist in decision-making when facing inputs that it is
uncertain about or unfamiliar with, but there is a certain
penalty for using hints. After full training, the model will not
request hints for inputs it is very certain about or has seen
before, where its confidence is high. For unfamiliar inputs,
it will request real labels as hints, indicating lower confidence.
Based on these, the probabilities after using hints are
calculated as Equation (12), where pi and yi are the predicted
and real probabilities of the session belonging to i th category
respectively. c is the confidence generated by the confidence
generator. The closer c is to 1, the more confident the model
is in its prediction results.
pi′ = c · pi + (1 − c) · yi

(12)

The classification loss L p using modified probabilities is
calculated as follows. n c is the number of categories and it
equals 2.
Lp =

nc
X

−yi log( pi′ )

(13)

i=1

To prevent the model from always setting c to 0 for using
real labels to make decisions, we add a confidence loss Lc as
the penalty of using hints.
Lc = −log(c)

(14)

6877

Fig. 5. An example of traffic data augmentation for a session. The left shows
the augmentation for content, and the right for pattern.

The overall loss L is the sum of prediction loss and
confidence loss. λ is the weight of confidence loss, and it
is a hyper-parameter to balance these two losses.
L = L p + λLc

(15)

In the early stage of training, capturing good initial parameters is crucial as it facilitates faster convergence and improves
the final performance of the model. If the model is allowed to
use hints with a low penalty in the early stage, it will hamper
the learning of features used for classification in the probability
branch. Conversely, in the later stage, after the model has
been exposed to a sufficient number of samples, it should
focus more on enhancing the confidence of its predictions.
Therefore, we set λ to be gradually decreasing, which means
the cost of using hints reduces gradually [25]. The decay
process of λ with the training step s is shown in Equation (16).
λ0 is the initial value of λ, β is used to adjust the decay
speed.
λ(s) = λ0 ∗ e−s/β

(16)

We also follow Devries [24] to give hints to the 50% of the
inputs to prevent the model from ignoring outliers.
3) Traffic Data Augmentation: When over-fitting occurs, the
model may accurately predict all inputs with a confidence of
1. It will lead to the failures of the confidence branch when
facing test data. To address this problem, we specially design
a traffic data augmentation method to generate hard samples.
Data augmentation is performed from both content and
pattern perspectives. For content augmentation, we randomly
set one of the n p packet features f p used in content feature
extraction to zero vectors. For pattern augmentation, we add
random perturbations to the encoded sequence vector vsq to
modify the communication pattern of the session. Specifically,
we randomly pick half the rows from vsq and randomly add or
subtract 1 to one or two values in each row. If the altered value
becomes negative, it is maintained at 0. Figure 5 illustrates an
example of content augmentation and pattern augmentation.
We perform content augmentation on the data comprising
a proportion of αc , and pattern augmentation on the data
comprising a proportion of α p . Note that a session might
undergo both content augmentation and pattern augmentation
simultaneously.
4) Malicious Traffic Detection: A well-trained ECNet can
provide low confidence for unknown data while giving high
confidence and accurate class probabilities for inputs it is
certain about. Once we have trained a model, we can use it to
perform malicious traffic detection. In a normally functioning
network environment, the traffic generated by users’ routine
activities usually does not change significantly. Traffic that

6878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

differs greatly from past patterns in a network can be generally
considered to be malicious traffic.
Based on these observations, we can detect malicious traffic
as shown in Equation (17). r is the final predicted category to
which the test data belongs. 0 represents normal and 1 represents malicious. If the confidence c is lower than the threshold
δc , it means that the model has not previously processed
related data, then the traffic is classified as malicious. This
approach enables the detection of unknown malicious traffic.
Conversely, if the confidence is higher than the threshold, the
class with the higher probability is assigned as the sample’s
category, enabling detection of known malicious traffic.

 1,
c < δc
(17)
r = arg max p ′ , other wise

i
i∈{0,1}

The confidence values for known normal and malicious traffic are close to 1, and they rely on the category probabilities for
classification. The confidence values for unknown malicious
traffic are relatively low, and they are directly classified as
malicious. At this point, the probabilities are untrustworthy
and meaningless.
V. E VALUATION
A. Experiment Overview
To thoroughly validate the performance of ECNet, we conduct comprehensive experiments. We first introduce the
experimental setup, including the datasets, baseline methods,
and evaluation metrics. Specifically, to reflect the complex
situation of traffic in the real world, we reorganize the datasets.
Then, we detail the experimental results, comparing the performance of ECNet and baselines in detecting both known
and unknown malicious traffic, and also comparing their
complexities. The results indicate that our method outperforms
other methods, especially in detecting variants and unknown
malicious traffic. Additionally, we perform ablation studies
and sensitivity analysis of parameters on ECNet for a deeper
understanding of its workings.
B. Experiment Setup
1) Datasets: Randomly splitting data into training and test
sets fails to reflect the diverse traffic in the real world. To verify
the performance comprehensively, we use two basic datasets
and reorganize them for evaluation.
a) Basic datasets: We use the public dataset
CICIDS2018 [26] and the self-collected dataset EnTra2023
as basic datasets.
• CICIDS2018. The CICIDS2018 dataset is a widely
used dataset for malicious network traffic detection.
It simulates an enterprise network environment, with
approximately 500 devices involved. It encompasses a
variety of attacks such as Brute Force, Botnet, DoS,
DDoS, and Web Attacks, alongside normal activities.
• EnTra2023. The EnTra2023 dataset is collected by ourselves. Its normal traffic comes from a day’s network
activity of select hosts within an enterprise network. The
malicious traffic is sourced from the Malware Capture

Facility Project (MCFP). From this project, we gather
traffic generated by spyware, miner, ransomware, botware, and adware, totaling 64 pcap files.
b) Data reorganization: In real-world scenarios, the
malicious traffic may generated by known, variant and
unknown attacks. We reorganize the two datasets accordingly.
Table I presents the reorganization details of malicious traffic.
For the scenario of known attacks, we randomly mix all
traffic in each dataset, including normal and malicious traffic,
and then split them into two parts for the training and testing
sets. The new datasets reorganized in this manner are named
CICIDS2018-I and EnTra2023-I.
Variant attacks refer to attacks belonging to the same
category, but they have adjustments in strategies, methods,
or other characteristics. For the CICIDS2018 dataset, we place
similar attacks using different tools into the training and testing
sets, such as DoS-GoldenEye and DoS-Slowloris. We use the
normal traffic of the first five days as training data and the
last three days as test data. For the EnTra2023 dataset, traffic
from different pcap files is allocated to the training and testing
sets separately. The normal traffic is also divided into training
and testing sets based on the sequence of time. The two
datasets reorganized in this way are named CICIDS2018-II
and EnTra2023-II. The normal traffic is divided into training
and testing sets based on the sequence of time. The two
reorganized datasets are CICIDS2018-II and EnTra2023-II.
For unknown attacks, we put different types of attacks into
the training and testing sets for the CICIDS2018 dataset. For
the EnTra2023 dataset, the training set only contains traffic
generated by three types of malware, while the testing set
includes traffic from other categories or types of malware.
The division of normal traffic follows the same methodology
as the variant attack datasets. The reorganized datasets are
CICIDS2018-III and EnTra2023-III.
For each dataset, we randomly selected 10% of the data
from the training set to serve as the validation set for hyperparameter tuning and model selection.
c) Statistics of datasets: To ensure the comparability of
results across the three reorganized datasets and to balance the
ratio of normal and malicious traffic, we sample the datasets,
and the statistical information is shown in Table II.
2) Baselines: To thoroughly evaluate the performance of
ECNet, we establish seven baseline methods for comparison,
including supervised methods (FS-Net [6], CICAutoML [27],
GTID [7]) and an unsupervised method (Kitsune [10]), as well
as methods specifically focused on robust malicious traffic
detection (Rosetta [15], ACID [14], CVAE-EVT [17]).
FS-Net. FS-Net can learn representative features from
packet length sequences. It utilizes a multi-layer encoderdecoder structure and reconstruction mechanism to mine
the potential sequential characteristics.
• CICAutoML. We combine CIC features with Automated
Machine Learning (AutoML) [28] to implement CICAutoML to represent these ML-based methods as a baseline.
CIC features are extracted by CICFlowMeter [29] and are
a set of widely used statistical features of network traffic,
including more than 80 features.
•

HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION

6879

TABLE I
R EORGANIZATION D ETAILS OF M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC OF THE CICIDS2018 DATASET AND THE E N T RA 2023 DATASET

TABLE II
T HE S TATISTICS OF DATASETS

GTID. GTID utilizes raw network traffic directly for
analysis. It uses n-gram frequency to extract packet-level
features, and uses a time-aware Transformer to extract
session-level features for malicious traffic detection.
• Kitsune. Kitsune is an unsupervised malicious traffic
detection method. It uses an ensemble of autoencoders to
reconstruct the features of normal traffic, and the traffic
with high reconstruction error is considered malicious.
• Rosetta. Rosetta is a robust traffic classification method
in diverse network environments. It leverages TCP-aware
traffic augmentation mechanisms and self-supervised
learning to generate robust features based on packet
length sequences and uses LSTM as the classifier.
• ACID. ACID uses a supervised adaptive clustering technique to learn cluster centers to expand the features,
thereby enhancing the robustness against outliers and
the generalization abilities of the model in the face of
evolving traffic landscapes.
• CVAE-EVT. CVAE-EVT employs conditional autoencoders and extreme value theory to implement a
hierarchical detection method, and performs staged classification of known attacks and detection of unknown
attacks.

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE CICIDS2018-I DATASET (%)

•

We also offer a simplified version of ECNet that does
not utilize confidence, named ECNet-Simple, for comparison.
We introduce it here for ease of reference in the following
sections, although it is not a baseline method in the traditional
sense.
•

ECNet-Simple. Its feature extraction component is the
same with ECNet. After obtaining the fused session

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE E N T RA 2023-I DATASET (%)

features, it employs a fully connected network and a
softmax layer for both training and detection.
3) Metric: To offer a comprehensive view of the model’s
performance across various aspects of predictive accuracy and
reliability, we choose Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1 score
as our evaluation metrics.
C. Known Malicious Traffic Detection
We conduct experiments of known malicious traffic detection on the CICIDS2018-I dataset and the EnTra2023-I dataset.
Table III and Table IV compare the performance of ECNet
and baselines. ECNet achieves an accuracy of 99.97% and an
F1 of 99.98% on both datasets, outperforming other baseline
methods, and ECNet-Simple also reaches F1 of 99.71% and

6880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE CICIDS2018-II DATASET AND THE CICIDS2018-III DATASET (%)

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE E N T RA 2023-II DATASET AND THE E N T RA 2023-III DATASET (%)

99.98%. Their performances are comparable to GTID, indicating that our content and pattern features are representative
enough. They can achieve similar performance to using all raw
network traffic while avoiding noise. ECNet-Simple’s performance on both datasets surpasses CICAutoML, suggesting our
features are superior to the statistical features of sessions. For
kitsune, we use normal traffic to train it, and its performance
is obviously not as good as other supervised methods, and
the precision is lower, indicating that there are many false
positives for normal traffic.
Using confidence in ECNet does not significantly enhance
performance compared to ECNet-Simple, as the model
encounters known patterns during testing and assigns high
confidence values to almost all samples, making the confidence
branch of ECNet less influential in decision-making.
D. Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection
Detecting unknown malicious traffic is more challenging
than detecting known traffic, as it requires the model to
have a certain degree of generalization ability. We conduct
experiments on CICIDS2018-II, CICIDS2018-III, EnTra2023II, and EnTra2023-III. We refer to variant attacks and truly
unknown attacks as unknown attacks in this section. Variant
attacks can be considered unknown to some extent compared to known attacks. Besides, this approach allows us
to analyze how these methods perform when faced with
varying degrees of differences between training and testing
sets.

1) Overall Performance: Table V and Table VI compare
the performance of ECNet with baselines. It can be seen
that ECNet achieves the best performance across all datasets,
especially in the case of detecting unknown malicious traffic,
where our method significantly outperforms other methods.
For the CICIDS2018-II dataset, our method achieves an
accuracy of 98.97% and an F1 score of 94.59%, only a slight
decrease from the performance on the CICIDS2018-I dataset
(with a decrease of 1.01% in accuracy and 5.39% in F1
score). Other supervised methods show a noticeable decline in
performance, especially in terms of recall. For example, FSNet has a recall of 69.73% and an F1 of 78.71%. The reason
for these low recalls is that a lot of malicious traffic is misclassified as normal traffic, which also shows that these methods
cannot handle variant malicious traffic well. The recall for
Kitsune is 91.31%, which is similar to ECNet’s recall, but
its precision is lower, indicating that a significant amount of
normal traffic is falsely classified as malicious. Furthermore,
the performance of robust malicious traffic detection methods
that augment features, such as Rosetta and ACID, is unsatisfactory. Their F1s are 61.93% and 73.17%, similar to those
of ordinary methods. They can only handle minor changes in
traffic, such as those caused by environmental variations, and
their robustness in detecting unknown attacks is insufficient.
CVAE-EVT performs multi-stage detection of unknown and
malicious traffic, achieving an accuracy of 96.88%, which is
superior to other methods. However, our ECNet still surpasses
it by 2.09%, indicating that our confidence-based end-to-end

HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION

approach can achieve a better global solution than the stagewise method.
For the CICIDS2018-III dataset, due to greater differences
between the training and testing data, the baseline methods
experience more severe performance drops. GTID’s recall is
only 41.65%, with an F1 of 56.08%, which is almost the same
as random guessing. The F1 of CICAutoML is 35.85%, even
worse than random guesses. In contrast, our ECNet maintains
an F1 of 85.78%, a significant 22.41% improvement over the
best supervised baseline method, FS-Net. The unsupervised
method Kitsune is not significantly affected by the novelty
of new attacks since it is trained only on normal traffic,
as evident from its accuracy and recall. Comparatively, ECNet
achieves a recall similar to that of Kitsune, indicating that our
method is capable of reaching a level comparable to unsupervised methods in detecting unknown attacks. The performance
degradation of these robust malicious traffic detection methods
is also obvious. The F1 of Rosetta and ACID both decrease
by approximately 30%, and CVAE-EVT’s F1 decreases by
22.76%. In contrast, ECNet’s F1 decreases by less than 10%,
further demonstrating ECNet’s superior robustness in handling
unknown traffic compared to other methods.
For the EnTra2023-II dataset, the performance of these
methods are still satisfactory. This is because the training
and test sets include malicious traffic generated by the same
malware. Our ECNet achieves an accuracy of 99.82% and an
F1 of 99.79%, surpassing other methods. On the EnTra2023III dataset, most methods still experience the performance
decline observed in the CICIDS2018-III dataset. For example,
FS-Net drops to an accuracy of 88.41% and an F1 of 83.72%.
The performance of Kitsune on this dataset doesn’t change
significantly compared to the performance on Entra2023-II,
but is still not as good as supervised methods. When there is a
certain degree of correlation between the malicious traffic data
in the test set and the training set, Kitsune is unable to leverage
this information, which limits its performance. Compared to
others, CVAE-EVT and ECNet exhibit minimal performance
degradation, but ECNet still significantly outperforms CVAEEVT, with F1s of 99.08% and 95.10% and accuracies of
99.25% and 98.12%, respectively. ECNet benefits from the
rich features extracted from both content and pattern perspectives, as well as from its confidence-based end-to-end learning
and detection model, demonstrating excellent capability in
detecting unknown malicious traffic. In contrast, CVAE-EVT
employs statistical features and adopts a multi-stage learning
strategy, resulting in inferior performance compared to ECNet.
2) Detailed Performance: To further investigate the performance of methods, we calculate the recall for each type
of malicious traffic in the CICIDS2018-III and EnTra2023-III
datasets. The recall indicates how much of each category of
malicious traffic is correctly identified as such. Figure 6 and
Figure 7 display the corresponding heatmaps.
For the CICIDS2018-III dataset, most supervised methods
demonstrate decent detection capabilities for DDOS (LOIC
for HTTP), likely benefiting from the presence of DoS and
Botnet traffic in the training data. However, the recalls for
other types of malicious traffic are relatively low. Rosetta,
for instance, has a recall of only 2.39% for DDOS (LOIC

6881

Fig. 6. Heatmap of recall for each category of malicious traffic on the
CICIDS2018-III dataset.

Fig. 7. Heatmap of recall for each category of malicious traffic on the
EnTra2023-III dataset.

for UDP). CICAutoML’s recalls across all categories are
relatively uniform but all below 50%. This could be due to a
well fit on the training set but a lack of generalization ability,
leading to an almost random guess in detecting traffic of
all categories. In comparison, ECNet’s recall is much higher,
reaching 98.7% for DDOS (LOIC for UDP). Its recall for Web
attack (XSS) is 61.67%, which might be because the traffic
generated by this attack is somewhat similar to normal traffic.
For the EnTra2023-III dataset, ECNet also outperforms
other methods in terms of recall across all categories. The
lowest recall is 97.14% in detecting spyware. Other baselines
have relatively weaker capabilities in detecting malicious traffic generated by adware. The difficulty in detecting adware
could be attributed to the significant functional differences
between adware and other types of malware, leading to
greater variations in traffic patterns. Kitsune exhibits the lowest
recall for adware, possibly due to the similarity between
adware-generated traffic and normal traffic. In contrast to
supervised methods, our ECNet is not limited by whether the
same type of malicious traffic appeared in the training set and
maintains stable performance in detecting unknown malicious
traffic. Compared to unsupervised methods, ECNet can utilize
the probability branch to classify data that is similar to normal
traffic effectively.
3) Confidence Visualization: To analyze the role of the
confidence branch in detecting malicious traffic, we visualize
the confidence levels of normal and malicious traffic during testing. Figure 8 shows the distribution of confidence

6882

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE VII
N UMBER OF PARAMETERS AND T IME OVERHEAD

Fig. 8.
Confidence distribution of normal and malicious traffic on the
CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset (right).

values on the CICIDS2018-III and EnTra2023-III datasets,
respectively.
The confidence of normal traffic is basically close to 1,
meaning that the detection of normal traffic mainly relies on
the probability branch. In the CICIDS2018-III dataset, about
50% of the malicious traffic has a confidence level below 0.5.
This suggests the confidence branch significantly contributes
to the excellent performance of ECNet on this dataset. In the
EnTra2023-III dataset, only a small part of the malicious
traffic has low confidence. For malicious traffic with high
confidence levels, ECNet accurately detects them by extracting
representative features combined with the probability branch,
achieving an F1 of 99.08%.
Combining these observations, we can conclude that both
the probability and confidence branches of our ECNet are
crucial. They complement each other, ensuring that ECNet
maintains robust performance in various scenarios.
E. Complexity Analysis
To fully evaluate the trade-off between the model’s performance and complexity, we compare the number of model
parameters and the time required to analyze a session for
ECNet and other methods, as shown in Table VII.
Rosetta has a significantly more parameters than other
methods because its feature augmentation process requires the
use of pre-trained models. ECNet employs both packet length
sequences and raw packets, yet its parameter count is lower
than that of FSNet, which uses packet length sequences, and
GTID, which uses raw packets. Additionally, ECNet has a
shorter runtime and superior detection performance compared
to these methods, indicating that its model design is both
concise and efficient. Compared to ACID and CVAE-EVT,
ECNet has slightly higher parameter counts and runtime,
mainly due to its processing of features from multiple perspectives. Nonetheless, ECNet’s latency is acceptable and can
achieve near real-time performance. ECNet leverages easily
accessible features, including randomly sampled packets and
session packet length and direction sequences, along with a
simple model to reduce overhead.
F. Ablation Experiment
To quantify the individual contribution of each component
in ECNet, we perform ablation experiments, and the results are
shown in Table VIII and Table IX. For convenience, we denote
using only content features and pattern features as ‘w/ Content’
and ‘w/ Pattern’. Feature fusion is not required in these cases.

TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN ECN ET
ON THE CICIDS2018-I, II, III DATASET (%)

TABLE IX
A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN ECN ET
ON THE E N T RA 2023-I, II, III DATASET (%)

‘w/o Fusion’ represents not using gated feature fusion, but
instead directly concatenating the two types of features.
Both content and pattern features play important roles.
In most cases, content features are more crucial than pattern
features. When detecting unknown malicious traffic, such as on
the CICIDS2018-II dataset, using only pattern features results
in a 6.53% decrease in accuracy and a 20.39% decrease in F1
for ECNet. Similar trends are observed on the EnTra2023-II
dataset. Interestingly, on the CICIDS2018-III dataset, using
only content features leads to a more significant performance
drop, with a decrease of 10.82% in F1. This also shows that
relying on a single type of feature is unstable and insufficient
to cope with the variability of network traffic. Instead, the

HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION

Fig. 9. Performance of ECNet with different number of randomly selected
packets on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset
(right).

6883

Fig. 10. Performance of ECNet with different dimension of encoded sequence
vector on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset
(right).

optimal performance is achieved by combining both content
and pattern features.
Additionally, the use of gated feature fusion also plays a
certain role in enhancing the performance of ECNet. On the
CICIDS2018-III dataset, it results in an increase of 1.57% in
accuracy and an improvement of 4.41% in F1.
G. Sensitivity Analysis
To investigate the impact of hyper-parameters on performance, we conduct a thorough sensitivity analysis of the
key parameters in ECNet on the CICIDS2018-III dataset and
EnTra2023-III dataset. The parameters analyzed include the
number of randomly selected packets n p , the dimension of
encoded sequence vector vsq m, the proportion of augmented
samples αc and α p , and the confidence threshold for detecting
malicious traffic δc .
1) Number of Randomly Selected Packets: ECNet randomly
selects n p packets from each session to extract content features. Figure 9 illustrates the performance of ECNet as n p
varies. The model performs poorly with only two packets,
while the performance with six and four packets shows
minimal differences. Typically, four packets are sufficient to
include packets from both the session establishment and data
transmission processes, so increasing to six packets does not
yield substantial benefits. The inferior performance when using
two packets can be attributed to two main factors. Firstly,
two packets contain limited information. Secondly, it may be
affected by the data augmentation process. During content
augmentation, one of the n p packet vectors is randomly set to
a zero vector. When using only two packets, half of the content
features are set to zero, potentially negatively impacting the
model’s training.
2) Dimension of Encoded Sequence Vector: ECNet encodes
packet length and direction sequences into a vector vsq with
m columns. Figure 10 shows the impact of m on model
performance. The results indicate that the choice of m has
minimal impact on performance, suggesting that our encoding
method combined with SessionCNN can effectively capture
the pattern features of interaction processes. However, the
choice of m affects the size of vsq , which in turn influences
the time and space overhead. In vsq , each row stores the
lengths of consecutive packets in the same direction (burst),
while adjacent rows store the lengths of packets in different
directions. If the length of a burst exceeds m, a blank row
consisting of zeros needs to be filled in; if a burst is shorter
than m, it is also padded with zeros to fill up to m. Figure 11
provides statistics of the burst lengths of the two datasets,

Fig. 11. Distribution of burst lengths in the CICIDS2018 dataset and the
Entra2023 dataset.

Fig. 12.
Performance of ECNet with different proportion of sessions
performed content augmentation on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and
the EnTra2023-III dataset (right).

Fig. 13.
Performance of ECNet with different proportion of sessions
performed pattern feature augmentation on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left)
and the EnTra2023-III dataset (right).

showing that the burst length less than or equal to 3 can cover
about 80% of the data, so setting m to 3 is enough.
3) Proportion of Augmented Samples: Data augmentation
includes content augmentation on the data comprising a proportion of αc and pattern augmentation on the data comprising
a proportion of α p during training. To more clearly analyze the
effect of augmenting these two types of features, we avoid augmenting pattern features when adjusting the sample proportion
for content feature augmentation, and vice versa. Figure 12 and
Figure 13 respectively show the impact of the value of αc and
α p on the performance of ECNet.
From Figure 12, we observe that ECNet performs best when
10% of the samples are performed content augmentation, and
there is a significant improvement compared to the scenario
without data augmentation (αc = 0). However, as αc continues

6884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 14. Performance of ECNet with different confidence threshold on the
CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset (right).

to increase, the model’s performance begins to decline. This is
because content augmentation involves replacing all the values
of a data packet with zeros, which has a considerable impact.
A continual increase in αc leads to an increase in difficult
samples, resulting in unstable gradients during model training
and hindering the learning of effective features.
The impact of pattern augmentation on performance is
not as significant as that of content augmentation. From
Figure 13, it can be observed that ECNet achieves satisfactory
performance when 30% to 50% of the samples are performed
pattern augmentation. During the training process, our ECNet
performs both content and pattern augmentation on the training
data to optimize the model’s learning capability.
4) Confidence Threshold: Traffic with a confidence lower
than δc are considered malicious. Figure 14 shows the variation
in ECNet’s performance as δc changes. When δc is 0, the
confidence branch does not play a role. At this point, the model
misclassifies many malicious traffic as normal, particularly
resulting in poor performance on the CICIDS2018-III dataset.
As δc increases, more and more unknown malicious traffic is
correctly classified. When δc continues to increase from 0.6 to
0.9, there is a slight decrease in precision, as a small number
of unfamiliar normal sessions are misclassified as malicious.
However, this situation is rare and has minimal impact on
overall performance.

we use normal data from different time periods for training and
testing, ECNet exhibits high confidence in data, and the probability branch also accurately classifies the data, indicating that
our method can resist slight changes well. Furthermore, in the
future, we can combine ECNet with incremental learning.
This allows ECNet to continuously learn new normal traffic
patterns and continue to update and accumulate knowledge.
This is different from attack data information leakage [30].
New attacks are unpredictable and cannot be obtained in
advance, while normal traffic can be obtained continuously,
so incremental learning is a feasible solution. In situations of
drastic network changes, all methods face the challenge of
retraining models by capturing a new dataset over a period
and retraining the model, which is a common practice.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a robust malicious traffic detection
method with multi-view feature extraction and confidence
mechanism, which can effectively and accurately detect malicious traffic in the real world. ECNet extracts multi-view
features from sessions, including content features and pattern
features. A gated-based feature fusion method is also used
to combine these features. ECNet introduces a confidence
mechanism. For each session model, it not only outputs
the probability that it belongs to each category but also
outputs a confidence value, indicating the reliability of this
result. Combining these two outputs, ECNet can accurately
detect known and unknown attacks. We conduct comprehensive experiments on six reorganized datasets, and the results
demonstrate that our ECNet outperforms other state-of-theart methods in detecting both known and unknown malicious
traffic.
In the future, we will explore integrating ECNet with
incremental learning to further enhance its robustness. We will
also investigate the adaptive configuration of the confidence
threshold, making it more automated.

VI. D ISCUSSION
A. Challenges for Attackers in Evading Detection
Attackers may attempt to evade detection by modifying
packets or altering the speed of traffic to mimic the characteristics of normal traffic. ECNet uses a deep learning
approach. Attackers must understand normal network traffic
over time and know the structure and settings of our model
to evade detection. Furthermore, our method involves the
random selection of packets, and the use of packet length and
direction sequences. Attackers need to modify both aspects
simultaneously while ensuring the effectiveness of their attack,
which is very difficult. The random selection of packets means
that the attacker needs to modify all packets. The combination
of packet length and direction sequences requires attackers to
control not only the packets they send but also those sent by
the target host. This significantly heightens the challenge for
attackers aiming to manipulate these features.
B. Usability in Changing Environment
In slightly changing network environments, ECNet shows
good performance without being affected. In experiments,

R EFERENCES
[1] D. Ucci, L. Aniello, and R. Baldoni, “Survey of machine learning
techniques for malware analysis,” Comput. Secur., vol. 81, pp. 123–147,
Mar. 2019.
[2] J. Gu and S. Lu, “An effective intrusion detection approach using
SVM with naïve Bayes feature embedding,” Comput. Secur., vol. 103,
Apr. 2021, Art. no. 102158.
[3] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Halifax, NS, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
[4] X. Han et al., “STIDM: A spatial and temporal aware intrusion detection
model,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput.
Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2020, pp. 370–377.
[5] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
Art. no. 108117.
[6] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Sep. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[7] X. Han, S. Cui, S. Liu, C. Zhang, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “Network intrusion
detection based on n-gram frequency and time-aware transformer,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103171.
[8] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.

HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION

[9] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Def.,
2022, pp. 495–509.
[10] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[11] M. Catillo, A. Pecchia, and U. Villano, “CPS-GUARD: Intrusion
detection for cyber-physical systems and IoT devices using outlieraware deep autoencoders,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, Jun. 2023,
Art. no. 103210.
[12] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[13] P. Zhang et al., “Real-time malicious traffic detection with online
isolation forest over SD-WAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 18, pp. 2076–2090, 2023.
[14] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf.
Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.
[15] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic classification in diverse network environments with TCPaware traffic augmentation,” in Proc. ACM Turing Award Celebration Conf. China, Jul. 2023, pp. 625–642. [Online]. Available:
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/xie
[16] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[17] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion
detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
2021.
[18] Z. Qiu, D. Zhou, Y. Zhai, B. Liu, L. He, and J. Cao, “VAEMax: Openset intrusion detection based on OpenMax and variational autoencoder,”
2024, arXiv:2403.04193.
[19] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
[20] D. Suciu, S. McLaughlin, L. Simon, and R. Sion, “Horizontal privilege escalation in trusted applications,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur.
Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2020, pp. 825–840.
[21] S. Siby, M. Juarez, C. Diaz, N. Vallina-Rodriguez, and C. Troncoso,
“Encrypted DNS–> privacy? A traffic analysis perspective,” 2019,
arXiv:1906.09682.
[22] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A
channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025,
2023.
[23] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bidirectional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
[24] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Learning confidence for out-ofdistribution detection in neural networks,” 2018, arXiv:1802.04865.
[25] Y. Lu, J. Zeng, J. Zhang, S. Wu, and M. Li, “Learning confidence for
transformer-based neural machine translation,” 2022, arXiv:2203.11413.
[26] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[27] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
[28] (2023). Automl for Image, Text, Time Series, and Tabular Data.
Accessed: Dec. 7, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://auto.gluon.
ai/stable/index.html
[29] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017,
pp. 253–262.
[30] E. Quiring et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,” in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.),
2022, pp. 3971–3988.

6885

Xueying Han received the B.S. degree from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2020. She is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Institute of Information Engineering, University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing. Her research interests include
deep learning and intrusion detection.

Song Liu received the M.S. degree from the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently
an Engineer with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current
research interests include network attack detection
and defense, and big data processing.

Junrong Liu received the master’s degree from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
in 2010. She is currently a Senior Engineer with
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. Her research interests include
network situational awareness and network security
visualization.

Bo Jiang received the Ph.D. degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. He is currently
an Assistant Professor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
His research interests include network situational
awareness, knowledge graphs, and data mining.

Zhigang Lu received the Ph.D. degree in computer applications from the University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences. He is currently a Professor
with the Department of Cyber Security, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has published more than 30 papers in top network and
security journals and conferences, including IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS
AND S ECURITY , Computer Networks, Computers
& Security, and TrustCom. His research interests
include network and system security, with a specific
focus on cyber situation awareness, intrusion detection and prevention, and
mobile terminal security.
Baoxu Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2002. He is currently a
Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, and the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing. His current research interests include network attack detection and defense, and network
security situational awareness.