1102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

Encoder-Decoder Contrast for Unsupervised
Anomaly Detection in Medical Images
Jia Guo , Shuai Lu , Lize Jia, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Weihang Zhang ,
and Huiqi Li , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract — Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) aims
to recognize anomalous images based on the training set
that contains only normal images. In medical image analysis, UAD benefits from leveraging the easily obtained normal
(healthy) images, avoiding the costly collecting and labeling of anomalous (unhealthy) images. Most advanced UAD
methods rely on frozen encoder networks pre-trained using
ImageNet for extracting feature representations. However,
the features extracted from the frozen encoders that are
borrowed from natural image domains coincide little with
the features required in the target medical image domain.
Moreover, optimizing encoders usually causes pattern collapse in UAD. In this paper, we propose a novel UAD method,
namely Encoder-Decoder Contrast (EDC), which optimizes
the entire network to reduce biases towards pre-trained
image domain and orient the network in the target medical
domain. We start from feature reconstruction approach that
detects anomalies from reconstruction errors. Essentially,
a contrastive learning paradigm is introduced to tackle
the problem of pattern collapsing while optimizing the
encoder and the reconstruction decoder simultaneously.
In addition, to prevent instability and further improve performances, we propose to bring globality into the contrastive
objective function. Extensive experiments are conducted
across four medical image modalities including optical
coherence tomography, color fundus image, brain MRI,
and skin lesion image, where our method outperforms all
current state-of-the-art UAD methods. Code is available at:
https://github.com/guojiajeremy/EDC
Index Terms— Medical anomaly detection, unsupervised learning, feature reconstruction, contrastive learning,
anomaly localization.

I. I NTRODUCTION
EEP neural networks have become a popular methodology for analyzing medical images [1], [2], [3]. These
successes should be attributed not only to the profound
progress in deep learning techniques but also to a great

D

Manuscript received 31 July 2023; revised 16 October 2023;
accepted 22 October 2023. Date of publication 26 October 2023; date
of current version 4 March 2024. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant
82072007, in part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant
IS23112, and in part by the Beijing Institute of Technology Research Fund
Program for Young Scholars. (Corresponding authors: Weihang Zhang;
Huiqi Li.)
The authors are with the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
100081, China (e-mail: guojia.jeremy@gmail.com; lushuaie@163.
com; 3220212096@bit.edu.cn; zhangweihang@bit.edu.cn; huiqili@bit.
edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMI.2023.3327720

number of carefully annotated medical image datasets [4].
However, the collection and labeling of medical images is
usually an arduous task, especially for rare diseases [5]. It is
also difficult to exhaust every possible anomaly for building
disease screening systems. In health examinations, the amount
of normal (healthy) subjects usually overwhelms anomalous
(unhealthy) subjects, making normal image collection much
easier. Unsupervised anomaly detection (UAD) aims to identify anomalous images based on the training set that contains
only normal images. Recently, UAD has attracted increasing
interest in medical image analysis [5], [6], [7].
Most UAD methods attempt to learn the distribution of
available normal samples. Pixel reconstruction methods [5],
[7], [8], [9], [10] train auto-encoders or generative adversarial networks (GAN) [7] from scratch to reconstruct normal
images, relying on the hypothesis that the networks trained
on normal images can only reconstruct normal regions, but
fail for anomalous regions. However, recent studies [11], [12]
suggest that anomalous regions can also be well constructed
when normal and anomalous regions share similar pixel values
or anomalies are too subtle. Accordingly, feature reconstruction methods reconstruct features from pre-trained encoders
instead of raw pixels, because learned features provide more
discriminative and noise-free representation [11], [12], [13].
To prevent the reconstruction networks from converging to a
trivial solution, i.e., pattern collapse, the parameters of the
encoders should be frozen during training [11]. However, the
semantic gap between natural images (usually ImageNet [14])
on which the frozen networks were pre-trained and medical
images in various modalities causes poor transfer ability.
Memory matching methods [15], [16], [17], [18] memorize
all anomaly-free features extracted from pre-trained networks
in training, and match them with test samples during inference. Apart from the expensive computational overhead, these
methods also struggle in transfer as the feature extractor is not
optimized in the target domain.
In this study, our motivation is to reorient the large-scale
pre-trained encoders to target medical UAD datasets without
losing their ability to extract discriminative features. We propose a novel UAD method, namely Encoder-Decoder Contrast
(EDC), as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). The essence of contrastive
learning (Fig. 1(a)) and feature reconstruction UAD (Fig. 1(b))
are elegantly combined, orienting the network in the medical
domain by training all parameters end-to-end.

1558-254X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GUO et al.: ENCODER-DECODER CONTRAST FOR UAD IN MEDICAL IMAGES

1103

1) To address the poor transfer performance of the frozen
pre-trained encoder, we propose a simple yet effective
UAD method for detecting medical anomalies, combining the key elements of contrastive learning and feature
reconstruction.
2) We introduce the stop-gradient operation to optimize the
entire network in target medical domains without feature
collapse.
3) We design a new objective loss function, introducing
globality into cosine distance to prevent instability and
divergence.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection

Fig. 1.
Comparison of three similar architectures. (a) Contrastive
learning [19], [20] for self-supervised representation learning. It maximizes the similarity between the representations of two augmentations
of one image (x and x′ ) while trying to avoid collapsing solutions (all
inputs encoded to a constant). (b) Feature reconstruction [11], [13].
It reconstructs 2-D features extracted by frozen pre-trained encoder for
anomaly detection. (c) Our proposed EDC prototype. It combines 2-D
reconstruction with the elements of contrastive learning, i.e. training
encoder, stop-gradient, and global distance. Here, 1-D and 2-D indicate
the distance is calculated by 1-D feature representations RC and 2-D
feature map RC×H×W , respectively.

First, we start with the feature reconstruction-based UAD
methods that detect anomalies by reconstruction errors
between the encoder and the reconstruction network (decoder)
[11], [13]. Second, we explain why the direct optimization of
encoder causes feature collapse by probing the behavior of
encoder features. Accordingly, we introduce the key element
of contrastive learning into feature reconstruction, building
a feature map contrast paradigm to train the encoder and
decoder jointly on medical images. Specifically, we target
the essential operation, stop-gradient, that enables contrastive
representation learning methods [19], [20] to train without
collapse. Third, we observe that optimizing the encoder makes
the training procedure extremely unstable, which causes degradation in the end. Inspired by global average pooling (GAP),
a new optimization objective, namely global cosine distance,
is proposed to make the contrast in a global manner to stabilize
the optimization and further improve performances.
We evaluate EDC with extensive experiments on four medical image datasets, including optical coherence tomography
(OCT) [21], color fundus image [22], brain MRI [23] and
skin lesion image [24]. Without elaborately designed modules
or pseudo anomalies, our proposed method achieved superior
performance compared with previous state-of-the-arts. On the
widely used OCT2017 benchmark, proposed method achieves
nearly perfect scores (AUC=99.56%), reducing the error of
previous best by three-quarters. The contributions of this study
can be summarized as:

Unsupervised anomaly detection methods rely on learning the distribution of available normal samples. Classical
approaches focus on utilizing machine learning methods for
building a one-class classifier, such as one-class support vector
machine (OC-SVM) [25] and support vector data description
(SVDD) [26]. With the advance of deep learning, most recent
works apply neural networks on UAD tasks. Reconstructionbased methods are under the hypothesis that the networks
trained on normal images can only reconstruct anomaly-free
regions, but fail for anomalous regions [27]. Within the reconstruction paradigm, pixel reconstruction methods are trained
from scratch to reconstruct normal pixels via auto-encoder
(AE) [10], [27], variational auto-encoder (VAE) [9], [28], and
generative adversarial network (GAN) [5], [7], [29]. Such
methods detect anomalies by the pixel value errors between
input images and reconstructed images. Recent studies suggest
that unseen anomalous regions can also be well restored when
normal and anomalous regions share similar pixel values or
the anomalies are too subtle [11], [13].
Most advanced methods utilize networks pre-trained on
large-scale datasets (ImageNet [14]) for extracting discriminative and informative feature representation in UAD tasks.
Because the available UAD training set is usually small
and contains only one class of image, i.e., normal samples,
the usage of a powerful pre-trained network alleviates the
need for training networks from scratch with limited supervision. Feature reconstruction methods reconstruct features from
pre-trained encoders instead of raw pixels [11], [12], [30].
To prevent the reconstruction networks from converging to a
trivial solution, i.e., pattern collapse, the parameters of the
encoders are frozen during training [13]. Feature distillation
is a special configuration of feature reconstruction, where the
student network mimics the output features of the pre-trained
teacher network with the same input of normal images [11],
[31], [32]. The above two approaches are also based on the
hypothesis that the models trained on normal samples only
succeed in predicting features of normal regions. Memory
matching methods [15], [16], [17] memorize all (or their
reduced subset) normal features extracted from pre-trained
encoders and match them with test samples during inference.
Since these methods require memorizing, processing, and
matching nearly all features from training samples, they are
computationally expensive in both training and inference,
especially when the training set is large. Pseudo-anomaly

1104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

methods generate artificial defects on normal images to imitate
anomalous images, converting UAD to supervised classification [33] or segmentation task [34]. These methods deeply rely
on how well the pseudo anomalies match real anomalies [11],
which makes it hard to generalize to different datasets. Another
type of paradigm, i.e., normalizing-flow, models the likelihood
(distribution) function of normal samples. Such methods [35],
[36], [37] deploy a sequence of invertible and differentiable
mappings to transform a complex distribution of extracted
image features into a standard normal distribution, and detect
anomalies by estimating the likelihood of features.
There are considerable semantic gaps between large-scale
natural images on which the frozen networks were pre-trained
and the medical images in various modalities. Therefore,
methods based on pre-trained networks struggle in transferring
to medical images as the feature encoders are not optimized
in the target medical domain. There are some efforts [6], [38],
[39] paying attention to first pre-train a domain-specific feature extractor on normal samples via self-supervised learning
and then run aforementioned UAD methods. However, such
two-step approaches require an additional pre-text training
phase and a carefully designed pre-text task, which limits efficiency and generality. In this work, we mainly focus on orienting the network in the medical domain during UAD training.


 N
available, given as Dtrain = (x i , yi }i=1
, yi ∈ {0}, where
xi is the i th sample with its label yi . During test, Dtest =
M , y ∈ {0, 1} (0 for normal, 1 for anomalous)
(x i , yi }i=1
i
containing both normal and anomalous images is given. The
goal is to build a model using Dtrain to distinguish (x, 1)
from (x, 0) in Dtest , while localizing anomalous regions as
explanations. As usual, no validation set is used in UAD
settings because no anomalous samples are available in the
training data which includes the validation set.
Instead of introducing our proposed method directly,
we present an exploration journey starting from the
conventional feature reconstruction (config. 1) to our
Encoder-Decoder Contrast with global cosine distance (EDC,
config. 4) in a problem and solution manner. We believe such
exploration will motivate researchers to rethink the role of
encoders in UAD. In this section, the exploration is conducted
on the APTOS dataset. By convention, area under the receiver
operating characteristic (AUC) is used as the primary evaluation metric.

B. Anomaly Detection in Medical Images
UAD methods for medical image are mostly adaptations or
combinations of previously discussed approaches. AnoGAN
[8] and f-AnoGAN [7] utilize GAN to detect anomalies in
medical images. VAE is adopted for UAD on ultra-sound
images [28]. A hybrid framework SALAD [5] was proposed
to combine GAN and pseudo-anomaly. Normal images are
first augmented to carry the artificial anomaly through pixel
corruption and pixel shuffling. The fake abnormal images and
normal ones are fed to the GAN for learning discriminative
feature representations. This method demands strong prior
knowledge of the real anomaly type. Most recently, SQUID
[40] was proposed for detecting anomalies in chest x-ray,
which is a GAN-based in-painting network with memory
bank. ProxyAno [41] makes use of an auto-encoder with a
memory bank in the middle to reconstruct super-pixels instead
of raw pixels. STMC [42] proposed to memorize texture and
structure information to avoid reconstructing anomalies too
well. SCVAE [43] is proposed for retinal OCT images by
introducing both spatial and contextual constraints in the latent
space of VAE to amplify the anomalous reconstruction errors.
The above methods are trained from scratch, without the help
of pre-trained feature extractors. Self-supervised learning [44]
is used to pre-train networks on medical images for better
transfer [6] as supplementary to the base UAD methods. AEflow [37] was proposed as a normalizing flow-based AE for
modeling the distribution of features extracted by an ImageNet
encoder. The method also suffers from the transfer ability of
the frozen pre-trained feature encoder.

A. Config. 1: Feature Reconstruction, A Baseline
First, we build a simple feature reconstruction-based UAD
approach, encoder-decoder reconstruction, which is the simplified version of RD4AD [11] without the multi-scale feature
bottleneck. This configuration consists of a pre-trained encoder
and a reconstruction decoder, as depicted in Fig. 2(a). The
encoder is frozen, aiming to extract informative feature maps
with different spatial sizes. The decoder is the reverse of the
encoder, i.e., the down-sampling operation at the beginning of
each layer is replaced by up-sampling. During training, the
decoder learns to reconstruct the output of the encoder layers
by maximizing the similarity between feature maps. During
inference, the decoder accurately reconstructs anomaly-free
regions of the feature maps but fails for anomalous regions
as the decoder has never seen such samples. Without loss of
generality, we consider the standard 4-layer ResNet [45] as
our encoder and reconstruct the output of the first three layers.
k
k
k
Mathematically, let f Ek , f Dk ∈ RC ×H ×W denote the output
feature maps from the k-th layer of the encoder and decoder
respectively, where C k , H k , and W k denote the number of
channels, height, and width of the k-th layer, respectively.
As illustrated in Fig. 2(e), the point-wise cosine distance [11],
[32] is used to measure the difference between f Ek and f Dk
k
k
point by point, obtaining a 2-D anomaly map Mk ∈ R H ×W :
Mk (h, w) = 1 −

f Ek (h, w)T · f Dk (h, w)
f Ek (h, w)

f Dk (h, w)

,

(1)

where ∥·∥ is ℓ2 norm, and a set of (h, w) locates a spatial point
in the feature map. A large value in Mk indicates anomaly
at the corresponding position. Final anomaly map Mano is
obtained by up-sampling all Mk to the same size and makes
an average, as:
Mano =

3
X

R(Mk ),

(2)

III. M ETHOD : F ROM R ECONSTRUCTION TO C ONTRAST

k=1

First, we give the definition of unsupervised anomaly detection. During training, a dataset with N normal images is

where R denotes the up-sampling operation. The maximum
or mean value of Mano is taken as the anomaly score for the

GUO et al.: ENCODER-DECODER CONTRAST FOR UAD IN MEDICAL IMAGES

1105

Fig. 2. Training configurations. (a) config. 1, encoder-decoder reconstruction. (b) config. 2, encoder-decoder reconstruction without freezing encoder.
(c) config. 3, encoder-decoder contrast. (d) config. 4 (Ours), encoder-decoder contrast with global cosine distance. (e) Illustration of point-wise cosine
distance and global cosine distance.

Fig. 3. Training record. (a) Test AUC. (b) Training loss. (c) Feature diversity of the 3rd encoder layer. (d) Feature diversity of the 2nd encoder layer.

image. During training, the anomaly maps are minimized on
normal images by the point-wise cosine distance loss, given
as:
L=

3
X
k=1

Hk Wk

1 XX
1−
k
H Wk
h=1 w=1

f Ek (h, w)T · f Dk (h, w)
f Ek (h, w)

f Dk (h, w)

.
(3)

The AUC of test set is presented by the blue line in Fig. 3(a),
indicating that config. 1 can serve as a solid baseline.
B. Config. 2: Unfreeze Encoder
It seems straightforward to adapt the network in the target medical domain by jointly optimizing the encoder and
decoder, as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). However, previous studies
suggest that training encoders would lead encoders to extract
indiscriminative features that are easy to reconstruct [13],
which is also described as pattern collapsing or converging to
trivial solution [11]. In this configuration, we observe a similar

phenomenon that the training loss quickly decreases to nearly
zero, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Though the network converges
to an easy solution, the AUC does not degrade completely as
previously expected but rises slowly to a comparable result as
in Fig. 3(a).
To inspect the behavior of the encoder feature, we examine
the diversity of feature maps by probing the standard deviation
(std) of f Ek (h, w)/ f Ek (h, w) 2 . The larger the std, the more
discriminative the feature, and the more distinctive between
normal and anomalous regions. We plot the feature diversity
of the 2nd and 3rd encoder layers during training in Fig. 3(c)
and Fig. 3(d), respectively. The std of config. 2 drops quickly
during training, while the std of config. 1 keeps relatively
constant as a comparison. In addition, the std of config.
2 does not completely collapse to zero, which explains the
passable AUC performance. The experiment shows that the
trivial solution is attributed to the degeneration of the features
extracted by the optimized unfrozen encoder. It is noted that
the std starts from different values because of the different
modes of batch normalization (BN) [46] during training. BN is

1106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

Fig. 4. Optimization of cosine distance losses. The black arrows represent optimization directions.

in eval mode in config. 1 using pre-trained running mean and
variation, and it is in train mode in other configurations using
batch mean and variation.
C. Config. 3: Encoder-Decoder Contrast
Contrastive learning [19], [20], [44] for self-supervised representation learning (SSL) maximizes the similarity between
the representations of two augmentations of one image while
trying to avoid collapsing solutions (all inputs are encoded to a
constant value). It has been proved that the stop-gradient operation plays an essential role in preventing collapsing for SSL
methods that rely only on positive pairs [19]. Interestingly,
we found that contrastive methods can be explained from the
perspective of feature reconstruction. Take SimSiam [19] as
an example, the predictor (a multi-layer perceptron, MLP) can
also be regarded as a reconstruction network that reconstructs
the representation of one view x to match the representation
of another view x ′ . Vice versa, feature reconstruction UAD
can be converted to contrastive learning as well, regarding the
reconstruction network as a predictor. Literally, “reconstruction” means the reconstructed object is constant, while the
objects of “contrast” are adaptive during training.
To this end, we introduce the stop-gradient operation into
encoder-decoder reconstruction, transforming it into a contrastive learning paradigm. In this configuration, the network
is optimized by contrasting the feature maps of the encoder
and decoder, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The gradients propagate,
instead of directly into the encoder, back into the encoder
through the decoder. It is implemented by modifying (3) as:

3
Hk Wk
X
sg f Ek (h, w)T · f Dk (h, w)
1 XX

L=
1−
,
HkWk
sg f Ek (h, w)
f Dk (h, w)
k=1

h=1 w=1

(4)
where sg denotes the stop-gradient operation. The encoder features are treated as constants in (4), but still optimized by the
gradients of L from the decoder. The training of this configuration can be seen as a mutual reinforcement. The optimization
of f Dk makes both the encoder and decoder more informative in
the task image domain, while the more informative f Ek requires
further optimization of f Dk . In Fig. 3(c) and (d), we plot
the feature std, showing that config. 3 can constantly extract
more discriminative features. The performance rises quickly

at the beginning of the training; however, we observe extreme
instability during the training with “dips” in the AUC curve,
as shown by the green curve in Fig. 3(a). The high and stable
feature diversity indicates that this instability is not caused by
the degradation of features as in config. 2.
D. Config. 4: Global Cosine Distance
We are now one step away from the last success. The
config. 3 proves to be effective to extract discriminative feature
representation on the target domain by contrasting. However,
the instability in training limited its performance, especially in
the UAD setting where validation set is not available for selecting the best checkpoint. In addition, previous studies suggest
that the instability in neural network training harms the final
performance, though catastrophic failure (e.g., divergence) is
not caused [47]. Therefore, it is of great importance to find
the reason and the solution to the instability.
Recalling the structure of SSL methods, there is still one
component missing: globality. It is a convention to use global
average pooling (GAP) to pool the 2-D feature map of the
last network layer to a 1-D representation, in both supervised
classification and SSL approaches. In UAD, the use of GAP
will simply mess up all feature points together, losing the
ability to distinguish normal and anomalous regions, as shown
in Fig. 4(b). Therefore, we try to bring globality into the loss
function directly. Let F denote a flatten operation that casts a
−

2-D feature map f ∈ RC×H ×W to a vector f ∈ RC H W . Our
proposed global cosine distance loss is given as:

T 

3
sg F f Ek
· F f Dk
X
 

Lglobal =
1−
(5)
sg F f Ek
F f Dk
k=1
The calculation difference between Lglobal and point-wise L
is depicted in Fig. 2(e). In Lglobal , a variation of one feature
point will alter the whole representation vector and further
affects the cosine distance, as opposed to the point-by-point
independent cosine distance in L. Intuitively, Mk (1) is also
minimized along with the minimization of Lglobal . It is easy
to prove that minimizing global cosine distance to 0 equals

to minimizing Mk to 0. For simplicity,
we denote F f Ek by

A = [a1 , . . . , a N ], and F f Dk by B = [b1 , . . . , b N ], where
each ai and bi represent feature points f Ek (h, w) and f Dk (h, w)

GUO et al.: ENCODER-DECODER CONTRAST FOR UAD IN MEDICAL IMAGES

1107

at the same location. Therefore, the Lglobal of the k-th layer
can be given as:

2
AT · B
1
A
B
1−
=
−
∥A∥ ∥B∥
∥B∥
2 ∥A∥
A
1
B
.
=
−
∥B∥
2 ∥A∥
If the above equation equals to 0,
A
B
ai
bi
=
,
=
, ∀i ∈ 1 . . . N .
∥A∥
∥B∥
∥A∥
∥B∥
As ai and bi are linearly correlated, their cosine distance is
0. Thus, Mk is 0 on each location. Though losses are not
completely optimized to 0 in neural network training, we still
use point-wise Mano as anomaly map just like previous
configurations.
The AUC record is shown in red in Fig. 3(a), exceeding
all previous configurations with stability. We coarsely make a
hypothesis on how Lglobal work: the loss landscape of Lglobal
is flatter than L, especially when both the encoder and decoder
are included. In config. 2 and 3, the “dips” in the AUC curve
are sometimes accompanied by “spikes” in the training loss
curve, as shown in Fig. 3, which implies the optimizer encounters a cliff in the loss landscape. The rough loss landscape of
L can be caused by the point-by-point distance, as depicted in
Fig. 4(a). The fitting of one region may cause under-fitting of
the others, and further disturbs the optimization. Lglobal can
be seen as the distance between manifolds of feature points,
as depicted in Fig. 4(c), which measures the consistency
globally instead of excessively focusing on individual regions.
The real mechanism can be more complicated and is still under
further investigation.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
OCT2017 is an retinal optical coherence tomography
(OCT) dataset [21]. The dataset is labeled into four classes:
normal, drusen, DME, and CNV. The latter three classes are
considered anomalous. The dataset was already separated into
training and test set. The official training set contains 26,315
normal images and the official test set contains 1,000 images.
It is noted that the 2-D images are slices from the original 3-D
imaging modality. Images are resized to 256 × 256 pixels.
APTOS is a color fundus image dataset, available as the
official training set of 2019 APTOS blindness detection challenge [22]. The dataset contains 3662 images with annotated
grade 0-4 to indicate different severity of diabetic retinopathy.
Grade 0 is healthy and grade 1 to 4 are diabetic retinopathy
with increasing severity, giving 1805 normal images and
1,857 anomalous images. For data balance in the test set,
we randomly selected 1,000 normal images as our training set
and the rest 2,662 images (805 normal, 1,857 anomalous) as
the test set. Images are preprocessed to remove the redundant
background and then resized to 256 × 256 pixels.
Br35H is a brain MRI dataset on Kaggle [23]. It contains
1,500 2-D image slices that are tumorous and 1,500 images
that are non-tumorous. We randomly selected 1,000 nontumorous images as our training set and the rest 2,000 images

Fig. 5. Dataset Exclusion. There are medical-irrelevant differences
between normal and anomalous images in some datasets. There are
calibration marks in most pneumonia X-rays, but not in healthy X-rays
in Chest X-ray (first row). The left-down corner of normal and poly-p
endoscope images is in different colors in HyperKvasir (second row).

as the test set. It is noted that the 2-D images are slices
from the original 3-D imaging modality. Images are resized
to 256 × 256 pixels.
ISIC is a skin disease dataset, available as task 3 of
ISIC2018 challenge [24]. It contains seven classes and we
take NV (nevus) class as normal samples and the rest classes
as anomalous samples, following [37]. The official training
set contains 6,705 normal images. The official validation set
is used as test set, which includes 193 images. Images are
resized to 256 × 256 and center cropped to 224 × 224 pixels.
Dataset Exclusion: For the dataset used in previous UAD
studies, we found that Chest X-ray [21] used in [5], [37], and
[40] and HyperKvasir [48] used in [6] contain anomalous
images that differ from normal images not only in diseased
anomalies but also in the aspect of medically irrelevant
artifacts, e.g. calibrations, labels, and different imaging
devices, as shown in Fig. 5. It might be caused by difference
sources when collecting healthy and unhealthy samples.
In our preliminary exploration, we found that UAD methods
do pay strong attention to those regions. Though we achieved
promising AUC of 89.6% and 98.5% respectively on these
datasets, we do not recommend utilizing such datasets for
fair comparison.
B. Expermiental Settings and Metrics
Standard ResNet50 pre-trained on ImageNet is utilized
as the encoder by default. The decoder is the upside-down
version of the encoder without layer 4, i.e., the down-sampling
convolution with stride 2 at the beginning of each layer
is replaced by an up-sampling interpolation followed by a
convolution with stride 1. AdamW optimizer [49] is utilized
with β=(0.9,0.999) and weight decay=1e-4. The learning rates
(lr) of the encoder and decoder are separately searched in {1e3, 5e-4, 1e-4} and {1e-4, 5e-5, 1e-5} on each dataset, while
keeping the lr of decoder lower than the lr of encoder. The

1108

selected encoder lr are 5e-4, 5e-4, 5e-4, 1e-4 for OCT2017,
APTOS, Br35H, and ISIC, respectively. The selected decoder
lr are 1e-5, 1e-5, 5e-5, 1e-5, respectively. The networks are
trained with the batch size of 32 for 1,000, 4,000, 6,000,
and 500 iterations on APTOS, Br35H, OCT2017, and ISIC.
In ISIC, normal and anomalous images are both with lesions
and they differ by their overall appearance; in the other three
datasets, anomalous images differ from normal images by local
lesions on the healthy background. Therefore, we take the
mean of Mano as the image anomaly score (indicates overall
anomaly) for ISIC and the maximum value of Mano (indicates
local anomaly) for the other three datasets. By default, all
batchnorm layers (BN) is in train mode during training.
However, we observe instability when setting the encoder
BN to train mode on OCT2017 (probably because of the
contrasting white background); therefore, we set it to eval on
OCT2017. Experiments are conducted on NVIDIA GeForce
RTX3090 GPUs and PyTorch.
We adopt Area Under Receiver Operation Characteristic
(AUC), F1-score (F1), accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SEN), and
specificity (SPE) as the evaluation metrics. Their definitions
are given as followed:
SEN = T P/(T P + F N ) S P E
= T N /(F P + T N )
PRE (precision) = T P/(T P + F P)
ACC = (T P + T N )/(T P + T N + F P + F N )
F1 = 2 ∗ P R E ∗ S E N /(P R E + S E N )
where TP, TN, FP, and FN are true positives, true negatives,
false positives, and false negatives, respectively. AUC is the
area under SEN - (1−SPE) curve across different operating
thresholds. AUC, F1, and ACC are the evaluation of overall
performance, while SEN and SPE focus on the positive
samples and negative samples, respectively. Following [5] and
[37], the operating threshold of F1, ACC, SEN, and SPE is
determined by the optimal value of F1.
C. Comparison to State-of-the-Arts
We compare our method with previous state-of-the-arts
(SOTA) on four medical datasets. Auto-Encoder and VAE
[9] are basic pixel reconstruction methods. GANomaly [29],
f-AnoGAN [7], and SALAD [5] are pixel reconstruction methods based on GAN. ProxyAno [41] is based on auto-encoder
with memory bank. SCVAE [43] is based on VAE. MBUNet [50] is specifically designed for OCT images via layer
segmentation. SSD [39] pre-train a domain-specific feature
encoder on normal samples via contrastive learning. The
aforementioned methods train networks from scratch on the
target training set, while the following methods utilize pretrained encoders. STFPM [32] and MKD [31] are feature
distillation methods. RD4AD [11] is a feature reconstruction
method. PaDiM [15] is a memory matching method. DifferNet
[35], Fastflow [36], and AE-flow [37] are methods based on
normalizing flow. We take the results of compared methods
from the original papers or papers that report the performances
if available. Otherwise, we reproduce the method if code is

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

TABLE I
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE (%) ON OCT2017

open source. The results of our EDC are the averages of
the last iteration of three runs. Some works report their best
performance during training [37]; therefore, we report our
best checkpoint (in AUC, check every 100 iterations) during
training as well for fair comparison (denoted with †).
1) Results on OCT2017: We first evaluate our method
on OCT2017. The experimental results are presented in
Table I. Among the compared methods, GAN-based methods
outperform AE-based methods among pixel reconstruction
paradigms. In addition, methods that make use of pre-trained
feature encoders (STFPM, MKD, PaDiM, AE-flow and Ours)
generally outperform methods that train networks from scratch
(AE, VAE, GANomaly, f-AnoGAN, SALAD, ProxyAno,
SCVAE, MBU-Net, SSD), indicating that medical UAD
benefits from large-scale pre-training. The advanced methods proposed for general and industrial anomaly detection
(STFPM, MKD, and PaDiM) also generalize promisingly well
on OCT2017.
Our method producesan superior AUC of 99.56%, F1 of
98.6%, and ACC of 97.9%, exceeding previous SOTA AE-flow
by 1.41%, 2.24%, and 3.48%. In the aspect of error (1)AUC), we achieve 0.44%, reducing the previous SOTA error
by 76.2%.
2) Results on APTOS: Anomaly detection on APTOS is
a significantly harder task, as the lesions in retinal fundus
images can be extremely inconspicuous, especially for mild
and moderate diabetic retinopathy. The experimental results
are presented in Table II. Among competing methods, PaDiM
cannot perform as well as in OCT2017 because it models
the features based on the position. However, fundus images
are not registered with the same anatomical position. Though
PaDiM produces the best SEN, it sacrifices the SPE with a
low anomaly threshold. Surprisingly, other methods for general
anomaly detection outperform all previous medical anomaly
detection methods, suggesting that researchers should also pay
close attention to the latest UAD approaches for natural images
while developing medical UAD methods.
Nevertheless, our EDC achieves the best results in all metrics except SEN. Specifically, EDC outperforms the runner-up
counterparts STFPM by 1.82% in AUC, 1.2% in F1, and

GUO et al.: ENCODER-DECODER CONTRAST FOR UAD IN MEDICAL IMAGES

TABLE II
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE (%) ON APTOS

TABLE III
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE (%) ON B R 35H

1.73% in ACC. In the aspect of AUC error, we achieve 4.59%,
reducing the previous best error by 28.4%. Though EDC does
not perform best in SEN, it produces a favorable SEN-SPE
trade-off.
3) Results on Br35H: Anomaly detection on Br35H is a
relatively simple task, as tumors are generally conspicuous
in this MRI dataset. The experimental results are presented in
Table III. The performance of SOTA methods are comparatively good, with four methods (MKD, PaDiM, RD4AD and
Ours) exceeding 98% in AUC.
Our method produces an excellent AUC of 99.85%, F1 of
99.57%, and ACC of 99.35%, outperforming previous SOTA
RD4AD by 0.73%, 0.53%, and 0.8%. In the aspect of AUC
error, our EDC presents only 0.15%, reducing the previous
error by 83%.
4) Results on ISIC: For the ISIC skin lesion image dataset,
the normal class (nevus) is a kind of benign lesion, instead of
a completely normal object like other datasets (plain skin in
this scenario), which makes normal images easily mistaken
with anomalous images. The experimental results are presented in Table IV. All compared methods present relatively
undesirable results (AUC under 90%), including the most
recently proposed AE-flow in which ISIC is first proposed as
a UAD dataset. Methods based on normalizing flow generally
outperform GAN-based pixel reconstruction methods, which
may also be attributed to the pre-trained feature extractor
utilized in such methods.
The results of our last iteration are already comparable
to previous SOTA AE-flow that reports their best results
during training. In the aspect of best checkpoints, we achieve
superior results in all metrics compared to AE-flow. However,

1109

TABLE IV
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE (%) ON ISIC

the performance is still less satisfactory than other image
modalities. We argue that the setting of UAD is designed for
detecting anomalies in healthy objects, which is not suitable
for the classification of different diseases or lesions. Most
UAD methods construct the anomaly detection paradigm by
segmenting unseen regions (lesions) on seen backgrounds
(objects); however, it is less reasonable to segment unseen
lesions out of normal lesions. Besides, the intra-class variation
is more significant than other image modalities, causing the
false-positive activation of irrelevant objects like hairs and
pores. Therefore, such tasks require investigation to further
improve performance.
D. Visualization of Anomaly Localization
Localization of lesions is important to the explanation of
detection in clinical disease screening. We present the anomaly
maps of anomalous samples by min-max-normalizing each
Mano to 0-1 and overlaying it on the input image. The
visualization result is shown in Fig. 6. Our method produces
strong responses to diseased regions. It is also observed that
EDC detects large lesions by their edge. However, the anomaly
map of the anomalous image in ISIC is less instructive,
activating lesions as well as other noises, which accounts for
the unfavorable anomaly detection performance.
E. Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct further ablation studies on
APTOS and OCT2017 to evaluate the contribution made by
each proposed element, as shown in Table V. Each result is
reported with a single run. Because some configurations are
extremely unstable in training, we report both the last and the
best AUC during training. Starting from conventional feature
reconstruction (config. 1), optimizing the encoder and decoder
together (config. 2) causes a small performance drop on
APTOS but a complete collapse on OCT2017. By introducing
the stop-gradient operation to construct a contrastive learning
paradigm (config. 3), the performance is recovered and further
improved. Finally, replacing point-wise cosine distance with
the proposed global cosine distance yields the best result
(config. 4, Ours). In addition, we show that the global cosine
distance can improve the baseline feature reconstruction alone
(config. 1 + Lglobal ), indicating the generality of the proposed
objective function.

1110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

Fig. 6. Visualization of anomaly maps. The first column from the left presents normal images as references. On OCT2017, APTOS, and Br35H,
anomalous regions are indicated by red arrows. On ISIC, the whole foreground lesions are considered to be anomalous.
TABLE V
A BLATION S TUDY ON APTOS AND OCT2017

By default, the predicted anomaly map Mano is the ensemble of all anomaly maps M1 , M2 , and M3 . We further
explore the detection performance of the anomaly map of each
layer, as shown in Table VI. We observe that different dataset
favors different layer. M3 yields the best result in APTOS,
while M2 yields the best result in OCT2017. As each layer
has a different receptive field, they are sensitive to different

kinds and sizes of anomalies. The superior result is obtained
by ensemble the anomaly maps of all layers to detect a wider
range of anomalies.
In addition, we test a variety of encoder backbones,
i.e., ResNet50 (default), ResNet34, WideResNet50 [51], and
ResNeXt50 [52]. The corresponding decoder is the reversed
version of the encoder. It is noted that different encoders

GUO et al.: ENCODER-DECODER CONTRAST FOR UAD IN MEDICAL IMAGES

1111

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE (AUC, %) OF A NOMALY M APS OF D IFFERENT L AYERS

jointly optimizing all parameters end-to-end without pattern
collapse and training instability. In addition, we propose a
new objective function, namely global cosine distance, to make
the contrast between feature point manifolds to stabilize the
optimization and further improve performances. Extensive
experiments demonstrate our superiority, setting a new stateof-the-art on four public datasets. The proposed EDC with 2-D
encoder is currently limited to 2-D input. For application on
3-D modalities, our method can be applied to the 2-D slices
of 3-D images and the results are aggregated. The proposed
method also has the potential to extend to 3-D input given
a pre-trained 3-D encoder. The idea of optimizing encoders
may further boost the research of UAD methods not only in
medical images but also in other image applications that are
far from natural image domain.

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE (AUC, %) OF D IFFERENT E NCODER B ACKBONES

R EFERENCES

Fig. 7. Performance on OCT2017 with varied numbers of training
images.

may favor different optimal learning rates. We set the encoder
learning rate of ResNet50, ResNet34, ResNext50 to 1e-5
(default), and WideResNet50 to 5e-5. Results are shown in
Table VII. Different backbones produce comparable results,
suggesting the generality of our method.
F. Training With Fewer Samples
Building UAD models with a limited number of normal
samples is a relevant setting for real-world scenarios, e.g.,
after a piece of new imaging equipment is launched in a
hospital. Therefore, we study the performance with fewer
training images. On OCT2017 with 26315 normal samples,
we vary the number of training samples from 100 (0.38%)
to 2000 (7.6%). As training with fewer samples for the same
iterations (6000) causes over-fitting, we also present the best
AUC during training to save searching time. Results are
presented in Fig. 7. With only 200 (0.76%) normal samples,
our EDC can still match previous SOTA performance.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we propose a novel contrastive learning
paradigm, namely EDC, for medical anomaly detection.
It enhances the transfer ability of the pre-trained encoder by

[1] A. Esteva et al., “Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer
with deep neural networks,” Nature, vol. 542, no. 7639, pp. 115–118,
Feb. 2017.
[2] W. Zhu, C. Liu, W. Fan, and X. Xie, “DeepLung: Deep 3D dual path nets
for automated pulmonary nodule detection and classification,” in Proc.
IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2018, pp. 673–681.
[3] Z. Zhou, M. M. R. Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang, “UNet++:
A nested U-Net architecture for medical image segmentation,” in Proc.
Int. Workshop Deep Learn. Med. Image Anal., in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science: Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, vol. 11045, 2018,
pp. 3–11.
[4] D. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. Zhang, and L. Wang, “FocalMix: Semisupervised learning for 3D medical image detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 3950–3959.
[5] H. Zhao et al., “Anomaly detection for medical images using selfsupervised and translation-consistent features,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 3641–3651, Dec. 2021.
[6] Y. Tian et al., “Constrained contrastive distribution learning for unsupervised anomaly detection and localisation in medical images,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., in Lecture
Notes in Computer Science: Including Subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, vol. 12905,
2021, pp. 128–140.
[7] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and
U. Schmidt-Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection
with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54,
pp. 30–44, May 2019.
[8] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial
networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process.
Med. Imag., in Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Including Subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics Computer Science, vol. 10265, 2017, pp. 146–157.
[9] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in
Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2014.
[10] P. Perera and V. M. Patel, “Learning deep features for one-class classification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 5450–5463,
Nov. 2019.
[11] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
[12] Z. You, K. Yang, W. Luo, L. Cui, Y. Zheng, and X. Le, “ADTR:
Anomaly detection transformer with feature reconstruction,” 2022,
arXiv:2209.01816.
[13] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” 2022,
arXiv:2206.03687.
[14] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
[15] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., in Lecture Notes in Computer
Science: Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, vol. 12664, 2021, pp. 475–489.

1112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

[16] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 14298–14308.
[17] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly
detection and segmentation,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., in Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Including Subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics, vol. 12627,
2021, pp. 375–390.
[18] O. Rippel, P. Mertens, and D. Merhof, “Modeling the distribution of
normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 6726–6733.
[19] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2021, pp. 15745–15753.
[20] J. B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent a new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Dec. 2020,
pp. 21271–21284.
[21] D. S. Kermany et al., “Identifying medical diagnoses and treatable diseases by image-based deep learning,” Cell, vol. 172, no. 5,
pp. 1122–1131.e9, Feb. 2018.
[22] APTOS 2019 Blindness Detection, Asia Pacific Tele-Ophthalmology
Society, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2019.
[23] H. Ahmed, “Br35H: Brain tumor detection 2020,” Kaggle, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ahmedhamada0/
brain-tumor-detection and https://github.com/guojiajeremy/EDC
[24] N. Codella et al., “Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection
2018: A challenge hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration
(ISIC),” 2019, arXiv:1902.03368.
[25] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and
R. C. Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional
distribution,” Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471,
Jul. 2001.
[26] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach.
Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, Jan. 2004.
[27] A.-S. Collin and C. De Vleeschouwer, “Improved anomaly detection by
training an autoencoder with skip connections on images corrupted with
stain-shaped noise,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR),
Jan. 2021, pp. 7915–7922.
[28] F. Milkovic, B. Filipovic, M. Subašic, T. Petkovic, S. Loncaric, and
M. Budimir, “Ultrasound anomaly detection based on variational autoencoders,” in Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Image Signal Process. Anal. (ISPA),
Sep. 2021, pp. 225–229.
[29] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly:
Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc.
Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., in Lecture Notes in Computer Science:
Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics, vol. 11363, 2019, pp. 622–637.
[30] Y. Shi, J. Yang, and Z. Qi, “Unsupervised anomaly segmentation
via deep feature reconstruction,” Neurocomputing, vol. 424, pp. 9–22,
Feb. 2021.
[31] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14897–14907.
[32] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature
pyramid matching for anomaly detection,” 2021, arXiv:2103.04257.
[33] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9659–9669.

[34] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 8330–8339.
[35] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but DifferNet:
Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE
Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 1906–1915.
[36] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
[37] Y. Zhao, Q. Ding, and X. Zhang, “AE-FLOW: Autoencoders with
normalizing flows for medical images anomaly detection,” in Proc. 11th
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023.
[38] T. Reiss, N. Cohen, L. Bergman, and Y. Hoshen, “PANDA: Adapting
pretrained features for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 2805–2813.
[39] V. Sehwag, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal, “SSD: A unified framework for
self-supervised outlier detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
2021.
[40] T. Xiang, Y. Liu, A. L. Yuille, C. Zhang, W. Cai, and Z. Zhou,
“In-painting radiography images for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023,
pp. 1–6.
[41] K. Zhou et al., “Proxy-bridged image reconstruction network for
anomaly detection in medical images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 41,
no. 3, pp. 582–594, Mar. 2022.
[42] K. Zhou et al., “Memorizing structure-texture correspondence for image
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
no. 6, pp. 2335–2349, Jun. 2022.
[43] X. Zhou et al., “Spatial–contextual variational autoencoder with attention
correction for anomaly detection in retinal OCT images,” Comput. Biol.
Med., vol. 152, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 106328.
[44] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[45] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[46] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. 32nd
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 1, 2015, pp. 448–456.
[47] X. Chen, S. Xie, and K. He, “An empirical study of training selfsupervised vision transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9620–9629.
[48] H. Borgli et al., “HyperKvasir, a comprehensive multi-class image and
video dataset for gastrointestinal endoscopy,” Sci. Data, vol. 7, no. 1,
p. 283, Aug. 2020.
[49] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2019.
[50] L. Mou, L. Liang, Z. Gao, and X. Wang, “A multi-scale anomaly
detection framework for retinal OCT images based on the Bayesian
neural network,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 75, May 2022,
Art. no. 103619.
[51] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” 2016,
arXiv:1605.07146.
[52] S. Xie, R. Girshick, P. Dollár, Z. Tu, and K. He, “Aggregated residual
transformations for deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 5987–5995.