786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Explosive Cyber Security Threats During
COVID-19 Pandemic and a Novel Tree-Based
Broad Learning System to Overcome
Ying Gao , Hongyue Miao , Jixiang Chen, Binjie Song , Xiping Hu, and Wei Wang

Abstract— The rapid spread of the COVID-19 has not only
affected personal health and economy, but also revolutionized
people’s lifestyles. As more people turn to work and socialize
online, the development of unmanned technologies based on the
Internet of Vehicles (IoV), such as unmanned delivery, unmanned
vehicles, unmanned transportation, etc., will become an inevitable
trend. However, all kinds of intelligent terminals for unmanned
equipment require a large amount of data interaction with
devices such as cloud servers, mobile terminals, and roadside
terminals, which poses cyber security risks. Furthermore, the
outbreak of COVID-19 has prompted people to put forward
higher demands for the security of network communications.
Unfortunately, the current intrusion detection methods based on
machine learning still have weaknesses such as low accuracy and
low efficiency when faced with unbalanced data distribution.
To solve the above problems, we propose a novel Tree-based
BLS (TBLS) intrusion detection method according to the idea
of ensemble learning and decision tree (CART and J48). The
performance of TBLS was tested on the NSL-KDD dataset and
the UNSW-NB15 dataset respectively, which contain a variety of
malicious traffic types for attacks on the IoV. The results show
that our proposed method can achieve higher accuracy rate and
lower false alarm rate, compared with the existing 16 solutions.
Index Terms— Intrusion detection, broad learning system
(BLS), decision trees, ensemble learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

S

INCE 2020, the number of COVID-19 cases has been
increasing and spreading rapidly to the world. It has not
only affected personal health and economy, but also completely changed people’s ways of life. More people choose to
work and socialize online to protect themselves from the virus.
Thanks to huge advances in artificial intelligence, mobile

Manuscript received 25 November 2021; revised 3 February 2022; accepted
14 March 2022. Date of publication 28 March 2022; date of current version 17 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the Key-Area
Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province under Grant
2019B010137001 and Grant 2020B010166001 and in part by the Natural
Science Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grant 2018A030313351.
The Associate Editor for this article was L. Wan. (Corresponding author:
Binjie Song.)
Ying Gao, Hongyue Miao, Jixiang Chen, and Binjie Song are with the
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University
of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: gaoying@scut.
edu.cn; csmiaohy1997@mail.scut.edu.cn; cs_cjx_cdh@mail.scut.edu.cn;
sbj332644514@163.com).
Xiping Hu and Wei Wang are with the School of Intelligent Systems
Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China (e-mail:
huxiping@mail.sysu.edu.cn; wangw328@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2022.3160182

sensing, ultra-reliable and low-latency communications, and
intelligent manufacturing technology, the Internet of Vehicles
(IoV), which refers to a vast interactive network composed
of information such as vehicle position, speed, and routes, has
grown rapidly in recent years, especially during the COVID-19
pandemic. The great breakthrough in unmanned technologies
has not only attracted the attention of industry and academia,
but also brought potential network security risks, because all
intelligent terminals of unmanned equipment need to interact
with cloud servers, mobile terminals, roadside terminals, and
other devices for large amounts of data interaction [1]–[4].
Taking the VANET as an example, a distributed denial of
service (DDoS) attack may occur during vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication [5].
Once the intrusion is successful, it may cause communication
congestion, or even send malicious instructions to mislead the
vehicle’s actions, and even lead to serious traffic accidents.
Monitored by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) of China, there were more than one million
malicious attacks appeared on the VANET platforms in the
first half of 2021, which is an increase of more than 80%
over the same period in 2020. With the spread of COVID-19,
people have put forward higher requirements for the security
and stability of the IoV [6].
Nowadays, experts have done lots of research work [7]–[10]
to improve the safety and reliability of IoV, adopting mainly
machine learning-based methods, such as artificial neural networks (ANN) [11], convolutional neural networks (CNN) [12],
decision trees (DT) [13], random forests (RF) [14], support
vector machines (SVM), Naive Bayes (NB) [15] and so on.
However, the current intrusion detection methods expose the
following challenges [16]:
1) Anomalous traffic is relatively difficult to obtain, which
results in more normal data in the training set and fewer anomalous data. The imbalance of the dataset leads to insufficient
training of the detection method, and the detection results often
tend to classify the abnormal traffic as normal.
2) There are differences between the same types of traffic,
and similarities between the different types of traffic, which
makes it difficult to detect anomalies.
3) It is not known in advance which features contribute
greatly to anomaly detection.
4) VANET has high real-time performance and a large
amount of data, which requires high efficiency in detection.

1558-0016 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME

At present, the anomaly detection method based on deep
learning needs to be layer-by-layer in training. This results
in large time overhead and low efficiency.
To improve the accuracy of intrusion detection, the existing
methods usually take two approaches [7]. One is to obtain
better feature representation in order to enlarge the difference
between data distributions and the other is to enhance the
recognition ability of the classifier.
Although these approaches have achieved good intrusion
detection results, in fact, most of them are still misuse-based
method rather than advanced. With the continuous increase of
data volume, the demands for data processing efficiency will
also become higher. Thus, complex methods such as ensemble
learning [17]–[19] were adopted to improve the performance
of the classifier. However, the added time and space overhead
of these methods will limit their deployment on NIDS.
Considering the existing problems comprehensively, this
paper firstly proposes an intrusion detection method based on
BLS. As far as we know, this is the first time that BLS [20] is
applied to intrusion detection. We also propose a novel method
named Tree-based BLS (TBLS) to detect network intrusion in
IoV systems. The implementation process is as follows. First,
multiple decision tree classifiers are used to fit the features of
the dataset. Second, based on the idea of ensemble learning,
we use BLS to integrate the features fitted by each basic
tree classifier, and finally get the distribution features of the
raw traffic. In the intrusion detection stage, BLS performs
multiple non-linear transformations on the input nodes to
obtain feature nodes. Then the input nodes and feature nodes
are concatenated for the next step and the final classification
result is obtained through the pseudo-inverse operation.
The contributions of this paper include the following
aspects:
1) To our best knowledge, this is the first time that BLS has
been adopted in network intrusion detection. This paper realizes the preliminary exploration of BLS in intrusion detection
and shows how to set various parameters in order to maximize
its effectiveness. We also have provided references for the
latter research work.
2) We have improved the BLS intrusion detection method
and proposed the TBLS method, which uses trees to improve
the input nodes of the original BLS and further improve the
generalization ability of the BLS.
3) The experimental results show that the proposed method
can adapt to intrusion detection better. Compared with other
proposed intrusion detection method, TBLS can obtain higher
accuracy and a lower false alarm rate, and it shows higher
intrusion detection efficiency in the test phase.
The structure of the following paper is as follows: Section II
mainly introduces the related work of the paper. Section III
is the key part, which mainly describes the BLS and TBLS
algorithms in detail. Section IV includes the analysis of the
experimental content and results. The summary and future
work are in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
As we know, network intrusion detection systems (NIDS)
can be divided into two categories [21]. The first category

787

is the misuse-based anomaly detection method. This method
creates a library of exception rules, which stores known types
of attack behaviors. During detection, if the network traffic
matches a rule in library B, the traffic is identified as abnormal.
Thus, this method cannot detect unknown abnormal traffic.
The other category is the anomaly-based detection method,
which only learns the pattern of normal network traffic. During
detection, if the network traffic cannot be identified by the
model, the traffic will be regarded as abnormal. Although this
method can identify new types of abnormal traffic, the false
alarm rate is high because it will treat new normal traffic and
traffic never seen before as an exception.
With the development of big data technology [22]–[25] and
artificial intelligence (AI) [26]–[28], the self-learning model
based on massive data is widely used in the field of NIDS.
Nowadays, machine learning has been widely used in intrusion
detection and can be divided into three categories.
The first category is supervised anomaly detection method.
In the training process, a training set and labels representing
categories are required. Shone et al. [29] combined the deep
and shallow learning for intrusion detection. This approach
adopted a deep neural network for feature extraction with
random forest for classification. The result showed that it
was more efficient and effective than the deep brief network (DBN). Yin et al. [30] used recurrent neural networks
to build IDS that suitable for binary and multiclass classification. The experimental results showed that its performance is superior to that of traditional ML classification
methods.
The second is unsupervised anomaly detection method.
It requires only a training set and no labels. The classification
is achieved by means such as clustering. Cao et al. [31]
proposed a novel method to help the AE achieve shallow
representation of abnormal traffic, and proposed two models which are Shrink Auto-encoder (SAE), and Dirac Delta
Variational Auto-encoder (DVAE). They adopted seven oneclassifiers to detect abnormal traffic. Experiments showed that
SAE and DVAE can achieve higher accuracy when compared
with the other three shallow representation methods. Ahmed
and Mahmood [32] presented a clustering-based collective
anomaly detection approach to detect denial of service (DoS)
attacks in the traffic. Their approach was proved to be more
efficient than other traditional cluster methods.
The third is the semi-supervised anomaly detection method.
This method combines the above two methods and adopts
a few labels to train the model. Semi-supervised learning
methods can be further subdivided into transductive learning
and inductive learning. An online sequential and network
Entropy estimation based semi-supervised ML approach was
proposed for DDoS detection in [33]. The supervised part was
designed to reduce the false alarm rate of the unsupervised
part. A semi-supervised learning method called FSSL-EL was
also proposed to detect abnormal network traffic in [34]. After
training the supervised part, the author adopted the fuzzinessbased method to mine the hidden structure of unlabeled
data and combined them via a neural network. However, the
prediction performance of the above methods still needs to be
improved.

788

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Structure of TBLS.

III. T HE I MPLEMENTATION P ROCESS
A novel Tree-based Broad Learning System (TBLS) for
intrusion detection is presented in this section, which can give
a more accurate classification with less time consumption.
The main structure of broad learning is also artificial neural
network. However, unlike the deep learning system which
mainly learns hidden features by increasing the number of
layers in its neural network, a broad learning system adds
neurons to each layer to extend features in order to realize
thorough analysis and recognition of complex and multivariate
data. Moreover, in order to further improve the fitting degree
of traffic data and the processing performance of unbalanced
data, we have involved several weighted DT classifiers in our
structure.
In the following subsections, data preprocessing, k-means
based data sampling, broad learning system and the novel treebased BLS method for NIDS will be introduced respectively
in detail. For better understanding our method, the flowchart
of the proposed approach is described in Fig.1.

A. Data Preprocessing
In this paper, we set X = {x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x n } ∈ R m×n to denote
the training traffic with features, where n expresses the amount
of traffic in the training dataset, and m represents the number
j
of dimensional features. x i represents the j -th feature in x i .
Due to the existence of non-numerical features in X which
may cause a negative effect on the learning process, we adopt
the one-hot encoding method to transform symbolic features
into numerical data. For example, if a column in X has three
distinct values { f 1 , f2 , f3 }, and then they will be mapped to
three binary vectors [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1] respectively,
which are regarded as their new values.

After encoding, we use min-max standardization to scale all
the feature values within the interval [0, 1], the new value is
calculated by:
j
xi =

j

xi − M I N j
M AX j − M I N j

(1)

j
where x i is the attribute value, M I N is the minimum of the
j -th column while M AX is the maximum.
Meanwhile, Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn } denotes the label of X,
and the range of y j is determined according to the classification categories. For instance, we set yi ∈ {0, 1} if there
are only two types of records: normal and abnormal. If there
are five types to be identified, we will set yi ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}.
We also implement the one-hot encoding method on Y as well,
it will facilitate the training process of the whole model.
In addition, the redundancy and correlation between features
in Traffic data may slow down the training process and reduce
detection efficiency. Hence, we use the Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) algorithm to reduce the dimensions of the
dataset for better feature selection and improving the speed
of training process. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a
kind of unsupervised learning feature extraction method which
maps high-dimensional data to a low-dimensional space by
linear projection. Useful information will be kept after the
change. In this paper, we adopt PCA to discard the redundant
components and extract the important features.
B. K-Means Based Data Sampling
A universal characteristic of the network traffic dataset is
that the original data is unbalanced. The number of normal
data is always much larger than that of abnormal data. Thus,
once a classifier is trained on an imbalanced dataset, it will
tend to bias towards those frequent records. To avoid this,

GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME

Algorithm 1 K-Means Based Sampling Approach
Input: The labeled examples S = {X, Y }, the number
of categories C, the number of clusters k, and sampling
threshold n over
Output: The labeled examples Snew after sampling
1: initialize Snew = {}
2: for i = 1 : C
3:
select all examples
 that labeled i from S, and mark
i = Xi, Y i
them
as
S
 
4:
if  S i  ≤ n over
 
5:
randomly select n over −  S i  records from
S i as S dup , add perturbation to X dup in S dup
6:
Snew = Snew ∪ S dup ∪ S i
7:
end
 if
8:
if  S i  > n over
 
9:
calculate sample rate r = n over /  S i 
10:
fit a k-means model with k and X i

11:
get the clustered examples set S1i , . . . ,Ski
12:
for j = 1 : k
  
 
13:
randomly select S ij  ∗ r records to form Sˆij
14:
S
=S
∪ Sˆi
new

15:
16:
17:
18:

new

j

end for
end if
end for
return Snew

789

alternative approach to deep learning. In order to save the
time consumption caused by multi-layer neural network, there
are only two layers in a BLS. The first layer contains input
nodes together with feature nodes which are mapped by input
nodes. And the second layer is the output layer, which has the
same number of nodes as the number of categories. A BLS can
expand the model by adding feature nodes to the first layer,
and in this way extract more useful and non-linear information.
Besides, the BLS does not require backpropagation to find
the optimal weights because it only has two layers. Instead,
Pseudoinverse and ridge regression learning algorithms are
adopted to calculate the optimal weights.
Assume the input data is X, the feature nodes group is
F (X) = F1 (X) , F2 (X) , . . . , Fq (X) , the number of the
feature nodes is q, the i -th feature node is calculated via the
following formula:
Fi (X) = δ (wi X + bi )

(2)

where wi (i = 1, 2, . . . , q) indicates weight and bi (i =
1, 2, . . . , q) indicates bias, which are both randomly generated. δ(·) represents the activation function. In this paper,
we adopt tanh function as the activation function. The formula
is as follows:
δ (x) =

e x − e−x
e x + e−x

(3)

After calculating the feature nodes from the input, the first
layer A(X) of the BLS can be expressed as:
we adopt a k-means based sampling method to get a balanced
training set from an imbalanced one.
First, we define n over as the sampling threshold, k as the
number of clusters for a k-means clustering algorithm, Snew
as the sampled dataset. Second, we divide the training set
S into C subsets S i (i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C}) based on the label.
For a subset S i , if the number
 records is less than n over ,
 of
we randomly select n over −  S i  records from S i , then add
noise to those duplicates and put both the duplicates and
the original subset into Snew . For a subset whose quantity is
more than n over , we first cluster the subset into k clusters and
calculate the sample rate r by a function which is defined in
Algorithm 1, then randomly select records from each cluster at
this sample rate and add them into Snew . Finally, we get a new
dataset Snew , which is a balanced one with around C ∗ n over
records. The details of the sampling approach are presented in
Algorithm 1.
After data sampling, if n over is set appropriately, the new
training set can well represent the raw dataset and is suitable
for training a fairer classifier.

A (X) = [X|F(X)] = [X, F1 (X)]

= X, F 1 (X) , · · · , Fq (X)

Finally, calculate the weight matrix W which satisfies the
equation A (X) W = Y . Because there are only two layers
in BLS, the optimal weight can be calculated by a simple
inversion method. The formula is as follows:
W = A (X)−1 Y

Deep learning-based method includes many hidden layers.
It can further grasp the correlation between features and the
target labels by continuously increasing the depth of the structure. However, the huge number of parameters to be optimized
in a deep learning structure usually takes a lot of time and
machine resources. To resolve these issues, the Broad Learning
System was first introduced in [20], aiming to provide an

(5)

However, the inverse matrix of A(x) may not exist, and
we cannot get (A(X))−1 directly. Therefore, a pseudo-inverse
operation is adopted to substitute the matrix inverse operation,
expressed as A(X)W ≈ Y . The pseudo-inverse of a matrix M
can be calculated by the following formula:
M + = li m (M T M + λI )−1 M T
λ→0

(6)

the pseudo-inverse of A(X) and the optimal weight matrix W
are calculated as follows:
A(X)+ = li m (A(X)T A(X) + λI )−1 A(X)T

C. Broad Learning System (BLS)

(4)

λ→0

W = A (X)+ Y

(7)
(8)

It is obviously that it takes much less time to get the
weight matrix compared with deep learning approaches which
require complex backpropagation processes. Thus, the BLS
shows better real-time performance in dealing with the massive
dataset of VANET and at the same time effectively avoids the
transmission error between layers in backpropagation.

790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

D. Tree-Based BLS Method for NIDS
Since all the feature nodes are generated from the input X,
the quality of the input data plays a vital role in the performance of BLS. While the raw data of traffic is not able to
fully present the relationship between feature X and labels Y ,
we reconstruct the input nodes of BLS with the help of
ensemble learning, and put forward a novel network intrusion
detection method named Tree-based BLS (TBLS). The TBLS
uses the extended feature nodes of broad learning algorithm
to integrate the learning results of each weighted decision
tree classifier and adaptively calculate the input weight of
each classifier so that it can achieve better predictions than
a single classifier.
Assume the input of BLS is I (X) , for an original BLS,
I (X) = [X]. Instead of using raw training data X as input,
we define I (X) = [I1 (X) ,I2 (X) , . . . ,I p (X)], where Ii is a
decision tree classifier, p denotes the number of the trees, and
Ii (·) is the i -th tree’s decision function, i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , p}. The
dimension of I (X) is p × C, where C denotes the number of
classes.
First, for the training dataset S = {X, Y }, we adopt a
bootstrap sampling strategy to get some samples from S as
Bi to train the i -th basic classifier Ii . The sample rate r is set
to 0.4 based on sufficient experimental results in this paper.
After p classifiers have been generated, input X to each basic
classifier to get the
 predictions, and assemble them to form
the input I (X) = I1 (X) , I2 (X) , . . . , I p (X) of BLS.
Second, according to the training approach of BLS
described in the previous section, the i -th feature node is
mapped via the following formula:
Fi (X) = δ wi I (X)T + bi
thus, the first layer can be present as:

A (X) = [I (X)|F(X)] = I (X) , F1 (X) , · · · ,Fq (X)

(9)

(10)

where q denotes the number of the feature nodes.
Finally, the weight matrix W which satisfies the equation
A (X) W = Y is calculated by the following formula:
W = A (X)+ Y

(11)

+

where A (X) is the pseudo-inverse matrix of A (X).
In the testing phase, for a record x, after data preprocessing,
the input is mapped to I (x) = [I1 (x) , I2 (x) , . . . , I p (x)] in
the first step. Then, use all the wi and bi which have been
fitted during the training process to build the i -th feature node
and F (x). After that, I (x) and F (x) are used for generating
A (X) via Eq. (10). Finally, the output of x is ŷ = A (X) W .
Since there are C nodes in the output layer, ŷ contains C
values, and the label corresponding to the maximum value of
ŷ is considered as the prediction class.
To make it easier to understand, the details of the TBLS
algorithm are demonstrated in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Tree-Based BLS
Input: The labeled training dataset S = {X, Y }, the number
of the basic classifiers p, the number of the feature nodes q
and the bootstrap sample rate r
Output: Tree-based BLS model χ
1: χ = {}
2: for i = 1 : p
3:
Generate bootstrap Bi by sampling S with sample
rate r
4:
Train a tree classifier Ii on Bi , χ = χ ∪ {I i }
5: end for 
6: I (X) = I1 (X) , . . . ,I p (X)
7: for i = 1 : q
8:
randomly initialize weight wi and bias bi
9:
χ = χ ∪ {wi , bi }
10:
Calculate Fi (X) use Eq. (9)
11: end for 
12: F (X) = F1 (X) , . . . ,Fq (X)
13: A (X) = [I (X)|F(X)]
14: Calculate the optimal weight W use Eq. (11)
15: χ = χ ∪ W
16: return χ
TABLE I
C ONFUSION M ATRIX

proposed model. The representations of these three metrics are
given as follows:
TP +TN
(12)
T P + T N + FP + FN
TP
DR =
(13)
T P + FN
FP
(14)
FAR =
FP + T N
where true positive (TP) refers to the number of attack records
correctly identified as an attack, true negative (TN) denotes the
number of normal records that are correctly identified as normal, false positive (FP) denotes the number of normal records
incorrectly identified as an attack, and false negative (FN)
refers to the number of attack records incorrectly identified
as normal. The definition of a confusion matrix is shown in
Table I. The accuracy describes the ability of a detection model
to make correct prediction while the detection rate indicates
the probability that attacks can be identified correctly. The
false alarm rate indicates the rate that the normal records
are predicted as attacks. Researchers try their best to build
a detection model with high accuracy and low FAR.
AC =

IV. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
A. Evaluation Measures

B. Experiment Dataset and Settings

In our work, accuracy (AC), detection rate (DR), and false
alarm rate (FAR) are used to evaluate the performance of the

KDD Cup 99 dataset has been widely used as a benchmark
dataset for evaluating the performance of IDS for many years.

GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME

791

TABLE II
T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF C LASSES IN NSL-KDD D ATASET

TABLE III
T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF C LASSES IN UNSW-NB15 D ATASET

However, it was observed that the training data contains a
lot of redundant records. This redundancy causes the learning
algorithms to be biased towards the frequent records and leads
to poor classification results of harmful records. Thus, this
paper is tested on the other two common datasets, NSL-KDD
[35] and UNSW-NB15 [40], respectively.
NSL-KDD dataset is an improved version of the KDD
Cup 99 dataset, and it was built by eliminating the redundant
records from the training and test data in KDD Cup 99 dataset.
Hence, the NSL-KDD dataset contains a reasonable number
of records, which make it more suitable for the training and
evaluating of any learning algorithm. Nowadays, although
there are some other newer datasets available for evaluation,
NSL-KDD dataset is still considered as one of the most
authoritative benchmark datasets in this filed. Therefore, we
utilize the NSL-KDD dataset in our work as mentioned before.
The NSL-KDD dataset covers two training sets ‘KDDTrain’
and ‘KDDTrain_20percent’, ‘KDDTest+’ and ‘KDDTest-21’
as the testing sets. Each record consists of 41 features in
numerical or symbolic type, and one class label for indicating
whether the record is normal or a particular kind of attack.
There are five typical network events involved in the dataset,
i.e., normal, probe, Denial-of-Service (DoS), user to root
(U2R) and remote to local (R2L). We provide Table II below
to show the distribution of classes in NSL-KDD dataset.
The ‘KDDTrain_20percent’ dataset contains 20% records
in the ‘KDDTrain’, which can still represent the distribution
well. Specifically, we use the ‘KDDTrain_20percent’ dataset
as our training dataset for improving training efficiency while
guaranteeing a good performance. Besides, ‘KDDTest+’ and
‘KDDTest-21’ are used for testing.
The UNSW-NB15 dataset is collected and established by
the Australian Centre for Cyber Security (ACCS) from IXIA
PerfectStorm. The dataset contains multifarious normal and

TABLE IV
T HE PARAMETERS IN D ATA P REPROCESSING

abnormal behaviors of traffic data. Compared with NSLKDD, the UNSW-NB15 dataset has more novel types of
attacks and features. It has nine aggressive behaviors in total:
Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoor, DoS, Exploits, Generic, Reconnaissance, Shellcode, and Worms. The raw data of UNSWNB15 includes 47 features, and can be divided into two subsets
‘UNSW-NB15_training-set.csv’ and ‘UNSW-NB15_testingset.csv’. And in these subsets, the number of features has been
reduced to 42. Table III shows more information about the
distribution of classes in UNSW-NB15 dataset.
The experiments are performed on a personal computer,
and the configurations are listed as follows: The Windows
10 professional system, Intel Core i7-8700 CPU @ 3.20 GHz,
and 16 GB RAM, NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2070S GPU.
C. Experimental Results
In order to make our experimental testing process easier
to understand, all the specific parameters of the experiments
under the NSL-KDD dataset and UNSW-NB15 dataset are
written in the following Table IV and Table V.
1) The Impact of the PCA Method: To maximize the performance of the proposed model, we designed an experiment

792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

TABLE V
T HE PARAMETERS OF TBLS

Fig. 3.

Relationship between sample size n over and detection accuracy.

Fig. 2. Relationship between PCA dimensionality d and detection accuracy.

to find out the optimal parameter for PCA. The results of
NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15 are shown in Fig.2. For the
NSL-KDD dataset, when the dimensionality is set to 20, the
proposed model reaches its best performance in terms of
accuracy on Test+ and Test-21 datasets. When the dimension
is lower than 20, the processed data is not able to describe
the raw data fully, and the performance is unsatisfactory
predictably. Meanwhile, when the dimension is higher than 20,
the processed data may generate irrelevant data that adversely
affect the detection performance and consume more computing
resources. When the dimension is set to 121, it means the PCA
is not applied, and we have observed that the accuracy drops
sharply. For the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the model peeks when
the dimensionality is set to 30. Neither higher than 30 nor
lower than 30 can give better performance. The result shows
that it is necessary to apply PCA to reduce the dimension of
the data before the training process. Thus, we choose to use
the 20-dimension and the 30-dimension data respectively for
our proposed model in the following experiments.
Besides, we also made tests about the threshold n over of the
k-means based sampling method to explore the relationship
between n over and detection accuracy. Fig.3 shows the whole
results of the above two datasets. When n over is too small, the
lack of data samples results in underfitting, which makes the
model unable to achieve a satisfactory training effect. Meanwhile, when n over is too large, the algorithm is more inclined
to classify traffic into normal class and ignore other aggressive
behaviors. Therefore, it is proved that proper sampling can
reduce the impact of data imbalance to a certain extent, make
the algorithm pay more attention to those attack classes, and
then improve the performance of data prediction and detection
of attack behaviors. As a result, we decided to choose 400 and

Fig. 4. Relationship between number of decision trees p and detection
accuracy.

3000 as the sample size of the NSL-KDD dataset and the
UNSW-NB15 dataset respectively.
2) The Impact of the Bootstrapping Method: In this part,
we test the effects of two parameters in the bootstrapping
process which are the number of decision trees p and the
sample rate r , to study the efficiency of the ensemble learning
method. Relative results are shown in Fig.4. When p is set to
100, the TBLS method performs the best. As p declines from
100, there is a significant decrease in accuracy, which indicates
that the model is underfitting and cannot learn the training
data comprehensively. Therefore, we choose p = 100 as the
optimal number of decision trees.
Furthermore, it is shown in Fig.5 about the performance
of the TBLS algorithm when different sample rates are used.
Through the outcomes, when r is set to 0.4, the model gets
the best accuracy in all three datasets. If the r is set below
0.4, the accuracy of the model will be poor due to lack of
sampled data. However, the performance of the model will
still decline when r is set over 0.4, since TBLS cannot fully
learn the distribution of the dataset based on a mass of data.
As a result, we choose r = 0.4 as the sample rate of our
approach.
3) The Impact of the Feature Nodes: In order to verify the
effect of increasing feature nodes in broad learning system on
the overall performance of model, we change the number of
feature nodes q to see which is the most appropriate one. The

GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME

Fig. 5.

Relationship between sample rate r and detection accuracy.

Fig. 7.

793

Classification results of different basic classifier.

TABLE VI
C OMPARED W ITH THE C URRENT D ETECTION M ETHODS

Fig. 6.
Relationship between number of feature nodes q and detection
accuracy.

results are shown in Fig.6, illustrating that the detection ability
to traffic data is constantly improving with the increase of the
feature nodes. However, limited by the personal computer’s
performance in the experiment, we can only set q to 80 as the
optimal number of feature nodes.
4) The Impact of the Basic Classifier: To explore the
influence of different basic classifiers on the detection accuracy
of our TBLS model, we tried three decision tree classifiers J48,
CART and C4.5 respectively as the basic classifiers. Besides,
an original BLS based on GNB classifiers was built to act
as the baseline for comparison. For each model, grid search
and cross-validation techniques are used to search for the best
parameters. After training, we apply the models to the testing
set for multiple classifications.
The results are described in Fig.7. The detecting accuracy of
BLS(GNB) in ‘KDDTest-21’ and ‘UNSW-NB15_testing-set’
drops to almost 50% without the help of the decision trees, and
the integrated model gets the highest accuracy score when J48
serves as the base classifier. In a word, the TBLS has proved to
be more efficient than the original BLS for intrusion detection
with a stronger non-linear representation produced by the basic
decision tree classifiers. Moreover, after weighted processing,
the decision tree classifiers can improve the performance of
the whole model more effectively.
5) Comparison With Other Existing Methods: In this
section, we compare the proposed method with 16 existing

methods. Among them, ‘Experiment-1’ in [38] and
‘Experiment-2’ in [39] are methods based on semi-supervised
learning. In addition, we also used the original BLS framework
and the tree-based deep learning system (TDLS) to conduct
ablation experiments. The results are shown in Table VI.
The accuracy of TBLS is 84.49% on ‘KDDTest+’, 70.92%
on ‘KDDTest-21’, and 72.84% on ‘UNSW-NB15_testing-set’
(which is not listed). When compared with the most popular
semi-supervised learning algorithms, our approach can still
stay ahead. Although the accuracy of TBLS is relatively weak
on ‘KDDTest+’, it has obvious advantage in FAR, which is
regarded more important in the field of intrusion detection.

794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

The great improvement of our TBLS over the original BLS
have emphasized the importance of using tree structure as the
basic classifier. Furthermore, in order to verify the superiority
of BLS in NIDS, we replace the broad learning structure in
Fig.1 with a 3-layer neural network to connect each decision
tree classifier. Momentum-based gradient descent algorithm
was used to train the new model called TDLS. Experimental
results show that the TBLS not only learns faster, but also has
better detection performance than TDLS in NIDS scenarios.
In sum, the proposed TBLS is superior to other methods
regardless of AC or FAR. Results have already proved that our
proposed method can be well adapted to intrusion detection.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel Tree-based broad learning system
(TBLS) method is proposed for intrusion detection task in
VANET during COVID-19 pandemic. The presented TBLS
approach achieves 84.49%, 70.92%, and 72.84% accuracy
respectively on ‘KDDTest+’, ‘KDDTest-21’, and ‘UNSWNB15’ datasets through a large series of experiments, which
stand out from the other state-of-the-art methods.
Overall, the main contributions of our method can be
summarized as follows. Firstly, it is the first time that BLS
has been applied to intrusion detection domain as far as
we know, aiming to reduce training time consumption and
provide a faster way to remodel without retraining. Secondly,
multiple decision trees are trained to reconstruct the input of
a BLS so that the integrated TBLS model can perform better
on multi-class classification. Finally, several approaches like
PCA method and k-means based sampling method have been
adopted to discard the redundant part of data for extracting
important features and address the issue of data imbalance,
which ensures the quality of data and thus raises the ceiling
of performance.
In the future research, we are going to try more machine
learning structures like the Generative Adversarial Networks
in order to improve the generalization ability of our model
and realize the real-time detection of new attacks. Our goal is
to build an all-around intrusion detection system. By the way,
we will test our approach on more public benchmarks.
R EFERENCES
[1] H. F. Al-Turkistani and H. Ali, “Enhancing users’ wireless network cyber
security and privacy concerns during COVID-19,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf.
Artif. Intell. Data Anal. (CAIDA), Apr. 2021, pp. 284–285.
[2] A. A. Shammari, R. R. Maiti, and B. Hammer, “Organizational security
policy and management during COVID-19,” in Proc. SoutheastCon,
Mar. 2021, pp. 1–4.
[3] J. Ahmed and Q. Tushar, “COVID-19 pandemic: A new era of cyber
security threat and holistic approach to overcome,” in Proc. IEEE Asia–
Pacific Conf. Comput. Sci. Data Eng. (CSDE), Dec. 2020, pp. 1–5.
[4] A. Rahman, M. S. Hossain, N. A. Alrajeh, and F. Alsolami, “Adversarial
examples—Security threats to COVID-19 deep learning systems in medical IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 9603–9610,
Jun. 2021.
[5] A. M. Alrehan and F. A. Alhaidari, “Machine learning techniques
to detect DDoS attacks on VANET system: A survey,” in Proc. 2nd
Int. Conf. Comput. Appl. Inf. Secur. (ICCAIS), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[6] N. Mathew and V. Uma, “VANET security—Analysis and survey,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Control, Power, Commun. Comput. Technol.
(ICCPCCT), Kannur, India, Mar. 2018, pp. 100–106.

[7] L. Tawalbeh, F. Muheidat, M. Tawalbeh, M. Quwaider, and G. Saldamli, “Predicting and preventing cyber attacks during COVID-19 time
using data analysis and proposed secure IoT layered model,” in Proc.
4th Int. Conf. Multimedia Comput., Netw. Appl. (MCNA), Oct. 2020,
pp. 113–118.
[8] M. Said Elsayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, and A. D. Jurcut, “Dealing with
COVID-19 network traffic spikes [cybercrime and forensics],” IEEE
Security Privacy, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 90–94, Jan. 2021.
[9] W. Choi, K. Joo, H. J. Jo, M. C. Park, and D. H. Lee, “VoltageIDS:
Low-level communication characteristics for automotive intrusion detection system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 8,
pp. 2114–2129, Aug. 2018.
[10] R. Bitton and A. Shabtai, “A machine learning-based intrusion detection
system for securing remote desktop connections to electronic flight
bag servers,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 1164–1181, May 2021, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2019.2914035.
[11] A.-H. Muna, N. Moustafa, and E. Sitnikova, “Identification of malicious
activities in industrial Internet of Things based on deep learning models,”
J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 41, pp. 1–11, Aug. 2018.
[12] K. Wu, Z. Chen, and W. Li, “A novel intrusion detection model for
a massive network using convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 50850–50859, 2018.
[13] Y. Won, M.-J. Choi, B. Park, and J. W.-K. Hong, “An approach for
failure recognition in IP-based industrial control networks and systems,”
Int. J. Netw. Manage., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 477–493, Mar. 2012.
[14] Y. Chang, W. Li, and Z. Yang, “Network intrusion detection based on
random forest and support vector machine,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Sci. Eng. (CSE) IEEE Int. Conf. Embedded Ubiquitous Comput.
(EUC), Guangdong, China, Jul. 2017, pp. 635–638.
[15] J. M. Beaver, R. C. Borges-Hink, and M. A. Buckner, “An evaluation
of machine learning methods to detect malicious SCADA communications,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl., Miami, FL, USA,
Dec. 2013, pp. 54–59.
[16] J. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Meng, Y.-P. Tan, and J. Yuan, “Boosting positive
and unlabeled learning for anomaly detection with multi-features,” IEEE
Trans. Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1332–1344, May 2019.
[17] A. H. Mirza, “Computer network intrusion detection using various classifiers and ensemble learning,” in Proc. 26th Signal Process. Commun.
Appl. Conf. (SIU), Izmir, Turkey, May 2018, pp. 1–4.
[18] B. Morris, “Explainable anomaly and intrusion detection intelligence
for platform information technology using dimensionality reduction and
ensemble learning,” in Proc. IEEE AUTOTESTCON, National Harbor,
MD, USA, Aug. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[19] A. S. Varal and S. K. Wagh, “Misuse and anomaly intrusion detection
system using ensemble learning model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Recent
Innov. Electr., Electron. Commun. Eng. (ICRIEECE), Bhubaneswar,
India, Jul. 2018, pp. 1722–1727.
[20] C. L. P. Chen and Z. L. Liu, “Broad learning system: An effective
and efficient incremental learning system without the need for deep
architecture,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1,
pp. 10–24, Jan. 2018.
[21] T. F. Lunt, “A survey of intrusion detection techniques,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 405–418, Jun. 1993.
[22] L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, Y. Wang, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Big data analytics in
intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 383–398, Jan. 2019.
[23] G. Bello-Orgaz, J. J. Jung, and D. Camacho, “Social big data: Recent
achievements and new challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 28, pp. 45–59,
Mar. 2016.
[24] U. Aftab and G. F. Siddiqui, “Big data augmentation with data warehouse: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Seattle, WA, USA,
Dec. 2018, pp. 2785–2794.
[25] G. Chareyron, J. Da-Rugna, and T. Raimbault, “Big data: A new
challenge for tourism,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Washington,
DC, USA, Oct. 2014, pp. 5–7.
[26] B. S. Sager, S. Niranjan, N. Kashyap, and D. N. Sachin, “Providing
cyber security using artificial intelligence—A survey,” in Proc. 3rd Int.
Conf. Comput. Methodol. Commun. (ICCMC), Erode, India, Mar. 2019,
pp. 717–720.
[27] B. Zhang, T. Zhang, and Z. Yu, “DDoS detection and prevention based
on artificial intelligence techniques,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Commun. (ICCC), Chengdu, China, Dec. 2017, pp. 1276–1280.
[28] M. Lin and Y. Zhao, “Artificial intelligence-empowered resource management for future wireless communications: A survey,” China Commun., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 58–77, Mar. 2020.

GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME

[29] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning approach
to network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018.
[30] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for
intrusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access,
vol. 5, pp. 21954–21961, 2017.
[31] V. L. Cao, M. Nicolau, and J. McDermott, “Learning neural representations for network anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 49,
no. 8, pp. 3074–3087, Aug. 2019.
[32] M. Ahmed and A. N. Mahmood, “Novel approach for network traffic
pattern analysis using clustering-based collective anomaly detection,”
Ann. Data Sci., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 111–130, 2015.
[33] M. Idhammad, K. Afdel, and M. Belouch, “Semi-supervised machine
learning approach for DDoS detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 48, no. 10,
pp. 3193–3208, 2018.
[34] Y. Gao, Y. Liu, Y. Jin, J. Chen, and H. Wu, “A novel semi-supervised
learning approach for network intrusion detection on cloud-based robotic
system,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50927–50938, 2018.
[35] T. M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Ottawa, ON, Canada, Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[36] B. Ingre and A. Yadav, “Performance analysis of NSL-KDD dataset
using ANN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Signal Process. Commun. Eng. Syst.,
Andhra Pradesh, India, Jan. 2015, pp. 92–96.
[37] T. A. Tang, L. Mhamdi, D. McLernon, S. A. R. Zaidi, and M. Ghogho,
“Deep learning approach for network intrusion detection in software
defined networking,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw. Mobile Commun.
(WINCOM), Fez, Morocco, Oct. 2016, pp. 258–263.
[38] M. Yousefi-Azar, V. Varadharajan, L. Hamey, and U. Tupakula,
“Autoencoder-based feature learning for cyber security applications,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Anchorage, AK, USA,
May 2017, pp. 3854–3861.
[39] R. A. R. Ashfaq, X.-Z. Wang, J. Z. Huang, H. Abbas, and Y.-L. He,
“Fuzziness based semi-supervised learning approach for intrusion detection system,” Inf. Sci., vol. 378, pp. 484–497, Feb. 2017.
[40] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Canberra, ACT, Australia,
Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
Ying Gao received the bachelor’s and master’s
degrees from the Central South University, China,
and the Ph.D. degree from the South China University of Technology, China, in 1997, 2000, and
2006, respectively. She is currently a Professor with
the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
South China University of Technology. She has
published more than 70 papers in international journals and conferences. Her current research interests
include service-oriented computing technology, software architecture, and network security.
Hongyue Miao was born in Zhenjiang, Jiangsu,
China, in 1997. He received the B.S. degree in electronic science and technology from the South China
University of Technology in 2019, where he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer science
and technology. His research interests include deep
learning, adversarial attacks, and network intrusion
detection.

795

Jixiang Chen is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
in computer science and technology with the School
of Computer Science and Engineering, South China
University of Technology, China. His research interests include deep learning, big data, and network
anomaly behavior recognition.

Binjie Song received the M.S. degree from the South
China University of Technology, China, in 2020. His
main research interests include machine learning,
deep learning, evolutionary computation, cyberspace
security, network anomaly behavior recognition, and
the Internet of Things.

Xiping Hu received the Ph.D. degree from The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
China. He has more than 120 papers published and
presented in prestigious conferences and journals.
His research areas consist of mobile cyber physical
systems, crowd sensing, and affective computing.

Wei Wang received the Ph.D. degree in software
engineering from the Dalian University of Technology in 2018. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering,
Sun Yat-sen University, China. Before this, he had
been the UM Macao Research Fellow at the University of Macau, Macau. He has authored/coauthored
over 60 scientific papers in international journals and
conferences. His research interests include computational social science, data mining, the Internet of
Things, and artificial intelligence.