9334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Federated Deep Reinforcement Learning for Efficient
Jamming Attack Mitigation in O-RAN
Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE, Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE,
and Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Open RAN (ORAN or O-RAN) revolutionizesRadio
Access Networks (RAN) by offering flexibility and cost-efficiency
through inter-vendor equipment interoperability.More importantly, it addresses emerging security threats, such as jamming
attacks, by incorporating network softwarization and leveraging
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques. However, AI-based systems
face challenges such as limited training data, slow convergence, and
vulnerability to dynamic attack patterns like Zero-day attacks. To
enhance jamming attack mitigation in O-RAN, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has been introduced for improved
flexibility and robustness. However, MARL requires data sharing,
which consumes network bandwidth and slows down training, and
the curse of dimensionality limits its benefits due to the exponential
growth of the state-action space. To overcome these limitations,
we provide a novel framework that combines federated learning
(FL) and deep reinforcement learning (DRL) for efficient jamming
attack detection in O-RAN. FL allows decentralized agents to
train local models using their data sources, and the models are
aggregated into a global model at a Non-real-time RAN Intelligent
Controller (RIC) to guide decision-making. The federated learning
process enables distributed intelligence, while deep reinforcement
learning ensures adaptive and robust jamming attack detection.
Our proposed framework improves security, privacy, and resilience
in ORAN through collaborative FL and adaptive DRL. Extensive simulations demonstrate its superiority in detection accuracy,
resource efficiency, and scalability.
Index Terms—Federated learning, jamming attacks, multi-agent
reinforcement learning, Open RAN, wireless sensor networks.

I. INTRODUCTION
AMMING attacks have witnessed a significant rise in recent
years, emerging as a prominent threat to the security and
reliability of O-RAN networks [1]. Wireless networks, such
as the Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN), are vulnerable
to jamming attacks that can severely impact their performance

J

Manuscript received 30 June 2023; revised 11 November 2023 and 11 January
2024; accepted 26 January 2024. Date of publication 29 January 2024; date
of current version 16 July 2024. The review of this article was coordinated
by the Guest Editors of the Special Section on Open Radio Access Networks:
Architecture, Challenges, Opportuities, and Use Cases in Vehicular Networks.
(Corresponding author: Zakaria Abou El Houda.)
Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the Centre Énergie Matériaux Télécommunications, Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS-EMT), Varennes,
QC J3X 1S2, Canada (e-mail: zakaria.abouelhouda@inrs.ca).
Hajar Moudoud is with the L@bISEN, ISEN Yncrea Ouest, 58000 Nevers,
France (e-mail: hajar.moudoud@usherbrooke.ca).
Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of Computing and Informatics, Sharjah University, Sharjah J3X 1S2, UAE (e-mail:
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3359998

and compromise user experience. According to a recent report,
the frequency and severity of jamming attacks have increased
globally [2], affecting communication systems and disrupting
critical services [3].
Attacking the open radio interface (ORI) in communication
systems can indeed be complex, and adversaries may employ
various techniques to disrupt or compromise the communication channel. One such method is a jamming attack, where
the adversary intentionally interferes with the radio signals to
disrupt communication. These attacks exploit vulnerabilities
in wireless communication protocols, targeting radio signals
and causing interference that hampers the transmission of data
and compromises network performance. The consequences of
jamming attacks can be severe, leading to service disruptions,
financial losses, and potential breaches in data privacy. In light
of these alarming statistics, it is imperative to develop robust
countermeasures and mitigation strategies to safeguard O-RAN
networks against jamming attacks, ensuring uninterrupted communication and preserving the integrity of the system.
AI algorithms can identify patterns and anomalies related to
jamming attempts by analyzing large amounts of network data.
Additionally, AI algorithms can optimize resource allocation
and traffic management to mitigate the impact of jamming
attacks and ensure efficient network operation [4], [5], [6],
[7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. However,
these AI-based systems, including those deployed in O-RAN
networks, encounter challenges when dealing with jamming
attacks. These challenges include limited training data, slow
convergence, and vulnerability to dynamic attack patterns like
zero-day attacks. To enhance the mitigation of jamming attacks
in O-RAN, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has
been introduced as a promising approach to improve flexibility
and robustness. However, the implementation of MARL comes
with certain challenges. One such challenge is the need for data
sharing between agents, which can consume significant network
bandwidth and result in slower training processes. Additionally,
the curse of dimensionality in MARL refers to the exponential
growth of the state-action space, which can limit the potential
benefits of the approach. These challenges need to be addressed
to fully leverage the capabilities of MARL in enhancing jamming attack mitigation in O-RAN.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel framework
that combines FL with DRL for effective jamming attack detection in O-RAN. FL is a decentralized learning paradigm that
allows multiple agents to collaboratively learn from their local

0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN

data without directly sharing it. In FL, each agent trains its local
model using its local data and periodically communicates only
the model updates with a centralized server. This approach reduces the amount of data exchanged between agents, mitigating
the bandwidth and privacy concerns associated with transmitting
large amounts of raw data. In our proposed framework, multiple
agents are deployed within the near real-time RIC module
of O-RAN, where they generate local learning models using
FL. These models capture the knowledge and insights gained
from their respective local data sources. The agents then communicate the model updates to a centralized Non-real-time RIC,
where the local models are aggregated to create a global model
that represents the collective intelligence of the agent network.
The global model, derived from the FL process, is utilized
within the DRL framework to facilitate effective jamming attack
detection. The agents interact with the environment, taking actions based on the global model’s guidance, and receive rewards
and system state information. The DRL algorithm, powered
by the deep neural network model, enables the agents to learn
and update their policies, considering the aggregated knowledge
from the federated learning process [17].
By combining FL with DRL, our approach addresses the challenges of data sharing and the curse of dimensionality in MARL.
It enables effective jamming attack detection in O-RAN by
utilizing the benefits of distributed learning, localized decisionmaking, and the expressive power of deep neural networks.
Furthermore, the integration of FL and DRL ensures efficient utilization of network resources and promotes scalability in largescale wireless networks. The combination of FL and DRL allows
agents to benefit from the distributed intelligence and localized
decision-making capabilities of FL while leveraging the expressive power and generalization abilities of DRL models. We
evaluate our approach through extensive simulations, comparing
it with existing methods. The results demonstrate the superiority
of our approach in terms of detection accuracy, resource efficiency, and scalability. The federated learning process enables
distributed intelligence and localized decision-making, while
the deep reinforcement learning component ensures adaptive
and robust detection of jamming attacks. Extensive simulations
show that our proposed framework outperforms recent AI-based
models in terms of accuracy and F1 score while significantly
reducing training delay and achieving fast convergence.
The structure of this paper is organised as follows. In Section
II, we overview some of the prominent works in the field
of jamming attack detection. Then, Section III provides our
system model. In Section IV, we evaluate the performance of
our proposed framework in terms of efficiency and compare it
to recent work. Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
O-RAN seeks to enhance network performance by employing a virtualized network architecture and open standardized
interfaces for deployment. This novel and distinctive network
environment, however, has given rise to new vulnerabilities
that the current security frameworks are ill-equipped to handle. Traditional cellular network security methods, such as

9335

authentication protocols, are based on the belief in robust trust
connections. This assumption, however, is at odds with the
changing architecture and deployment paradigm beyond 5 G
networks.
A handful of research studies have begun to explore the security challenges associated with O-RAN deployment and suggest
solutions to address them [18]. Habler et al. [19] performed
a systematic Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) threat assessment for O-RAN, examining ML use cases and deployment
scenarios, and establishing a threat model that identifies potential adversaries, their capabilities, and objectives. Similarly,
Mohammadi et al. [20] presented a comprehensive examination
of the SVM-based intrusion detection and feature selection
methods. Nair et al. [21] presented a novel unsupervised ML
algorithm designed specifically for rapid RF fingerprinting of
LoRa-modulated chirps in emerging networks. The objective is
to establish a robust method for authenticating IoT sensors in
the context of new network deployments.
To enhance the performance of Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS), researchers have explored the application of RL approaches. RL methods are well-suited for the ORAN environment, as they enable systems to adapt their behavior based
on continuous feedback to maximize rewards. Several studies
have utilized DRL algorithms for intrusion detection in both
real-world and simulated environments [22]. Iannucci et al. [23]
proposed an innovative approach called Intrusion Response
DRL, which employs a stateful Markov Decision Process to
handle large-scale systems and sophisticated attack scenarios.
Alazizadeh et al. [24] investigated the use of Deep Q-Learning
(DQL), a combination of RL and a deep neural network, for network intrusion detection. Their approach leverages automated
trial and error and continual learning to effectively detect various
types of intrusions, enhancing overall detection capabilities.
However, while RL techniques have demonstrated effectiveness
in detecting intrusions in IoT networks, none of the existing
works have considered the impact of low device and agent
reliability on intrusion detection accuracy. The presence of
malicious software within a network can potentially overwhelm
or compromise its functionality, leading to decreased reliability
and accuracy of intrusion detection systems.
FL has emerged as a distributed ML paradigm, specifically
designed to address privacy concerns associated with large-scale
interactions such as O-RAN. It has become a crucial component in securing open networks, offering numerous benefits.
Extensive research has been conducted on various aspects of FL,
including its effectiveness [25], privacy preservation [26], and
security enhancements [27]. In [28], Lu et al. proposed a secure
data sharding framework where the blockchain technology is
integrated with the FL framework. In this work, the authors
described the specific mechanisms employed to ensure privacy,
data integrity, and security in the context of IoV data sharing.
The provided experimental evaluations have demonstrated the
effectiveness and efficiency of their proposed approach based
on metrics such as communication overhead, training accuracy,
and the resilience of the system against attacks. In [29], Yi et al.
proposed a novel methodology that utilizes FL to predict traffic
flow while preserving the privacy of individual data sources. The

9336

proposed FL enables model training to be performed locally on
individual devices without sharing sensitive data. By aggregating the locally trained models, a global traffic flow prediction
model is generated. In [30], Yin et al. proposed a traffic flow
prediction model, called FedGRU (Federated Gated Recurrent
Unit) based on the principles of FL. FedGRU is a solution to
enable secure collaboration and knowledge sharing among IoT
devices while protecting the privacy of individual data sources.
FedGRU utilized FL to train deep learning models collaboratively without sharing raw data. The mechanism incorporates
privacy-preserving techniques and secure aggregation methods
to ensure data security during the model training process. In
[31], Guowen et al. proposed a framework called Verifynet,
which aims to enhance the security and veracity of FL. Verifynet employs cryptographic techniques and secure multi-party
computation protocols to protect the privacy of participants’ data
during the model training process. It also provides mechanisms
for verifying the correctness and integrity of the contributed
model updates from different participants. The authors present
an in-depth analysis of the Verifynet framework, explaining its
technical components and the cryptographic techniques utilized.
It may discuss the experimental evaluation of Verifynet’s security guarantees and the veracity of the properties using real-world
datasets or simulations.
While integrating DRL enhances the effectiveness of conventional AI-driven mitigation strategies against jamming attacks,
applying DRL directly to a large-scale network poses challenges.
The need for an extensive policy space to govern all nodes
complicates the DRL agent’s ability to reach a stable state and
attain optimal performance. Additionally, the substantial data
(i.e., state-action space) exchanged among agents can strain network bandwidth, potentially impeding the training process. By
combining FL with DRL, our approach addresses the challenges
of data sharing and the curse of dimensionality in MARL. It enables effective jamming attack detection in O-RAN by utilizing
the benefits of distributed learning, localized decision-making,
and the expressive power of deep neural networks. Furthermore,
our proposed framework ensures efficient utilization of network
resources and promotes scalability in large-scale wireless networks.
III. FRL-ENABLED JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN
This section starts by presenting the identified problem, followed by a comprehensive exploration of our proposed solution
and its associated mathematical formulation.
A. System Architecture
We formalize the problem of jamming attack mitigation as
a Federated Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (FMARL)
problem. In FMARL, we consider multiple agents that actively
cooperate and learn to make effective decisions in an environment affected by jamming attacks. The environment in this case
represents the Radio Access network, including components
such as O-RU, O-DU, and O-CU. The agents interact with this
environment through the E2 interface, which allows them to

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

execute a set of actions and receive feedback in the form of
rewards and system state information.
The system architecture, as illustrated in Fig. 1, shows the
hierarchical wireless topology network we consider. Within this
architecture, the near real-time RIC module of O-RAN plays
a crucial role. It hosts intelligent agents that are responsible
for generating local learning models. These agents operate in
a federated manner, allowing for distributed intelligence and
localized decision-making. Once the local models are created,
they are transmitted to the centralized Non-real-time RIC, where
they are aggregated to create a global model. This collaborative
approach ensures that the knowledge and insights gathered by
the intelligent agents are effectively utilized for system-wide
decision-making.
However, the sharing of data, particularly in terms of the
state-action space, between agents in MARL setup can present
challenges such as consuming network bandwidth and potentially slowing down the training process. Additionally, the curse
of dimensionality in MARL, characterized by the exponential
growth of the discrete state-action space, can limit the potential
benefits of traditional RL approaches. To address these issues
and ensure effective jamming attack detection in O-RAN, we
propose a novel approach that combines FL with DRL. In our
system, intelligent agents are deployed within the near real-time
RIC module of O-RAN, where they generate local learning
models using FL. These models capture the knowledge and
insights gained from their respective local data sources. The
agents then communicate the model updates to a centralized
Non-real-time RIC, where the local models are aggregated to
create a global model that represents the collective intelligence
of the agent network.
The global model, derived from the federated learning process, is utilized within the DRL framework to facilitate effective
jamming attack detection. The agents interact with the environment, taking actions based on the global model’s guidance,
and receive rewards and system state information. The DRL
algorithm, powered by the deep neural network model, enables
the agents to learn and update their policies, considering the
aggregated knowledge from the federated learning process. To
detect jamming attacks, the intelligent agents periodically execute actions via the E2 interface. These actions are aimed at
identifying and mitigating the effects of jamming in the network
(see the following section). For instance, an agent may adjust
the resource allocation and scheduling policy within the O-DU’s
MAC layer to isolate and minimize the impact of jammers on the
overall system performance. The rewards obtained by the agents
are determined based on the consequences of their actions,
taking into account metrics such as the quality of experience for
the users. Simultaneously, the new state of the system, including
information about the total number of allocated resource blocks
and user density, is conveyed to the agents through the E2 interface. This feedback loop allows the agents to continuously learn
and adapt their strategies in response to changing network conditions and evolving jamming attacks. Our strategy overcomes
the problems with data sharing and the dimensionality curse in
MARL by merging FL with DRL. It enables effective jamming
attack detection in O-RAN by utilizing the benefits of distributed

HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN

Fig. 1.

9337

Proposed O-RAN-based architecture.

learning, localized decision-making, and the expressive power
of deep neural networks. Furthermore, the integration of FL
and DRL ensures efficient utilization of network resources and
promotes scalability in large-scale wireless networks.
B. System Model
In this subsection, we outline the mathematical approach to
the problem we studied.
1) Markov Decision Process (MDP): The MDP is defined
by the triplet (St , At , Rt ), where St , At , and Rt represent the
state space, action space, and reward function at time step t,
respectively. State St : Represents the current information or
observations available to the agent at time step t. It captures
the relevant aspects of the environment, such as signal strength,
network traffic, and any indications of jamming activity. Action
At : The decision or choice made by the agent at time step t
based on the current state St . It represents the agent’s response
to the detected or potential jamming activity. Reward Function
R(St , At ): Let St represent the state at time step t, and At
represent the action taken at time step t. The reward function
R(St , At ) is defined as: computing the immediate reward from
action At in state St . The reward function encourages desired
behavior and penalizes undesirable actions. The reward function,
R(St , At ), can be defined as follows:
R(St , At ) = wprompt · Rprompt (At ) + wdetection · Rdetection (St )
+ wmitigation · Rmitigation (At )

(1)

where wprompt , wdetection , wmitigation , and wineffective are weights
associated with each reward component. More specifically:
r Prompt Action Reward (Rprompt (At )): Encourages the
agent to take actions promptly to mitigate or respond to

jamming. It is weighted by wprompt .
Rprompt (At )
⎧
⎪
⎨1 if the agent takes actionAt to encourage
=
prompt action
⎪
⎩
0 otherwise

(2)

r Jamming Detection Reward (Rdetection (St )): Rewards the
agent for successfully detecting jamming based on the
current state. It is weighted by wdetection .

1 if jamming is successfully detected
Rdetection (St ) =
0 otherwise
(3)
r Mitigation Reward (Rmitigation (At )): Rewards the agent for
successful actions taken to mitigate the impact of jamming.
It is weighted by wmitigation .
Rmitigation (At )

n if the agent takes n successful actions
=
0 if no successful actions are taken

(4)

where n is a positive integer representing the number of
successful taken actions to mitigate a jamming attack in ORAN.
To incorporate penalties, let P (St , At ) denote the penalty
function penalizing undesirable actions or delays in response.
Penalty Function P (St , At ): Calculates the penalty for taking
action At in state St . The penalty function discourages undesirable behavior and delays in responding to jamming. The penalty
function can be defined as:
P (St , At ) = wIneffective · PIneffective (At ) + wdelay · Pdelay (St , At )
(5)

9338

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

where wIneffective and wdelay are weights associated with each
The optimal joint value function V ∗ (s) and optimal joint
penalty component.
action-value function Q∗ (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) can be defined as:
r Ineffective Action Penalty (Rineffective (At )): Ineffective Ac
tion Penalty: Penalizes the agent for taking actions that
V ∗ (s) = max . . . max R1 (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
a1 ∈A1
aN ∈AN
fail to effectively address the jamming. It is weighted by
wineffective . It is be defined as:
+ . . . + RN (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
⎧

⎪
⎨−m if the agent takes m ineffective
P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )V ∗ (s )
+γ
Rineffective (At ) =
actions

s ∈S
⎪
⎩
(9)
0
if no ineffective actions are taken
(6)
Q∗ (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) = R1 (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) + . . .
where m is a positive integer representing the number of
ineffective taken actions.
+ RN (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
r Delay Penalty: Penalizes the agent for delays in responding

P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )
+γ
to jamming. It encourages prompt action and is weighted

s ∈S
by wdelay .
Thus, the total Reward Rtotal (St , At ) that takes into account
. . . max Q∗ (s , a1 , . . . , aN )
(10)
aN ∈AN
both the reward and penalty components is calculated as the sum
of the reward function and penalty function, as follows:
The optimal joint policy π ∗ (a1 |s), . . . , π ∗ (aN |s) can be obRtotal (St , At ) = R(St , At ) − P (St , At )
(7) tained by selecting the actions that maximize the joint actionvalue function for each agent:
2) Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: MARL stands for
(11)
πi∗ (ai |s) = arg max Q∗ (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning, which extends reinforceai ∈Ai
ment learning to the setting where multiple agents interact in a
3) Federated Deep Reinforcement Learning: We consider a
shared environment.
federated
learning scenario with K clients denoted by subscript
In MARL, there are N agents, and the environment is reprei
=
1,
2,
.
. ., K and a central server. - Each client i has its local
sented as a Markov Game, which is an extension of the Markov
consisting of sequences of states, actions, rewards,
dataset
D
i
Decision Process (MDP). The Markov Game is defined by a
i
. The
and
next
states,
given as Di = {(si,t , ai,t , ri,t , si,t )}Tt=1
tuple (S, A1 , . . . , AN , P, R1 , . . . , RN , γ), where:
goal
is
to
train
a
global
policy
p
that
can
effectively
detect
and
S is the set of states, Ai is the set of actions available to
mitigate
jamming
attacks
in
O-RAN.

agent i, P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s ) is the state transition probability,
Each client i trains its local policy pi using its local dataset
representing the probability of transitioning from state s to state
and deep reinforcement learning algorithms such as Deep
D


i
s when agents take actions a1 , . . . , aN , Ri (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )
Q-Network
(DQN) or Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). The
is the reward function for agent i, representing the immediate
local
policy
pi is trained to maximize the expected cumulative
reward obtained by agent i when transitioning from state s to
rewards
by
iteratively
updating its parameters θi based on the ob
state s while agents take actions a1 , . . . , aN , γ is the discount
served
rewards.
The
update
rule for the local policy parameters
factor, determining the importance of future rewards.
can
be
expressed
as:
The goal in MARL is to find a joint policy π1 (a1 |s), . . . ,
πN (aN |s) for all agents that maximizes the expected cumuTi

lative reward over time. This can be represented by the joint
θi ← θi + α∇θi
ri,t + γ max Qθi (si,t , a)
a
π
value function V (s), which is the expected cumulative reward
t=1
starting from state s and following the joint policy π, and the joint
− Qθi (si,t , ai,t ) ,
(12)
action-value function Qπ (s, a1 , . . . , aN ), which is the expected
cumulative reward starting from state s, with agents taking
actions a1 , . . . , aN , and then following the joint policy π.
where α is the learning rate, γ is the discount factor, ∇θi repreThe joint value function and joint action-value function can sents the gradient of the local policy, Qθi (s, a) is the action-value
be defined using the Bellman equations:
function parameterized by θi , and ai,t is the action taken by client
i
at time t.



π
Then, after local training, the central server aggregates the
...
R1 (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
V (s) =
local
policies to obtain the global policy p by averaging their
a1 ∈A1
aN ∈AN
parameters:
+ . . . + RN (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
K
1 


π 
θi ,
(13)
θ
=
P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )V (s )
+γ
K
i=1

s ∈S

(8)

where θ represents the parameters of the global policy.

HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN

Algorithm 1: Federated Deep Q-Learning for Jamming
Attack Detection.
Initialize: global replay buffer D
Initialize: global Q-networks with parameters
θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN for each client
For
: round = 1 to R
For
: each client c in parallel
1: Receive global Q-network parameters θc from the
server;
2: Initialize local replay buffer Dc ;
3: Initialize states s1 , s2 , . . . , sNc ;
While : s1 , s2 , . . . , sNc are not terminal
For
: each agent i = 1 to Nc
4: Select action ai for agent i using an exploration
strategy (e.g., epsilon-greedy);
5: Execute joint action a = (a1 , a2 , . . . , aNc ), observe
rewards r = (r1 , r2 , . . . , rNc ) and next states
s = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sNc );
6: Compute total reward
Rtotal (St , At ) = R(St , At ) − P (St , At );
7: Store transition (s, a, r, s ) in local replay buffer Dc ;
8: Sample a mini-batch of experiences from Dc ;
For
: each agent i = 1 to Nc
For
: each experience (s, a, r, s ) in the mini-batch
9: Compute target Q-value:
Qitarget (s, a) = ri + γ · maxai Q(s , ai ; θc );
10: Compute predicted Q-value:
Qipredicted (s, a) = Q(s, a; θc );
11: Compute loss:
Li (θc ) = (Qitarget (s, a) − Qipredicted (s, a))2 ;
12: Update local Q-network parameters:
θc ← θc − α · ∇θc Li (θc );
13: Update states: s ← s ;
14: Send local Q-network parameters θc to the server;
15: Send local replay buffer Dc to the server;
16: Aggregate and update global Q-network parameters θ
N
using federated averaging: θ ← N1
c=1 θc ;

Algorithm 1 summarizes the process of FMARL for jamming
attack detection in O-RAN. Each client trains a local policy
using its own data, and the central server aggregates the local
policies by averaging their parameters to obtain a global policy.
The global policy is then used to detect and mitigate jamming
attacks in O-RAN.
4) Jamming Attack Mitigation: A Resource Blocks (RB) Allocation Problem: The global policy p is deployed in O-RAN
to detect and mitigate jamming attacks. Each client i can use the
global policy p to make decisions based on the observed states
and take appropriate actions to counteract jamming attacks.
We formalize the problem of jamming attack mitigation as a
problem of RB Allocation in ORAN, where only trustworthy
and reliable devices that have high reputation scores can be
allowed to use the maximum allowed RBs. In the context of
ORAN, RBs represent the available communication resources,
and the goal is to allocate these RBs to reliable devices in a way

9339

that mitigates the impact of jamming attacks. Only trustworthy
and reliable devices with high reputation scores are allowed to
utilize the RBs.
The formulation for the RB allocation problem with reputation scores, penalty factors, weight factors, scaling factors,
cost factors, load balancing, and additional constraints can be
expressed as follows:
Objective:
max

N


wi · Ci · B i

i=1

Subject to:
Bi ≥ 0 ∀i
N


Bi ≤ Btotal (total available bandwidth constraint)

i=1

Bi ≤ Bmax ∀i (maximum bandwidth constraint per device)
Bi ≤ wi · Pi · S · Ri · Btotal ∀i (with penalty/scaling factors)
Bi − Bj ≤ Bdiff ∀i, j (load balancing constraint)
N


wi = 1 (weight normalization constraint)

i=1

Ri ≥ Rmin ∀i (minimum reputation score constraint)
Ri ≤ Rmax ∀i (maximum reputation score constraint)
Bi ≥ Bmin ∀i (minimum bandwidth allocation constraint)
where Ci represents the cost factor for device i reflecting the cost
implications of bandwidth usage; S is the scaling factor that adjusts the influence of reputation scores on bandwidth allocation;
Bdiff is the maximum allowed difference in bandwidth allocation
among devices, promoting load balancing; Btotal is the total
available bandwidth; Bmax represents the maximum bandwidth
allocation per device; Rmin and Rmax are the minimum and
maximum reputation scores, respectively; and Bmin represents
the minimum bandwidth allocation for each device.
The objective function aims to maximize the overall system
performance considering the weighted combination of bandwidth allocation, reputation scores, and cost factors. This mechanism can effectively allocate resource blocks to devices based
on their reputation scores, taking into account penalty factors,
weight factors, scaling factors, cost factors, load balancing, and
additional constraints. The iterative optimization process adjusts
the resource block allocations until convergence, optimizing the
system performance while considering reputation-based constraints and other considerations (see Algorithm 2).
Also, we introduce a scaling factor to adjust the overall impact
of reputation scores on bandwidth allocation. Let S represent
the scaling factor. By multiplying the reputation score of each
device by S, we can control the influence of reputation scores
in the equation. This factor allows for fine-tuning the balance
between reputation-based allocation and other considerations.

9340

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 2.

Accuracy of our proposed framework for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

The reputation-based constraint with the scaling factor becomes:
∀i Bi ≤ wi · Pi · S · Ri · Btotal

(14)

We also incorporate a cost factor associated with bandwidth
allocation. Let Ci represent the cost factor for device i. By
multiplying the bandwidth allocation of each device by its cost
factor, we can account for the cost implications of bandwidth
usage. The objective function with the cost factor becomes:
max

N


Algorithm 2: Resource Block Allocation in Open RAN
Based on Reputation Scores and Deep Reinforcement
Learning.

wi · Ci · Bi (objective function with cost factor)

i=1

To promote load balancing, we can introduce a constraint that
limits the difference in bandwidth allocation among devices. Let
Bdiff represent the maximum allowed difference in bandwidth
allocation. The load balancing constraint can be defined as:
Bi − Bj ≤ Bdiff ∀i, j (load balancing constraint)
This constraint ensures that the difference in bandwidth allocation between any two devices does not exceed a specified
threshold, promoting a more equitable distribution of resources.
By incorporating these additional factors and constraints,
we can further tailor the equation to account for scaling factors, cost considerations, load balancing, and other relevant
aspects of the IoT system, enabling a more comprehensive
and fine-grained bandwidth allocation based on reputation
scores.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we present the implementation and evaluation
steps for our proposed framework. Initially, we assess the performance of the framework and then provide a comparison with
some recent works.
To implement our proposed FRL framework, we utilize
Pysyft [32], a privacy-centric deep learning library based on
PyTorch. In our testing environment, multiple agents conduct
local training, each specializing in a specific domain and utilizing a set of deployed wireless devices. To evaluate the feasibility
and effectiveness of our framework, we employ the WSN-DS
dataset [33] for intrusion detection in wireless sensor networks.
In our study, we considered two scenarios (i.e., binary scenario
and multi-class scenario). In the multi-class scenario, predictions
are made from a set of multiple labels (i.e., Blackhole, Greyhole,
Flooding, and Scheduling), whereas the binary scenario involves
distinguishing between two labels (Normal and Attack). The

TABLE I
WSN-DS LABELS

TABLE II
CONSIDERED SCENARIOS

HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN

Fig. 3.

Confusion matrices of our proposed framework for binary classification during (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 4.

Confusion matrices of our proposed framework for Multi-class classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 5.

ROC Curves of our proposed framework for Binary classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

main objective is to assess performance in diverse classification
tasks, with a particular focus on addressing the challenge of
non-independently and identically distributed (non-IID) data
(see Table II). Considering the wide range of values in the input
features of the WSN-DS dataset, we apply a standardization
technique to normalize the feature values.
Fig. 2(a), (b), and (c) show the obtained accuracy of the trained
model across the four Real-Time RICs during 10, 25, and 50
rounds of training, respectively. We achieve a high accuracy of
99% for both scenarios. This highlights the framework’s high
accuracy and privacy in detecting jamming attacks. Figs. 3 and
4 depict the confusion matrices for our proposed framework in
binary classification and multi-class classification, respectively.
In both scenarios, 99% of attack traffic was accurately classified
as such, indicating that the proposed framework is well-trained
and effectively detects jamming attacks.

9341

A. Performance Evaluation
We evaluated our proposed framework using various metrics including, accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and AUC.
The ROC curve illustrates the model’s trade-off between sensitivity and specificity, while the confusion matrix provides
a detailed summary of classification results. AUC measures
binary classifier performance on a scale of 0 to 1, with higher
values indicating better performance. Fig. 5 shows the ROC
curves of our proposed framework for binary classification
setup. A micro-average ROC curve is used when classes are
imbalanced, while a macro-average ROC curve is useful for
balanced classes. For 10, 25, and 50 rounds, we achieved highperformance scores of 99%, 99%, and 100% respectively.
Table III and Fig. 6 show the performance metrics of our
proposed framework and AI benchmarks using the WSNDS dataset, including some recent AI-based solutions (i.e.,

9342

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE METRICS OF OUR PROPOSED FRAMEWORK AND BENCHMARKS

a central server using federated averaging. We evaluated the
proposed framework under different settings and proposed a
resource block allocation algorithm to optimize system performance considering device reputation. Extensive simulations
showed that the proposed framework achieves superior detection
accuracy, efficient resource utilization, and high scalability.
REFERENCES

Fig. 6.

Performance metrics of our proposed framework and benchmarks.

Naive Bayes (NB) [29], Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [34],
Adaboost [35], and Gradient Boost (GB) [35]) using the same
WSN-DS dataset. our proposed framework achieves the highest
performance on the WSN-DS dataset, achieving an accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 score of 99% each. Moreover, our
proposed framework only requires 60 seconds of training time
to achieve these results, which is relatively fast compared to
other state-of-the-art approaches. These findings indicate that
our proposed framework is an effective algorithm for intrusion
detection in WSNs, and it outperforms other existing approaches
in terms of accuracy and efficiency. This makes it a promising
candidate for real-world applications where detecting intrusions
in WSNs is critical.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a novel Federated Deep Reinforcement
Learning framework for effective jamming attack mitigation in
Open RAN. The proposed approach leverages the strengths of
federated learning and deep reinforcement learning to overcome
the challenges of limited data, slow convergence, and vulnerability to zero-day attacks faced by AI systems. First, we proposed
a deep Q-learning model to enable adaptive decision-making
and detect sophisticated jamming attack patterns. Second, we
designed a distributed federated learning approach, where the
proposed model is trained on distributed devices while preserving privacy. The locally trained models were then aggregated at

[1] M. Liyanage, A. Braeken, S. Shahabuddin, and P. Ranaweera, “Open RAN
security: Challenges and opportunities,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 214,
2023, Art. no. 103621. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1084804523000401
[2] H. Pirayesh and H. Zeng, “Jamming attacks and anti-jamming strategies
in wireless networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 767–809, Secondquarter 2022.
[3] B. Brik, K. Boutiba, and A. Ksentini, “Deep learning for B5G open radio
access network: Evolution, survey, case studies, and challenges,” IEEE
Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 228–250, 2022.
[4] P. Zhou, Q. Yan, K. Wang, Z. Xu, S. Ji, and K. Bian, “Jamsa: A utility
optimal contextual online learning framework for anti-jamming wireless
scheduling under reactive jamming attack,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1862–1878, Jul.–Sep. 2020.
[5] Y. Guan and X. Ge, “Distributed attack detection and secure estimation of
networked cyber-physical systems against false data injection attacks and
jamming attacks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Netw., vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 48–59, Mar. 2018.
[6] L. Yang and C. Wen, “Optimal jamming attack system against remote
state estimation in wireless network control systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 51679–51688, 2021.
[7] A. Garnaev, Y. Liu, and W. Trappe, “Anti-jamming strategy versus a
low-power jamming attack when intelligence of adversary’s attack type is
unknown,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Netw., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 49–56,
Mar. 2016.
[8] A. A. Elsaeidy, A. Jamalipour, and K. S. Munasinghe, “A hybrid deep
learning approach for replay and DDoS attack detection in a smart city,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 154864–154875, 2021.
[9] B. Kannhavong, H. Nakayama, Y. Nemoto, N. Kato, and A. Jamalipour,
“A survey of routing attacks in mobile ad hoc networks,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 85–91, Oct. 2007.
[10] C. D. Alwis et al., “Survey on 6G frontiers: Trends, applications, requirements, technologies and future research,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc.,
vol. 2, pp. 836–886, 2021.
[11] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Ensemble learning for intrusion
detection in SDN-based zero touch smart grid systems,” in Proc. IEEE 47th
Conf. Local Comput. Netw., 2022, pp. 149–156.
[12] B. Kannhavong, H. Nakayama, N. Kato, Y. Nemoto, and A. Jamalipour,
“Analysis of the node isolation attack against OLSR-based mobile
ad hoc networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Netw., 2006,
pp. 30–35.
[13] G. Raja, N. D. Philips, R. K. Ramasamy, K. Dev, and N. Kumar, “Intelligent
drones trajectory generation for mapping weed infested regions over 6G
networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 7506–7515,
Jul. 2023.
[14] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
“IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12,
pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.
[15] D. Liu, F. Sun, W. Wang, and K. Dev, “Distributed computation offloading
with low latency for artificial intelligence in vehicular networking,” IEEE
Commun. Standards Mag., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 74–80, Mar. 2023.
[16] Z. A. El Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Securing federated
learning through blockchain and explainable AI for robust intrusion detection in IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops,
2023, pp. 1–6.
[17] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, and L. Khoukhi, “A MEC-based
architecture to secure IoT applications using federated deep learning,”
IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 60–63, Mar. 2023.
[18] D. Dik and M. S. Berger, “Open-RAN fronthaul transport security architecture and implementation,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 46185–46203,
2023.
[19] R. Bitton et al., “Adversarial machine learning threat analysis in open radio
access networks,” 2022, arXiv:2201.06093.

HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN

[20] M. Mohammadi et al., “A comprehensive survey and taxonomy of the
SVM-based intrusion detection systems,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 178,
Mar. 2021, Art. no. 102983.
[21] M. Nair, T. Cappello, S. Dang, and M. A. Beach, “RF fingerprinting of
LoRa transmitters using machine learning with self-organizing maps for
cyber intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE/MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp., IMS
2022, 2022, pp. 491–494.
[22] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, Third Quarter
2019.
[23] S. Iannucci, V. Cardellini, O. D. Barba, and I. Banicescu, “A hybrid modelfree approach for the near-optimal intrusion response control of nonstationary systems,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 109, pp. 111–124,
Aug. 2020.
[24] H. Alavizadeh, J. Jang-Jaccard, and H. Alavizadeh, “Deep Q-Learning
based reinforcement learning approach for network intrusion detection,”
Computers, vol. 11, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 41.
[25] Z. A. E. Houda, A. S. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “MiTFed: A privacy
preserving collaborative network attack mitigation framework based on
federated learning using SDN and blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1985–2001, Jul.–Aug. 2023.
[26] X. Yin, Y. Zhu, and J. Hu, “A comprehensive survey of privacy-preserving
federated learning: A taxonomy, review, and future directions,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–36, 2021.
[27] Y.-A. Xie et al., “Securing federated learning: A covert communicationbased approach,” IEEE Netw., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 118–124, Jan./Feb. 2023.
[28] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain empowered asynchronous federated learning for secure data sharing in internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311,
Apr. 2020.
[29] Y. Liu, J. J. Q. Yu, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and S. Zhang, “Privacy-preserving
traffic flow prediction: A federated learning approach,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7751–7763, Aug. 2020.
[30] B. Yin, H. Yin, Y. Wu, and Z. Jiang, “FDC: A secure federated deep
learning mechanism for data collaborations in the Internet of Things,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6348–6359, Jul. 2020.
[31] G. Xu, H. Li, S. Liu, K. Yang, and X. Lin, “VerifyNet: Secure and
verifiable federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 15,
pp. 911–926, 2020.
[32] “Pysyft,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/OpenMined/
PySyft
[33] A. Iman, A.-K. Bassam, and A.-A. Mousa, “WSN-DS: A dataset for intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor networks,” J. Sensors, vol. 2016,
2016, Art. no. 4731953.
[34] S. Ismail and H. Reza, “Evaluation of naïve Bayesian algorithms for cyberattacks detection in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE World AI IoT
Congr., 2022, pp. 283–289.
[35] M. Nouman, U. Qasim, H. Nasir, A. Almasoud, M. Imran, and N. Javaid,
“Malicious node detection using machine learning and distributed data
storage using blockchain in WSNs,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 6106–6121,
2023.

9343

Zakaria Abou El Houda (Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, in 2021,
and the second Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
from the University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes,
France, in 2021. He is currently a Professor with
the Energy, Materials, and Telecommunications Center, National Institute of Scientific Research (INRS),
Québec City, QC, Canada. He is also a Member of
the INRS-UQO Joint Research Unit in Cybersecurity.
Prior to joining INRS, he was a research scientist in
various institutions, contributing to significant research projects on the application of machine learning for intrusion detection systems, and studying the
explainability and robustness of these systems. His research interests include
applied AI for intrusion detection systems, security in distributed/federated
machine learning, and Blockchain for network security.
Hajar Moudoud (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. degree in software engineering from the Mohammadia School of Engineers, Rabat, Morocco,
in 2018, the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
from the University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC,
Canada, in 2022, and the second Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of Technology
of Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2022. Her research
interests include the security of the Internet of Things,
applied machine/deep learning for intrusion detection
systems, and leveraging blockchain to enhance the
security of next-generation networks (5G and beyond/6G).
Bouziane Brik (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Engineer degree (Ranked First) in computer science
and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Laghouat University, Laghouat, Algeria, in 2010, 2013, and 2017,
respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor
with the Computer Science Department, Computing
and Informatics College, Sharjah University, Sharjah, UAE. Before joining Sharjah University, he was
an Assistant Professor with the DRIVE Department,
Bourgogne University, Dijon, France. He was also a
Postdoc with the CESI School, University of Troyes,
Troyes, France, and Eurecom Research Institute, France. He has been working
on resources management and security challenges of 5G network slicing in the
context of H2020 European projects, including MonB5G, 5GDrones, InDiD,
and 5G-INSIGHT. His research interests include 5G and beyond networks,
explainable AI, and machine/deep learning for wireless networks. He is an
active member of many conferences’ organizing committees, such as Globecom,
WCNC, ICC, GIIS, EAI, and EAI CICom. He actively organized different
special issues in prestigious journals and conference workshops.