2618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Federated Learning-Based Personalized
Recommendation Systems: An Overview on
Security and Privacy Challenges
Danish Javeed , Student Member, IEEE, Muhammad Shahid Saeed, Prabhat Kumar , Member, IEEE,
Alireza Jolfaei , Senior Member, IEEE, Shareeful Islam, and A. K. M. Najmul Islam , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The recent advancement in next-generation
Consumer Electronics (CE) has created the problems of
information overload and information loss. The significance of
Personalized Recommendation Systems (PRS) to efficiently and
effectively extract useful user information is seen as an ideal
solution to provide users with personalized content and services
and therefore is used in different application domains including
healthcare, e-commerce, social media, etc. Security and privacy
are the two major challenges of the existing PRS for next-gen
CE data. Federated learning (FL) has the potential to elevate
the aforementioned challenges by sharing local recommender
parameters while keeping all the training data on the device and
therefore is seen as a promising technique to enhance security
and privacy in PRS for the next-gen CE data. In this survey,
we have first discussed the enhancement of the existing CE
technologies, a holistic review of security and privacy challenges
in current PRS, and the advantage of FL-based PRS for
next-gen CE. Finally, we list a few open issues and challenges
that can guide researchers and practitioners to further drive
research in this promising area.
Index Terms—Consumer electronics, federated learning, privacy, personalized recommendation systems, security.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE RECENT advancement in Artificial Intelligence
(AI) Virtual Reality (VR)/Augmented Reality (AR), and
Internet of Things (IoT) has significantly revolutionized the
Consumer Electronics (CE) market. According to the “Statista
Research Department”, the global revenue of CE market will

T

Manuscript received 25 April 2023; revised 21 July 2023; accepted 21
September 2023. Date of publication 25 September 2023; date of current
version 26 April 2024. This work was supported by the European Union’s
Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Program under Grant 101120779,
CyberSecDome—An innovative virtual reality based intrusion detection, incident investigation and response approach for enhancing the resilience, security,
privacy and accountability of complex and heterogeneous digital systems and
infrastructures. (Corresponding author: Prabhat Kumar.)
Danish Javeed is with the Software College, Northeastern University,
Shenyang 110169, China (e-mail: 2027016@stu.neu.edu.cn).
Muhammad Shahid Saeed is with the Department of Computer
Science, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail:
shahidsaeedrana@gmail.com).
Prabhat Kumar and A. K. M. Najmul Islam are with the Department
of Software Engineering, LUT School of Engineering Science, LUT
University, 53850 Lappeenranta, Finland (e-mail: prabhat.kumar@lut.fi;
najmul.islam@lut.fi).
Alireza Jolfaei is with the College of Science and Engineering,
Flinders University, Adelaide, SA 5042, Australia (e-mail: alireza.jolfaei@
flinders.edu.au).
Shareeful Islam is with the School of Computing and Information
Science, Anglia Ruskin University, CB1 1PT Cambridge, U.K.
(e-mail: shareeful.islam@aru.ac.uk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3318754

show an increase of U.S.$ 125.5 billion between 2023 and
2028 [1]. These facts show the tremendous and steep growth
of the CE devices and as a result, a “data lake” is expected to
be formed. The majority of CE is connected to the Internet to
offer consumers countless services [2]. However, the amount of
information on the Internet has significantly outpaced the need
of consumer requirements and, thus poses an information overload problem that prevents timely access to online resources
of interest [3]. This has led to a greater-than-ever growth
in demand for recommender systems. Recommender systems
are information filtering systems that address the issue of
information overload by selecting key information fragments
from enormous amounts of dynamically generated data in accordance with user choices, interests, or observed behavior towards
the item [4]. Furthermore, there is a lot of research being
done on Personalized Recommendation Systems (PRS), which
leverage personalization in the domain of product recommendations [5]. On another hand, most PRS uses centralized servers
to store and process consumer data. Specifically, the cloud
servers are equipped with powerful computing resources and
therefore are used to understand, visualize and extract pertinent information. However, sending the consumer confidential
data to cloud servers brings some inherent challenges related
to security and privacy, where the attacker or malicious cloud
can hack or steal PRS data, and it can result in data leaks and
identity theft [6], [7]. The data might also be sold to third-party
companies that want to utilize it for product recommendation,
which is another potential privacy problem.
Federated Learning (FL) is one of the emerging technologies that enable the execution of machine learning models
in a distributed manner. In FL-based PRS, CE devices are
not needed to exchange their own data; instead, they train
on-device using model parameters that are given by a coordinating server [8]. The model is specifically trained locally
by all participating users, and updated model parameters are
communicated with the cloud server to conduct aggregation and to create a new set of parameters to be utilized
in the following iteration [9]. Until a specific degree of
accuracy is reached, this procedure is repeated continuously
over a number of iterations. Even though the FL-based
PRS solves the security and privacy issues of consumers
but still it has some other challenges related to computation and communication cost, explainability in FL-based
PRS, and working of FL-based PRS in 5G and beyond
networks.

c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1558-4127 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES

Fig. 1.

2619

Advancements in the Next-gen Consumer Electronics.

A. Our Contribution
The main contributions of this survey paper are as follows:
First, we discussed the relationship between consumer electronics with personalized recommendation systems (PRS) and
how federated learning can enhance the security and privacy
challenges in PRS for the next-gen CE data. Second, we have
discussed the state-of-the-art techniques used to enhance data
privacy and security and low-latency network communication.
The rest of the article is organized as follows: In Section II, we
gave an overview of next-gen CE, PRS, and FL. In Section III,
we discussed the shortcoming of PRS and how FL-based PRS
can enhance security and privacy. In Section IV, we discussed
the challenges in implementing FL-based PRS for next-gen
CE and finally, we conclude the paper in Section V.
II. P RELIMINARIES
A. Overview of Next-Gen Consumer Electronics
Consumer electronics have always been a driving force in
technology innovation. From the invention of the television
to the first mobile phone, these devices have changed how
we communicate, entertain ourselves, and our daily lives [10],
[11]. Today, we are on the edge of the next generation of
consumer electronics (Next-gen CE), and the possibilities are
endless. Next-gen CE is the latest and upcoming electronic
device designed to enhance user experience and offer advanced
features, capabilities, and performance. These devices are built
using cutting-edge technologies characterized by their ability
to connect seamlessly with other devices, services, and platforms. Fig. 1 shows the recent advancement in the next-gen
CE. Some of the key trends and advancements in the next-gen
CE include [2]:
1) Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML):
One of the most significant technological advancements over
the past decade has been the rise of AI and ML. These technologies have been integrated into various industries, including
smart agriculture [12], healthcare [13], finance [14], smart
industries [15], and transportation [16]. AI and ML can

potentially revolutionize how we interact with our devices
in CE. For instance, smart homes and virtual assistants have
made significant progress in recent years, allowing us to control our home devices with our voices. The Next-gen CE will
have more sophisticated AI and ML algorithms, enabling them
to learn from our behavior and provide personalized experiences [3]. Moreover, AI and ML can enhance the cameras
and sensors on our devices. They can automatically adjust the
lighting, contrast, and focus based on the user’s environment,
ensuring the best possible photo or video. Furthermore, AI
can be used to power facial recognition technology, allowing
our devices to unlock or authenticate purchases with a single
glance [17].
2) Augmented Reality: Augmented reality (AR) is another
technology molding the Next-gen CE. AR can lay over digital
content in the real world, resulting in a flawless blend of the
physical and virtual worlds [18]. It is already being used in
mobile apps, such as Pokemon Go and Snapchat, but it is
expected to be used in a wider range of CE devices in the
future. AR could be used in smart glasses, for example, to
provide users with a heads-up display of information or to
overlay digital content onto real-world objects.
3) Virtual Reality: Virtual reality (VR) is another technology that is shifting the Next-gen CE. VR can generate
immersive digital atmospheres in which users can interrelate
and explore. VR is already used in entertainment and gaming [19], but it is likely to be used in a wider range of CE
devices in the upcoming years. It could be used in education
to create mesmerizing learning experiences, or in healthcare
to imitate medical procedures.
4) Extended Reality (XR): Extended Reality (XR) is a term
that defines the spectrum of technologies encompassing VR,
AR, and mixed reality (MR). XR is capable of changing the
way we experience education, medical treatment, entertainment, and education [20]. The advancement in standalone VR
and AR headsets is one of the most substantial progresses in
XR. Such devices provide users with complete mobility by
not needing a smartphone or a PC to function. Further, they

2620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

are also affordable in price, making them more reachable to
the average consumer. XR can also be used to improve educational experiences by letting students discover historical sites,
witness scientific phenomena, and even conduct experiments
in a simulated environment [21].
5) Wearables: Wearable Technology (WT) has been
around for a while, with devices like smartwatches and fitness
trackers, becoming progressively popular in recent years. The
next generation of WT promises to be even more influential,
with devices that can measure the activity of a human brain,
monitor health metrics, and even analyze sweat to analyze
hydration levels [22]. WT will also become more integrated
into our daily lives. For example, smart clothing, which is
capable of monitoring vital signs and adjusting its temperature
based on the environment of the user. Wearables will also grow
more sophisticated, with gadgets that look like jewellery [23].
6) Smart Homes: The rise of smart homes will also change
the Next-gen CE. It uses Internet-connected devices to automate and regulate several household tasks, such as light
systems, security, and heating [24]. Smart home devices are
already popular, with products like Amazon Echo and Nest
Thermostat [25]. Nevertheless, the next generation of smart
home devices is expected to be even more advanced. For example, smart home devices could be furnished with AI abilities to
learn from the behavior of the user and make decisions about
controlling numerous household functions [26].
B. Personalized Recommendation System
Recommendation Technology (RT) is a key component
of IoT services since it may be in assistance of consumers in getting information and better service anytime,
anyplace [27]. A personalized recommendation system (PRS)
is a type of information filtering system that anticipates a
user’s interests or preferences and recommends content that
is likely to be of interest to them. These technologies are
often employed to deliver a more personalized experience for
users in e-commerce, social networking, and entertainment
platforms [4]. Some key concepts in PRS are Content-Based
Filtering (CBF), Collaborative Filtering (CF), Hybrid Filtering
(HF), User Profile (UP), and Item Profile (IP). The CF is
considered the most well-known and adopted recommendation
technique [28], [29]. It predicts a user’s preferences based on
the preferences of other users who exhibit similar behavior or
have comparable interests. It can be based on user-based or
item-based similarity [30], [31]. The CF has no specific criteria, such as metadata or description for the recommended
goods. It is capable of dealing with a wide range of things,
including books and music [32]. As a result, it has been widely
used in commercial applications [33].
On the other hand, CPF predicts a user’s preferences based
on the characteristics of the items that the user has interacted
with or shown interest in. It can be based on item features or
item descriptions [5]. Moreover, the HF combines CF and CBF
to provide personalized recommendations. It can overcome
the limitations of each technique and provide more accurate and diverse recommendations [34]. According to a recent
analysis by the authors of [35], Amazon’s recommendation

algorithm accounted for more than 30% of the total sales
volume. Moreover, RS is a vital component of cloud computing [6], [7]. While the CF systems have seen significant
success, several disadvantages still remain, i.e., scalability
cold-start, etc. The researchers have proposed various techniques to solve such issues. For example, the authors of [36]
and [37] proposed hybrid recommendation models to eliminate the cold-start. Moreover, in [38], the authors claim
that Singular Value Decomposition and Matrix Factorization
models can efficiently eliminate sparsity issues.
C. Federated Learning Concept
The demand for a significant amount of data for ML/DL
model training in CE has prompted a slew of projects aiming
at pooling data from disparate sources. The CE data, on the
other hand, may have substantial commercial value, making it
less to freely share with cloud providers.
Federated Learning (FL) addresses data governance challenges and privacy concerns by empowering shared learning
without data centralization. For example, FL resolves the
issue of insufficient data by providing data privacy, trust factor between heterogeneous domains, and delocalization [39].
It is an ML-based method that allows multiple devices or
systems to collaboratively train a model without sharing their
raw data with a Central Server (CS). Instead, the training
takes place locally on each device or system, and only the
updates to the model parameters are communicated to a CS,
where they are aggregated to form an improved model. At
the same time, having a model trained on larger landscape
data is another advantage of this federated environment. With
its advanced architectures, it has transformed many AI-based
applications by providing novel privacy-enhancing and distributed AI solutions [40]. FL is especially appealing for
constructing dispersed CE systems because it pushes AI tasks,
such as data training, to the network edge at CE devices where
the data resides. Consequently, the data of the user is never
exchanged openly with a third party, consenting to cooperative training of a shared Global Model (GM) that benefits
the CE users and network operators with regard to privacy
improvement and network resource savings.
The FL concept in CE networks comprises CE devices and
an Aggregation Server (AS). The AS is located at the Access
Point (AP) or Base Station (BS), as shown in Fig. 2. In the
Next-gen CE network, the FL plays a vital role in achieving complete intelligence in CE system at the network edge
since the BS is not capable of gathering the data from the
scattered CE devices for training. In the FL process, each CE
user trains a shared model where each device or system has
its own dataset, and they are not all combined into a central dataset. After this, a Local Model (LM) trains the ML
model on a device or system using the local data. The LM is
updated with each training iteration and is used to compute
the updates that are sent to the CS. It is responsible for coordinating the training process across the devices and systems.
Hereinafter, the CS receives updates from LMs and aggregates
them to form an improved GM without considerably compromising the privacy of the user data. The model aggregation can

JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES

Fig. 2.

Architecture of FL for CE.

be performed using various techniques, including federated
averaging and FL with differential privacy [48].
III. OVERVIEW OF FL-BASED PRS FOR N EXT-G EN
C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS
A. Security and Privacy Challenges in PRS for Next-Gen
Consumer Electronics
Personalized Recommendation Systems (PRS) have surprisingly revolutionized the way users interact with nextgen CE by acting as an advisory bridge between CE and
end-consumers. However, some potential security and privacy challenges are associated with it that possess notorious
impacts [49]. PRS majorly relies on collecting tons of consumers’ data, including their interaction patterns, browsing
history, cookies, frequently called queries, etc. [50]. The data
may also contain personally Identifiable Information (PII),
such as an identity number, credit card details, and banking
credentials. The data stored in PRS is then analyzed to predict
the behavior of consumers towards a specific entity [31]. The
entire process of collecting, storing, and analyzing consumers’
data increases the probability of malicious activities and makes
PRS a favorite target for attackers. Unauthorized access to
the system’s resources is one of the most common adversarial practices performed by the bad elements. Despite such
unauthorized access, the extensive operational process of PRS
may have consequences that may disclose the confidentiality,
authenticity, and even integrity of consumers’ data in some
scenarios [41]. Data breaching is another possible malicious
approach that may be performed by attackers to obtain valuable information from consumers. Such a hazardous situation
leads to a variety of serious risks, including identity theft, misuse of data, and reputational damage [42]. Access to online
banking data opens the door to a variety of finance-related
fraudulent activities as well, which is another serious challenge
currently surrounding PRS [43].
Inference attack is another major challenge in PRS that may
have critical outcomes. This attack is knowingly performed
with the bad intention of exploiting deterministic information
about the targeted audience. The inference attack adopts a

2621

superficially precarious approach that is technically complex
in nature. The adversarial elements send a series of specially
constructed queries to the recommendation system and then
analyze the system’s responses against identical queries to
draw an answering pattern. After examining a handful of
streams of queries along with recommendations, the attacker
may retrieve sensitive information about the consumers that
was not intended to be disclosed. In the absence of an adequate
security matrix, PRS may be a desired target for such crucial
attacks that flash an alarming situation to exploit the privacy
and confidentiality of consumers [44]. Various research studies
objectify the algorithm of PRS in terms of its limited immunity
against mega-security threats. The algorithm is highly susceptible to systematic alterations, leading to unfair analysis of data
and biased recommendations. The weakness of the algorithm
makes the overall durability of PRS a question mark [45].
In the case of next-gen CE, higher accuracy in recommendations is a vital objective to be achieved. Additionally, the
recommendation system should be capable enough to provide
consumers with diversified recommendations for preferable
decision-making. The adaptability of new preferences from
the consumer side is another common phenomenon that modern recommendation systems are suffering from. An effective
PRS should be responsive enough to adopt new preferences
and return up-to-date recommendations. The weak algorithm
may not only lack the ability to provide accurate and diversified recommendations but may also lack the ability to maintain
updated recommendations [46].
The next major challenge is operational transparency to
avoid any misconceptions regarding the large amounts of
consumer data taken by PRS. While considering the confidentiality and privacy norms of consumers’ data, the information
collected from individuals must be treated in an ethical way by
ensuring transparency in its usage [47]. Transparency should
also be provided in practical aspects by educating the end consumers about the way recommendations are generated. Some
recommendation systems obtain consumer data irrespective
of future use, including location and their interaction patterns with other devices. Consumers must be aware of the
futuristic scope of this data and its possible relevance to getting more personalized recommendations. The negligence may
encourage the unwanted sharing of this data with third-party
organizations for various other purposes. Hence, there must
be an appropriate framework to provide consumers with useful insight into their data and its processing operations to
get recommendations about next-gen CE. Table I provides a
comprehensive insight into the existing security and privacy
challenges for PRS in next-gen CE.
1) Secure Data Sharing Issues: While employing a PRS
for specific recommendations in next-gen CE, secure data
sharing between authorized entities should be the prominent objective. To meet such desired secure communication
challenges, PRS must be competent enough to mitigate the
possibilities of any unwanted data security threat in the
future. PRS collects a diversified variety of consumer data to
ensure its smooth operations and to provide optimized recommendations. Generally, the more detailed information about
the consumers is, the more accurate will be the generated

2622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE I
A NALYSIS OF E XISTING C HALLENGES FOR PRS IN N EXT-G EN CE

TABLE II
S ECURE DATA C OMMUNICATION C HALLENGES IN PRS

and ensure instant recommendations in return. If a secure
communication protocol does not leverage the data transmission, the swear data exposure may occur to sabotage the
confidentiality and privacy of consumers’ data [58]. The possible data communication challenges for PRS in next-gen CE
are enlisted in Table II.

Fig. 3.

Architecture of the Federated Recommender System [51].

recommendation [52]. Accordingly, the risks of significant
data security threats increase, urging the need for a secure
data exchange framework between end-consumers and PRS.
When the extracted data consists of critical information of consumers, e.g., PII, financial details, and medical data, the need
for secure data sharing increases exponentially [53], there are
several possible ways for data leakage in PRS designed for
next-gen CE.
The data obtained from consumers is stored in PRS data
repositories, and insufficient access control over such data
databases offers a smooth ground for malicious attempts on
consumers’ data. The successful attempts result in data leakage, data tempering, or even the elimination of important
information [54]. Hence, it becomes a vital challenge to protect
these databases from attackers by designing comprehensive
access controls. PRS formulates a generic systematic architecture in which the data communication from consumers to
PRS repositories is regulated through a central server [55].
This plane transmission channel is easier to take over than
a secure communication line containing end-to-end encrypted
data [56]. In the case of next-gen CE, most consumers’ devices
are integrated with third-party mobile applications that take
unauthorized control of that particular device. Hence, the data
transmitted from or to such devices is observed by some thirdparty element triggering the chances of data breaches [57].
Most of the back-end algorithms of PRS are empowered by
cloud services to instantly adopt new consumer preferences

2) Resource-Constrained Consumer Devices: The term
“Resource-Constrained” describes the availability of limited
resources. From a CE perspective, the resource-constrained
nature of devices indicates small devices with less computation power, storage, and processing units. The integration
of PRS with next-gen resource-constrained CE is encircled
by an extensive range of challenges that must be addressed
appropriately. Most next-gen CE, such as wearables, smartwatches, and small gaming units, come with limited computational resources. That fact hinders their way of reflecting
effective collaboration with PRS [59]. The availability of
limited computational capacity is not an ideal situation for
running complex and optimized PRS algorithms. These circumstances introduce the concept of lightweight algorithms.
However, various studies have proven the compromised nature
of lightweight algorithms. Hence, there is a trade-off between
the security and convenient execution of PRS algorithms on
next-gen CE. Resource-constrained CE may also negatively
impact the trustworthiness of PRS by blocking their way of
implementing complex security measures. The high-efficiency
privacy and data security protocols have convoluted processing
that expects an adequate implementation ecosystem. Resourceconstrained CE needs to welcome such complex computational
alliances resulting in unsatisfactory security practices [60].
The next dominant challenge is finite memory units in CE
that are good enough for their own. However, it requires large
memory units to be compatible enough with PRS as broad
memory bases invite extended data arrays that act as a supplement for more accurate recommendations by PRS [61].
Communication limitations are another notable challenge for
PRS to be operational for next-gen CE. Most of the PRS
are empowered by various cloud services to respond to CE
with personalized recommendations instantly. However, the
resource-constrained CE may suffer from poor connectivity

JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES

2623

TABLE III
C RITICAL A NALYSIS OF PRS IN NEXT-GEN CE

issues because of limited communication resources. This may
impact the overall quality of the communication stream by
causing latency, unwanted noise, and even communication
breakage in the worst cases. As a result of this resourceconstrained nature of CE, it becomes a hectic task to interact and be synchronized with the cloud service configured
between PRS and next-gen CE [62]. The instant response
from CE is also a significant challenge for PRS. As the
resource-constrained CE are equipped with limited resources,
it becomes difficult for such devices to exhibit synchronized
progress with the cloud server connecting PRS with CE.
This scenario results in the slow performance of PRS and
unnecessary communication delays [63]. Power consumption
is another crucial factor in resource-constrained CE. These
devices are powered by small-scale batteries that do not
offer enough support to cater to intensive recommendation
algorithms [64].
Moving forward, scalability is another serious challenge
PRS must face while entertaining next-gen CE. It is observed
that each CE device has its predefined working attributes and
processing patterns. To obtain more accurate recommendations, it is advised to broaden the databases containing data
from various identical units by creating a cluster of relevant
CE devices. This practice helps to collect vast amounts of data
and, after necessary processing, yields comprehensive recommendations to all participant CE devices. Due to the predefined
interaction pattern, and lack of quick alterations, CE devices
lack to shake hands with other identical CE devices. While
expanding the application brackets of PRS over multiple CE
devices becomes an unsettled task to configure multiple CE
over PRS [65]. A broader overview of challenges for PRS in
resource-constrained next-gen CE is given in Table III.
B. FL-Based PRS for Next-Gen Consumer Electronics:
Characteristics and Impact
The next-generation consumer electronics environs smart
devices purely designed at the consumer grade such as wearable, body implants, virtual reality gadgets, personal entertainment units, etc. Their intelligent nature makes them entirely
different from traditional electronic devices. The warm adaptability of such next-generation consumer electronics devices
demands these devices to be more functional and efficient.
Therefore, PRS are integrated to make the user experience
better. A PRS effectively analyzes scalable data and provides
optimal suggestions recommended by the recommendation
engines. PRS must be capable of accommodating the expectations of clients. However, we have seen that the learning

process of PRS raises serious security and privacy challenges
due to the fact that the CE data is often stored and analyzed
on centralized cloud storage. FL has the ability to overcome
this challenge by training the model on the devices. FL-based
PRS are well-trained, which made them an excellent choice
for next-generation consumer electronics.
1) Data Privacy and Security Enhancement: FL enables
participant devices to jointly learn a shared prediction model.
This method keeps the training data on the device, rather than
uploading and storing the data on a central server. FL also
employs secure aggregation to maintain the confidentiality of
client updates. As a result, the server is unable to determine
the value or source of the users’ model updates. This diminishes the probability of inference and data attribution attacks.
In case of sensitive communications, the local storage of personal information helps to maintain strict privacy regulations.
It alleviates the burden of aggregating data on a central and
external server, thereby making the data less vulnerable to
breaches. The central server is the core coordinator, and it
manages clients, centralizes their local models, and keeps the
global model up-to-date. FL optimization is an iterative process that improves the global ML model with each iteration.
FL is generally based on pre-defined parameters in an initial
training phase. The model parameters are then disseminated
to the participating clients and will be revised based on client
feedback in subsequent steps. In the local model training, a
list of participants is established where each client receives
the global model and fine-tuning parameters, which are based
on their local data for a given number of training epochs. The
updated model weights are then transmitted to the central server
to update the global model. The central server accumulates the
updated models of all participating clients. Then by combining
their parameters, it produces an updated general model.
To reduce biases, this step must incorporate multiple factors, including client confidence and participation frequency.
In a decentralized system, there is no longer a central server
that acts as an initiator, coordinator, or model aggregator.
Researchers have designed an anomaly detection framework
to investigate the presence of unwanted entities in IoT-enabled
smart environments. The proposed scheme classifies possible
attacks by consuming minimal computational resources. The
FL-based operational segment is devoted to ensuring on-device
training of local data models, and the Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) offers extra layers of security to ensure the privacy
of clients. The model proves a protected shield against common adversaries, e.g., man-in-the-middle attacks, Denial of
Service (DoS) attacks, and Modbus query flood attacks [66].

2624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Another effort towards privacy preservation is made in [67],
which mainly focuses to prohibit the retrieval of irrelevant
information. The model filters the spam images in the raw
data, and after that, these responsible clients are flagged to
take part in the training phase. The system is employed with
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and is trained on a customized dataset. In [68], the authors addressed the integration
of blockchain technologies with the FL to enhance the security
and privacy metrics. A smart contract-based secure algorithm
is proposed that directly measures the accuracy of the updated
global model. Thus, it is unnecessary to assume that participants in the FL training process are trustworthy. Initial findings
indicate that the algorithm offers a high degree of protection against model poisoning attacks. They anticipate that the
obtained results can be used as a baseline for implementing
the algorithm on various blockchain technologies.
In [69], a blockchain security approach is described,
where the authors developed a blockchain-enabled decentralized and asynchronous FL-based IoT anomaly detection
scheme. The proposed method has the potential to boost efficiency while remaining robust and privacy-preservative. In
another approach, researchers, have designed a novel privacypreserving tree-boosting algorithm named Secure Boost [70].
The core objective is to train a high-quality model with
private data separated over multiple clients. Secure Boost
aligns entities under a privacy-preserving protocol and then
builds boosting trees across multiple parties using a carefully
designed encryption strategy. This FL system lets multiple
parties with common user samples but different feature sets
jointly learn from a vertically partitioned dataset. The Secure
Boost model embraces identical accuracy with non-federated
gradient tree-boosting algorithms.
2) Low-Latency Network Communication: Latency is an
imperative component to evaluate the performance of a communication system. It states the duration taken by a data
packet to travel from the sender to the receiver end. In traditional ML approaches, the clients send raw data to the
server end, unnecessarily occupying the bandwidth for a sustainable period [71]. However, FL has outpaced this concept
by introducing a new pattern of communication. It enables
the clients to transmit only the updated model parameters
rather than sending whole chunks of raw data. In this way, the
network resources are efficiently managed, and considerably
low latency occurs in the communication channel [72]. The
latency in FL systems is remarkably lower than the centralized systems. Such performance makes FL an ideal choice for
sensitive networks where minor communication delays may
result in severe reactions. Health monitoring systems, sensitive manufacturing units, and smart grids are some valuable
examples of aforementioned sensitive networks [73].
The second major FL component is latency-based scheduling or preferred scheduling. In normal ML approaches, the
clients are required to send a whole stream containing the
raw data, and this data is revised in each iteration [74]. That
mechanism overburdened the system resources, especially the
network bandwidth remain occupied. However, FL permits
preferred scheduling in which the parameters are preferably
defined. The clients are supposed to follow these parameters,

and they do not even need to propagate an entire stream of data.
Rather, they transmit only the updated models. In this way, FL
calculates the time consumption of each iteration, which makes
the communication process more robust, and responsive [75].
IV. C HALLENGES AND F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
In this section, we have discussed the challenges of implementing FL for PRS. The main challenges are listed below:
A. Computation and Communication Cost
Computing and communication play a critical role to
achieve PRS optimized performance. User devices need to
communicate and update various intermediate parameter values with the server to generate recommendation results in their
local system. This can pose a huge communication overhead
which directly impacts the model performance. Additionally,
users of consumer electronics devices and infrastructure may
have varying capabilities relating to storage, speed, and computational power that certainly impact the overall training
efficiency, delaying the whole process and reducing the efficiency of the global recommendation model [76]. However,
communication cost incurs much great overhead cost than
computation in case numerous users’ devices are sending their
model parameters to the central server [77]. There is a pressing need to reduce the computation and communication cost
within Next-gen CE for an efficient recommendation model
for individual users’ needs.
Several methods are proposed which aim to improve the
model efficiency and reduce the computation and communication overhead notably important-based model updating,
client selection, model compression, asynchronous communication, etc. Important-based model update strategy considers
an important part of the global model to reduce the communicate parameterized size instead of choosing all parameters.
A multi-arm bandit method based on Federated Collaborative
Filtering and Bayesian Thompson Sampling (FCF-BTS) is
proposed which aims to select a specific part of the global
model for a smaller payload to the client [78]. However, this
approach also reduces the overall model accuracy. The client
selection approach selects clients based on resource constraints
such as limited computation resources or poor wireless channel
conditions instead of random client selection to enhance the
efficiency and performance of the global model. Researchers
introduced the Fedcs protocol by which the server sends a
resource request to each client to check the downloading,
updating, and uploading time of local models so that the server
can update the clients during the restricted time by following
the greedy approach [79]. The shortest upload time is considered to select the client followed by a scheduling mechanism
based on the maximum remaining bandwidth for enhancing the
uploading efficiency [8]. Model compression is another widely
used method that compresses the communication parameters
for each communication which reduces the scale of parameter transmission. Researchers have designed a Coreset-Based
Federated Learning (CBFL) framework to remove redundant
data values from the main dataset. Rather it extracts a coreset
and uses a smaller network model to train on this extracted

JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES

coreset yielding similar accuracy as the training of a regular network model on the main dataset [9]. Structured and
sketched updates are considered to decrease the uplink communication costs by updating from a pre-specified structure
parameterized using fewer variables or compressing the full
local update before communicating to the server.
Despite all these methods, there are still challenges to tackle
the computation and communication cost issues. In particular,
important-based model updating reduces the recommendation
performance as well as raises privacy concerns. Due to the
diversity of the users’ devices and the inherent complexity
of the users’ network environment client selection problem
requires an optimized selection approach. Model compression
significantly reduces the communication cost but at the same
time increases the overall computational overhead. To this end,
future research directions need to investigate trade-off issues
between computation and communication cost based on the
users’ consumer devices capacity and infrastructure as well as
develop methods to achieve optimal compression of network
model parameters taken into account the trade-off parameters. Additionally, the design of efficient and trustworthy FL
for PRS is also required to improve overall efficiency and
reduce communications costs. Generally consumer electronic
devices are intelligent and numerous devices are connected to
the dynamic and complex infrastructure, therefore client selection model should also need to follow the dynamic schedule
strategy to ensure robust performance from the users’ devices.
B. Explainability in FL-Based PRS
As stated previously, FL empowers data sharing while
preserving privacy within a decentralized context. PRS heavily relies on the data for developing informed recommendation
models. Federated Recommended Systems (FedRS) is now
widely considered to improve recommendation performance
with the ability to collaborate the data from different systems.
However, despite these significant benefits, FEdRS exhibits
many challenges some of which are discussed notably relating to the computation and communication costs and privacy.
Additionally, stakeholders within the PRS ecosystem including users and service providers also demand a transparent,
fair, and understandable PRS model which should be accurate and meaningful to them [80]. Explainability (XAI) is
the core for the development of trustworthy FedRS models,
which ensure a certain level of explainability (i.e., details
and reasons a model gives to make its functioning clear or
easy to understand) and transparency (i.e., characteristics of
a model to be inherently understandable for a human) of the
generated models [81], [82]. European Commission’s Ethic
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI mentioned that “AI systems
and their decisions should be explained in a manner adapted
to the stakeholder concerned” [83]. The XAI in FL should
ensure an adequate degree of explainability of the FL-based
PRS to develop FedRS. To this end, XAI in FL aims to contribute trustworthy PRS that ensures a transparent, fair, and
understandable recommended system to all user levels.
Explainability for PRS ensures that the models should be
easily understandable and provide straightforward reasoning

2625

for the recommendation results. However, this task is quite
challenging specifically the development of a trustworthy,
unbiased, and understandable PRS model requires multiple
stages including data presentation, recommendation, and evaluation in a complex and dynamic environment. To this end,
future work needs to focus on developing methods and models
within multiple aspects including novel data processing techniques, FL-based explainable learning models, and advanced
representation learning techniques that aim to remove the bias
and retain the genuine data while preserving the privacy of the
extracted data [76], [84]. Additionally, the PRS model needs
to consider beyond accuracy oriented approach for an effective
trustworthy model evaluation. In this context, future direction
needs to consider the development of novel trustworthiness
evaluation schemes and metrics from both technical and ethical dimensions taking into account the accuracy, transparency,
explainability, and privacy of the model as well as the model’s
impact on the potential user groups. The aforementioned future
directions advocate to consider human-centric approaches for
achieving explainability in FL-based PRS.
C. Integration of 5G and Beyond Networks
The emergence of 5G technology significantly increases the
wider adoption of PRS due to the high data transmission rate
and low energy consumption across the networks within diverse
platforms. This technology facilities faster high-volume data
transmission and supports the development of real-time PRS
by reducing the time interval between the user’s behavior and
the system’s feedback and updating the recommendation model
accordingly. 5G accelerates the development of the PRS based
on the evolving needs of the relevant stakeholder. Data for the
PRS can be collected from various sources including cloud
infrastructure which certainly increase the transmission latency
and volume and the processing model of 5G can determine based
on the data and latency. The application of 5G technology in the
PRS will improve efficiency and enhance the user experience
with the recommended system. Despite the benefits, 5G can
also pose challenges specifically relating to potential cyberattacks and data leakage due to the transmission of huge data
volume [85], [86]. Therefore, there is a need to develop methods
and techniques to enhance the capability of real-time PRS with
the integration of 5G technology.
A direction of future research in PRS is about the integration
of real-time models with 5G and beyond networks. PRS needs
to provide a good user interface so that the user can easily
understand and operate with the personalized recommendation
model and value the identified products. 5G can process large
volumes of data which can provide better-customized recommendations, but this can pose data leakage and loss [87]. It
is necessary to develop new models and techniques to reduce
the transmission delay and filter unnecessary information for
a more secure and reliable recommendation system.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we discussed the next-generation consumer
electronics and how personalized recommendation systems
can accurately model user preferences from their historical

2626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

interactions. We discussed the security and privacy challenges
of personalized recommendation systems and the importance
of federated learning to enhance data privacy and security
with low-latency network communication. Finally, we outlined
challenges, that need to be addressed while implementing federated learning-based personalized recommendation systems
for next-gen consumer electronics.

R EFERENCES
[1] S. C. M. Insights. “Revenue of the consumer electronics market worldwide from 2018 to 2028.” 2023. Accessed: Apr. 10,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/forecasts/1286653/
worldwide-consumer-electronics-market-revenue
[2] M. A. Kesselman and W. Esquivel, “Technology on the move, consumer
electronics show 2022: The evolving metaverse and much more,” Library
Hi Tech News, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1–4, 2022.
[3] M. G. Kibria, K. Nguyen, G. P. Villardi, O. Zhao, K. Ishizu, and
F. Kojima, “Big data analytics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence in next-generation wireless networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 32328–32338, 2018.
[4] Y. Tian, B. Zheng, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Q. Wu, “College library
personalized recommendation system based on hybrid recommendation
algorithm,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 83, no. 8, pp. 490–494, 2019.
[5] U. Javed, K. Shaukat, I. A. Hameed, F. Iqbal, T. M. Alam, and S. Luo, “A
review of content-based and context-based recommendation systems,”
Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 274–306, 2021.
[6] M. Rahhali, L. Oughdir, Y. Jedidi, Y. Lahmadi, and M. Z. El Khattabi,
“E-learning recommendation system based on cloud computing,” in
Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Wireless Technol. Embedded Intell. Syst., 2022,
pp. 89–99.
[7] A. Khoshkbarforoushha, A. Khosravian, and R. Ranjan, “Elasticity management of streaming data analytics flows on clouds,” J. Comput. Syst.
Sci., vol. 89, pp. 24–40, Nov. 2017.
[8] C. Du, “Bandwidth constrained client selection and scheduling for federated learning over SD-WAN,” IET Commun., vol. 16, pp. 187–194, no. 7,
Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://digital-library.theiet.org/content/
journals/10.1049/cmu2.12333
[9] K. Li and C. Xiao, “CBFL: A communication-efficient federated learning framework from data redundancy perspective,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 5572–5583, Dec. 2022.
[10] B. Burke, “Gartner top strategic technology trends for 2022,”
Information Age, London, U.K., 2020.
[11] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
“An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, May 19, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3277856.
[12] D. Javeed, T. Gao, M. S. Saeed, and P. Kumar, “An intrusion
detection system for edge-envisioned smart agriculture in extreme
environment,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Jun. 22, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3288544.
[13] T. Panch, H. Mattie, and L. A. Celi, “The “inconvenient truth” about AI
in healthcare,” NPJ Digit. Med., vol. 2, no. 1, p. 77, 2019.
[14] L. Cao, “AI in finance: Challenges, techniques, and opportunities,” ACM
Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–38, 2022.
[15] D. Javeed, T. Gao, M. S. Saeed, and M. T. Khan, “FOG-empowered
augmented intelligence-based proactive defensive mechanism for IoTenabled smart industries,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Jun. 22,
2023, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3288563.
[16] E. K. Nti, S. J. Cobbina, E. E. Attafuah, E. Opoku, and M. A. Gyan,
“Environmental sustainability technologies in biodiversity, energy, transportation and water management using artificial intelligence: A systematic review,” Sustain. Futur., vol. 4, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 100068.
[17] J. Singh, Y. Goel, S. Jain, and S. Yadav, “Virtual mouse and
assistant: A technological revolution of artificial intelligence,” 2023,
arXiv:2303.06309.
[18] Y. Yin, P. Zheng, C. Li, and L. Wang, “A state-of-the-art survey on augmented reality-assisted digital twin for futuristic human-centric industry
transformation,” Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf., vol. 81, Jun. 2023,
Art. no. 102515.
[19] R. Llamas, Worldwide Augmented and Virtual Reality Hardware
Forecast, IDC, Needham, MA, USA, 2018,”

[20] M. Darwish, S. Kamel, and A. Assem, “Extended reality for enhancing spatial ability in architecture design education,” Ain Shams Eng. J.,
vol. 14, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 102104.
[21] L. Gong, Å. Fast-Berglund, and B. Johansson, “A framework for
extended reality system development in manufacturing,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 24796–24813, 2021.
[22] S. M. Iqbal, I. Mahgoub, E. Du, M. A. Leavitt, and W. Asghar,
“Advances in healthcare wearable devices,” NPJ Flexible Electron.,
vol. 5, no. 1, p. 9, 2021.
[23] J. J. Ferreira, C. I. Fernandes, H. G. Rammal, and P. M. Veiga, “Wearable
technology and consumer interaction: A systematic review and research
agenda,” Comput. Human Behav., vol. 118, May 2021, Art. no. 106710.
[24] X. M. Alimdjanovna et al., “Climate control and light control in a smart
home,” Eur. J. Interdiscipl. Res. Develop., vol. 8, pp. 149–155, 2022.
[25] L. Reid and G. Sisel, “Digital care at home: Exploring the role
of smart consumer devices,” Health Place, vol. 80, Mar. 2023,
Art. no. 102961.
[26] S. S. Gill et al., “AI for next generation computing: Emerging
trends and future directions,” Internet Things, vol. 19, Aug. 2022,
Art. no. 100514.
[27] R. Ranjan et al., “The next grand challenges: Integrating the Internet of
Things and data science,” IEEE Cloud Comput., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 12–26,
May/Jun. 2018.
[28] Y. Koren, S. Rendle, and R. Bell, “Advances in collaborative filtering,”
in Recommender Systems Handbook. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 2021,
pp. 91–142.
[29] N. Nassar, A. Jafar, and Y. Rahhal, “A novel deep multi-criteria collaborative filtering model for recommendation system,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
vol. 187, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 104811.
[30] J. Bu, X. Shen, B. Xu, C. Chen, X. He, and D. Cai, “Improving collaborative recommendation via user-item subgroups,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 2363–2375, Sep. 2016.
[31] F. Wang, H. Zhu, G. Srivastava, S. Li, M. R. Khosravi, and L. Qi,
“Robust collaborative filtering recommendation with user-item-trust
records,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 986–996,
Aug. 2022.
[32] X. Wu, B. Cheng, and J. Chen, “Collaborative filtering service
recommendation based on a novel similarity computation method,”
IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 352–365,
May/Jun. 2015.
[33] F. Xue, X. He, X. Wang, J. Xu, K. Liu, and R. Hong, “Deep item-based
collaborative filtering for top-N recommendation,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 1–25, 2019.
[34] H. Ning, S. Dhelim, and N. Aung, “PersoNet: Friend recommendation
system based on big-five personality traits and hybrid filtering,” IEEE
Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 394–402, Jun. 2019.
[35] B. Smith and G. Linden, “Two decades of recommender systems
at amazon.com,” IEEE Internet Comput., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 12–18,
May/Jun. 2017.
[36] Z. Zhou, Z. Cheng, L.-J. Zhang, W. Gaaloul, and K. Ning, “Scientific
workflow clustering and recommendation leveraging layer hierarchical
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 169–183,
Jan./Feb. 2018.
[37] W. Zhang and J. Wang, “A collective Bayesian poisson factorization
model for cold-start local event recommendation,” in Proc. 21th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2015, pp. 1455–1464.
[38] A. Paterek, “Improving regularized singular value decomposition for
collaborative filtering,” in Proc. KDD Cup Workshop, 2007, pp. 5–8.
[39] S. R. Pokhrel and J. Choi, “Federated learning with blockchain for
autonomous vehicles: Analysis and design challenges,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 4734–4746, Aug. 2020.
[40] B. Ghimire and D. B. Rawat, “Recent advances on federated learning
for cybersecurity and cybersecurity for federated learning for Internet
of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8229–8249,
Jun. 2022.
[41] A. A. Khaliq, A. Anjum, A. B. Ajmal, J. L. Webber, A. Mehbodniya,
and S. Khan, “A secure and privacy preserved parking recommender
system using elliptic curve cryptography and local differential privacy,”
IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 56410–56426, 2022.
[42] Y. Himeur et al., “Blockchain-based recommender systems:
Applications, challenges and future opportunities,” Comput. Sci.
Rev., vol. 43, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 100439.
[43] K. Sruthi and S. Prabhu, “Influence of consumer decisions by
recommendar system in fashion e-commerce website,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Decis. Aid Sci. Appl. (DASA), 2022, pp. 421–424.

JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES

[44] S. Zhang, W. Yuan, and H. Yin, “Comprehensive privacy analysis on federated recommender system against attribute inference
attacks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Jul. 14, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3295601.
[45] M. Dong, F. Yuan, L. Yao, X. Wang, X. Xu, and L. Zhu, “A survey
for trust-aware recommender systems: A deep learning perspective,”
Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 249, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 108954.
[46] D. Nawara and R. Kashef, “Context-aware recommendation systems in
the IoT environment (IoT-CARS)—A comprehensive overview,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 144270–144284, 2021.
[47] A. Vultureanu-Albişi and C. Bădică, “Recommender systems: An
explainable AI perspective,” in Proc. Int. Conf. INnovat. Intell. SysT.
Appl. (INISTA), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[48] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[49] G. Wei, Q. Wu, and M. Zhou, “A hybrid probabilistic multiobjective
evolutionary algorithm for commercial recommendation systems,” IEEE
Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 589–598, Jun. 2021.
[50] B. Cao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Liu, Ł. Skonieczny, and Z. Lv,
“Recommendation based on large-scale many-objective optimization for
the Intelligent Internet of Things system,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 15030–15038, Aug. 2022.
[51] B. Tan, B. Liu, V. Zheng, and Q. Yang, “A federated recommender
system for online services,” in Proc. 14th ACM Conf. Recommen. Syst.,
2020, pp. 579–581.
[52] S. Kanwal, S. Nawaz, M. K. Malik, and Z. Nawaz, “A review of textbased recommendation systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 31638–31661,
2021.
[53] P. M. Alamdari, N. J. Navimipour, M. Hosseinzadeh, A. A. Safaei, and
A. Darwesh, “A systematic study on the recommender systems in the
E-commerce,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 115694–115716, 2020.
[54] K. Yu, Z. Guo, Y. Shen, W. Wang, J. C.-W. Lin, and T. Sato, “Secure artificial intelligence of things for implicit group recommendations,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2698–2707, Feb. 2022.
[55] Y. Himeur, S. S. Sohail, F. Bensaali, A. Amira, and M. Alazab, “Latest
trends of security and privacy in recommender systems: A comprehensive review and future perspectives,” Comput. Security, vol. 118,
Jul. 2022, Art. no. 102746.
[56] A. B. Suhaim and J. Berri, “Context-aware recommender systems for
social networks: Review, challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 57440–57463, 2021.
[57] T. B. Ogunseyi, T. Bo, and C. Yang, “A privacy-preserving framework
for cross-domain recommender systems,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 93,
Jul. 2021, Art. no. 107213.
[58] M. del Carmen Rodríguez-Hernández and S. Ilarri, “AI-based mobile
context-aware recommender systems from an information management
perspective: Progress and directions,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 215,
Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106740.
[59] C. Li, J. Zhang, X. Yang, and L. Youlong, “Lightweight blockchain consensus mechanism and storage optimization for resource-constrained IoT
devices,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 58, no. 4, 2021, Art. no. 102602.
[60] Z. Xue et al., “A resource-constrained and privacy-preserving edgecomputing-enabled clinical decision system: A federated reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 11,
pp. 9122–9138, Jun. 2021.
[61] J. H. Khor, M. Sidorov, and P. Y. Woon, “Public blockchains for
resource-constrained IoT devices—A state-of-the-art survey,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 11960–11982, Aug. 2021.
[62] V. A. Thakor, M. A. Razzaque, and M. R. Khandaker, “Lightweight
cryptography algorithms for resource-constrained IoT devices: A
review, comparison and research opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 28177–28193, 2021.
[63] S. J. Nawaz, S. K. Sharma, M. N. Patwary, and M. Asaduzzaman, “Nextgeneration consumer electronics for 6G wireless era,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 143198–143211, 2021.
[64] M. Savi and F. Olivadese, “Short-term energy consumption forecasting at the edge: A federated learning approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 95949–95969, 2021.
[65] C. K. Wu, C.-T. Cheng, Y. Uwate, G. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and K. F. Tsang,
“State-of-the-art and research opportunities for next-generation consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access,
Dec. 27, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2022.3232478.

2627

[66] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for iot
security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
Feb. 2022.
[67] A. Makkar, U. Ghosh, D. B. Rawat, and J. H. Abawajy, “FedLearnSP:
Preserving privacy and security using federated learning and edge computing,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 21–27,
Mar. 2022.
[68] A. R. Short, H. C. Leligou, M. Papoutsidakis, and E. Theocharis,
“Using blockchain technologies to improve security in federated learning systems,” in Proc. IEEE 44th Annu. Comput. Softw. Appl. Conf.
(COMPSAC), 2020, pp. 1183–1188.
[69] L. Cui et al., “Security and privacy-enhanced federated learning for
anomaly detection in IoT infrastructures,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3492–3500, May 2022.
[70] K. Cheng et al., “SecureBoost: A lossless federated learning framework,”
IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 87–98, Nov./Dec. 2021.
[71] E. Samikwa, A. Di Maio, and T. Braun, “Adaptive early exit of computation for energy-efficient and low-latency machine learning over IoT
networks,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf.
(CCNC), 2022, pp. 200–206.
[72] M. Asad, A. Moustafa, T. Ito, and M. Aslam, “Evaluating the communication efficiency in federated learning algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE 24th
Int. Conf. Comput. Support. Cooperat. Work Design (CSCWD), 2021,
pp. 552–557.
[73] W. Qi and H. Su, “A cybertwin based multimodal network for ECG
patterns monitoring using deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 6663–6670, Oct. 2022.
[74] W. Y. Bryan Lim et al., “Federated learning in mobile edge networks:
A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 2031–2063, 3rd Quart., 2020.
[75] W. Xia, W. Wen, K.-K. Wong, T. Q. Quek, J. Zhang, and H. Zhu,
“Federated-learning-based client scheduling for low-latency wireless
communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 32–38,
Apr. 2021.
[76] Z. Sun et al., “A survey on federated recommendation systems,” 2023,
arXiv:2301.00767.
[77] J. Wen, Z. Zhang, Y. Lan, Z. Cui, J. Cai, and W. Zhang, “A survey on
federated learning: Challenges and applications,” Int. J. Mach. Learn.
Cyber., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 513–535, 2023.
[78] F. K. Khan, A. Flanagan, K. E. Tan, Z. Alamgir, and M. A. Ud Din,
“A payload optimization method for federated recommender systems,” in
Proc. 15th ACM Conf. Recomm. Syst., Sep. 2021, pp. 432–442. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145%2F3460231.3474257
[79] T. Nishio and R. Yonetani, “Client selection for federated learning with
heterogeneous resources in mobile edge,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–7. [Online]. Available: https://doi.
org/10.1109%2Ficc.2019.8761315
[80] S. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Liu, and F. Ricci, “Trustworthy
recommender systems,” 2022, arXiv:2208.06265.
[81] A. B. Arrieta et al., “Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI): Concepts,
taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI,”
vol. 58, pp. 82–115, Jun. 2020.
[82] D. Javeed, T. Gao, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “An explainable and resilient
intrusion detection system for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., early access, Jun. 7, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3283704.
[83] “High-level expert group on AI, report, european commission.” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/
ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
[84] Y. Xiong, M. Ren, and R. Urtasun, “LoCo: Local contrastive representation learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
pp. 1–12.
[85] Z. Cai and Z. He, “Trading private range counting over big IoT data,”
in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), 2019,
pp. 144–153.
[86] W. Huang, B. Liu, and H. Tang, “Privacy protection for recommendation system: A survey,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser., vol. 1325, no. 1, Oct. 2019,
Art. no. 12087. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742–
6596/1325/1/012087
[87] G. Li, G. Yin, J. Yang, F. Chen, and J. Wang. “SDRM-LDP: A recommendation model based on local differential privacy.” 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6640667