IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

9987

Generalized Out-of-Distribution Fault Diagnosis
(GOOFD) via Internal Contrastive Learning
Xingyue Wang , Hanrong Zhang , Xinlong Qiao , Ke Ma , Shuting Tao ,
Peng Peng , Member, IEEE, and Hongwei Wang , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Fault diagnosis is crucial in monitoring machines within industrial processes. With the increasing
complexity of working conditions and demand for safety
during production, diverse diagnosis methods are required,
and an integrated fault diagnosis system capable of handling multiple tasks is highly desired. However, the diagnosis subtasks are often studied separately, and the current
methods still need improvement for such a generalized
system. To address this issue, we propose the generalized
out-of-distribution fault diagnosis (GOOFD) framework to
integrate diagnosis subtasks. Additionally, a unified fault
diagnosis method based on internal contrastive learning
and Mahalanobis distance is put forward to underpin the
proposed generalized framework. The method involves feature extraction through internal contrastive learning and
outlier recognition based on the Mahalanobis distance. Our
proposed method can be applied to multiple fault diagnosis tasks and achieve better performance than the existing single-task methods. Experiments are conducted on
benchmark and practical process datasets, indicating the
effectiveness of the proposed framework.
Index Terms—Fault diagnosis, internal contrastive learning (ICL), open-set classification, process monitoring.

I. INTRODUCTION
URING the industrial process and mechanical operation,
faults inevitably occur, resulting in declining industrial efficiency and severe losses. Accurate fault diagnosis has become
increasingly crucial in system design and maintenance to ensure
safety in machinery production [1], [2], [3], [4].
Currently, the research in fault diagnosis mainly contains
two tasks. 1) Determining whether the system is normal. The

D

Manuscript received 12 November 2023; revised 12 February 2024;
accepted 4 April 2024. Date of publication 30 April 2024; date of current
version 5 August 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62276230. Paper no. TII-234488. (Xingyue Wang and Hanrong Zhang are co-first authors.) (Corresponding authors: Hongwei Wang; Peng Peng.)
Xingyue Wang, Hanrong Zhang, Xinlong Qiao, Peng Peng, and Hongwei Wang are with the Zhejiang University, Haining 314400, China, and
also with the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Joint Institute,
Haining 314400, China (e-mail: xinyue1.22@intl.zju.edu.cn; hanrong.
22@intl.zju.edu.cn; xinlong.23@intl.zju.edu.cn; pengp17@mails.tsing
hua.edu.cn; hongweiwang@intl.zju.edu.cn).
Ke Ma and Shuting Tao are with the College of Computer Science
and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310013, China (e-mail:
ke.22@intl.zju.edu.cn; shuting.17@intl.zju.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3390446.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3390446

technique for this task is called process monitoring, which aims
to detect the abnormal during production. 2) Distinguishing
bluefaults that occurred while finding their reasons. The methods
for this task are fault detection and fault classification. In process
monitoring, the traditional approaches applied the multivariate statistical method, such as principal components analysis
(PCA) [5], partial least squares (PLS) [6], and independent
component analysis (ICA) [7], which extract features by transforming the raw data into a lower dimension and detecting occurred faults simply by statistical variance. In recent years, some
new tasks have emerged to deal with more complex production
situations, such as a novel task called open set fault diagnosis
(OSFD), which detects unseen faults that occur during industrial
processes. It is a relatively new task in fault diagnosis, aiming to
detect unknown fault samples while correctly classifying known
classes. Transfer learning (TL) and domain adaptation (DA)
combined with other deep-learning methods have been widely
utilized in the OSFD task [8], [9]. Chen et al. [10] proposed a
multisource open-set DA diagnosis approach to tackle the OSFD
task. Mao et al. [11] introduced an interactive dual adversarial
neural network (IDANN), which uses weighted unknown classification items to distinguish the outliers. Li et al. [12] established
a deep adversarial TL network (DATLN), where a classifier is
trained to learn the decision boundary and detect new faults.
The tasks and techniques mentioned above are often discussed
and tested separately. Nevertheless, since practical production
is complicated, it leads to two problems: 1) a generalized fault
diagnostic framework for multiple tasks is still lacking; 2) the
training on different techniques is time-consuming since they
have different feature extraction methods and network structures.
To address the problems, it is crucial to develop a generalized
fault diagnosis system that considers several situations with a
unified method to deal with multiple tasks. It enables comprehensive monitoring of a machine’s status, which facilitates the
timely detection and identification of any faults that may arise,
allowing for prompt action to be taken. Moreover, the process
monitoring and OSFD methods mentioned above still need to
be improved for the generalized framework. First, these methods can only solve a single task. They cannot simultaneously
deal with all subtasks in a generalized framework, which does
not match the comprehensive approach we need. Second, the
working environment changes during the practical production
process, and the above methods do not perform well in detecting
faults under variable condition scenarios due to the lack of

1551-3203 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

9988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

a powerful feature extractor. As a result, internal contrastive
learning (ICL), as an effective representation learning technique,
can be consequently used in our method.
In recent years, contrastive learning has been used to extract features from data [13]. It is a stochastic data augmentation method in self-supervised learning, aiming to pull similar
samples closer while pushing different samples apart in the
embedding space. This method has proven effective in feature
representation learning [14] in numerous research studies. Currently, some studies have applied contrastive learning to fault
diagnosis methods to extract features and improve performance
under changing working conditions. The contrastive-learningbased diagnosis methods are able to learn invariant features
and improve performance under changing operating conditions.
Zhang et al. [15] introduced a semisupervised contrastive learning method to enhance the feature mapping of limited data.
Li et al. [16] used contrastive learning for the fault diagnosis
of rolling element bearings to extract interclass features. Zhang
et al. [17] proposed a contrastive learning-based diagnosis model
to learn domain-invariant fault features and improve performance under variable working conditions. In recent research,
Tom and Wolf [18] have utilized ICL for anomaly detection. This
method uses subvectors from given samples as positive/negative
pairs to generate the contrastive loss, which depends little on the
data structure and can better detect outliers.
Inspired by the above, this article proposes a novel framework,
and the main contributions are summarized as follows.
1) We are the first to propose an integrated diagnostic system
called the generalized out-of-distribution fault diagnosis (GOOFD) framework, including process monitoring,
fault classification, and OSFD tasks, which offers significant room for expansion and exploration.
2) This article introduces a novel integrated diagnosis
method ICL-OD to address the multitasks issue in the
GOOFD framework and learn more distinctive features
for unknown classes based on ICL and the Mahalanobisdistance approach.
3) Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets and actual
mechanical datasets are conducted to indicate that our
proposed method can be applied to different fault diagnosis tasks and has a better performance compared to the
existing single-task methods.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section
II presents the motivation and background of our proposed
framework and methods. Section III introduces the integrated
fault diagnosis framework and the proposed methods. Section
IV presents the experimental results and the validation of the
proposed model. Finally, Section V concludes this article.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. Motivation
There are increasing numbers of new tasks and demands
for fault diagnosis in industrial production, and many of these
tasks have numerous subtasks that require various techniques.
In the production process, there are often situations where many
different types of faults need to be diagnosed, such as fault

detection, fault classification, and unseen fault detection, which
cannot be achieved through a single task alone. A fault diagnosis
system that can comprehensively solve multiple tasks is required
to diagnose faults more efficiently.
Currently, subtasks are discussed separately and have yet to be
integrated to implement a comprehensive fault diagnosis system,
and specific steps in the tasks, such as feature extraction and fault
recognition, are also carried out separately. Thus, it is essential
to build a comprehensive diagnostic system. We have found that
the diagnosis subtasks have some commonalities, such as all
involving the detection of outliers, indicating that it is feasible to
combine these subtasks to solve them, and integrating them can
also improve the efficiency of model training by using a unified
feature map. Therefore, we propose this integrated framework
to consolidate these subtasks.
Our method treats the unified problem in the proposed framework as the outlier detection task. In process monitoring, fault
samples are defined as the outliners. In OSFD, the outliners
are the unknown fault samples. This way, the generalized fault
diagnosis issue can be treated as the out-of-distribution detection
problem, in which the outliers vary from specific subtasks.
Therefore, we used a contrastive learning method that is more
suitable for outlier detection: ICL. The ICL technique generates
positive and negative samples from the internal subvectors of
the given sample, which focuses more on learning its characteristics and is more suitable for outlier detection problems in
binary classification. By integrating ICL into our method, the
detection of outliers is improved, achieving better fault detection
performance.
B. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is a stochastic data augmentation method
in self-supervised learning, which is proven effective in feature
representation learning [14]. For a batch of N samples, the
model generates 2N augmented data, where each source data
x has two augmentations x̃i and x̃j . For each augmented data
x̃i , the other augmented data x̃j generated from the same source
data x is regarded as the positive pair. The remaining 2(N − 1)
augmentations x̃j (m = j) generated from other (N − 1) source
data is deemed as the negative pair of x̃i . The model is trained to
minimize the distance between every positive pair and maximize
the distance between every negative pair. The contrastive loss is
defined as

exp(f (x̃i ) · f (x̃j )/τ )
(1)
L=−
log 
m=j exp(f (x̃i ) · f (x̃m )/τ )
i∈A

where f (x̃k ) represents the embedding of augmented data x̃k
by encoder f (·). The index i ∈ A ranges from (0, 2N ).
C. Internal Contrastive Learning
Tom and Wolf [18] proposed an anomaly detection method
based on ICL. The method sliced the input vector into different
dimensions. The network is trained to produce similar embeddings for complementary pairs and push away every subvector pair in the input vector. Based on the internal contrastive
loss, the method generates positive and negative pairs from

WANG et al.: GENERALIZED OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION FAULT DIAGNOSIS (GOOFD) VIA INTERNAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

9989

Fig. 1. (a) Difference between the GOOFD framework and existing single-task methods. A single-task approach can only handle a specific task.
However, the GOOFD framework is dedicated to integrating and solving various fault diagnosis tasks through a unified method. (b) Basic process
of our approach addresses multitask issues.

the subvectors of a sample xi with dimension D to learn the
representations of each sample. To split the vectors, here, we set
a hyperparameter d to represent the starting index of a subvector,
also called the internal dimension of the subset pairs. First,
given the parameter d, extract consecutive l-length subvector
} from xi . Then, the complementary part
pdi = {xdi , . . ., xd+l−1
i
d+l
,
x
, . . ., xD
D − l, is
qid = {x1i , . . ., xd−1
i } with the length of
i
i

defined as the positive pair of pdi . For index d = d, pdi is regarded
as the negative pair of qid . The method has two encoders F and
G to learn the feature map of pdi and qid , respectively. Here, we
normalized the networks and obtained the normalized networks
F N and GN . Let D(qid , pdi ) represent the dot product between
pdi and qid , which is shown in the following:
D(qid , pdi ) = F N (qid ) · GN (pdi ).

(2)

The two networks are trained to learn similar embeddings
between positive pairs F N (pdi ) and GN (qid ) while minimizing

the mutual information between negative pairs pdi and qid . The
internal contrastive loss for sample xi in internal dimension d is
defined in the following, where k = D − l + 1
eD(qi ,pi )/τ
d

(xi , j) = −ln k

d =d e

d



D(qid ,pd
i )/τ

.

(3)

In the internal contrastive loss, for a given sample xi and
internal dimension d, the method learns to produce similar
embeddings qid and pdi between the matched subvectors from
the same dimension j and separate the l-length subvectors qid

and pdi from different dimensions. Then the model can generate
scores S(xi ) for xi considering all the internal dimensions
d = {0, . . ., k}, as shown in the following;

(4)
S(xi ) = d (xi , d)
where the final output score S(xi ) denotes the representation of
the sample xi .
III. GENERALIZED OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION FAULT DIAGNOSIS
The framework of the proposed GOOFD system is shown in
Fig. 1. The framework uses the ICL-OD method to learn the
boundary for outliers and then detect outliers to complete both
process monitoring and OSFD tasks. The following subsections
first introduce the definition of the unified tasks in the GOOFD

system and then describe the methodology of the ICL-OD approach and how it is used to tackle multiple tasks in the GOOFD
system.
A. Task Definition
Given a set of n normal data D0 = {x1 , . . ., xn }, categorized in the normal class X0 , and a set of known fault data
Df = {f1 , . . ., fm }, which belong to (N − 1) fault classes
X1 , . . ., XN −1 . The embedding space for normal data D0 is
called S0 and the embedding space for the known fault data
Df is called Sf . For the unknown fault Du = {u1 , . . ., uk } with
embedding space Su , the label of ui is class XN . The embedding
space of known data is defined as Sk . Its corresponding open
space is defined as Ok .
In the proposed GOOFD, the embedding space S0 , Sf , and Su
collectively form the entire embedding space. The process monitor and OSFD tasks are fused by specifying different boundaries
for the known embedding space Sk . In process monitoring, the
known embedding space contains only normal data D0 . Thus,
it is defined as Sk = S0 . Its corresponding open space O0 is
Sf ∪ Su , which contains all the faults. While in OSFD, the
known embedding space Sk consists of normal data D0 and
known faults Df , and its corresponding Ok = Su .
B. ICL for Outlier Detection
The proposed ICL for outlier detection (ICL-OD) method can
be divided into two steps: generate the embedding map based on
ICL and detect the outliers. The ICL-OD applied the ICL-based
method for fault diagnosis in [18] to extract features from the
input samples. Given a set of input samples X = {x1 , . . ., xn },
obtain score S(xi ) as the feature space for each sample xi based
on (4).
After obtaining the score S(xi ), the method uses a
Mahalanobis-distance-based classifier to detect the outlier. The
Mahalanobis distance measures the distance between a sample
and a distribution. Given an input sample x and a distribution
Q, the Mahalanobis distance dM (x) between them is defined in
the following:

−1
(x − μ)
(5)
dM (x) = (x − μ)

9990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024


where μ represents the means of Q and represents the covariance matrix of Q. Unlike Euclidean distance, the Mahalanobis
distance considers associations between correlated variables. It
has been proven to be an effective graphic tool for identifying
outliers. In our method, the Mahalanobis distance can be applied
to measure the distance dS (x) between sample x and the distribution of the training set (normal data) in the score embedding
space, as shown in the following:

−1
dS (x) = (S(x) − μS )
(S(x) − μS )
(6)
S


where S(x) denotes the output score of sample x, μS and S
represent the means and covariance matrix of score S for training
sets, respectively. In the one-classification task, the training set
contains only normal data, so the output score S can be deemed
as the distribution of normal data.
Given training samples, the method first implements the ICL
method to obtain the output score S for training input
samples
and calculate the means μtr and covariance matrix tr of S.
Then, for every sample {xtr
i |i ∈ (1, n)} in the training set, cal= {dS (xtr
culate the Mahalanobis distance dtrain
i )|i ∈ (1, n)} of
S
each training sample to the normal distribution, as shown in the
following:

−1
tr
dS (xi ) = (S(xtr
(S(xtr
(7)
i ) − μtr )
i ) − μtr ).
tr

Similarly, for every sample {xte
i |i ∈ (1, m)} in the testing
te
set, calculate the Mahalanobis distance dtest
S = {dS (xi )|i ∈
(1, m)} of each test sample to the normal distribution. Based
on the distance, the outliers can be identified, as shown in the
following:

inliner, dS (xte ) ≤ θ
y=
(8)
outlier, dS (xte ) > θ
where threshold θ is used to reject outliers, and its value is equal
te
to the k% quantile of Mahalanobis distance in dtrain
S . If dS (xi )
will
be
determined
as
the
exceeds threshold θ, the sample xte
i
outlier, and vice versa, is determined as the normal.
C. Generalized Out-of-Distribution Detection
As previously described, the GOOFD fault diagnosis task
contains both process monitoring and OSFD tasks for fault
diagnosis. The ICL outlier detection (ICL-OD) method proposed
in this article can be used in GOOFD fault diagnosis for process
monitoring and OSFD, as shown in Fig. 1. Since the process
monitoring task aims at detecting the fault from normal, the
input data x only consist of normal data of class X0 . Then,
the ICL-OD method helps to generate the score S for normal
data and reject the anomaly based on dS (x), as shown in the
following:

−1
dS (x) = (S(x) − μ0 )
(S(x) − μ0 )
(9)


0

where μ0 and 0 represent the means and covariance matrix
of score S for normal samples. Then, use the k% quantile of
Mahalanobis distance of normal samples as the threshold θ0 to

find the outliers, as shown in the following:

0, dS (x) ≤ θ0
y=
1, dS (x) > θ0 .

(10)

For a sample x in the test set, if the Mahalanobis distance
dS (x) of x exceeds the threshold θ0 , the sample x is labeled as
1 and rejected as the outliers. Otherwise, it will be labeled as 0
and classified as normal.
In OSFD, which is a multiclass classification task, the training
data contain normal data and known faults, regarded as known
classes. First, the method trains a classifier C to classify known
classes, which include the normal data class X0 and N − 1
known fault class X1 , . . .XN . The input samples are regarded
as the known classes in OSFD. Then, the ICL-OD method is
used to learn the boundary of the empirical data in Mahalanobis
distance. Similar to anomaly detection, for a given sample x from
the testing set, the method uses the Mahalanobis-distance-based
threshold to reject the unknown, shown in the following:

−1
(S(x) − μk )
(11)
dS (x) = (S(x) − μk )
k

where μk and k denote the means and covariance matrix of
the known training samples, respectively. The method uses the
k% quantile of Mahalanobis distance of training samples as
the threshold θu to reject the unknown. Finally, the method
can distinguish between known and unknown, shown in the
following:

argmax(C(x)) ∈ (1, N ), dS (x) ≤ θu
(12)
y=
N + 1,
dS (x) > θu .
The trained classifier C first outputs the softmax score of x
and classifies them into known classes 1 ∼ N . Then, for all
the samples whose Mahalanobis distance is greater than the
threshold θu , the method will treat these points as outliers and
classify them into the unknown class (class N + 1).
IV. EXPERIMENT STUDY
In this section, we evaluate and compare our proposed method
with baseline methods and set up two experiments to prove the
effectiveness of the proposed method. In Experiment I, we first
use a simulated benchmark dataset to perform a preliminary validation of the proposed method. In Experiment II, the evaluation
of our approach is further verified using two datasets generated
from the real-world process. The details of the two experiments
are listed below.
1) Experiment I: The proposed method will be evaluated in
the Tennessee Eastman (TE) process [19] to measure the
performance in process monitoring and OSFD for fault
diagnosis. In process monitoring, the dataset uses normal
data as the training set and fault data as the test set. The
OSFD task divides the dataset into open and closed sets
to test its ability to detect unseen faults.
2) Experiment II: To further evaluate the effectiveness of
our method, Experiment II implements the proposed technique with a real-world dataset: multiphase flow facility
(MFF) dataset [20]. The MFF dataset is used in process
monitoring and OSFD tasks, respectively.

WANG et al.: GENERALIZED OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION FAULT DIAGNOSIS (GOOFD) VIA INTERNAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

Fig. 2.

Flowchart of the TE process [19].

Baseline. In Experiment I, for the process monitoring task, we
compare the proposed method with the following seven baseline
methods: PCA [5], Kernel PCA (KPCA) [5], ICA [7], Kernel
ICA (KICA) [21], dynamic PCA (DPCA) [22], structured joint
sparse canonical correlation analysis (SJCCA) [23], orthonormal subspace analysis (OSA) [24], and decentralized support
vector data descriptions (DSVDD) [25]. In the OSFD task, we
compare the proposed method with the following six baselines:
SoftMax, OpenMax [26], CenterLoss [27], EOW-SoftMax [28],
generalized ENtropy score (GEN) [29], and positive and unlabeled learning and label shift estimation (PULSE) [30]. In addition, we compare our proposed method with the ICL anomaly
detection approach [18] to validate the superiority of our method.
Since the ICL anomaly detection approach cannot be directly
applied to the OSFD task, we add a classifier to the method to
complete the experiment, which we call ICL+ in the later section.
Experiment II implements PCA, DPCA, PLS, enhanced dynamic latent variable (EDLV) analysis [31], and global-local
preserving projection based on optimal active relative entropy
(OARE-GLPP) [32] as the baseline methods in the process monitoring task. The baseline used in the OSFD task remains SoftMax, OpenMax, CenterLoss, EOW-Softmax, GEN, PULSE, and
ICL+.
Metrics: In process monitoring, our experiments use the fault
detection rate (FDR) to evaluate a model’s ability to detect
faults. In OSFD, we use the F1 score and AUROC to assess
performance.
A. Experiment I: Evaluation With TE Process
1) Dataset: Based on actual chemical reaction processes,
Eastman Chemical Company has developed an open and challenging chemical model simulation platform, the TE [19] simulation platform 2, which generates time-varying data for testing
control and diagnostic models of complex industrial processes.
The TE dataset contains 21 faults. In process monitoring, the
experiment uses normal data as the training set and 21 fault data
as test data to evaluate the performance. In the OSFD task, the
training set consists of normal data and known faults (fault 1,
fault 2, fault 4, and fault 5). Then, the unseen faults (faults 6, 7,
13, 14) are randomly picked and used as test sets to assess the
model’s performance.

9991

2) Training Scheme: In the ICL-OD method, the model employs Adma Optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. We set
the subvector’s length l = 2 and temperature τ = 0.01. The F
and G are fully-connected networks. The hidden layers in the F
network have u and 2 u units. A LeakyRelu activation and batch
normalization layer is applied for each hidden layer. In the G
network, hidden units are u/4 and u/2, with the LeakyRelu
activation for each layer. Unlike network F , G applied batch
normalization only in the first hidden layer. We set hidden unit
u = 200 for both F and G. The classifier C for the TE dataset
is a fully connected network with one hidden layer of 20 units.
The classifier applies Adam Optimizer and the CrossEntrophy
loss in the training phase. The threshold θu is set at values when
k% = 98% to reject the unknown samples.
3) Results: In process monitoring, our proposed method
outperforms the baseline methods in most cases, highlighted
in green in Table I. “OT” in Table I refers to the cases where the
event of fault detection was impossible to determine because
the indicator value was already over the threshold before the
fault introduction. In most cases, our model achieves the highest
FDR compared to other baselines. Especially in cases of fault
3, fault 9, and fault 15, our model dramatically improves the
results compared to the poor performance of baseline methods.
Even in the case where the FDR of our model is not the
highest, our proposed method can still achieve relatively good
results.
In OSFD, we repeat experiments for each method five times
to report the average F1-score and AUROC. The results in
Table II show that our proposed model outperforms the baseline
methods. Fig. 3 presents the detailed results where Fault 6 is seen
as the unknown. From the confusion matrix shown in Fig. 3(a),
we can see that our proposed method has a higher recognition
rate for the unknown, while the classification of the closed-set
data are still guaranteed.
Fig. 3(b) presents the distribution of the prediction scores to
further analyze the superiority of our method. The prediction
scores generated by the Softmax and CenterLoss methods exhibit significant overlap between known and unknown classes,
leading to the misclassification of most unknown classes as
known ones. The OpenMax method demonstrates a clearer
distinction between scores of unknown and known classes, but
there are still instances where the scores for unknown categories
are too high, resulting in misclassification as known categories.
The EOW-SoftMax method presents a similar issue, producing
overly low scores for unknown data, resulting in misidentification as known classes. The GEN method has difficulty generating
predictive scores with high discrimination, and most of its normal samples (class 0) and unknown samples have similar scores,
resulting in poor classification. The PULSE method has better
classification results, but some unknown samples have overly
high confidence scores, leading to their misclassification into
known categories.
However, our method can generate prediction scores with
greater distinctiveness, enabling better identification of unknown classes. As shown in Fig. 3(b), our method has minimal overlap between the distribution of prediction scores for
unknown and known classes. In contrast, in the ICL+ method,
there is still a significant overlap between the prediction scores of

9992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

TABLE I
RESULTS OF PROCESS MONITORING IN TE PROCESS

TABLE II
RESULTS OF OSFD IN TE PROCESS

unknown and known classes, resulting in a higher mislabeling
rate for unknown classes. Fig. 4 shows the histogram of the
prediction scores for unknown classes in both the ICL+ method
and our approach. Our method can generate more “extreme”
prediction scores for unknown classes, thereby enhancing differentiation from known categories. These results indicate that,
in contrast to other baseline methods, our approach with an effective feature extractor can generate prediction scores with greater
distribution disparity between unknown and known categories,
thereby achieving superior performance.
Experiment I trains and validates the model with the TE
dataset and demonstrates that our proposed model can combine
the process monitoring and OSFD tasks while achieving better
performance than baseline methods in both tasks.
B. Experiment II: Evaluation With MMF
1) Datasets.: To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, Experiment II uses a real-world datasets: and MFF
dataset [20] to validate the model.
The MMF dataset is derived from the Three-phase Flow
Facility system at Cranfield University. The data has 24 process
variables and is acquired at the sampling rate of 1 Hz. The MFF
dataset contains normal data and six fault cases. In normal data,
three datasets (T1, T2, T3) are captured from the system to

TABLE III
DESCRIPTION OF TEST SETS OF MMF IN PROCESS MONITOR EXPERIMENT

represent normal operating conditions adequately. For each fault
case, the process data are generated under different operation
conditions and used as different sets. In process monitoring, we
use the T1 and T3 set of normal data to train our method. The
description of the test set is shown in Table III. All test datasets
are from Set 1 with changing operating conditions. In the OSFD
test of Experiment II, we use the T2 set of normal data and
Set-2 of each fault case to train and evaluate our model. We
randomly select normal data and three fault cases as the training
set.
2) Training Scheme: The parameter settings of the ICL-OD
method in Experiment II are the same as those in Experiment I.
The classifier C for the MFF dataset is a fully connected network
with one hidden layer. The hidden layer has 12 units, followed by
a ReLU activation layer. During the training phase, the classifier
applies Adam Optimizer and CrossEntrophy loss.

WANG et al.: GENERALIZED OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION FAULT DIAGNOSIS (GOOFD) VIA INTERNAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

9993

Fig. 3. (a) Confusion matrix for the OSFD task in the TE process with Fault 6 as the unknown class. (b) We visualize the distribution of prediction
scores generated by each method. The images in the second row are the enlarged display of the yellow region in the first-row images, providing
a better view of details. The prediction scores of the Softmax, OpenMax, and CenterLoss methods are softmax probabilities. Scores below the
threshold are classified as unknown. The prediction scores of the EOW-Softmax method constitute the (K+1)th-dimensional probability of its output,
estimating open-world uncertainty. Scores surpassing the threshold are classified as unknown. The GEN method can be applied to any pretrained
softmax-based classifier to generate the entropy-based score, and scores below a threshold are determined to be unknown. The prediction score
of the PULSE method is the output of the discriminator. Scores below the threshold are labeled as unknown classes. The prediction score of ICL+
and our method are the opposites of the output score. Data with prediction scores below the threshold are classified as the unknown class. The
smaller the overlap between the prediction scores of known and unknown categories, the better the method’s performance.

TABLE IV
RESULTS OF PROCESS MONITORING IN MFF

Fig. 4. Histogram of prediction scores for unknown classes in ICL+
and our methods. The prediction scores of the ICL+ and our method
shown in Fig. 3(b) are overly dense, making it difficult to discern specific
distributional features. Therefore, we present a clearer display of the
distribution of the prediction scores for unknown classes.

3) Results: The FDR results of the process monitor experiment are shown in Table IV. It can be seen that our method
outperforms all other baseline methods in the MFF dataset.
For the OSFD evaluation, we ran the experiment five times,
and the average results of the MFF process are shown in Table V.
The Known–Unknown in Table V shows the known classes for
training and their corresponding unknown fault for evaluation

in each case. Compared with the other six baseline methods,
our approach shows a significant improvement in the F1-score
and AUROC metrics for each case. Furthermore, our method
outperforms ICL+. With unknown faults of 2 and 4, both the
AUROC and F1-score of our method are significantly better than
those of the ICL+ method. Especially when the unknown fault
is 2, our method improves by 12% on the F1-score compared
to ICL+, which is a great classification improvement. In the
case of unknown faults of 3 and 5, even though AUROC is both
1.0 (achieving the best result), the F1-score of our method still
exceeds the ICL+ method, which suggests that our method can
better predict the boundaries of known classes and generate more
accurate thresholds to reject unknown classes. The results of
Experiment II indicate that even in real-world data, our method
can achieve remarkable performance in the GOOFD task and
can surpass baseline methods in both tasks.
C. Ablation Study
In the ablation study, the experiments are conducted on the TE
dataset in the OSFD task. The known class consists of normal
data, faults 1, 2, 4, and 5. The experiments are repeated five
times to present the average F1-score and AUROC.
1) Threshold for Outliers: The threshold θu is used to determine and reject unknown classes. Therefore, it is crucial to select
an appropriate threshold, which will determine the performance
of unknown fault detection. We set different values of θu (80%,
85%, 90%, 95%, 98%, and 100%) on the TE dataset in OSFD

9994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

TABLE V
RESULTS OF OSFD IN MMF

TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY ON DIFFERENT MEASUREMENTS OF DISTANCE

is 12.6%–22% higher compared to the rest of the distances.
This suggests that the Mahalanobis distance generates more discriminatory confidence scores compared to the other distances.
Theoretically, the Mahalanobis distance can be regarded as a
modification of the Euclidean distance, which corrects the problem of inconsistent and correlated dimensional scales, as shown
in (5). Therefore, since the Mahalanobis distance can eliminate
the problem of different scales between different dimensions,
and make dimensional corrections to the sample distribution, it
is more suitable for outlier detection than other distances.
V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 5. Average F1-score of OSFD tasks in TE process when applying
various threshold θu .

task. The results in Fig. 5 show that it can reach the best performance when θu = 98%. When the threshold is within the range
of 80%–98%, the F1-score shows an increasing trend, indicating
that raising the threshold for rejecting unknown categories has
a positive effect on the method’s performance. However, when
the threshold exceeds 98%, the F1-score decreases, suggesting
that setting an overly high threshold for unknown categories
may mistakenly identify them as known, leading to a decline in
model performance.
2) Distance for Outlier Detection: In order to find a more suitable measurement for unknown class detection, we compared
the Mahalanobis distance with other measures of distance (cityblock distance, Canberra distance, and Euclidean distance). The
results in Table VI show that the Mahalanobis distance leads to
better classification performance. Both AUROC and F1-score
are significantly better than the rest of the distances in the case
of the Mahalanobis distance. Particularly, in the case of the
unknown fault 13, the AUROC of the Mahalanobis distance

In this article, we were the first to introduce the novel idea
of an integrated fault diagnosis framework and present the
GOOFD framework to integrate multiple fault diagnosis tasks.
Compared to existing single-task fault diagnosis approaches,
our ICL-OD method can be applied to multiple tasks and can
also better extract features and generate prediction scores with
greater discriminability. Extensive experiments were conducted
to demonstrate that our method led to better performance for
each subtask. In future work, we intend to expand GOOFD
to cover more diagnostic subtasks, enhancing fault detection
capabilities and system robustness. This development aims to
improve industrial safety, and machine reliability, and reduce
maintenance costs. Furthermore, we will work on incorporating
interpretability within the framework to improve transparency
and user trust, which are expected to deliver significant societal
advantages, such as safer industrial operations and economic
efficiencies.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Momeni, N. Sadoogi, M. Farrokhifar, and H. F. Gharibeh, “Fault
diagnosis in photovoltaic arrays using GBSSL method and proposing
a fault correction system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 16, no. 8,
pp. 5300–5308, Aug. 2020.
[2] L. Feng and C. Zhao, “Fault description based attribute transfer for zerosample industrial fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 1852–1862, Mar. 2021.

WANG et al.: GENERALIZED OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION FAULT DIAGNOSIS (GOOFD) VIA INTERNAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

[3] A. Glowacz, “Thermographic fault diagnosis of shaft of BLDC motor,”
Sensors, vol. 22, no. 21, 2022, Art. no. 8537.
[4] A. Glowacz, “Thermographic fault diagnosis of electrical faults of commutator and induction motors,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 121, 2023,
Art. no. 105962.
[5] X. Deng, X. Tian, S. Chen, and C. J. Harris, “Nonlinear process fault
diagnosis based on serial principal component analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 560–572, Mar. 2018.
[6] H. Abdi and L. J. Williams, “Partial least squares methods: Partial least
squares correlation and partial least square regression,” Comput. Toxicol.,
vol. 2, pp. 549–579, 2013.
[7] Z. Ge and Z. Song, “Performance-driven ensemble learning ICA model for
improved non-Gaussian process monitoring,” Chemometrics Intell. Lab.
Syst., vol. 123, pp. 1–8, 2013.
[8] Y. Shi et al., “Domain transferability-based deep domain generalization
method towards actual fault diagnosis scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 7355–7366, Jun. 2023.
[9] Y. Zhou, Y. Dong, and G. Tang, “Time-varying online transfer learning for
intelligent bearing fault diagnosis with incomplete unlabeled target data,”
IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 7733–7741, Jun. 2023.
[10] Z. Chen et al., “A multi-source weighted deep transfer network for open-set
fault diagnosis of rotary machinery,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1982–1993, Mar. 2023.
[11] G. Mao, Y. Li, S. Jia, and K. Noman, “Interactive dual adversarial neural network framework: An open-set domain adaptation intelligent fault
diagnosis method of rotating machinery,” Measurement, vol. 195, 2022,
Art. no. 111125.
[12] J. Li, R. Huang, G. He, S. Wang, G. Li, and W. Li, “A deep adversarial
transfer learning network for machinery emerging fault detection,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 20, no. 15, pp. 8413–8422, Aug. 2020.
[13] C. Yang, J. Liu, Q. Xu, and K. Zhou, “A generalized graph contrastive
learning framework for few-shot machine fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Inform., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2692–2701, Feb. 2024.
[14] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, pp. 8703–8714, 2021.
[15] W. Zhang, D. Chen, Y. Xiao, and H. Yin, “Semi-supervised contrast
learning based on multiscale attention and multitarget contrast learning
for bearing fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 10,
pp. 10056–10068, Oct. 2023.
[16] C. Li, X. Lei, Y. Huang, F. Nazeer, J. Long, and Z. Yang, “Incrementally
contrastive learning of homologous and interclass features for the fault
diagnosis of rolling element bearings,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19,
no. 11, pp. 11182–11191, Nov. 2023.
[17] T. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Liu, and Z. Liu, “Domain discrepancy-guided
contrastive feature learning for few-shot industrial fault diagnosis under
variable working conditions,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 10,
pp. 10277–10287, Oct. 2023.
[18] T. Shenkar and L. Wolf, “Anomaly detection for tabular data with internal
contrastive learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Apr.
25–29, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=%5C_
hszZbt46bT
[19] N. Lawrence Ricker, “Decentralized control of the tennessee eastman
challenge process,” J. Process Control, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 205–221, 1996.
[20] C. Ruiz-Cárcel, Y. Cao, D. Mba, L. Lao, and R. T. Samuel, “Statistical
process monitoring of a multiphase flow facility,” Control Eng. Pract.,
vol. 42, pp. 74–88, 2015.
[21] Y. Zhang, “Fault detection and diagnosis of nonlinear processes using improved kernel independent component analysis (KICA) and support vector
machine (SVM),” Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., vol. 47, no. 18, pp. 6961–6971,
2008.
[22] J. Tiago Rato and M. S. Reis, “Fault detection in the tennessee eastman
benchmark process using dynamic principal components analysis based
on decorrelated residuals (DPCA-DR),” Chemometrics Intell. Lab. Syst.,
vol. 125, pp. 101–108, 2013.
[23] X. Xiu, Y. Yang, L. Kong, and W. Liu, “Data-driven process monitoring
using structured joint sparse canonical correlation analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. II: Exp. Briefs, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 361–365, Jan. 2021.
[24] Z. Lou, Y. Wang, Y. Si, and S. Lu, “A novel multivariate statistical process monitoring algorithm: Orthonormal subspace analysis,” Automatica,
vol. 138, 2022, Art. no. 110148.
[25] J. Wang, P. Liu, S. Lu, M. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Decentralized plantwide monitoring based on mutual information-Louvain decomposition and
support vector data description diagnosis,” ISA Trans., vol. 133, pp. 42–52,
2023.

9995

[26] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 1563–1572.
[27] Y. Wen, K. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “A discriminative feature learning
approach for deep face recognition,” in Proc. 14th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2016, pp. 499–515.
[28] Y. Wang, B. Li, T. Che, K. Zhou, Z. Liu, and D. Li, “Energy-based
open-world uncertainty modeling for confidence calibration,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 9282–9291.
[29] X. Liu, Y. Lochman, and Z. Christopher, “Gen: Pushing the limits of
softmax-based out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 23946–23955.
[30] S. Garg, S. Balakrishnan, and Z. Lipton, “Domain adaptation under open
set label shift,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, vol. 35,
pp. 22531–22546.
[31] X. Wang, H. Shi, B. Song, Y. Tao, and S. Tan, “Enhanced dynamic latent
variable analysis for dynamic process monitoring,” J. Taiwan Inst. Chem.
Eng., vol. 156, 2024, Art. no. 105292.
[32] B. Liu, Y. Chai, C. Huang, X. Fang, Q. Tang, and Y. Wang, “Industrial
process monitoring based on optimal active relative entropy components,”
Measurement, vol. 197, 2022, Art. no. 111160.

Xingyue Wang received the undergraduate degree in digital media technology from the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing, China, in 2022. She is currently working
toward the graduation degree in electronic information with the Zhejiang University-University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Joint Institute,
Zhejiang University, Haining, China.
Her research interests include artificial intelligence, natural language processing, and fault
diagnosis.

Hanrong Zhang received a dual B.S. degree in
computer science from the University of Leeds,
Leeds, U.K., and Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, in 2022. He is currently
working toward the master’s degree in computer technology with the Zhejiang UniversityUniversity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Joint
Institute, Zhejiang University, Haining, China.
His current research interests include deep
learning, fault diagnosis, and knowledge graph.

Xinlong Qiao received the B.E. degree in
software engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China, in 2023.
He is currently working toward the master’s
degree in computer technology with the Zhejiang University-University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign Joint Institute, Zhejiang University,
Haining, China.
His current research interests include deep
learning, named entity recognition, and fault
diagnosis.

Ke Ma received the M.S. degree in structural engineering, mechanics, and materials
from the Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA, USA, in 2020. He is currently
working toward the doctoral degree in computer
science with Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China.

9996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Shuting Tao received the dual bachelor degree
in computer engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China and University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL, USA, in
2021. She is currently working toward the doctoral degree in computer science and technology with the College of Computer Science and
Technology, Zhejiang University.
Her current research interests include machine learning, knowledge graph, and imbalanced learning.

Peng Peng (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s degree in control engineering and automation from the Department of Automation,
Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, in
2017, and the Ph.D. degree in control engineering and automation from the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in
2022.
His research interests include process monitoring and prognostic and health management.

Hongwei Wang (Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in information technology
and instrumentation from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2004, the M.S. degree in
control science and engineering from Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D.
degree in design knowledge retrieval from the
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., in
2010.
From 2011 to 2018, he was a Lecturer and
then, a Senior Lecturer in engineering design
with the University of Portsmouth. He is currently a Tenured Professor with Zhejiang University and the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign Joint Institute, Haining, China. His research in the areas
of his research interests has been published in over 120 peer-reviewed
papers in well-established journals and international conferences. His
research interests include knowledge engineering, industrial knowledge
graph, intelligent and collaborative systems, and data-driven fault diagnosis.