IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

2045

GETRF: A General Framework for Encrypted
Traffic Identification With Robust Representation
Based on Datagram Structure
Xiaojuan Wang , Zikui Lu , Xinlei Wang , Mingshu He , Member, IEEE, and Xiaojun Wang

Abstract—Identifying encrypted traffic is essential for network
management, but it becomes increasingly challenging as more
and more users adopt encryption protocols and traffic defense
mechanisms for data privacy. Most existing methods heavily rely
on deep features and labeled samples, overlooking the opportunity to capture pattern information of datagram structure.
As a consequence, these methods are unable to extract rulebased knowledge from unlabeled data, limiting their ability to
identify unseen or feature-perturbed traffic. In this paper, we
propose a new framework for encrypted traffic identification
named Generic Encrypted Traffic Representation Framework
(GETRF), which includes three pre-training tasks designed based
on the datagram structure. By leveraging the advantages of
these tasks, GETRF can utilize unlabeled traffic to form generic
and robust representations, capturing the characteristics of
datagrams at the byte, packet, and flow levels. After fine-tuning,
these representations can be applied to identification tasks across
multiple scenarios. The results demonstrate that GETRF achieves
state-of-the-art performance in multi-scenario and fine-grained
identifications, and effectively handles feature-perturbed traffic.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic identification, pre-training,
generic traffic representation, cyberspace management, datagram
structure, privacy-enhancing technology.

I. I NTRODUCTION
DENTIFYING and categorizing traffic behaviors into
their respective applications and services is crucial for
cyberspace management [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. They allow
Internet service providers to improve the quality of service
as well as detect potential security threats [6]. However, with
the growth of privacy-enhancing technologies [7], [8], traditional methods and machine learning models are encountering
two significant challenges. Firstly, the availability of plaintext is decreasing, making methods based on port numbers
and protocol information unreliable. Secondly, the increasing

I

Manuscript received 16 November 2023; revised 27 March 2024; accepted
7 May 2024. Date of publication 14 May 2024; date of current version
6 December 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62227805 and Grant 62071056. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for
publication was Y. Sagduyu. (Corresponding authors: Zikui Lu; Mingshu He.)
Xiaojuan Wang, Zikui Lu, Xinlei Wang, and Mingshu He are with
the School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: Luzikui@bupt.edu.cn;
hemingshu@bupt.edu.cn).
Xiaojun Wang is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City
University, Dublin 9, Ireland.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3400825

randomness of payload data and statistic values makes fingerprinting and feature-counting methods inadequate for the
current environment.
Deep learning, through hierarchical mapping and
weighted computations, enables automatic feature extraction,
thereby addressing the challenges posed by random
algorithms [9], [10]. As such, researchers employ end-to-end
models to classify encrypted traffic. However, these end-toend methods heavily depend on the feature distribution of
samples and label quality, which can limit the generalization
ability of the models. To mitigate the impact of label
quality on models, researchers begin to adopt pre-training
approaches for identification. Works [11], [12] apply pretraining techniques to encrypted traffic classification and
achieve significant results in application classification and
attack detection tasks. Although reducing the amount of
labeled data during the training, these works overlook the
effect of latent information of datagram structure on traffic
representation, resulting in poor performance in multi-scenario
and fine-grained classification.
To better tackle the challenge of encrypted traffic identification, some practical issues that need to be discussed:
1) The method for encrypted traffic identification should
minimize the use of specific field values and hand-craft
features.
Encryption algorithms gradually cover plaintext, rendering the traffic behavior analysis based on specific values
ineffective. Manual feature extraction, which often relies on
expert knowledge, faces challenges due to the rapid growth of
applications and services on the network, making the manual
update of effective features increasingly complex.
2) The method for encrypted traffic identification should
be robust and not rely on label quality or specific feature
distributions.
Data labeling is a time-consuming task, and such a data collection process not only results in long bootstrap times but also
poses additional challenges for identification. Furthermore,
traffic defense mechanisms aim to disrupt the feature distribution, negatively impacting models that rely on the specific
feature distribution of sample data for traffic classification.
3) The method for encrypted traffic identification should be
generalized and able to be quickly applied to multi-scenario
tasks as well as fine-grained classification.
Encrypted traffic identification includes application classification, attack detection, anonymous detection, encapsulation

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2332-7731 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

detection, malware detection, and other tasks. An ideal method
should perform well across all of these tasks. Furthermore,
in real network scenarios, there exists a significant amount of
background traffic. A method with strong generalization capabilities should be able to mitigate the impact of background
traffic and complete fine-grained identification of target flows.
To sum up, considering the application scenarios and
challenges faced in encrypted traffic identification, an ideal
method needs to satisfy both generality and robustness. For
generality, employing pre-training models to generate traffic
representations is a natural idea. These models can leverage
large-scale unlabeled data and minimize the impact of specific
feature distributions on generic representations by separating representation objectives from specific task objectives.
Compared to generality, robustness is a more challenging
issue. We consider that addressing this issue should focus
on the datagram structure itself. Due to the limitations of
current random algorithms and the cold-start policy followed
by the traffic protection measures, privacy-enhanced technologies cannot produce perfectly random encrypted traffic.
Therefore, similar patterns exist in datagrams of the same
type. These similarities, observable in the traffic structure and
padding characters, are influenced by the protocol, content, and
encryption algorithm. By thoroughly leveraging this metadata,
we can uncover latent patterns behind the traffic.
Based on the above considerations, in this paper, we propose
a new framework with a pre-training model, named Generic
Encrypted Traffic Representation Framework (GETRF), for
building generic and robust traffic representations. The framework includes three pre-training tasks based on datagram
structure: Mask Token Prediction (MTP), Same Packet
Prediction (SPP), and Hidden State Feature Prediction (HSP).
Benefiting from these tasks, GETRF can utilize unlabeled
traffic to form generic and robust representations by capturing
datagram characteristics at the byte, packet, and flow levels.
Additionally, knowledge extraction from different aspects of
datagram structures can also help mitigate the impact of traffic
defense mechanisms. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel pre-training learning framework
for encrypted traffic identification, which leverages
large-scale unlabeled data to achieve high-performance
and multi-scenario traffic classification without model
modification or extensive data training. Moreover, the
framework can effectively mitigate interference of
privacy-enhancing technologies and background traffic.
• We design three pre-training tasks based on datagram
characteristics, capturing byte, packet, and flow-level
traffic information to generate generic and robust representations. Benefiting from the knowledge extraction
from different aspects of datagram structures, representations that are fine-tuned with a small amount of sample
data can be applied to various tasks. Additionally, multiperspective learning enhances the framework’s ability to
resist feature perturbations.
• We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate the
framework using five public datasets and an experimental dataset. The results show that GETRF achieves

state-of-the-art performance across five tasks with an
average F1 score of 99.12%. Additionally, we further validate the ability of GETRF for fine-grained identification
and its capability to resist traffic defense mechanisms, and
our method shows effectiveness under these conditions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II discusses the related work. Section III proposes
the framework architecture and pre-training tasks. Section IV
presents the results and analysis of comparison experiments.
Finally, the paper is concluded in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Encrypted Traffic Identification
The research on traffic identification has been widely
applied across a variety of applications. For discussion purposes, we categorize the methods into three classes [6], with
the related works summarized in Table I.
1) Statistic Method: The earliest methods used for traffic
classification were port-based methods and DPI [13]. However,
these methods heavily relied on unencrypted information, and
random changes in it could lead to misleading results. In
contrast, our method learns the traffic representations from
multiple perspectives, which helps to enhance its robustness.
2) Machine Learning Method: To reduce the impact of
random content on classification, researchers utilize sidechannel information and machine learning to classify traffic.
Panchenko et al. [14] identified unknown traffic using features
like packet size, packet direction, and the volume of bytes.
AppScanner [15] trained classifiers using statistical features
such as packet sizes, while BIND [16] exploited temporal
features to classify traffic. However, these methods rely on
expert knowledge and require appropriate feature design. The
evolving nature of network traffic makes solutions, based on
manually- and expert-originated features, unable to keep pace.
3) Deep Learning Method: Deep learning methods include
end-to-end approaches, multimodal-based approaches, and
representation-based approaches.
Wang et al. [17] first introduced the end-to-end method
for flow classification, transforming packet data into grayscale
images for CNN. Building on this, Sirinam et al. [18]
employed CNN for deep fingerprinting, while Bhat et al. [19]
designed Var-CNN for flow classification. However, these
schemes did not fully consider the characteristics of datagram
structure in their design, leading to unsatisfactory model
performance. Lotfollahi et al. [20] developed DeepPacket to
characterize raw payloads. Luo et al. [21] utilized transformer models to capture semantic relationships between
characters for traffic classification. Shen et al. introduced
GraphDApp [22], transforming application traffic into graphs
for GNN-based identification. Huoh et al. [23] analyzed the
relationships between traffic bytes, metadata, and packet interactions for application classification. Although these methods
do not require feature engineering, they require substantial
amounts of new, task-specific labeled data for retraining when
addressing new tasks. In contrast, our model can be easily
adapted to new scenarios with minimal fine-tuning on a small
dataset.

WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

2047

TABLE I
N OTABLE R ELATED W ORKS IN E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC I DENTIFICATION TASKS

To overcome the limitation of single-model approaches,
which fail to generalize high-dimensional features,
researchers adopt multimodal approaches to classify traffic.
MIMETIC [24], by assembling models that observe different
features, addresses the problem of multi-view capitalization
of traffic data. However, this method still requires a large
number of labeled samples for training, resulting in a
long bootstrap time. Considering bursts and communication
protocols separately, Mimetic-All [25] leveraged context
inputs as an additional modality for application classification,
while APP-Net [26] combined BiLSTM and CNN models for
identification. Both methods demonstrate high performance in
application classification. Nevertheless, these approaches fail
to take the influence of background traffic into account and
cannot be easily applied to other classification scenarios.
Representation-based approaches leverage pre-training to
utilize unlabeled data, which has been proven effective in
NLP [27]. Similar to the “paragraph-sentence-word” structure
in natural language, there is a “flow-packet-byte” hierarchy in
network traffic. Therefore, researchers employ representationbased methods for traffic identification. He et al. [11] applied
ALBERT to encrypted traffic classification and achieved
93.27% accuracy in ISCX-VPN [28]. However, the method did
not design reasonable pre-training tasks, limiting the model’s
performance. Observing the process of Web page rendering,
Lin et al. [12] designed a new structure named BURST for
the pre-training task and generated traffic representation for
identification. Nonetheless, this method did not consider the
basic structure of the traffic, leading to poor performance
in fine-grained identification. Our method, however, improves
performance by learning the context, structure, and hidden
state features of the flow, and maintains good performance
when faced with feature-perturbed traffic.
B. Traffic Defense Mechanism
The purpose of traffic identification is to classify traffic
and manage cyberspace effectively. However, some studies

have demonstrated that traffic patterns can be distorted through
methods such as dummy packet padding or traffic regularization [29], [30]. These methods, which prevent accurate
traffic identification, are referred to as traffic defense mechanisms [31].
During the transmission of traffic, datagrams pass through
multiple relay nodes. By deploying defense models at these
relay nodes, traffic can be manipulated, resulting in distorted
traffic observations at these nodes.
The primary methods of traffic defense mechanisms include
obfuscation, confusion, and regularization [29]. Among these,
both obfuscation and confusion methods involve dummy
packet padding. This approach can significantly disrupt the
feature distribution of traffic, making it difficult to distinguish between dummy packets and real packets. Moreover, it
exploits the advantages of low overhead, making it feasible
for implementation in the real world. For instance, WTF-PAD
has been deployed in Tor circuits [30]. Regularization methods
restrict how nodes send and receive packets to strictly limit
the feature space, for example, by enforcing a fixed packet
rate [31].
Given the potential for distortion in the traffic, we further
evaluate the performance of GETRF on datasets processed
by the traffic defense mechanism. It is worth noting that
regularization methods are challenging to implement in the
real world. Hence, we opt to manipulate the traffic by adding
dummy packets for evaluation purposes.
III. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this section, we present the design details of GETRF.
We start with an overview of GETRF before exploring its
individual components.
As mentioned above, to achieve a generic and robust
traffic representation, two key considerations are necessary:
1) Designing pre-training tasks that separate representation
goals from identification objectives, thereby preventing the
overfitting of representations to specific feature distributions.

2048

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 1. Overview of the GETRF framework. The framework consists of three stages: preprocess, pre-training, and fine-tuning. In the preprocess stage, the
raw traffic is processed to form tokens and construct the model’s input sequence. In the pre-training stage, three pre-training tasks are utilized to contribute
to generating the traffic representations. In the fine-tuning stage, these representations are adjusted based on the task-specific data for fine-grained traffic
identification.

Fig. 2. The training process utilized during the pre-training and fine-tuning
phases of GETRF. During the pre-training phase, the input sequences are
processed by the embedding layer and the transformer encoder layer, resulting
in the traffic representations. These representations are then fed into the three
linear layers to acquire knowledge at different levels respectively. During
the fine-tuning stage, the three networks associated with pre-training tasks
are removed. Instead, an additional linear layer is added to perform specific
identification tasks.

2) Minimizing the impact of feature perturbations on pretraining objectives. In other words, the representations should
be resilient to changes in encrypted traffic without significant
adjustments to their initial learning objective.
The design of pre-training tasks in GETRF is based on
two key observations: Firstly, the raw bytes, metadata, and
packet relationships contain more information that can be

captured by the model [23], and specific-function metadata
often clusters within traffic segments, forming distinct patterns [32]. Secondly, leveraging data from multiple dimensions
can enhance model robustness [24]. Therefore, with a focus
on traffic metadata, we design pre-training tasks based on
datagram structure, namely MTP, SPP, and HSP. These tasks
are designed to learn traffic representations at the byte, packet,
and flow levels, respectively. The description of these three
methods is provided in Section III-B.
We plot the architecture of GETRF in Fig. 1. At a high
level, GETRF needs to analyze the correlation among three
pre-training methods to generate representations. In particular,
the transformer model with a self-attention mechanism is a
reasonable choice. The self-attention mechanism establishes
unique correlations between representations and patterns.
Additionally, the multi-head mechanism further enables the
framework to analyze comprehensive traffic patterns at three
different levels. Therefore, we design the model as shown in
Fig. 2 to capture traffic representations for subsequent training
phases. Specifically, GETRF consists of an embedding layer, a
transformer encoder layer, and three linear layers (or one linear
layer). The embedding layer includes three embedding functions, which embed token, position and segment information
of the input sequence, respectively. The transformer encoder
layer includes 12 transformer encoders, each of which includes
one multi-head attention model, one feed-forward model, two
dropout functions, and two normalization functions. The multihead attention model consists of four linear functions and one
dropout function, while the feed-forward model consists of two
linear functions. The selection of hyperparameters is provided
in Table IV.
GETRF is composed of three main components. First, preprocessing the raw data to form token sequences suitable for
the pre-training model, as detailed in Section III-A. Second,
based on three pre-training tasks outlined in Section III-B, the

WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

TABLE II
N OTATIONS U SED IN THE PAPER

encoding models are pre-trained, allowing for the acquisition
of traffic representation using unlabeled data. Finally, for
specific downstream tasks, fine-tuning is conducted with a
small set of labeled data, as described in Section III-C. Table II
provides a list of all symbols used in this paper.
A. Preprocess
The preprocess step aims to generate an appropriate input
sequence for the execution of the pre-training tasks.
We first split the raw traffic T r with the same 5-tuple
(source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, and
protocol), and then form the collection of session flow F. Each
session flow fi represents a specific behavior and contains
multiple packets, with packet pim denoting the m-th packet of
the i-th flow and bjmi denoting the j-th byte of the packet pim .
The relationship between flows, packets, and bytes is shown
as the following formulas:
F = {f1 , f2 , . . . , fi , . . . , fN , N ∈ N+ }

fi = {pi1 , pi2 , . . . , pim , . . . , piM , M ∈ N+ }
pim = {b1mi , b2mi , . . . , bImi , I ∈ N+ }

(1)
(2)
(3)

Even though both natural language and network traffic
share a structure comprising ‘words, sentences, paragraphs,
syntax’ (corresponding to bytes, packets, flows, and protocol
specifications), their difference lies in the fact that each
word has precise meanings, while a byte is formed by 8-bit
binary digits and hold no inherent meaning. Consequently,
we consider using bytes as basic tokens to form an input
sequence may lead to ambiguous representations. In this paper,
we adopt the bi-gram method to generate tokens, where each
token is composed of two adjacent bytes, and the symbol ’##’
is added to the front of the sequence pim along with the first

2049

byte to form the token. As shown in the preprocess part of
Fig. 1, the raw hexadecimal sequence pim is transformed into a
token sequence Sim using the bi-gram method. In addition, we
introduce the special tokens [CLS], [MASK], [SEP], [SEG],
[UNK], and [PAD] for pre-training. The maximum length L
of the token sequence Sim is set to 256, with the token [PAD]
used for padding shorter sequences.
In this framework, we first preprocess the sequence Sim in
two separate steps to produce two distinct sequences: the Bytemi and the Packet-Level sequence
Flow-Level sequence Kbf
mi
Kp . This dual-step preprocessing is designed to capture
different aspects of the datagram’s structure at both the byteflow and packet levels. Subsequently, these two sequences
are concatenated along with the token [SEG] to create a
unified input sequence U mi . The inclusion of the [SEG]
token facilitates the distinction between the different types of
sequences within the model. By integrating data from both
sequences in this manner, we aim to mitigate the potential
dominance of information from a single pre-training task on
the learning process of others.
On the one hand, we add token [CLS] to the beginning of
the sequence Sim and replace some right tokens with [MASK]
mi . On the other hand,
or other tokens to form sequence Kbf
for creating Kpmi , we first divide the hexadecimal sequence
pim into a header sequence phmi and a payload sequence ppmi ,
then generating token sequences Shmi and Spmi respectively.
In general, the token sequences Shmi and Spmi are same-origin
packet sequence. We then randomly shuffle the corresponding
relationship between the token sequences Shmi and Spmi . Using
Figure 1. as an example, we keep the relationship between
the token sequences Shmi and Spmi of packet0 unchanged, and
we concatenate the token sequence Shmi of packet1 with the
token sequence Spmi of packet2, similarly, the token sequence
Shmi of packet2 is concatenated with the token sequence Spmi
of packet1. Finally, we insert the token [SEP] between the
token sequences Shmi and Spmi to connect them and replace
mi , forming the packet-level sequence K mi .
tokens same to Kbf
p
The preprocess and pre-training stages of Figure 1 provide a
detailed demonstration of this process.

B. Pre-Training Tasks
We propose three pre-training tasks to obtain traffic patterns
from different perspectives. The first task is aimed at predicting
the hidden state features of flows to uncover traffic patterns
at the flow level. The second task focuses on acquiring
knowledge of protocol paradigms and constraints by predicting
the relationship of same-origin packets at the packet level. The
third task captures the contextual relationships of traffic by
predicting masked tokens at the byte level. The process of the
pre-training tasks is shown in the pre-training stage of Fig. 1.
1) Hidden State Feature Prediction: The goal of HSP is
to explore pattern knowledge of datagram structure at the
flow level. However, the concept of “traffic patterns” is inherently abstract, making it challenging to define with precise
numerical values or boundaries. The study [33] highlights that
by examining the relationships between state features–which

2050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

The acquisition of hidden state features can contribute to
extracting features at the flow level. Specifically, we train the
model to infer the relationship between the input sequence
U mi and the hidden state feature hi of the flow. Setting θ
denotes the model parameters, and the loss function of the
task is as below:
N

Lhsp = −

Fig. 3.

Hidden state feature of the flows.

encapsulate side-channel data from various flows–one can discern distinctive traffic fingerprinting. Inspired by this notion,
we aim to acquire pattern knowledge at the flow level by
analyzing the relationship between flows and their respective
state features. Given that the side-channel information of flows
at different times can constitute different state features, we
assume that the average values of these time-varying data may
reflect the overall state feature of the flow. Corresponding to
the “state feature” proposed in the work [33], we consider the
states reflected by the average values as “hidden state feature”.
To obtain hidden state features, we utilize side-channel data
such as packet size and inter-packet time. These are fundamental packet attributes that dynamically vary in response to
alterations in the content being transmitted and changes in
the network conditions. We calculate the average packet size
and the logarithm of the average inter-packet time for each
flow fi to form observation values. Subsequently, these values
are clustered to form hidden state features. The formulas for
computing the hidden state feature are as follows:
 
j
s
pi
j =1

M
Zi =

⎞

⎛M
j
j +1 
M −1 
)
−
t(p
)

t(p
j =1
i
i
⎠
Ti = log2 ⎝
M
Si = cluster (Zi , Ti )

(4)
(5)
(6)

where Zi and Ti represent the average packet size and the
logarithm of the average inter-packet interval time of flow fi
respectively, s(·) represents packet size, t(·) is arriving time
of a packet, M represents the total number of packets and
cluster means the K-means method, Si represents the hidden
state feature of fi .
To validate the assumption of hidden state features, we
cluster 2000 flows from the ISCX-VPN dataset using the
method according to equation (6), and the result is shown in
Fig. 3. The result illustrated that the traffic is divided into 8
categories, which have clear boundaries between them, i.e.,
the results can be regarded as the hidden state features of eight
different flows.

M



log P hi |U mi , θ

(7)

i=1 m=1

2) Same Packet Prediction: The purpose of SPP is to learn
knowledge of datagrams by exploring the structure at the
packet level. Here, we investigate the relationship between
the headers and the payloads. Packets serve as the fundamental units of network transmission, which include sufficient
metadata information. Regardless of how privacy-enhanced
technologies randomize or standardize packet attribute values,
packets can still independently route and be verified. Thus,
we consider that this metadata information, which exists
within both the header and payload, reflects the organizational
paradigm of the packet. On one hand, different protocols are
selected and marked in the header based on different transmission content. On the other hand, metadata in the header is
directly related to the payload; for example, the length field
in the header is calculated by considering the length of the
encrypted payload. Conversely, the payload, in turn, affects
the checksum for transmission verification. Thus, a reasonable packet should satisfy the mutual relationship/constraint
between the header and payload.
To visually demonstrate this constraint, we adopt the method
proposed in [17], converting the hexadecimal bytes of headers
and payloads into grayscale images to analyze their relationship. Specifically, for each packet, we convert the bytes of
the header and payload into distinct matrices. Each byte is
mapped to a grayscale value between 0 and 255, mirroring the
pixel intensity range in a grayscale image. This process enables
the transformation from packets to corresponding grayscale
images, as depicted in Fig. 4. For each type of packet, the
grayscale image of the header is displayed at the top, and
the payload is displayed at the bottom. Upon comparing these
images, we notice subtle differences in the grayscale patterns
of payloads corresponding to the same header type, evident in
Fig. 4(11) and (15), as well as Fig. 4(12) and (16). In contrast,
even within the same packet type, significant variations are
observed in the payload grayscale images of different header
types, as demonstrated in Fig. 4(2) and (3), and Fig. 4(7)
and (8).
Therefore, we consider that there is a certain pattern
between the header and payload that determines the validity
of the packet. Given a packet header, the payload is allowed to
change within a certain range rather than randomly. This pretraining task aims to discover this pattern, learn the constraint
rules between packet header and payload. Specifically, when
constructing Kpmi , we randomly shuffle the header and payload from different packets, where 50% of the relationships are
correct, 30% of the payloads are replaced with payloads from
other packets of the same flow, and the remaining 20% of the
payloads are replaced with payloads from packets of different

WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

EMAIL
(3)

(2)

(1)

2051

TABLE III
T HE D ETAILS OF DATASETS U SED IN M ULTI -TASK
C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTS

(4)

CHAT
(6)

(5)

(7)

(8)

AUDIO
(11)

(10)

(9)

(12)

The final pre-training objective is defined as the sum of the
aforementioned three losses:

FILE
(13)

(14)

(15)

LALL = Lhsp + Lspp + Lmtp

(16)

Fig. 4. Grayscale images of packet headers and payloads for different types
of packets.

flows. We train the model to predict whether the relationship
between the header and payload is of the same origin, where
the relationship is denoted as yim ∈ [0, 1], with 0 indicating
that the payload and header come from the same packet, and
1 indicating the opposite. The loss function for this task is as
below:
N

M

Lspp = −
i=1 m=1

log P (yim |Kpmi , θ)

(8)

3) Masked Token Prediction: MTP aims to explore the
knowledge of datagram structure at the byte level. As mentioned previously, flow can be regarded as a language between
different applications in the network, and similar to natural
language, flow exhibits structure and specification. Therefore,
we adopt the Masked Language Model to construct the pretraining task for discovering contextual relationships of traffic.
Specifically, in the pre-training process, each token in the input
sequence is randomly masked with a 20% probability. For each
selected token, we replace it with the special token [MASK]
with a probability of 80%, or choose another token (excluding
the special tokens) to replace it with a probability of 10%,
or leave it unchanged with a probability of 10%. The pretraining model is trained to predict the masked tokens based
on context. In the implementation, we first design a dictionary
containing all tokens involved in the pre-training process and
assign them numerical indices. Then, when replacing a token,
we simultaneously create a tuple containing the position and
the index of the replaced token. During pre-training, this tuple
aids the model in predicting the token index. The loss function
for this task is as follows:
N

M

Lmtp = −
i=1 m=1

mi
log P (maskjmi = tokenjmi |Kbf
, θ) (9)

(10)

C. Finetune
After pre-training, the model can generate generic and
robust representations for general encrypted traffic. However,
in specific traffic identification tasks, the representations cannot fully capture the particular task details, and fine-tuning
is necessary for more accurate results. The fine-tuning stage
involves a different model structure compared to the pretraining stage. In the pre-training stage, the model adds three
additional networks after the transformer encoder layer to
complete the pre-training tasks and adjust the parameters of
the transformer to generate representations. However, these
three networks are removed in the fine-tuning stage, and a
linear layer is added to execute specific identification. The
first token [CLS] of the representation can be directly used for
classification, as shown in the fine-tuning stage of Fig. 1.
IV. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
In this section, we primarily focus on evaluating the
performance of the proposed framework across different tasks
as well as assessing its robustness in unbalanced scenarios
and traffic defense mechanism scenarios. To achieve this, we
design experiments, including multi-task comparative experiments, imbalanced encrypted traffic identification experiments,
and traffic defense mechanism resistance experiments. To illustrate the necessity of the three pre-training tasks, we conduct
ablation experiments. Finally, we present the evaluation of
complexity.
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset and Tasks: We conduct experiments on different
datasets, including ISCX-VPN, ISCX-Tor [34], ToN-IoT [35],
USTC-TFC [36], and CSTNENT-TLS1.3 [12], with each
dataset is associated with a specific task, and the detailed
information of the datasets is shown in Table III.
ISCX-VPN: The dataset includes popular VPN protocols
such as OpenVPN and OpenConnect. Considering encapsulation and service types of the traffic [17], we categorize this
dataset into 12 labels: Email, Chat, Streaming, Transfer, VoIP,

2052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

P2P, VPN-Email, VPN-Chat, VPN-Streaming, VPN-Transfer,
VPN-VoIP, and VPN-P2P. We use this dataset to assess the
approach’s performance in encapsulation detection tasks.
ISCX-Tor: The dataset includes a large volume of traffic
captured from the Tor network, including Web browsers, Email
clients, and P2P file-sharing applications. Following the setting
in [12], we categorize this dataset into 14 labels: Browsing,
Chat, Email, Transfer, P2P, Streaming, VoIP, Tor-Browsing,
Tor-Chat, Tor-Email, Tor-Transfer, Tor-P2P, Tor-Streaming,
and Tor-VoIP. We utilize this dataset to validate the method’s
ability to perform anonymity detection tasks.
USTC-TFC: The dataset includes encrypted traffic from
malware such as Tinba, Miuref, and Cridex, as well as benign
traffic from applications like Facetime and Gmail. We use this
dataset to test the method’s effectiveness in malware detection
tasks.
ToN-IoT: The dataset was collected from a realistic and
large-scale network designed at the Cyber Range and IoT Labs
of SEIT and UNSW [37]. Here, we utilize the network dataset
for experiments, which includes nine types of attacks: backdoor, DDoS, DoS, Injection, MITM, Password, runsomware,
XSS, and scanning.
CSTNET-TLS1.3: The dataset consists of traffic from
120 applications, encrypted with TLS 1.3, collected by the
University of Science and Technology of China.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate and compare the
performance of the methods using four typical metrics, including accuracy (ACC), precision (PRE), recall (REC), and
F1 score, and the calculation methods of these metrics are as
follows:
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
TP
PRE =
TP + FP
TP
REC =
TP + FN
PRE ∗ REC
F1 = 2 ∗
PRE + REC

ACC =

(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

3) Implementation: We remove the IP and port information
because they are irrelevant to the specific traffic of the
transmitted content and do not contribute to generating the
representation. All experiments were conducted on the Ubuntu
system using PyTorch 1.8.0 and NVIDIA RTX 2080ti. In the
pre-training phase, we set the embedding size = 512, hidden
size = 512, learning rate = 5 × 10−4 , batch size = 50, and
train the model for 8 × 105 steps. The hyperparameter search
ranges and the selected values are shown in Table IV. We
utilize 25GB of public dataset data (20GB from ToN-IoT,
5GB from ISCX-VPN) to generate a total of 50GB of raw
corpus for pre-training. For each pcap file processed after the
5-tuple method, we use all packets in the pcap file to construct
Kpmi according to the method mentioned in Section III-B2.
mi involve different processes for the same
Since Kpmi and Kbf
metadata, we also utilize all hexadecimal bytes of the same
packet to make the token sequence (retaining only the 256
tokens). In the fine-tuning phase, for each flow, we only extract
one packet to generate the token sequence for identification.

TABLE IV
H YPERPARAMETERS S ELECTION FOR GETRF

We set the proportions of the training, validation, and testing
sets to 1:1:2, and evaluate the framework using the ten-fold
cross-validation method.
B. Multi-Task Comparative Experiment
In these experiments, we separately evaluate the
performance of the proposed framework on five different tasks:
malware detection, application classification, anonymous
detection, attack detection, and encapsulation detection.
Moreover, we compare GETRF with various methods,
including DF [18], DeepPacket [20], LeNet [38], VarCNN [19], AppScanner [15], App-Net [26], BIND [16],
CUMUL [14], FlowPrint [40], GraphDApp [22], FS-Net [39],
GCN_Transformer [21], and ET-BERT [12]. For details on
the implementation of the baseline models, please refer to
Appendix C.
Table V presents the performance of different methods in
encapsulation detection, anonymous detection, and application
classification. GETRF performs best across all four metrics
in these three tasks. Compared to the current state-of-the-art
method, GETRF achieves an average improvement of 0.512%
in accuracy, 0.448% in precision, 0.488% in recall, and
0.464% in F1 score across the three tasks. In the application
classification task, which has the most categories, GETRF
outperforms ET-BERT by 0.78% in accuracy and 0.76% in
F1 score. One possible reason for this improvement is that the
CSTNETE-TLS.13 dataset contains 120 different categories,
with many similar traffic patterns. GETRF mitigates the impact
of single patterns on the results by learning datagram structure
knowledge across multiple levels and achieves fine-grained
application identification.
Table VI presents the performance of different methods in
malware detection and attack detection. Our model achieves
the best performance on F1 score at 99.85% and 98.80%
respectively. We notice that some traffic in USTC-TFC
includes unencrypted data at the Application Layer. This
aspect simplifies the task for other models, as they can readily
utilize this plaintext for easier classification.
Overall, GETRF achieves the best performance in all five
tasks. Additionally, we find that representation-based methods
outperform other methods, indicating that pre-training can help
models learn faster and is suitable for identifying large-scale
flow data with a small number of sample data.

WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

2053

TABLE V
C OMPARISON R ESULT ON E NCAPSULATION D ETECTION , A NONYMOUS D ETECTION , AND A PPLICATION C LASSIFICATION TASKS

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON R ESULT ON M ALWARE D ETECTION AND ATTACK D ETECTION TASKS

C. Imbalanced Encrypted Traffic Identification Experiment
Generally, datasets for specific tasks typically include
only relevant protocols and applications, without other
traffic interference. However, in real-world environments,
a large amount of background traffic exists, and its
volume can be 100 times or more than that of the
task-relevant traffic [41]. Therefore, we design experiments
to verify the fine-grained identification performance of
GETRF.
In these experiments, we select traffic from Facebook,
Netflix, ICQ, and Vimeo in the ISCX-VPN dataset as background traffic, and traffic from Virut, NSIS, Geodo, Cridex,
Miuref, Password, Backdoor, XSS, and DDoS in USTC-TFC
and ToN-IoT as the target malicious flows. We also set δ as
the threshold to control the volume of target malicious flows.
For example, δ = 0.005 means that the maximum number
for each type of target malicious flow is 0.005 times that of
any background traffic. The specific details of the dataset are
shown in Table VII.

TABLE VII
T HE D ETAILS OF DATASETS U SED IN I MBALANCED E NCRYPTED
T RAFFIC I DENTIFICATION E XPERIMENTS

As shown in Fig. 5, most methods show improved
performance as δ increases, especially in terms of precision
and recall. This improvement indicates that the methods

2054

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Comparison of the results of different methods under various δ scenarios.

learn more about the target flow from the labeled data
during training, thus enhancing their performance. However, a
model with good generalization capabilities needs to maintain
high performance even under conditions of limited samples.
Fig. 5 (c) and (d) demonstrate that pre-training designs like
GETRF and ET-BERT outperform other models. Particularly
under the extreme condition of δ = 0.005, our method
surpasses ET-BERT, with precision and recall improvements of
4.96% and 4.85%, reaching 97.62% and 98.59% respectively.
As δ increases, the gap narrows, indicating that imbalanced
data affects model performance and highlighting our method’s
effectiveness in generalizing representations of encrypted traffic.
Fig. 6 presents the precision and recall confusion matrices
for GETRF and ET-BERT with δ=0.005. In this scenario,
the proportion of malicious flows is very small compared
to the background traffic, limiting the prior knowledge that
the methods can acquire. The results show that GETRF
outperforms ET-BERT in both precision and recall. GETRF
improves the recall score of XSS and Geodo from 75% to
93% and from 83% to 100%, respectively, and the precision
score of Miuref from 71% to 89%. These findings indicate that
our framework effectively learns the characteristics of traffic
for identification, mitigating the impact of background traffic
to achieve fine-grained classification with a small number of
target samples.

D. Traffic Defense Mechanism Resistance Experiment
In this experiment, we adopt Front [29] to disturb the traffic
pattern. To directly demonstrate the impact of Front on traffic
patterns, we apply WeFDE [42] to measure the amount of
information leakage of traffic features before and after the
application of Front.
Firstly, we sample data from ToN-IoT and label it as D1 ,
then we make the dataset as described in IV-C under the
setting with δ equal to 0.005, and label it as D2 . Fig. 7
shows the information leakage of the features in both datasets
before and after being processed by Front. Clearly, Front
successfully reduces the information leakage of the features,
with an average reduction of 0.3956 bit and 0.5842 bit for 60
features in D1 and D2 respectively. On D1 and D2 , the total
amount of information provided by 60 features after Front
interference accounts for 27.57% and 25.58% of the original,
respectively. For details about the calculation of information
leakage and the features selected for these experiments, please
refer to Appendix A.
Fig. 8 presents the performance of GETRF in D1 and D2 .
It can be observed that the accuracy, precision, recall, and
F1 score of the proposed framework have decreased by 4.80%,
4.89%, 4.40%, and 4.65% on D1 , and by 0.83%, 2.13%,
4.8%, and 3.48% on D2 , respectively. In comparison, the total
amount of effective information decreased by 72.43% in D1
and by 74.42% in D2 . Additionally, GETRF still performs

WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

Fig. 6.

2055

Confusion matrices of traffic identification for GETRF and ET-BERT (δ = 0.005).

for identification, rather than using all metadata in the flow,
which may mitigate some impacts of Front. Secondly, although
Front can potentially affect feature distribution and lead to the
misclassification of the model, GETRF includes pre-trained
knowledge at both the flow and packet levels. This allows it
to analyze the correlation among protocols, payload, and burst
features of dummy packets, thereby reducing the impact.
Fig. 7. Information leakage for individual feature on D1(left) and D2(right).

E. Ablation Study
better than most methods in accuracy according to IV-B
and IV-C under these conditions.
We consider that the performance of GETRF may be
attributed to two factors. For a given traffic, GETRF only
utilizes the first few bytes to generate a 256-token sequence

We present ablation results to validate each component’s
contribution to our method’s performance on the ToN-IoT
dataset. We first evaluate the method’s performance when the
specific pre-training task is omitted. As shown in Table IX,
compared to the complete framework, the F1 scores decrease
by 7.56%, 14.45%, and 26.52%, respectively. This indicates

2056

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Performance of GETRF under traffic defense mechanism.
TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON R ESULT OF C OMPLEXITY

that the three pre-training tasks are complementary and
provide different levels of information for accurate traffic
representation. Notably, the framework without MTP performs
the worst, indicating that learning the traffic patterns at
the byte-level is crucial for traffic representation. This also
supports the view presented in [43].
Additionally, to further analyze the impact of different
pre-training tasks on the final traffic representations, in
Appendix B, we generate the traffic representations using the
MTP, SPP, and HSP tasks respectively, and then visualize the
results.
We also observe that the model without pre-training has
a significant drop in precision, recall, and F1 score by
37.72%, 37.76%, and 37.74%, respectively. This demonstrates
that although transformer models have some advantages in
capturing flow features, pre-training can further improve the
model’s accuracy.
F. Evaluation of Complexity
In this section, we analyze the complexity of GETRF,
including trainable parameters and overall time costs. We

choose ET-BERT, GCN_Transformer, APP-Net, DF, and VarCNN as comparative objects because their performance
in Section IV-B closely matches GETRF’s. Additionally,
these methods involve architectures such as CNN, LSTM,
Transformer, and GCNs, which can provide a more comprehensive analysis.
As shown in Table VIII, we present the parameters, training
time, inference time, and performance of the methods. The
preparation stage refers to knowledge extraction before the
model is applied to specific tasks, while the deployment stage
means training and inference based on labeled data. Note that
the training time cost for GETRF is set to 1, serving as the
time cost baseline for other methods.
From Table VIII, it can be observed that in the deployment
stage, the parameters and time costs for Var-CNN, DF, and
APP-Net are less than those of other methods. However, these
three methods only exhibit high performance on a specific task,
which may be attributed to an insufficient number of training
samples and feature extractors. GCN_Transformer, ET-BERT,
and GETRF all contain multiple transformer encoders, resulting in a larger number of parameters and more comprehensive
feature extraction capabilities. Compared to ET-BERT, GETRF

WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

2057

TABLE IX
A BLATION S TUDY OF GETRF

TABLE X
F EATURE D ESCRIPTION

has fewer parameters and consumes less time. This is primarily
because the embedding sizes and the number of hidden units
of ET-BERT are both 768, leading to a larger space occupation
for each traffic mapping vector and increased computational
operations. However, in terms of performance, GETRF outperforms ET-BERT, further demonstrating the effectiveness of
the three proposed pre-training tasks.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed and implemented GETRF, a
novel framework for classifying encrypted network traffic.
This approach learns implicit patterns of the datagram structure at three distinct levels from large-scale unlabeled traffic
data, thereby generating generic and robust traffic representations. GETRF demonstrated superiority in multi-class
identification of encrypted network traffic. Additionally, in two
independent studies, we evaluated the performance of GETRF
in handling imbalanced data and traffic with disturbed features.
In terms of overall accuracy and F1 score metrics, the results
show that GETRF outperforms other reference methods. In
future work, we plan to collect a larger dataset encompassing a
wider range of protocols, features, and service types to further
validate our model. We aim to explore useful and meaningful
insights into the datagram structure and investigate metrics for
a comprehensive assessment of our approach in fine-grained
identification scenarios.

The authors are very grateful to Professor Mei Song for
her guidance and help with this article. They also thank
Professor Yinglei Teng for her invaluable guidance and
insights throughout the development of this paper. Finally,
they thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments, corrections, and inspiration to improve this paper.
A PPENDIX A
I NFORMATION L EAKAGE M EASUREMENT
In this section, we discuss the theoretical framework for
calculating information leakage from traffic features, and the
selection of features for our experiments.
The information leakage of a feature can be calculated using
mutual information, and the specific calculation method is as
follows.

p(x )H (C |x )dx

H (C |v ) =
φ

φ ci ∈C

H (C ) = −
ci ∈C

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I (C ; v ) = H (C ) − H (C |v )

=−

(15)

p(x )pr (ci |x )log2 pr (ci |x )dx (16)

pr (ci )log2 pr (ci )

(17)

where, I (·)represents mutual information, H (·) represents
entropy, C represents the category that traffic f belonging to,
pr (ci ) represents the probability of ci belonging to C, φ is
the domain of feature v, x refers to specific value of v, and
p(·) represents the probability density function.
As for features selection, we considered side-channel
information related to the traffic, including packet count
features, time statistics, packet ordering features, and burst
features. With specific descriptions as shown in Table X
A PPENDIX B
V ISUALIZATION OF T RAFFIC R EPRESENTATIONS
Here, we separately pre-train models based on the MTP,
SPP, and HSP tasks. During the evaluation phase, we remove
the last softmax layer of the framework and obtain the final
representation vectors. We utilize the t-distributed stochastic
neighbor embedding approach to reduce the dimensionality of
these vectors and plot them as two-dimensional images.
In Fig. 9 (b), (c), and (d) represent the traffic representations
generated based on the MTP, SPP, and HSP tasks respectively.

2058

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Visualization of traffic representations with different pre-training tasks on the ToN-IoT dataset.

It can be observed that their performance is less than satisfactory. Among them, (b) performs the best. However, (b) shows
disappointing results in classifying password, scanning, and
injection traffic. One possible reason is that these flows exhibit
behaviors such as multiple login attempts and a large number
of connection attempts, showing consistency at the byte
level, making them challenging to distinguish. So, additional
information is needed to assist in the task.
The traffic representations in (d) are distributed into several
different clusters, which may related to the previously mentioned hidden state features. Specifically, the model learns flow
behavior from side-channel data. However, different types of
flows may exhibit similar burst patterns during transmission,
which can lead to similarities in the observed side-channel
data. Consequently, the model groups different classes into one
cluster.
In summary, the traffic representations generated based on
individual pre-training tasks are not satisfactory, and only
the representations produced by the complete framework can
achieve optimal classification performance, as depicted in
Fig. 9 (a).
A PPENDIX C
I MPLEMENTATION OF THE BASELINE M ODELS
In this section, we discuss the implementation details of the
baseline models and the data preparation.
appscanner: This method uses a random forest as the
classifier with the threshold set to 0.9, and each decision tree

considers a maximum of 6 features during splitting. We utilize
statistical features to train the model, including 26 features
that score over 2% according to the work [15].
deeppacket: We extract the first 1500 bytes of the packet
and replace the IP address with 0, then divide all bytes by 255.
We adopt a CNN as the classifier, which is available in [44].
CUMUL: This method uses an SVM as the classifier with
an RBF kernel. For input features, we extract the number of
incoming and outgoing packets, the total size of incoming
packets, and the total size of outgoing packets from pcap
files. Then we use 3 as the interval point to obtain equidistant
values for 10 packets separately, resulting in 44 feature
representations for training.
BIND: This approach uses an SVM as the classifier with an
RBF kernel. For input data, we extract packet size, uni-burst
size, uni-burst time, uni-burst count, bi-burst size, and bi-burst
time for training.
Lenet: We take the first 784 bytes of the first packet from
pcap files and convert them into a 28x28 grayscale image to
input into the Lenet model for training.
DF: We extract packet direction sequences from each pcap
file and store them as pickle files according to the format
requirements in [18], then we use the publicly available
model [45] for training.
Var-CNN: We extract packet timestamp sequences and
packet directions from pcap files and store them according to
the requirements in work [46]. Then we train with the available
model [47].

WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION

FS-Net: We extract packet length sequences from pcap files
and train with the available model [39].
APP-Net: We extract sequences of packet lengths and payload bytes from pcap files. Since no source code is available,
we implement the model according to the description in the
paper [26]. The model consists of two embedding layers, two
BiLSTM layers, and two 1D-CNN layers. We set the hidden
size of the embedding to 10000, convolutional kernels to 256,
the filter size to 7, and the hidden size of BiLSTM to 128.
GraphDapp: We extract the first 10 packets from each pcap
file to build a TIG representation and corresponding adjacency
matrix. For the model, we construct 3 MLP layers, each
containing linear, batch norm, and dropout functions, with
64 hidden units in the linear function and a 25% dropout in
the dropout function.
Flowprint: We extract features from pcap files excluding
TLS certificates as mentioned in the work [40], and train using
the publicly available model [48].
GCN_Transformer: We extract the first 500 bytes from
pcap files and construct an adjacency matrix for the text
semantic graph based on word co-occurrence frequency and
document-word frequency. Point mutual information is used to
represent the association between words. The model includes
8 transformer encoders with hidden units set to 512.
ET-BERT: We extract individual packets from flow and
adopt the bi-gram method to generate tokens. Then, we build
a dictionary to map the tokens into sequences and train using
the publicly available model [12].
R EFERENCES
[1] M. He, X. Wang, P. Wei, L. Yang, Y. Teng, and R. Lyu, “Reinforcement
learning meets network intrusion detection: A transferable and adaptable framework for anomaly behavior identification,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2477–2492, Apr. 2024,
doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3352586.
[2] M. He, Y. Huang, X. Wang, P. Wei, and X. Wang, “A lightweight
and efficient IoT intrusion detection method based on feature grouping,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 2935–2949, Jan. 2024,
doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3294259.
[3] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noiseresistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019.
[4] M. D. Moizuddin and M. V. Jose, “A bio-inspired hybrid deep learning
model for network intrusion detection,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 238,
Feb. 2022. Art. no. 107894.
[5] H. Yan, L. Fu, Y. Qi, L. Cheng, Q. Ye, and D. J. Yu, “Learning a
robust classifier for short-term traffic state prediction,” Knowl. Based
Syst., vol. 242, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108368.
[6] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81,
May 2019.
[7] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2022.
[8] M. Macas, C. Wu, and W. Fuertes, “A survey on deep learning for
cybersecurity: Progress, challenges, and opportunities,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 212, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 109032.
[9] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches
for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and
open issues,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 189, Feb. 2020, Art. no. 105124.
[10] C. Wang et al., “Addressing the train-test gap on traffic classification
combined subflow model with ensemble learning,” Knowl. Based Syst.,
vol. 204, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 106192.
[11] H. Y. He, Z. G. Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
ITU Kaleidosc., Ind.-Driv. Digit. Transf. (ITU K), 2020, pp. 1–8.

2059

[12] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022,
pp. 633–642.
[13] R. Antonello et al., “Deep packet inspection tools and techniques in
commodity platforms: Challenges and trends,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 35, pp. 1863–1878, Nov. 2012.
[14] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc.
NDSS, 2016, pp. 1–15.
[15] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, pp. 63–78, 2018.
[16] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bidirectional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
Appl., 2016, pp. 177–188, doi: 10.1145/2991079.2991123.
[17] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Informat. (ISI), 2017,
pp. 43–48.
[18] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep Fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (CCS),
Toronto, Canada, 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[19] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A dataefficient Website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” in Proc.
Priv. Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, Jul. 2019.
doi: 10.2478/popets-2019-0070.
[20] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
“Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using
deep learning,” 2017, arXiv:1709.02656.
[21] Y. Luo, M. He, X. Wang, and L. Jin, “Network flow detection of
semantic relationship between flow and byte,” in Proc. IEEE 8th
Int. Conf. Big Data Comput. Service Appl. (BigDataService), 2022,
pp. 179–180.
[22] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3050608.
[23] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted
network traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3227500.
[24] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC:
Mobile encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944,
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2019.106944.
[25] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning
for activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps
during COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput Netw, vol. 219, Dec. 2022,
Art. no. 109452, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2022.109452.
[26] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-Net: A hybrid neural network for
encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commu. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2020, pp. 424–429,
doi: 10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS50562.2020.9162891.
[27] X. Wang, H. Wang, and D. Yang, “Measure and improve robustness
in NLP models: A survey,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc.
Comput. Linguist., Human Lang. Technol., 2022, pp. 4569–4586.
[28] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. Mamun, and A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[29] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against Website
fingerprinting,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Conf. Security Symp., 2020,
pp. 1–18.
[30] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Diaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an
efficient Website fingerprinting defense,” 2016, arXiv:1512.00524.
[31] N. Mathews, J. K. Holland, S. E. Oh, M. S. Rahman, N. Hopper,
and M. Wright, “SoK: A critical evaluation of efficient Website fingerprinting defenses,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2023,
pp. 969–986, doi: 10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179289.
[32] X. Deng et al., “Robust multi-tab Website fingerprinting attacks in the
wild,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2023, pp. 1005–1022,
doi: 10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179464.
[33] Z. Yao, J. Ge, Y. Wu, X. Lin, R. He, and Y. Ma, “Encrypted traffic
classification based on Gaussian mixture models and hidden Markov
models,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 166, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 102711.

2060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

[34] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[35] N. Moustafa, M. Ahmed, and S. Ahmed, “Data analytics-enabled intrusion detection: Evaluations of ToN_IoT Linux datasets,” in Proc. IEEE
19th Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom),
2020, pp. 727–735.
[36] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), 2017, pp. 712–717.
[37] “The TON_IoT datasets,” Datasets, UNSW Sydney. Accessed: Mar. 15,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/toniotdatasets
[38] Y. Zeng, Z. Qi, W. Chen, and Y. Huang, “TEST: An end-to-end
network traffic classification system with spatio-temporal features
extraction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Cloud (SmartCloud), 2019,
pp. 131–136.
[39] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow
sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[40] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-App fingerprinting on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. ISOC Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2020, pp. 1–18.
[41] Z. Wu, W. Li, L. Liu, and M. Yue, “Low-rate DoS attacks,
detection, defense, and challenges: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 43920–43943, 2020.
[42] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in
Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1977–1992.
[43] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN:
Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
pp. 3521–3538, Sep./Oct. 2022.
[44] “Deeppacket.” GitHub.com. Accessed: Apr. 15, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/KimythAnly/deeppacket
[45] P. Sirinam et al. “df.” GitHub.com. Accessed: Apr. 26, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/deep-fingerprinting/df
[46] T. Wang et al. “Wangknn-dataset.” Accessed: May 7, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/kdsec/wangknn-dataset
[47] S. Bhat et al. “Var-CNN.” Accessed: May 8, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/sanjit-bhat/Var-CNN
[48] T. van Ede et al. “FlowPrint.” Accessed: Apr. 15, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/Thijsvanede/FlowPrint

Xiaojuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree
in electronic science and technology from the
University of Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, where she is currently an
Associate Professor with the School of Electronic
Engineering. Her research interests include deep
learning, complex networks, and human gesture
recognition.

Zikui Lu is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
electronic science and technology with the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications. His
research interests include deep learning and traffic
analysis.

Xinlei Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
in electronic science and technology with the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her
research interests include deep learning and computer network security.

Mingshu He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2022, where
he is currently doing research with the School of
Cyberspace Security. His research interests include
network security, anomaly detection, and machine
learning.

Xiaojun Wang received the B.Eng. degree in computer and communications and the M.Eng. degree in
computer applications from the Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT) in 1984
and 1987, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
from Staffordshire University, England. He was
an Assistant Lecturer/Lecturer with BUPT from
1987 to 1989. He joined the School of Electronic
Engineering, Dublin City University in 1992, where
he is currently an Associate Professor. His research
interests include network security, energy-efficient
networking, and hardware acceleration of artificial intelligence and cryptography algorithms. He received a Sino-British Technical Co-operation Training
Award in 1989.