IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

5530422

Global-to-Local Spatial–Spectral Awareness
Transformer Network for Hyperspectral
Anomaly Detection
Xu He , Shilin Zhou, Qiang Ling , Miao Li , Zhaoxu Li , Yuyuan Zhang , and Zaiping Lin

Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) is one of
the momentous technologies in the field of Earth observation
and remote sensing monitoring. Profiting from puissant deep
feature extraction abilities, deep convolutional networks (DCN)
perform excellently in the HAD domain. Nevertheless, limited
by the restriction of unique local receptive fields, DCN-based
detection methods struggle to catch the long-range dependence
from a global perspective. In contrast, vision transformers (ViTs)
perform better in global feature extraction but still disregard the
local dependence properties. To this end, we proposed a novel
method entitled the global-to-local spatial–spectral awareness
transformer (G2LSSAT) network, in which the global transformer block (GTB) and local transformer block (LTB) are
deployed in sequence to capture deep reconstruction characteristics from the global view to the local view in a spatial–spectral
domain. In particular, the GTB is designed to explore the global
spatial–spectral characteristics that are dependent on a crossbarbased global sparse attention module. Furthermore, the global
glanced image is divided into multiple local patches and the LTB
is devised to learn the local spatial–spectral features supported by
a patch-based local self-invisible attention module. In addition,
considering that the abnormal pixels always be unexpectedly
reconstructed with the conventional self-attention module in
ViTs, we introduce a invisible diagonal mask (IDM), which is
embedded into the LTB module, to overshadow each pixel itself
in the receptive field and reconstruct itself based on global and
local dependent spatial–spectral features. Extensive experimental
results on six datasets illustrate the superiority of the proposed
G2LSSAT compared with other state-of-the-art detectors.
Index Terms— Invisible diagonal mask (IDM), global-to-local,
hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD), self-attention, vision
transformer (ViT).

I. I NTRODUCTION
YPERSPECTRAL remote sensing imaging technology
is one of the cutting-edge technologies in the field of
remote sensing for Earth observation. Compared to detection

H

Manuscript received 2 July 2024; revised 6 August 2024;
accepted 4 September 2024. Date of publication 10 September 2024;
date of current version 24 September 2024. This work was supported in part
by the National University of Defense Technology Independent Innovation
Science Foundation under Grant 22ZZCX-042 and in part by the Foundation
for Innovative Research Groups of the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61921001 and Grant 62401591. (Corresponding
author: Qiang Ling.)
The authors are with the College of Electronic Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China
(e-mail: hexu_710@nudt.edu.cn; slzhou@nudt.edu.cn; lq910131@163.com;
lm8866@nudt.edu.cn; lizhaoxu@nudt.edu.cn; zhangyuyuan22@nudt.edu.cn;
linzaiping@nudt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3456799

systems that use optical single channels such as visible light,
infrared, and ultraviolet, hyperspectral imagers can obtain
spectral curves that reflect the “fingerprint” characteristics of
targets to effectively identify target types without geometric
or textural features [1], [2], [3]. Hyperspectral images (HSIs)
have higher spectral resolution and can reach the nanoscale,
allowing for the detection and recognition of targets that could
not have been effectively detected in multispectral remote
sensing images [4], [5], [6]. Among the numerous remote
sensing image interpretation tasks based on hyperspectral
imaging systems, the hyperspectral object detection task has
attracted increasing attention from scholars and researchers
owing to its great application value in civil and military
fields, such as environmental monitoring [7], [8], resource
exploration [9], [10], smart agriculture [11], [12], [13], and
military reconnaissance and surveillance [14], [15], [16].
In practical research, the object detection technology for HSIs
can be divided into two categories: target detection pattern and
anomaly detection (AD) pattern. To be precise, hyperspectral
target detection (HTD) mainly compares the spatial–spectral
features of each test pixel with the spectral clusters of the
background pixels and the prior target spectral clusters. Then,
these differences will be mapped into a certain kind of
characteristic parameter to reflect the abnormality degree of
each test pixel. In contrast, hyperspectral AD (HAD) intends
to develop the spectral and spatial distribution differences
between the target and the surrounding background to locate
the target whose prior spectrum is in an unknown state. HAD
task is more in line with practical needs and has greater
application prospects because it has freed itself from dependence on the target prior information. Nevertheless, affected by
the limitations in imaging conditions such as noise-jamming
environments, long-distance imaging, low spatial resolution,
and so on, the distinguishability between abnormal targets and
heterogeneous backgrounds significantly diminished, which
gradually increased the difficulty of background modeling
and anomaly abstraction. Thereupon, differentiating anomalies
from sophisticated backgrounds is still a hard nut to crack
in HSI detection systems. In recent years, more and more
scholars have been involved in the research work of HAD,
and numerous outstanding algorithms have sprung up like
mushrooms. To the best of our knowledge, existing mainstream HAD methods can be divided into four categories,

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5530422

i.e., data statistics-based methods, data representation-based
methods, data factorization-based methods, and deep learningbased methods.
A. Data Statistics-Based Model
The data statistics-based model was the most classic and
time-honored HAD fashion. This kind of method always
assumes that the background of HSIs follows an inherent statistical distribution pattern, while the distribution of anomalies
significantly deviates from the background distribution, thus
screening out anomalies based on this basic principle [17].
Specifically, it will first initialize the statistical model of
the assumed background, and then select a certain number
of pixels to estimate the parameters of the model. Finally,
this model will determine whether the tested pixel is abnormal based on the distance measurement results between the
tested pixel and the background distribution. For instance, the
most representative method of the data statistics-based model
belongs to the Reed–Xiaoli (RX) [18] algorithm, which utilizes
the Mahalanobis distance as distance measurement criteria and
postulates that the background distribution complies with the
multivariate Gaussian distribution. Based on this simple and
efficient RX baseline model, many researchers [19], [20], [21],
[22] proposed numerous improved and extended algorithms for
complicated scenes. Specifically, Kown and Nasrabadi [23]
introduced the kernel function and maps the original HSI
data into a high-dimensional feature space to enhance the
separability of anomalous targets and backgrounds in highdimensional space. Then, Zhou et al. [24] proposed the cluster
kernel RX detector (CKRXD), which effectively reduced the
computational complexity of the kernel RX method by replacing each pixel with the cluster centers of the background
pixels. Matteoli et al. [25] devised a local adaptive kernel
density estimation to model the background distribution and
reduce the interference of clusters. Guo et al. [26] proposed the
linear filter-RX detector (LFRXD) to filter the abnormal targets
and noise for better background covariance matrix estimation
and higher detection accuracy. Tu et al. [27], [28] developed
the density peak clustering method to eliminate the contamination of anomalies in the process of background modeling.
Chang [29], [30], [31] implemented a novel dummy variable
trick to transform hyperspectral target detectors into anomaly
detectors. Furthermore, Chang et al. [32], [33], [34] developed
the versatile effective anomaly space (EAS) scheme to boost
the anomaly detectability of anomaly detectors. However, the
bulk of data statistics-based models depend heavily on the
prior assumptions of data distribution, which restricts their
applicability in sophisticated imaging scenarios.
B. Data Representation-Based Model
The data representation-based model will construct the
background dictionary and corresponding sparse coefficient
matrix of HSIs to determine whether the tested pixel belongs to
an abnormal target according to the reconstruction error of the
tested pixel without resorting to Gaussian assumptions about
the background distribution. Its core mechanism originates
from a fundamental theory, that is, each background pixel can

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

be represented by the spatial neighborhood pixels or background dictionaries, but abnormal pixels cannot. In the light of
different constraint modes of the representation coefficient, the
data representation-based models can be classified as sparse
representation (SR)-based models [35], [36] and collaborative
representation (CR)-based models [37], [38]. The SR-based
model structures the overcomplete dictionary based on the
background pixels and estimates the sparse coefficient, which
is constrained by the l1 norm. Then, the abnormal pixels will
be screened out due to significant errors in the reconstruction
process. Based on the basic SR-based model proposed by
Chen et al. [39], many improved HAD algorithms have been
designed to boost detection performance. For example, Zhu
and Wen [40] improved the performance of the SR-based
model by incorporating accurate background estimation and
adaptive weighting strategy into the fundamental SR-based
HAD framework. Ling et al. [36] applied the nonnegativity
and sum-to-one constraints on the sparse coefficient matrix to
endow with the practical physical significance of the SR-based
method. Moreover, Zhao et al. [41] designed a sparsity score
estimation detector to strengthen the discrepancy between the
learned anomaly dictionary and the background dictionary.
Similar to the SR-based model, the CR-based model considers
the spatial–spectral information between pixels and imposes
the l2 norm on the representation coefficient. Based on this
fundamental principle, Vafadar and Ghassemian [42] further
considered the statistical distribution of background to remove
the outliers before the CR operation for pollution-free background dictionary construction. In addition, Hou et al. [43]
applied the least squares method to avoid interference from
anomalies in the background dictionary construction, and
then the spatial saliency analysis was subsequently performed to improve the detection performance. Tan et al. [44]
combined the sliding dual-window scheme and CR strategy
mechanism to improve the detection accuracy and boost
the speed of operation. Chang and Ghamisi [45] devised
a novel CR-based model variant, in which the background
and anomaly union dictionary are introduced to extract reliable representation samples and remove anomalies or noise
contamination. Similarly, Wu et al. [46] presented a relaxed
CR-based model that combined the k-nearest neighbor method
to construct more a practical nonglobal dictionary for more
reliable background representation solutions. Nevertheless,
data representation-based methods still easily lose effectiveness in real scenarios due to predetermined parameter selection
and tweaking, which reduces the generality of the methods.
C. Data Factorization-Based Model
The data factorization-based model will implement AD by
decomposing the hyperspectral cube in different dimensions,
which are mainly classified as matrix factorization-based
models and tensor factorization-based models. The matrix
factorization-based model leverages the theoretical basis that
the anomalies in HSIs often present low target-to-image pixel
ratios and spatial sparsity, while the background in HSIs is
always monotonous and manifested as low-rank attributes.
With that in mind, the low-rank and sparse matrix factorization can be exploited in the HAD field. For example,

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

Xu et al. [47] represented the background pixels by the
low-rank matrix of the background dictionary and excavated
the local difference characteristics of anomaly targets by
the sparsity constraint. Huyan et al. [48] proposed a potential anomaly and background double dictionary construction
method to better discriminate anomalies from background
and noise interference. Considering that anomalies and noise
have analogous sparse characteristics, the detection results are
always mixed with false alarms (FAs) of noise. To this end,
Li et al. [49] incorporated the mixture of Gaussian (MoG)
method into the matrix factorization-based model, which effectively distinguished between anomalies and noise in a sparse
matrix and improved the detection accuracy. Chen et al. [50]
presented a simple and effective data decomposition method,
called component decomposition analysis (CDA) which better
separated anomalies from HSI data. In addition, Chang and
Chen [51] also proposed a novel sparsity density peak (SDP)
trick to represent the HSI data and extract anomalies in the
sparse space. The tensor factorization-based models [52], [53],
[54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59], [60], [61], [62] take advantage
of the 3-D structure of the HSI data cube and achieve high
performance in consideration of the 2-D spatial features and
1-D spectral features. Inspired by the mechanism of high-order
tensor decomposition, Wang et al. [52] exploited the classical
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) factorization to reconstruct
the background based on the principle that the background
tensor can be decomposed into the sum of numerous rank-1
tensors. In addition, Zhang and Wen [53] implemented Tucker
factorization to achieve the core tensor and corresponding
factor tensor, whose principal component can serve as a basis
for judging anomalies and backgrounds. Furthermore, Xu et al.
[54] introduced tensor singular value decomposition (t-SVD)
to resolve the matricization problem of Tucker factorization.
However, the tensor nuclear norm (TNN) used in [54] will
result in an over-shrinkage problem and deteriorate the detection performance. To solve this issue, He et al. [55] introduced
a novel ϵ-shrinkage TNN to obtain a more compact convex
closure of the tensor tubal rank. Xiao et al. [63] introduced the
optimal clustering framework-based enhanced tensor low-rank
(OCF-ETLR) factorization model to select effective bands and
reduce the interference from redundant bands. Besides that,
Feng et al. [56] employed the tensor ring factorization and
total variation constraint to extract the low-rank and piecewise
smoothness attributes of the background in the spatial and
spectral domains. Xiao et al. [64] also applied the total
variation constraint and explored a multiscale entanglement
renormalization ansatz (MERA) based tensor factorization
algorithm to decompose the HSI tensor into anomalies and
background parts. Notwithstanding, these methods only exploit
handcrafted shallow features and image attributes such as
low-rank and sparsity characteristics, lacking significant deep
context features devoted to discriminate anomalies from the
background.

5530422

mostly adopt the reconstruction-based self-supervised data
fitting pattern to precisely reconstruct the background and
suppress anomalies with large reconstruction errors [65], [66].
To the best of our knowledge, the mainstream DL-based
HAD solutions include convolution neural network (CNN)based models and generative adversarial network (GAN)-based
models. The CNN-based model exploits the formidable feature
extraction capability of CNNs to extract the spatial–spectral
features and reach effective reconstruction. As the inventors
of CNN-based models, Li et al. [67] trained the network with
differential pixel pairs and similar pixel pairs samples to determine whether the test sample is abnormal. Moreover, Fu et al.
[68] solved the HAD problem with a plug-and-play denoising
network model and employed CNN regularization to eliminate
background noise. Wang et al. [69] applied transfer learning to
obtain more training samples and effectively address the prior
knowledge agnostic problem. In addition, the autonomous AD
(Auto-AD) [70] implemented a fully convolutional autoencoder network with a skip connection structure to obtain a
reconstruction error map with high contrast between anomalies
and the background. Based on the autoencoder network framework, Liu et al. [71] designed a dual-frequency autoencoder
model which converted the hyperspectral data into low- and
high-frequency constituents and parallelly extracted anomalies
from these two constituents. Meanwhile, Jiang et al. [72]
developed an autoencoding density estimation network which
estimated the energy density of anomalies with an end-toend unsupervised learning manner. Li et al. [73] employed
an interpretable model-driven deep mixture network which
combined the autoencoder-based low-dimensional manifold
background learner and convex relaxation optimization with
anomaly sparse constraints. The GAN-based methods effectively model the background distribution and reconstruct the
background by means of the powerful data distribution learning ability of GAN. For example, Jiang et al. [74] proposed an
unsupervised discriminative reconstruction constrained GAN
(DRCGAN), which employed an autoencoder to realize the
discriminative reconstruction constraint for GAN and accurate background pixel distribution learning. Based on the
variational background inference strategy, Wang et al. [75]
achieved excellent background modeling and spectrum reconstruction effect in light of the GAN-based network framework.
Furthermore, Jiang et al. [76] devised a spectral-constrained
GAN, called WeaklyAD, for the reconstruction task of HSIs,
where the anomaly and the background can be better discriminated with a higher reconstruction error of the anomaly
target. Similarly, Li et al. [77] presented a novel sparse HAD
network that integrated the sparse coding strategy into the
GAN-based reconstruction network and improved the robustness of this weakly supervised HAD network. Jiang et al. [78]
implemented an unsupervised, low-rank embedded network
(LREN), where the latent layer cooperated with the Gaussian
mixture model.

D. Deep Learning (DL)-Based Model
Unlike the above three methods, DL-based models are prior
knowledge agnostic and do not depend upon data distribution assumptions. Actually, off-the-shelf DL-based methods

E. Motivation and Contributions
Through an in-depth analysis of the above DL-based methods, it can be perceived that the pivotal proposition of

5530422

the DL-based models rests on the construction of differential characteristics representation between backgrounds and
anomalies. Therefore, the employment of reconstruction error,
minimization can go along with this central foothold and
achieve exceptional detection performance in certain scenarios based on the basic assumption, where the background
part can be correctly reconstructed by the network while
anomaly targets cannot [79]. However, due to inevitable
abnormal sample contamination during network training, offthe-shelf detection network mostly has the flaw of inevitable
memory storage for anomalies [80]. Therefore, it is not
always pledged that anomalies cause emphatically higher
reconstruction errors than the background in the existing
DL-based methods [81], [82]. To this end, specific feature
guiding constraints should be applied for the background and
anomalies to enhance the background reconstruction while
weakening the anomalies reconstruction. In recent, several relevant DL-based literature about imposing specific constraints
on HSIs guiding reconstruction have emerged. For example,
Auto-AD [70] exploited a novel adaptive weighting loss that
dynamically utilized the reconstruction errors of anomalies to
determine the adaptive weighting loss for better anomalies
suppression during network training. Moreover, inspired by
representation-based methods, the deformable convolutional
autoencoder (DCAE) [83] designed a background guidance
module, which restrained the anomalies reconstruction by
guiding the parameter updating of the decoder in light of the
elaborate background dictionary representation. However, the
deployment of the above constraints only a trifle retards the
issue of anomalies reconstruction problem due to the neglect of
self-supervised memory learning for anomalies during network
training. In contrast, exploring the anomalies overshadowing
strategy can resolve the anomalies reconstruction issue during self-supervised learning. Specifically, Wang et al. [84],
[85], [86] proposed the invisible-spot self-supervised learning
network (BS3 LNet), which generated a high-quality reconstruction error map owing to the employment of anomalies
overshadowing-based invisible-spot architecture. Nevertheless,
restricted by the intrinsic local receptive fields of CNN framework, almost all existing DL-based AD methods, including
BS3 LNet, were flawed in capturing the long-range dependence and nonlocal content features from a global perspective.
In conclusion, the limitations of existing DL-based AD
methods can be summarized as the inevitable anomalies
reconstruction issue and intrinsic CNN local receptive fields
restriction. To this end, the research in this article offers
a new perspective on leading transformers into HAD tasks.
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, the target discovery process in the human vision system (HVS) actually adheres to
the global-to-local attention pattern which combines global
glance attention with local refining attention. Meanwhile,
as expressed in Fig. 2, both local spatial–spectral differences
and nonlocal similarity features are momentous clues for
reconstruction learning in the HAD task. Therefore, inspired
by this HVS attention mechanism, we propose a globalto-local spatial–spectral awareness transformer (G2LSSAT)
network paradigm for the HAD task. First, by means of
the exceptional long-range feature extraction capability of the

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 1. Schematic of the visual attention mechanism of the HVS. This visual
attention mechanism mainly adopts a global-to-local pattern. After observing
an image, HVS will first scan the entire image through a global attention
mechanism to obtain the global glanced image and key local regions of
interest. Then, HVS will further refine the feature extraction and attention
of the key local regions in a local focused image.

Fig. 2. Examples of the local and nonlocal spatial–spectral relationships
among pixels in HSIs. T1 and T2 represent the nonlocal relevant pixels with
spatial–spectral similarity. B1, B2, B3, and B4 are the pixels surrounding
the local neighborhood of T1. (a) and (b) Illustrate the spatial positional
relationships and their respective spectral curves of corresponding pixels.
The spectral curve of T1 is easily discriminated from its adjacent pixels
and determined as abnormal. Meanwhile, since T1 and T2 present extremely
similar spectral radiation and spatial morphological characteristics, long-range
pixel T2 can also be judged as an outlier if T1 belongs to the anomaly part.

transformer, we first implement a global transformer block
(GTB) that extracts the global glanced spatial–spectral features based on a crossbar-based global sparse self-attention
module. Then, similar to the global-to-local object detection
mode of HVS, the global glanced image is divided into
multiple local patches, followed by the employment of a local
transformer block (LTB) to abstract the local spatial–spectral
features supported by a patch-based local self-invisible attention module. Moreover, a novel anomalies overshadowing
self-supervised learning strategy is devised to alleviate the
anomalies reconstruction problem. Specifically, we incorporate
an elaborate invisible diagonal mask (IDM) into the selfattention module, which overshadows each abnormal pixel
or background pixel and implements reconstruction learning
based on the dependent spatial–spectral features from the
global and local receptive fields. In our experiments, we conduct extensive contrastive experiments and ablation studies on
multiple datasets to verify the effectiveness of the proposed
G2LSSAT. To summarize, the major contributions of our
article are concluded as follows.
1) We develop a brand-new global-to-local HAD framework based on the choreographed GTB-to-LTB transformer network structure, which effectively extracts deep

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

5530422

Fig. 3. Overall network framework of G2LSSAT. The proposed method is devised based on a global-to-local transformer architecture. Conv and Trans are
abbreviations for convolution and transformer. Linear, LN, and MLP represent the LPL, LayerNorm layer, and multilayer perceptron, respectively.

spatial–spectral reconstruction features from a global
perspective to a local perspective.
2) We introduce the crossbar-based global sparse attention
module and patch-based local self-invisible attention
module and embed them into the GTB and LTB
for nonlocal and local spatial–spectral characteristics
learning.
3) We develop novel anomalies overshadowing-based selfsupervised network learning strategy to address the
anomalies reconstruction issue based on a IDM.
4) We conduct copious comprehensive experiments on six
hyperspectral datasets to test and verify the superiority
of the proposed G2LSSAT for HAD.
The reminder of our article is organized as follows. First,
we introduce the related work and motivation of our work in
Section I. In Section II, we present the details of the proposed
G2LSSAT. In Section III, the experimental results and analysis
are provided. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section IV.
II. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
Taking inspiration from the global-to-local vision attention
mechanism of HVS and the transcendent capability of the
transformer in extracting global dependent features, we present
a novel G2LSSAT. In this section, we illustrate the proposed
G2LSSAT and explain the implementation details.

A. Overall Network Architecture
The overall network structure diagram of the proposed
G2LSSAT is shown in Fig 3. Let the input HSI data cube
be represented as H ∈ Rb×h×w , where h and w represent
the height and width of the input HSI, and b is the number of spectral bands. For the input HSI, we first employ
a spatial–spectral features enhancement (SSFE) convolution
block to enhance the spatial and spectral features representation. Specifically, the SSFE convolution block consists
of 1 × 1 convolution layers, Gaussian error linear units
(GELUs) layers, and depth-wise separable (DWS) convolution
layers [87]. In addition, the DWS convolution layer includes
a 3 × 3 convolution layer (depth-wise convolution) and a
1 × 1 convolution layer (point-wise convolution). Actually,
the DWS convolution layers can effectively strengthen spatial–
spectral features from spatial–spectral dimensions and increase
the generalization and trainability of the model. Therefore,
after the input HSI H is fed into the SSFE convolution block,
we can obtain the compact feature map F ∈ Rb×h×w as
follows:
F = C1×1 (G(DWS(G(C1×1 (H )))))

(1)

where C1×1 , G, and DWS represent the 1 × 1 convolution
layer, GELU layer, and DWS convolution layer, respectively.
Subsequently, the compact feature map F is fed into the

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of the G2LSSAT
Input: (1) the input HSI data H ∈ Rb×h×w ;
(2) maximum iteration Tmax ;
(3) batch size n;
(4) sliding windows stride k.
Procedure:
Initialize the network with random weights.
for epoch in [1,2,. . . .,Tmax ] do
Strengthen spatial-spectral features according to 1.
Update non-local spatial-spectral features based on
global transformer block.
Construct the local blocks according to the sliding
windows-based patch partition in 2.
Shuffle the local blocks and select the batch of
shuffled blocks as training samples.
for each sample batch n do
Update local spatial-spectral characteristics
based on local transformer block.
Strengthen spatial-spectral features based on 1.
Train the network by minimizing loss in 3.
Update network parameters with ADAM
optimizer.
end
Merge patches according to the position calibration
matrix of the shuffled blocks.
end
Output: Network parameters.

GTB to extract the global features and obtain the glanced
feature map G based on a pivotal crossbar-based global sparse
attention module. Subsequently, we implement a k 2 ×k 2 sliding
window to partition G into multiple sliding HSI local blocks
N
P = { pi }i=1
, with the sliding stride being k. In particular, the
spatial size of each local block is k 2 × k 2 and the total number
of local blocks n b is formulated as

Y  si + 2 pb − db (k 2 − 1) − 1
nb = nw × nh =
+1
k
i∈(0,1)
(2)
where si (i = 1, 2) represents the spatial size of the given
HSI, i.e., the width and height of the HSI. Notably, pb and
db denote the padding and dilation parameters which are set
to 0 and 1 in the unfold operation. Therefore, we can obtain
2
2
the local block feature map with a size of P ∈ Rn×k ×k ×b ,
where n denotes the number of batch size. Then, the block
feature map P will be shuffled along the first dimension
to enhance robustness during network training. In addition,
the block feature map will be divided into multiple local
patches and reshaped as an embedded token with the size of
2
2
E ∈ Rn×(k ×k )×b . The position calibration matrix C ∈ Rn w ×n h
will storages the position information of the shuffled block
feature map for the following patch merge process. Then,
the embedded token will be normalized by the LayerNorm
operation and fed into the local transformer block to capture
the local spatial–spectral reconstruction features supported by
a patch-based local self-invisible attention module. Finally,

Fig. 4.
Diagrammatic sketch of the global-to-local mechanism in our
G2LSSAT. (a) Global and local information dependent relationship. The
local neighborhood pixels surrounding the central pixel and nonlocal related
pixels can be utilized for reconstruction. (b) Local neighborhood pixels
reconstruction mechanism. The blue pixels denote the neighborhood pixels
which can be used to reconstruct the central pixel. (c) and (d) Represent the
relating pattern between spectral vector located in spatial coordinate (i, j) and
spatial coordinate (m, k). It can be seen that the related spectral vector located
in spatial coordinate (i, k) and spatial coordinate (m, j) can be captured by
the proposed crossbar-based global sparse attention. The pertinence relation
between (i, j) and (m, k) can be indirectly represented by the aid of (i, k)
and (m, j). Meanwhile, it can be easily deduced that the nonlocal information
cannot be obtained by single row or column self-attention.

the updated block feature map will be further enhanced by
employing SSFE operation. For the loss optimization of the
network, our G2LSSAT network is trained using the mean
squared error (mse) loss function according to the practical
experimental results in Section III-G
ψ̂ = arg min L (ψ)
ψ

= arg min ∥F (H ; ψ) − H ∥22

(3)

ψ

where F (H ; ψ) represents the overall network optimization
function and ψ refers to the learnable parameters in our
G2LSSAT. In the testing phase, the HAD result will be given
according to the reconstruction residual R between the input
HSI H and reconstructed HSI Ĥ as follows:
Ri, j = hi, j − ĥi, j 2

(4)

where hi, j ∈ Rb×1 and ĥi, j ∈ Rb×1 represent the pixels at
location (i, j) of H and Ĥ , respectively. Specifically, Ri, j
denotes the anomaly scores of the corresponding pixel located
at (i, j) of the final AD map R ∈ Rh×w . Note that all patches
can be exploited to calculate the reconstruction error loss and
generate the final AD map in the training and testing stage.
The critical processes of the proposed G2LSSAT are described
in Algorithm 1. Meanwhile, we record the feature dimensions
of the input and output of each module in Table I.

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

5530422

Fig. 5. Detailed network architecture of the crossbar-based global sparse self-attention and patch-based local self-invisible attention module. (a) Row sparse
self-attention module. (b) Column sparse self-attention module. (c) Patch-based local self-invisible attention module.

self-attention mechanism:

B. Global Transformer Block
As shown in Fig. 4(a), we can utilize the nonlocal content
similarity features, i.e., two planes with similar features at
a long distance, to improve the ability of the network over
anomalies judgment. Therefore, as presented in Fig 3, for
the enhanced compact feature map F, we first fed it into
a GTB to explore the nonlocal dependent spatial–spectral
features. Specifically, the core composition of the GTB
focuses on a crossbar-based global sparse attention module.
In a conventional transformer, the multihead self-attention
layers serve as the prominent network architectural components that can extract long-range context information.
Nevertheless, multihead self-attention is of quadratic complexity O(N 2 ) [88], which increases computational burden and
training difficulty. To tackle this issue, we develop a novel
crossbar-based global sparse attention, which is composed of
horizontal row self-attention and vertical column self-attention
module. The detailed network diagrammatic sketch of the
proposed crossbar-based global sparse attention is depicted
in Fig. 5(a) and (b). Specifically, for the horizontal row selfattention, the given HSI data cube F ∈ Rh×w×b will be
projected into query Q r ∈ Rh×w×c , key K r ∈ Rh×w×c , and
value Vr ∈ Rh×w×c by linear projection layers (LPLs)
Q r = F W Qr ,

K r = F W Kr , Vr = F WVr

(5)

where c = b/2 in our method. W Qr ∈ Rb×c , W Kr ∈ Rb×c ,
and WVr ∈ Rb×c represent the learnable weight matrix. Subsequently, the projected query Q r and key K r are rearranged
to produce the following row attention map Arow by the row



Q r K rT
√
Arow = Softmax
∈ Rh×w×w
c

(6)

where Softmax(·) denotes √
the softmax function along the
last axis of the data cube, c represents the scale factor.
Intuitively, as depicted in Fig. 6, we present the sparse row
spatial–spectral self-attention mechanism in detail. Specifically, for the spectral vectors located at spatial coordinates
(i, j) in projected query Q r , all spectral vectors located on
the same row, i.e., the same row matrix Q i ∈ Rw×c , will
be included in the self-attention calculation. The same row
Q i matrix will be multiplied by the transpose matrix K iT of
the same row matrix K i in the projected key K r to generate
the ith row self-attention map Ai ∈ Rw×w . By traversing
all rows, the final row self-attention map is given in (6).
Meanwhile, the projected value Vr will be weighted by multiplying Vr and the row self-attention map, which models
the spatial–spectral correlation between the spectral vector
in spatial coordinates (i, j) and all spectral vectors in the
same row. It can be noticed from Fig. 5(a) and (b) that the
row self-attention map is updated by the dropout operation
as Ârow = D(Arow ), where D denotes the dropout operation.
Then, the final output of the row self-attention module can
be expressed as Ârow V . Except for the row self-attention,
the column self-attention can be obtained by traversing all
columns according to a similar principle. Note that the row
and column self-attention must be iteratively spliced in series
for nonlocal spatial–spectral feature extraction and generating
global glanced features map G as indicated in Fig. 4(c)
and (d). In other words, a single row or column self-attention
cannot capture long-range features. In light of the proposed

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE I
F EATURE D IMENSIONS OF THE I NPUT AND O UTPUT OF E ACH M ODULE

C. Local Transformer Block
As described in Section II-A, we employ a sliding window
to divide the global glanced feature map G into multiple local
patches and introduce an LTB to extract local spatial–spectral
deep features. In our method, the sliding stride p and window
size w are set to k and k 2 , where k is a hyperparameter.
According to the sliding stride and window size of the sliding
window, we can obtain the number of patches r = w/ p in each
local block. Subsequently, as shown in Fig. 3, the embedded
tokens E ∈ Rn×(w×w)×b will be fed into the LayerNorm
and reshaped as Ê ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×b) , where each patch
is straightened into a 1-D spectral vector with the size of
( p× p×b). Then, as shown in Fig. 5(c), the updated embedded
tokens Ê will be imputed into the LPL to obtain the local patch
query Q l ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×e) , key K l ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×e) , and
value Vl ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×b)
Q l = Ê W Ql ,

Fig. 6. Sketch map of the calculation process of the row self-attention. The
yellow area represents the row matrix Oi where the spectral vector at spatial
coordinate (i, j) is located. The green arrow represents the traversal direction
of each column of Oi in the process of multiplying matrix Oi by the transpose
of K i .

crossbar-based global sparse self-attention, the computational
complexity of global self-attention has been reduced from
O(N 2 ) to O(N ) due to the serial iterative alternating implementation of row and column self-attention with complexity
O(N ) [88].

K l = Ê W Kl , Vl = Ê WVl

(7)

where e = b/2 in our method. W Ql ∈ Rb×e , W Kl ∈ Rb×e , and
WVl ∈ Rb×b represent the learnable weight matrix in LPLs.
Correspondingly, the local patch-based attention map A can
be obtained by multiplying the projected local patch query Q l
by the transpose of key K l


Q l K lT
∈ Rn×(r ×r )×(r ×r )
Aloc = Softmax √
p× p×e

(8)

where ( p × p × e)1/2 represents the corresponding scale
factor. Similar to the updating fashion of row and column
self-attention module, we incorporate dropout and invisible
diagonal masking operations to generate the final patch-based
local self-invisible attention map Âloc . The detailed mechanism
of the IDM can be found in Section II-D. Finally, we can

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

Fig. 7.
Diagrammatic sketch of self-attention and the proposed invisible diagonal masked self-attention in our G2LSSAT. The white regions
in attention weights represent zero-value regions. (a) Self-attention mechanism. (b) Receptive fields of self-attention. (c) Invisible diagonal masked
self-attention mechanism. (d) Receptive fields of invisible diagonal masked
self-attention.

obtain the local-focused HSI data cube Hloc as follows:
Hloc = T + MLP(LN(T ))
T = Reshape( Âloc Vl ) + Ê

to reconstruct the background and suppress the anomalies to
the maximum extent. Therefore, we hope that the network
will overshadow each pixel itself in the receptive field and
reconstruct itself by means of its relationship information with
other pixels. In that case, the anomaly pixel that distinctly
differs from the adjacent pixels cannot be dependably restored
and generates a larger reconstruction error during network
training. From this point of view, it is considered that the
diagonal element which describes the data autocorrelation
property in the attention weight matrix illustrates the receptive
field of each pixel for itself during the network training stage.
Therefore, as shown in Fig. 7(c) and (d), the diagonal element
in the attention weight matrix A, which measures the degree of
self-correlation must be set to 0. To this end, for the attention
weight matrix A, we design a novel IDM, which √
is embedded
before the Softmax operation. Let S = (Q K T )/ d ∈ Rm×m
be represented as follows:


s11 s12 · · · s1m
 s21 s22 · · · s2m 


S= . .
(10)
.. .
 .. ..
. 
sm1 sm2 · · · smm
Let m i denote the maximum value of ith row, the IDM can
be represented as follows:


m0 + ∞ m0
···
m0
 m1
m1 + ∞ · · ·
m1 


(11)
M =

..
..
..
..


.
.
.
.

(9)

where MLP and LN represent the multilayer perceptron layer
and LayerNorm layer, respectively. Moreover, reshape denotes
the operation of adjusting Âloc Vl ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×b) as the
size of Reshape( Âloc Vl ) ∈ Rn×(r × p)×(r × p)×b . Then, the SSFE
module will be embedded after the local focused feature map
to strengthen the spatial–spectral reconstruction representation.
Finally, the local focused HSI data cube will be merged to form
the output reconstructed HSI with the size of Ĥ ∈ Rw×h×b
according to the position calibration matrix.
D. Invisible Diagonal Mask
In the architecture of the patch-based local self-invisible
attention module, we incorporate a IDM to suppress excessive anomalies reconstruction. This section explains the
detailed mechanism of the IDM. Specifically, as illustrated in
Fig. 7(a) and (b), for conventional self-attention,
√ the attention
weight A can be denoted as Softmax(Q K T / d) ∈ Rm×m
based on the linear projected query Q ∈ Rm×d and the linear
projected value K ∈ Rm×d . In a nutshell, this type of selfattention mechanism will learn the dependency relationship of
each query on all other keys and build the global receptive
field. In other words, each feature information is a combination of all other features within the group. In the field of
imaging, the self-attention mechanism can enable each patch
to contain not only its own subject information but also its
relationship information with other patches. Nevertheless, the
overall optimization purpose of the reconstruction network is

5530422

mm

mm

· · · mm + ∞

where ∞ represents a large positive value which is set to
300 in our method.
Based on the IDM, the final attention weight matrix can
be described as Â = Softmax(S − M). On the one hand,
we subtract the maximum value of each row from each element
in the attention weight matrix to prevent a data overflow
issue [89]. On the other hand, we subtract a large value from
each value on the diagonal and utilize the Softmax operation,
i.e., limx→−∞ exp−x = 0, to zero the diagonal elements.
III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSES
In this section, numerous experiments are implemented to
test and verify the effectiveness of our G2LSSAT for the HAD
task on six real HSI datasets. Note that all the comparison
experiments were conducted on a workstation with Windows
10, Intel1 Core2 i9-10980XE CPU@3.00 GHz, 16-GB RAM,
and an NVIDIA 3090 GPU with 24-GB memory.
A. Datasets Introduction
In the experiments, we compare our method with nine
well-developed detectors on six hyperspectral datasets. The
detailed introduction of the six datasets is presented in Table II.
1 Registered trademark.
2 Trademarked.

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 8. HSI datasets used in our experiments. The first row and second row represent the pseudo-color image and ground truth of the corresponding dataset.
(a) Pavia. (b) Okavango Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat Island. (f) Salians.
TABLE II
I NTRODUCTION OF S IX HSI DATASETS . R ES . R EPRESENTS THE A BBREVIATION OF R ESOLUTION

1) Pavia Dataset: The first dataset was captured by the
Reflective Optics System Imaging Spectrometer-03 (ROSIS03) sensor over the Pavia city of Italy [90]. The spectral
wavelength range of the Pavia dataset involves 188 bands
in the range from 430 to 680 nm. Meanwhile, the spatial
resolution and spatial size of this dataset come to 1.3 m/pixel
and 150 × 150 pixels. As presented in Fig. 8(a), this dataset
is composed of the beach background and anomalous vehicle
targets with 68 pixels. The total abnormal target pixels account
for 0.3% of the entire hyperspectral image.
2) Okavango Delta Dataset: The second dataset is an HSI
with a land scene collected by the Hyperion sensor [91] carried
by EO-1. It was captured over the area of the Okavango
Delta. The wavelengths of the bands in the Okavango Delta
dataset range from 400 to 2500 nm. The background area
in this dataset consists of observations from 14 different
types of land cover. In addition, this dataset is composed of
100 × 100 pixels with 30 m/pixel spatial resolution and 145
spectral bands are preserved to hold discriminative information
for each pixel. As shown in Fig. 8(b), 32 anomalous pixels are
to be detected in the land background, making up 0.32% of
the total amount of pixels in the dataset.
3) Indiana Dataset: The third dataset was collected by
the Hyperion hyperspectral sensor over the zone of the State
of Indiana, USA [92]. It contains 149 spectral bands in the
wavelength range of 357∼2576 nm. Under a 10 m/pixel spatial
resolution, this dataset has a spatial size of 150 × 150 pixels.
As presented in Fig. 8(c), the 17 abnormal pixels mainly
consist of the storage silos and the roofs embedded in the
agricultural background region.

4) Gainesville Dataset: The fourth dataset was acquired by
the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
sensor over the region of Gainesville, Florida, USA [90].
It has 191 spectral bands used for the experiments after
erasing the low signal-to-cluster ratio (SCR) and water
absorption bands from the incipient dataset. Moreover, the
Gainesville dataset is comprised of 100 × 100 pixels,
with a spatial resolution of 3.5 m/pixel. As presented in
Fig. 8(d), this dataset includes 52 anomaly pixels with the ship
attribute to be detected, which accounts for 0.52% of all the
pixels.
5) Cat Island Dataset: The fifth dataset with a beach background was collected by the AVIRIS sensor [90]. As described
in Table II, the spatial size and number of spectral bands are
150 × 150 pixels and 188, respectively. The spatial resolution
of this dataset reaches 17.2 m/pixel. As shown in Fig. 8(e),
there exists a ship target with 19 pixels that need to be
detected, making up 0.08% of the total amount of pixels in
the dataset.
6) Salians Dataset: The sixth dataset was shot by the
AVIRIS airborne sensor from Salinas Valley, CA, USA [44].
At a spatial resolution of 3.7 m/pixel, a subimage with a size
of 120 × 120 pixels was cropped from the 512 × 217 pixels
original image in the experiments. The 25 randomly selected
anomalous pixels are synthetic data according to the identified
building spectral. After removing 20 atmospheric and water
vapor absorption bands (108–112, 154–167, and 224), there
are 204 reserved spectral bands ranging from 400 to 2500 nm
in the dataset. The pseudo-color image of the Salians dataset
is presented in Fig. 8(f).

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

TABLE III

B. Experimental Settings
1) Evaluation Indicators: To verify the performance of each
algorithm, we implement multiple evaluation indicators to test
the detection effectiveness and efficiency of the compared
HAD algorithms. First, the running time of each model
on six HSI datasets is selected as the evaluation indicator
for detection efficiency. In terms of detection effectiveness,
we employ multiple evaluation indicators to validate the detection performance from the
perspective of qualitative and quantitative. With respect
to the qualitative indicators, we introduce the AD map,
background-anomaly separation map [93], and 3-D receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve [94] to compare multiple
state-of-the-art algorithms in our experiments. Specifically,
the AD map can directly display the impression of AD and
background suppression (BS) from the shade of the color map.
By outlining the box plot of the background and anomalies, the
background-anomaly separation map can intuitively illustrate
the distribution relationship between the background part
and the anomaly part. The gap between the anomaly box and
the background box reflect the separation degree between the
background and the anomaly component in the detection map.
In addition, the 3-D ROC curve represents the variation curve
of detection probability rate Pd and FA Fa with the variation
of segmentation threshold τ ∈ (0, 1). Given a segmentation
threshold, Pd and P f are denoted as follows:
DF
DT
, Fa =
(12)
AT
AP
where AT and DT denote the total number of true anomaly
pixels in the HSI and the true anomaly pixels detected by
the corresponding algorithm, respectively. AP and DF denote
the number of all pixels in the HSI and the number of falsely
detected pixels under a certain threshold τ . Moreover, the comprehensive 3-D ROC curve evaluation indicator can describe
the capability of each method regarding AD and BS. Deriving
from the 3-D ROC curve, we can obtain a more quantitative
evaluation indicators for algorithm testing experiments. For
example, by pinning one of the three indicators PD , PD , or τ
in 3-D ROC curve, we can derive the 2-D ROC curves for
(Pd , Fa ), (Pd , τ ), and (Fa , τ ), respectively. Therefore, by the
integral calculation of the corresponding area under the curve
(AUC), the quantitative evaluation indicators AUC(Pd ,Fa ) ∈
(0, 1), AUC(Pd ,τ ) ∈ (0, 1), and AUC(Fa ,τ ) ∈ (0, 1), can be
naturally obtained.
Combining these three evaluation indicators, we can further
obtain the following indicators, which reflect the capability
of AD, BS, joint AD and BS (ADBS), overall detection
(OD), and the signal-to-noise probability ratio (SNPR). The
mathematical formula of these indicators are expressed as
follows:
Pd =

AUCad = AUC(Pd ,Fa ) + AUC(Pd ,τ )
AUCbs = AUC(Pd ,Fa ) − AUC(Fa ,τ )
AUCadbs = AUC(Pd ,τ ) − AUC(Fa ,τ )
AUCod = AUC(Pd ,Fa ) + AUC(Pd ,τ ) − AUC(Fa ,τ )
AUC(Pd ,Fa )
AUCsnpr =
AUC(Pd ,τ )

5530422

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)

PARAMETER S ETTINGS OF THE T EN C OMPARISON HAD A LGORITHMS
ON THE C AT I SLAND DATASET

where higher AUCad ∈ [0, 2], AUCbs ∈ [−1, 1], AUCadbs ∈
[−1, 1], AUCod ∈ [−1, 2], and AUCsnpr ∈ [0, +∞] values
represent better detection performance for AD and BS.
2) Comparison Methods: To investigate the effectiveness
and superiority of G2LSSAT, we select four excellent traditional algorithms, including OCF-ETLR [63], 2S-GLRT [17],
CRDBPSW [43], EAS-RX [33], and five DNN-based HAD
methods, including LREN [78], GAED [65], WeaklyAD [76],
DCAE [83], and BockNet [86], to serve as comparison methods in the experiments. As expressed in Table III, we present
the key parameters and corresponding settings of these ten
comparison methods on the Cat Island dataset. First, for
the statistical theory-based method EAS-RX, the parameters
of p and j are estimated in accordance with the NWHFC
and MXSVD algorithms in [37]. Meanwhile, the parameters
of the outer window size wout and inner window size win
in 2S-GLRT are set in the range {5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19}
and the range {3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17} to investigate the
best performance on different datasets. Then, for the data
representation-based algorithm CRDBPSW, the outer window size wout and inner window size win are selected from
the same range as 2S-GLRT. Moreover, the parameter settings of the weighting factor λ is fixed at 10−6 . Moreover,
OCF-ETLR is an excellent data factorization-based method
which relies on low-rank and sparse tensor factorization.
In OCF-ETLR, the parameters λ, α, and β are tuned in
the range {1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 , 1}. The number of
bands m is investigated from 5 to 65. For GAED, the
window size is varied from 3 to 13 for each dataset. Meanwhile, the penalty coefficient β is selected from the range
{1e−6 , 1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 , 1, 10}. For Auto-AD and
DCAE detectors, the tradeoff factor λ is elaborately selected
from the range {1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 }. For WeaklyAD,
the radius value Eps varies from 0.01 to 0.25 for optimal
performance, and the value MinPts is tuned from 1 to 25.
For BockNet, the number of spots Bs is varied from 1 to 9 for
the optimum performance in light of the algorithm literature.
For the proposed G2LSSAT, based on python 3.7.0 and the
DL framework of PyTorch 1.12.1, we train the network model
with the adaptive moment estimation (ADAM) optimizer. The
overall training procedure and basic parameter settings of the
proposed G2LSSAT are presented in Algorithm 1. The training
epoch and batch size are set to 150 and 256, respectively.

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 9. Analysis of the parameters on the six datasets. (a) Sliding window size k. (b) Number of stacking times n g of crossbar-based global sparse attention
in the GTB. (c) Number of multihead n h . (d) Learning rate lr .

In addition, the detailed parameter settings of k, n g , n h , and
lr of G2LSSAT on six datasets will be further discussed in
Section III-C. Except for LREN, which was implemented
based on TensorFlow 2.3.0, the remaining DNN-based models
were implemented using PyTorch 1.12.1.
C. Model Parameter Tuning
In this section, we investigate four momentous parameters
tuning in the G2LSSAT model, namely, k, n g , n h , and lr .
k represents the window size used in the patch partition.
lr denotes the learning rate during the network training.
n g and n h represents the stacking times and the number
of multihead in the crossbar-based global sparse attention
module.
1) Impact of k: k is a prominent parameter in the proposed
G2LSSAT model, which controls the size of the patch that
relates to local feature extraction and background reconstruction. In the experiments, to investigate the effect of sliding
size k on the AD performance, we preset k in the range of
{2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and record the AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values on six datasets.
It can be seen from Fig. 9(a) that the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values
are obtained when k = 4 on the Pavia and Cat Island datasets.
Meanwhile, the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values are obtained when
k = 2 on the Indiana and Salians datasets. Meanwhile,
for the Okavango Delta and Gainesville, the optimal values
of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) are generated when k = 3 and k = 5,

respectively. Therefore, the parameter settings of the sliding
size are determined according to the corresponding optimal
results. For the multiscale anomalies in these six datasets, the
proposed G2LSSAT needs elaborate parameter tuning for the
respective sliding windows size k which determines the size
of the local receptive field.
2) Impact of n g : The parameter n g represents the stacking
times of the crossbar-based global sparse attention module
in the GTB. We conduct a parameter tuning experiment
to investigate whether more attention module stacking can
implicitly improve the detection performance of the G2LSSAT.
As described in Fig. 9(b), we select the parameter n g from
the range {1, 2, 3, 4}. It can be seen that the AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values
gradually decrease when n g varies from 1 to 4 on all datasets.
This funding illustrates that larger n g cannot bring more vital
information but instead the reduces the detection ability. Based
on this phenomenon, the parameter n g is fixed at 1 for the
proposed G2LSSAT.
3) Impact of n h : The design of the multihead is aimed
at increasing the flexibility and capability of the transformer
model, enabling it to capture more complex feature relationships. Therefore, we also attempt to incorporate multihead
self-attention into our method. The AUC(Pd ,Fa ) metrics for
different n h are reported in Fig. 9(c). We select the optimal
parameter n g from the range {1, 2, 4, 8}. From Fig. 9(c), when
n h = 1, AUC(Pd ,Fa ) is the highest. It indicates that this
multihead design cannot be adequately coupled with the GTB

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

5530422

Fig. 10. Color anomaly response maps obtained by ten detectors on six datasets. (a) Pseudo-color image. (b) Ground truth. (c) OCF-ETLR. (d) 2S-GLRT.
(e) CRDBPSW. (f) EAS-RX. (g) LREN. (h) GAED. (i) WeaklyAD. (j) DCAE. (k) BockNet. (l) G2LSSAT.

structure. Therefore, in our article, we utilize only the singlehead self-attention structure and the parameter of n h is fixed
at 1 during network training and testing.
4) Impact of lr : The learning rate lr is an important hyperparameter that determines whether the objective loss function
can converge to a local minimum and when it will converge
to the minimum. An appropriate learning rate can enable the
objective function to converge around a local minimum within
an appropriate training time and then improve the detection
performance of the network. The parameters of learning rate lr
are tuned in the range {1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 }. Fig. 9(d)
lists the AUC(Pd ,Fa ) indicators for different learning rates on
all datasets. From Fig. 9(d), we can observe that when lr =
1e−3 , our G2LSSAT yields the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) on the all
datasets. Consequently, in our experiment, we set lr as 1e−3
to accurately detect anomalies.
D. Model Detection Accuracy Comparison
1) Qualitative Comparison Results: As presented in
Fig. 10, we show the visual color anomaly response maps of
the ten comparison methods on six HSI datasets. The anomaly
response map can clearly describe the response intensity of
anomalies among the HAD methods. It is noticed that the
response map in Fig. 10 varies from deep blue to deep
red, which corresponds to the color bar and demonstrates
that the anomaly response intensity is growing. First, the
anomaly response maps of these ten detection algorithms on
the Pavia, Okavango Delta, Indiana, and Gainesville datasets
are presented from the first row to the fourth row in Fig. 10.
It can be observed that the CRDBPSW, GAED, WeaklyAD,
LREN, and BockNet models demonstrate low responses to
anomalies, resulting in a certain of missed detections (MDs)
and incomplete target shape reconstruction. The anomaly

targets can be highlighted from the response maps by the OCFETLR, EAS-RX, 2S-GLRT, and DCAE algorithms.
However, some pronounced FAs are produced due to defects
in the BS ability. In contrast, our G2LSSAT has the superiority in both detecting anomalies and suppressing background
elements. In addition, the small anomalies in the Cat Island
and Salians datasets, the anomaly response maps of these ten
algorithms are illustrated in the last two rows of Fig. 10.
It can be observed that the OCF-ETLR, EAS-RX, LREN,
GAED, and WeaklyAD algorithms generate a series of FAs
pixels in these two scenes, which obviously contaminates the
detection results. Moreover, the 2S-GLRT, DCAE, BockNet,
and CRDBPSW struggle to accurately detect all anomalies in
the Salians dataset. Overall, the proposed G2LSSAT achieves
a more discriminative response to anomaly targets compared
to the comparison algorithms.
In addition, the ROC curve for (Pd , Fa ), (Pd , τ ), (Fa , τ ),
and (Pd , Fa , τ ) of the nine HAD algorithms on six datasets
are illustrated in Fig. 11. First, it can be observed from the
ROC curve for (Pd , Fa ) on the six datasets that the proposed
the G2LSSAT model is closest to the upper left corner of the
curve, which indicates the superiority of its comprehensive
detection performance compared to that of the other methods. Then, as depicted in Fig. 11, the 2-D ROC curve of
(Pd , τ ) obtained by the proposed method is proximate to the
upper-right corner of the Pavia, Gainesville, and Cat Island
datasets. The proximity of the 2-D (Pd , τ ) ROC curve to the
upper-right corner is the directive of the proposed G2LSSAT
obtaining superior anomaly discovery performance. Similarly,
the 2-D ROC curve for (Fa , τ ) of the proposed G2LSSAT can
quickly reach the lower-left corner of the coordinate axis on
the Okavango Delta and Indiana datasets. This phenomenon
demonstrates that the background suppressing performance of
G2LSSAT is satisfactory on these two datasets.

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 11. Three-dimensional (Pd , Fa , τ ) ROC curves, 2-D (Pd , τ ) ROC curves, 2-D (Fa , τ ) ROC curves, and 2-D (Pd , Fa , τ ) ROC curves of ten HAD
methods on six datasets. (I-a)–(I-d) Pavia. (II-a)–(II-d) Okavango Delta. (III-a)–(III-d) Indiana. (IV-a)–(IV-d) Gainesville. (V-a)–(V-d) Cat Island. (VI-a)–(VI-d)
Salians.

Moreover, as depicted in Fig. 12, we utilize box-whisker
plots to represent anomaly-background separation maps for

intuitively reporting the distribution discrimination between
the anomalies and the background in the detection maps.

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

5530422

Fig. 12. Anomaly-background separation maps of the ten detectors on the six datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Okavango Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat
Island. (f) Salians.

In Fig. 12, the red box and blue box denote the abnormal pixel
distribution and background pixel distribution, respectively.
Specifically, the larger gap between these two boxes represents
better anomalies and background separability of the algorithm.
It can be observed from Fig. 12 that the proposed G2LSSAT
gains pretty well performance in separation between the background and anomalies on the six HSI datasets especially on the
Pavia and Gainesville datasets, which demonstrate the excellent capability of G2LSSAT for anomalies and background
separation compared to other detectors.
2) Quantitative Comparison Results: Except for the qualitative comparison results, we report the quantitative comparison
results of each algorithm to quantitatively evaluate the detection effect. As recorded in Table IV, we present the eight
evaluation indicators of the AUC according to the 3-D ROC
curve, with the optimal results highlighted in bold and the
second-best results are underlined. It can be observed from
Table IV that our G2LSSAT yields the highest values of
AUC(Pd ,Fa ) , AUCadbs , and AUCod , on multiple datasets such
as the Pavia and Gainesville datasets, which demonstrates the
superiority of G2LSSSAT in terms of OD performance. Except
for the Gainesville dataset, the proposed G2LSSAT model
gains optimal AUC(Pd ,Fa ) on other datasets. Specifically, for
the values of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) , the proposed G2LSSAT yields an
essential improvement of 0.78%, 0.51%, 0.08%, 0.31%, and
0.23% on the other five datasets compared to the secondbest detector. Meanwhile, the proposed method also obtains
the exceptional AUCsnpr on the Cat Island, Okavango Delta,
Indiana, and Pavia datasets, which directly proves the reasonable background suppressing performance of our G2LSSAT.
Consequently, considering these qualitative and quantitative

comparison results comprehensively, it can be concluded that
our G2LSSAT achieves the most robust and second-to-none
HAD accuracy performance among the comparison detectors.
The proposed G2LSSAT model showcases clear superiority
in detecting multiple types of anomalies spanning different scenarios, as revealed by numerous evaluation indicators
results derived from the above qualitative and quantitative
comparison experiments. In comparison to the compared
DNN-based models (LREN, GAED, WeaklyAD, DCAE, and
BockNet), the proposed G2LSSAT almost obtains optimal
detection accuracy performance about evaluation indicators on
all datasets. To our knowledge, this is mainly attributed to the
fact that the proposed G2LSSAT incorporates a global-to-local
attention mechanism and invisible diagonal masking scheme,
which fully explores the global and local spatial–spectral
correlation features and overshadows the reconstruction of
anomalies, making the reconstructed image further away from
anomalies while closer to the real background.
E. Model Running Time Comparison
As illustrated in Table V, we report the running time of
ten detectors on all datasets to investigate the computational
burden of each algorithm. The WeaklyAD, DCAE, BockNet,
and G2LSSAT are implemented based on the PyTorch and
trained by the accelerated computing of GPU. The LREN
is implemented based on the TensorFlow by means of the
accelerated computing of GPU. The GAED model and four
traditional models are also implemented with the Python
environment. Among the four traditional detectors, EAS-RX
expends the shortest running time in comparison to other

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE IV
AUC VALUES OF T EN D ETECTORS THE S IX DATASETS

TABLE V
RUNNING T IME (I N S ECONDS ) OF T EN A LGORITHMS ON THE S IX DATASETS . T R AND T E R EPRESENT THE RUNNING T IME FOR T RAINING AND T ESTING

methods, and it performs comparatively well in detection
accuracy on the Okavango Delta and Indiana datasets. It can be

seen from Table V that the six DNN-based detectors require a
certain amount of training time, among which DCAE expends

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

5530422

TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDY OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD ON THE S IX DATASETS

the shortest training time on multiple datasets due to its
simpler network architecture and fewer network parameters.
In addition, apart from LREN requiring more running time
on dictionary construction and matrix factorization, the other
five DNN-based models all present extremely few network
inference times on six HSI datasets, while our G2LSSAT
takes relatively less inference time on different datasets.
In summary, our G2LSSAT obtains a relatively reasonable
tradeoff between detection accuracy and efficiency. Note that,
since the proposed G2LSSAT adopts joint local patches-based
and global crossbar-based sampling methods in the training
stage, it undeniably consumes extra training and inference
time compared to other reconstruction-based detectors such
as DCAE and GAED.
F. Ablation Study
To evaluate the influences of three central modules, i.e.,
GTB, LTB, and IDM, on the proposed G2LSSAT, we implement some ablation studies on six datasets. The detailed
experimental results are delineated in Table VI.
1) Effectiveness of GTB: As shown in Table VI, we implement six experimental control groups to investigate the
effectiveness of GTB, LTB, and IDM. Note that the baseline
in Table VI represents the basic model without the utilization
of these three components. First, to evaluate the effect of the
GTB on the proposed G2LSSAT, we compare the baseline
model with the baseline+GTB model and record the values
of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) on the six datasets. It can be observed from
Table VI that the improved model, which embeds the GTB
into the baseline model, results in increments of 0.15%, 0.52%,
0.69%, 6.36%, 0.9%, and 1.18%, relative to the baseline model
for each respective dataset. This is mainly because the GTB
module leverages a crossbar-based global sparse attention
mechanism to capture and integrate global information, which
augments the learning of nonlocal representations. In addition,
as presented in Table VII, we conduct an experimental comparison between the performances of basic multihead global
self-attention (MHGA) [95] and the proposed GTB. Specifically, the MHGA will independently represent each pixel by
the joint subspace of global spatial correlation information.
It can be concluded from Table VII that upon utilization
of GTB, the G2LSSAT results in a significant increase in
computational efficiency (31.32 s average reduction of running
time) and approximate detection accuracy [0.07% average

TABLE VII
C OMPARATIVE P ERFORMANCE OF GTB AND MHGA OVER AUC(Pd ,Fa )
AND RUNNING T IME ON THE S IX DATASETS . MHGA AND GTB R EP RESENT THE MHGA M ODULE AND THE GTB M ODULE
IN O UR M ETHOD

increment of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) ] compared to the G2LSSAT model
with MHGA, which further proves that the proposed GTB
has the ability of global correlation representation learning
similar to the MHGA while improving computing efficiency
by relying on the elaborate scheme of crossbar-based global
sparse attention.
2) Effectiveness of LTB: In the experiments, we follow the global-to-local reconstruction network framework
and incorporate the local transformer which extracts the
local reconstruction features based on the local patch-based
self-attention module. To verify the effectiveness of LTB,
we conduct an ablation study of LTB and present the experimental results in Table VI. It can be seen that the AUC(Pd ,Fa )
values derived from the improved baseline+LTB model yield
considerable increases of 0.29%, 0.76%, 1%, 6.07%, 1.3%,
and 2.27% compared to the baseline model, which fully
indicates that the detection accuracy can be boosted by
exploiting the spectral–spatial correlation features of the local
background. Meanwhile, the improved baseline+LTB+GTB,
which combines the GTB module with the LTB module,
can effectively bring about an average increase of 2.43% on
AUC(Pd ,Fa ) . This shows that these two components can be well
coupled and further improve the detection performance of the
proposed G2LSSAT.
3) Effectiveness of IDM: In our method, we design a
IDM to suppress the anomalies over-reconstruction issue
during network training. To investigate the effectiveness
of the IDM on G2LSSAT, several ablation experiments
have been quantitatively and qualitatively devised. First, as

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 13. Ground truth and color anomaly response maps obtained by the proposed G2LSSAT model with IDM and without IDM. The second and third rows
in the figure present the original HSIs and reconstructed HSIs with our G2LSSAT. The yellow region and green region circled in the fourth and fifth rows
of the figure represent the MDs and FAs of the G2LSSAT model without IDM in comparison to those of the G2LSSAT model. The red regions denote the
corresponding regions in the anomaly response map of the G2LSSAT model with IDM. (a) Pavia. (b) Okavango Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat
Island. (f) Salians.

shown in Table VI, the baseline+GTB+LTB+IDM and the
baseline+GTB+LTB represents the complete the G2LSSAT
model and the G2LSSAT model without the IDM. From
the quantitative results over AUC(Pd ,Fa ) , we can see that the
AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values derived from the G2LSSAT model with
IDM are higher than that of the G2LSSAT model with
IDM on six HSI datasets. Notably, relative to the controlled
baseline+LTB model, the evolved baseline+LTB+IDM model
also boosts the detection accuracy performance due to the
implementation of the IDM. Then, we present the original
HSI and reconstructed HSI with our G2LSSAT in the second
and third rows of Fig. 13. As presented in the reconstructed
HSIs of Pavia and Cat Island datasets in Fig. 13, it can be
visually observed that the anomalies in reconstructed HSI are
indeed overwhelmed by the background, which proves the
overall anomalies reconstruction suppression effect. Furthermore, as elucidated in the fourth and fifth rows of Fig. 13,
we intuitively compare the detection effect of these two models
in light of the anomaly response maps. Compared to the
complete G2LSSAT model, the absence of the IDM results in
the serious occurrences of FAs and MDs, which are triggered
by the decrease in background reconstruction residuals and
the increase in anomalies reconstruction residuals. This finding
confirms that the IDM in the HAD task results in a notable
augmentation of anomalies reconstruction inhibition and background reconstruction assistance from the opposite side.
G. Model Complexity and Convergence
1) Complexity Analysis: In this section, we investigate the
complexity of our G2LSSAT model. In the spirit of equality,
we mainly compare our method with the other two excellent
DNN-based reconstruction network, DCAE and BockNet,

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

5530422

Fig. 14. Comparative performance of the l1 , l1 , and smooth l1 loss functions over convergence characteristic curves on the six datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Okavango
Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat Island. (f) Salians.

TABLE VIII
M ODEL C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS OF THE T HREE DNN-BASED M ODELS

based on the same software and hardware implementation
platform. The comparison results of network parameter quantity, average training time, average testing time, and average
AUC(Pd ,Fa ) are listed in Table VIII. Compared to DCAE and
BockNet, G2LSSAT has the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) and a moderate level of running time and network parameters. Although
DCAE has less running time and network parameters than
G2LSSAT, the detection accuracy of DCAE has no advantages compared with our method. In summary, the proposed
G2LSSAT exhibits promising detection accuracy performance
and competitive efficiency advantages.
2) Convergence Analysis: As described in Figs. 14 and 15,
we conduct convergence characteristic analysis experiments
of the proposed G2LSSAT on all datasets. In our experiments, we introduce three different loss functions, i.e., l1 ,
l2 , and smooth l1 , to observe the corresponding detection
and convergence performances. l2 loss function stands for
the mse loss function. From the loss curves of l1 , l2 , and
smooth l1 loss in Fig. 14, it can be seen that the loss curves
of l2 loss and smooth l1 loss decrease at a faster rate than that
provided by the l1 loss function. Moreover, among these three
loss functions, the l2 loss function has distinct advantages in

Fig. 15.

AUC(Pd ,Fa ) of the three loss functions for the six datasets.

terms of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) outcomes, as shown in Fig. 15. These
observations, together with the loss curves in Fig. 14, lead us
to conclude that the l2 loss is excellent in terms of detection
accuracy and convergence stability for the proposed method.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we devise a transformer-based G2LSSAT
network model to achieve robust AD in HSIs. The proposed
model employs a global-to-local network structure in light
of the visual attention mechanism in HVS. To be specific,
the GTB and LTB are introduced in sequence to extract
the global and local spatial–spectral reconstruction features.
In addition, we embed the elaborate crossbar-based global

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

sparse attention and patch-based local self-invisible attention
into the GTB and LTB modules to explore the long-range and
local relation characteristics. Moreover, to avoid unexpected
anomalies reconstruction problem, we design a IDM to erase
abnormal pixels itself in the receptive field and effectuate
accurate reconstruction by means of the global and local
dependent features. Extensive comparison experiments and
ablation studies on six datasets demonstrate the superiority and
robustness of the proposed G2LSSAT compared with the stateof-the-art detectors. However, the proposed G2LSSAT also
inevitably suffers from the flaws of low computational efficiency and high computational costs during network training.
In future work, we will explore more strategies for reducing
the model complexity and design a more lightweight network
with real-time performance.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Plaza et al., “Recent advances in techniques for hyperspectral image
processing,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 113, pp. S110–S122, Sep. 2009.
[2] M. E. Paoletti, J. M. Haut, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Deep learning
classifiers for hyperspectral imaging: A review,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 158, pp. 279–317, Dec. 2019.
[3] M. E. Paoletti, S. Moreno-Álvarez, Y. Xue, J. M. Haut, and A. Plaza,
“AAtt-CNN: Automatical attention-based convolutional neural networks
for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511118.
[4] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection:
A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90,
Mar. 2022.
[5] X. Tao, T. Cui, A. Plaza, and P. Ren, “Simultaneously counting and
extracting endmembers in a hyperspectral image based on divergent subsets,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 8952–8966,
Dec. 2020.
[6] X. Tao et al., “Fast orthogonal projection for hyperspectral unmixing,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5523313.
[7] D. W. J. Stein, S. G. Beaven, L. E. Hoff, E. M. Winter, A. P. Schaum,
and A. D. Stocker, “Anomaly detection from hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 58–69, Jan. 2002.
[8] S. M. Schweizer and J. M. F. Moura, “Hyperspectral imagery: Clutter
adaptation in anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 5,
pp. 1855–1871, Aug. 2000.
[9] Q. Hao et al., “Fusing multiple deep models for in vivo human brain
hyperspectral image classification to identify glioblastoma tumor,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 4007314.
[10] S. Sudharsan, R. Hemalatha, and S. Radha, “A survey on hyperspectral
imaging for mineral exploration using machine learning algorithms,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. Netw. (WiSPNET),
Mar. 2019, pp. 206–212.
[11] M. T. Eismann, A. D. Stocker, and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Automated
hyperspectral cueing for civilian search and rescue,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 97,
no. 6, pp. 1031–1055, Jun. 2009.
[12] L. Fang, C. Wang, S. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyperspectral image
classification via multiple-feature-based adaptive sparse representation,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 1646–1657, Jul. 2017.
[13] Y. Ding, Y. Guo, Y. Chong, S. Pan, and J. Feng, “Global consistent
graph convolutional network for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 5501516.
[14] M. Shimoni, R. Haelterman, and C. Perneel, “Hypersectral imaging for
military and security applications: Combining myriad processing and
sensing techniques,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 101–117, Jun. 2019.
[15] B. Tu, X. Liao, C. Zhou, S. Chen, and W. He, “Feature extraction using
multitask superpixel auxiliary learning for hyperspectral classification,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 5018216.
[16] Y. Cai et al., “Superpixel contracted neighborhood contrastive subspace
clustering network for hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5530113.
[17] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel
anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567,
Oct. 2022.

[18] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
[19] J. M. Molero, E. M. Garzón, I. García, and A. Plaza, “Analysis and
optimizations of global and local versions of the RX algorithm for
anomaly detection in hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 801–814, Apr. 2013.
[20] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
[21] W. Liu et al., “Random selection-based adaptive saliency-weighted RXD
anomaly detection for hyperspectral imagery,” Int. J. Remote Sens.,
vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2139–2158, Apr. 2018.
[22] L. Ren, L. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “A superpixel-based dual window RX
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1233–1237, Jul. 2020.
[23] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
[24] J. Zhou, C. Kwan, B. Ayhan, and M. T. Eismann, “A novel cluster
kernel RX algorithm for anomaly and change detection using hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 11,
pp. 6497–6504, Nov. 2016.
[25] S. Matteoli, T. Veracini, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A locally adaptive
background density estimator: An evolution for RX-based anomaly
detectors,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 323–327,
Jan. 2014.
[26] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “WeightedRXD and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics
estimation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366,
Jun. 2014.
[27] B. Tu, X. Yang, C. Zhou, D. He, and A. Plaza, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection using dual window density,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 8503–8517, Dec. 2020.
[28] B. Tu, X. Yang, N. Li, C. Zhou, and D. He, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection via density peak clustering,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 129,
pp. 144–149, Jan. 2020.
[29] Chein-I. Chang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection: A dual theory of
hyperspectral target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511720.
[30] C.-I. Chang, “Target-to-anomaly conversion for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5540428.
[31] C.-I. Chang, “Constrained energy minimization anomaly detection for
hyperspectral imagery via dummy variable trick,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5517119.
[32] C.-I. Chang, “Effective anomaly space for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5526624.
[33] C.-I. Chang, S. Chen, S. Zhong, and Y. Shi, “Exploration of data scene
characterization and 3D ROC evaluation for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 1, p. 135, Dec. 2023.
[34] C.-I. Chang, C.-Y. Lin, and P. Fuming Hu, “Band sampling of hyperspectral anomaly detection in effective anomaly space,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5502729.
[35] J. Li, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Ma, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
by the use of background joint sparse representation,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2523–2533,
Jun. 2015.
[36] Q. Ling, Y. Guo, Z. Lin, and W. An, “A constrained sparse representation model for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2358–2371, Apr. 2019.
[37] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
[38] H. Su, Z. Wu, Q. Du, and P. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using
collaborative representation with outlier removal,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 5029–5038,
Dec. 2018.
[39] Y. Chen, N. M. Nasrabadi, and T. D. Tran, “Sparse representation for
target detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
Process., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 629–640, Jun. 2011.
[40] L. Zhu and G. Wen, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via background
estimation and adaptive weighted sparse representation,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 10, no. 2, p. 272, Feb. 2018.

HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD

[41] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via
a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017.
[42] M. Vafadar and H. Ghassemian, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral
imagery using modified collaborative representation,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 577–581, Apr. 2018.
[43] Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, P. Ma, and W. Shi, “Collaborative representation
with background purification and saliency weight for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 1–12,
Jan. 2022.
[44] K. Tan, Z. Hou, F. Wu, Q. Du, and Y. Chen, “Anomaly detection for
hyperspectral imagery based on the regularized subspace method and
collaborative representation,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 11, p. 1318,
Jun. 2019.
[45] S. Chang and P. Ghamisi, “Nonnegative-constrained joint collaborative representation with union dictionary for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5534913.
[46] Z. Wu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with relaxed collaborative representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5533417.
[47] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in
hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000,
Apr. 2016.
[48] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, and L. Jiao, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection via background and potential anomaly dictionaries construction,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2263–2276,
Apr. 2019.
[49] L. Li, W. Li, Q. Du, and R. Tao, “Low-rank and sparse decomposition
with mixture of Gaussian for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4363–4372, Sep. 2020.
[50] S. Chen, C.-I. Chang, and X. Li, “Component decomposition analysis
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5516222.
[51] C.-I. Chang and J. Chen, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection by data
sphering and sparsity density peaks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5526321.
[52] J. Wang, Y. Xia, and Y. Zhang, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral
image via tensor completion,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 18,
no. 6, pp. 1099–1103, Jun. 2021.
[53] X. Zhang and G. Wen, “A fast and adaptive method for determining
K 1 , K 2 , and K 3 in the tensor decomposition-based anomaly detection
algorithm,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3–7,
Jan. 2018.
[54] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Chanussot, and Z. Wei, “Joint reconstruction
and anomaly detection from compressive hyperspectral images
using Mahalanobis distance-regularized tensor RPCA,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2919–2930,
May 2018.
[55] X. He, J. Wu, Q. Ling, Z. Li, Z. Lin, and S. Zhou, “Anomaly
detection for hyperspectral imagery via tensor low-rank approximation
with multiple subspace learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5509917.
[56] M. Feng, W. Chen, Y. Yang, Q. Shu, H. Li, and Y. Huang, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection based on tensor ring decomposition with factors
TV regularization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5514114.
[57] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Graph and total variation regularized low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 391–406,
Jan. 2020.
[58] R. Feng, H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, and T. Zeng, “Local spatial
constraint and total variation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512216.
[59] T. Guo, L. He, F. Luo, X. Gong, Y. Li, and L. Zhang, “Anomaly detection
of hyperspectral image with hierarchical antinoise mutual-incoherenceinduced low-rank representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5510213.
[60] M. Wang, D. Hong, B. Zhang, L. Ren, J. Yao, and J. Chanussot, “Learning double subspace representation for joint hyperspectral anomaly
detection and noise removal,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5507517.
[61] W. Xie, T. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Jia, and J. Lei, “Structure tensor and guided
filtering-based algorithm for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4218–4230, Jul. 2019.

5530422

[62] L. Li, W. Li, Y. Qu, C. Zhao, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Prior-based
tensor approximation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1037–1050,
Mar. 2022.
[63] Q. Xiao, L. Zhao, S. Chen, and X. Li, “Enhanced tensor low-rank
representation learning for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, 2023, Art. no. 5512005.
[64] Q. Xiao, L. Zhao, S. Chen, and X. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
via MERA decomposition and enhanced total variation regularization,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5514919.
[65] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818.
[66] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314.
[67] W. Li, G. Wu, and Q. Du, “Transferred deep learning for anomaly
detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 597–601, May 2017.
[68] X. Fu, S. Jia, L. Zhuang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection via deep plug-and-play denoising CNN regularization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 9553–9568,
Nov. 2021.
[69] Y. Wang, F. Wang, Q. Zhu, M. Song, and C. Yu, “Transferred
tensor decomposition-based deep learning for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp. (IGARSS),
Jul. 2021, pp. 5279–5282.
[70] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5503314.
[71] Y. Liu, W. Xie, Y. Li, Z. Li, and Q. Du, “Dual-frequency autoencoder for
anomaly detection in transformed hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5523613.
[72] K. Jiang et al., “E2E-LIADE: End-to-end local invariant autoencoding
density estimation model for anomaly target detection in hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 11385–11396,
Nov. 2022.
[73] Y. Li, K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, X. Zhang, and Q. Du, “A model-driven
deep mixture network for robust hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5522916.
[74] T. Jiang, Y. Li, W. Xie, and Q. Du, “Discriminative reconstruction
constrained generative adversarial network for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7,
pp. 4666–4679, Jul. 2020.
[75] Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Tan, B. Han, J. Ding, and Z. Liu, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on variational background inference and
generative adversarial network,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 143, Nov. 2023,
Art. no. 109795.
[76] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022.
[77] Y. Li, T. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Sparse coding-inspired GAN
for hyperspectral anomaly detection in weakly supervised learning,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512811.
[78] K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, T. Jiang, and Y. Li, “LREN: Low-rank
embedded network for sample-free hyperspectral anomaly detection,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2021, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4139–4146.
[79] D. Ma, Y. Hou, M. Chen, B. Li, Z. Wang, and M. Li, “S2G2HAD:
A graph-guided Siamese reconstruction network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5526121.
[80] K. Li et al., “Spectral difference guided graph attention autoencoder for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–17, 2023, Art. no. 5001817.
[81] D. Ma, M. Chen, Y. Yang, B. Li, M. Li, and Y. Gao, “Coarse-to-fine multiview anomaly coupling network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5507715.
[82] P. Xiang, S. Ali, J. Zhang, S. Ki Jung, and H. Zhou, “Pixel-associated
autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Int. J. Appl. Earth
Observ. Geoinf., vol. 129, May 2024, Art. no. 103816.
[83] Z. Wu et al., “Background-guided deformable convolutional autoencoder
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531816.

5530422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

[84] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
“BS3LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
2023, Art. no. 5504218.
[85] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. J. Plaza, “PDBSNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot reconstruction network for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511914.
[86] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
“BockNet: Blind-block reconstruction network with a guard window for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531916.
[87] F. Chollet, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jul. 2017, pp. 1251–1258.
[88] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
[89] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, and M. Yang, “Large-margin softmax loss
for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
Jun. 2016, pp. 507–516.
[90] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with attribute and edge-preserving filters,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5600–5611,
Oct. 2017.
[91] S. Yu, X. Li, L. Zhao, and J. Wang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
based on low-rank representation using local outlier factor,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1279–1283, Jul. 2021.
[92] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Total variation and sparsity regularized
decomposition model with union dictionary for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 2,
pp. 1472–1486, Feb. 2021.
[93] D. F. Williamson, R. A. Parker, and J. S. Kendrick, “The box plot: A
simple visual method to interpret data,” Ann. Internal Med., vol. 110,
no. 11, pp. 916–921, 1989.
[94] C.-I. Chang, “An effective evaluation tool for hyperspectral target
detection: 3D receiver operating characteristic curve analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 5131–5153, Jun. 2020.
[95] D. Shen, X. Ma, W. Kong, J. Liu, J. Wang, and H. Wang, “Hyperspectral
target detection based on interpretable representation network,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5519416.

Xu He received the B.E. degree in electronic
engineering and the M.E. degree in information
and communication engineering from Air Force
Engineering University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, in
2019 and 2021, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the College of Electronic
Science, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China.
His research interests include hyperspectral image
processing, infrared small target detection, and pattern recognition.

Shilin Zhou received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 1994, 1996, and 2000,
respectively.
He is currently a Full Professor with the College of Electrical Science, National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha. He has authored or
co-authored more than 100 refereed articles. His
research interests include image processing and pattern recognition.

Qiang Ling received the B.E. degree in measurement engineering and the M.Eng. degree in control
science and engineering from Air Force Engineering
University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, in 2013 and 2016,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in information and
communication engineering from the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha,
China, in 2019.
He is currently a Lecturer with the College of
Electronic Science and Technology, NUDT. His
research interests include pattern recognition and
hyperspectral image processing.

Miao Li received the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees
from the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2012 and 2017,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
College of Electronic Science and Technology,
NUDT. His research interests include infrared dim
and small target detection.

Zhaoxu Li received the B.E. degree in communication engineering and the M.E. degree in
information and communication engineering from
the National University of Defense Technology
(NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2018 and 2020,
respectively, where he is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the College of Electronic Science.
His research interests include pattern recognition, machine learning, and hyperspectral image
processing.

Yuyuan Zhang received the B.E. and M.E. degrees
in electronics and communication engineering from
Naval Aeronautical University, Yantai, China, in
2019 and 2021, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the College of Electronic
Science, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China.
His research interests include semantic communication and signal processing.

Zaiping Lin received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
from the National University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2007 and 2012,
respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
College of Electronic Science and Technology,
NUDT. His research interests include infrared image
processing and signal processing.