IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

1623

Graph Autoencoder Anomaly Detection for
E-Commerce Application by Contextual Integrating
Contrast With Reconstruction and Complementarity
Jinjie Wu, Zhipeng Qiu, Zhixia Zeng, Ruliang Xiao , Imad Rida , and Shi Zhang

Abstract—Considering the personalized characteristics and
behavior patterns of users, quickly and accurately identifying
abnormal users is crucial in the realm of E-commerce applications. However, existing methods fall short in integrating local and
global structural information. Meanwhile, contextual information
can serve effectively as a supervisory signal for anomaly
detection. This paper proposes a Graph Autoencoder Anomaly
Detection model, GAAD, that leverages context-integrated contrast and reconstruction complementarity. This model utilizes
local information of target nodes and adopts a contrastive
learning module based on graph neural networks to capture
anomalies in the structure space; simultaneously, a context subgraph of the global information of the target node is constructed
and anomalies in the attribute space are captured through the
autoencoder-based reconstruction module. The GAAD model
integrates two complementary modules, contrast and reconstruction, to enhance the accuracy of anomaly node detection.
The experimental results showcase the superior performance of
the proposed model over existing baseline methods across all
seven benchmark datasets, thereby highlighting its efficiency in
anomaly detection within E-commerce applications. Our code is
available at https://github.com/jinjiewu2000/GAAD.
Index Terms—Autoencoder, graph neural network, contextual
integrating, anomaly detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE APPLICATION of anomaly detection in E-commerce
activities is of great significance. For example, in
E-commerce financial activities, it is necessary to identify
fraudulent accounts; and it’s crucial to quickly and accurately
identify anomalous users [1] in order to warn about or
halt abnormal user behavior. Attribute networks are adept at
effectively modeling such application scenarios. In attribute
networks, nodes with attributes represent real-world entities,
and links represent relationships between entities. However,

T

Manuscript received 29 October 2023; revised 9 December 2023
and 31 December 2023; accepted 5 January 2024. Date of publication
10 January 2024; date of current version 26 April 2024. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 62172097, and in part by the Fujian Provincial Department of Science
and Technology under Grant 2020H6011. (Corresponding author: Ruliang
Xiao.)
Jinjie Wu, Zhipeng Qiu, Zhixia Zeng, Ruliang Xiao, and Shi
Zhang are with the College of Computer and Cyber Security, Fujian
Normal University, Fuzhou 350117, China (e-mail: jinjiewu2000@
sina.com; qbx20230179@yjs.fjnu.edu.cn; QBX20220156@yjs.fjnu.edu.cn;
xiaoruliang@fjnu.edu.cn; shi@fjnu.edu.cn).
Imad Rida is with the Laboratoire Biomécanique et Bioingénierie UMR
7338, Centre de Recherches de Royallieu, Université de Technologie de
Compiégne, 60200 Compiégne, France (e-mail: imad.rida@utc.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3352186

the attribute network graph not only encompasses complex
connection (structural) information and node attribute details
but also typically harbors various types of anomalies, making
anomaly detection based on attribute networks a challenging
task [2], [3].
Currently, considerable research is dedicated to anomaly
detection utilizing attribute networks, and numerous solution
strategies have emerged. Shallow anomaly detection methods
include techniques like AMEN and Radar. However, shallow networks cannot model complex interdependent graph
relationships. With the significant progress made by deep
neural networks, researchers have also been exploring the
use of deep learning techniques for anomaly detection [4]
and abnormal behavior analysis [5]. Deep anomaly detection
methods, like Xiao et al. [6], achieve anomaly detection in
various environments by learning causal relationships and
generalizing them to new scenarios. Jin et al. [7] proposed
a model for graph anomaly detection that detects anomalies
based on the relationship between nodes and their subgraphs.
Zhang et al. [8] detects anomalies by comparing nodes and
subgraphs. These methods overlook the contextual information
of nodes, and anomalies based on this context can disrupt
personalized features. Even if the supervised classification
method is used, it is not applicable. Therefore, there remains
a deficiency in effective anomaly detection methods capable
of handling multiple anomaly patterns in complex scenarios [9], [10].
Deep anomaly detection in attribute networks is commonly
conducted using the graph neural network model, GNN [11].
GNN encompasses several models, such as graph autoencoders
(GAEs) and graph convolutional networks (GCNs), among
others. In the field of deep graph representation learning,
the DGI [12] method learns the representation of nodes
in the graph by maximizing mutual information. Following
DGI, Ren et al. [13] proposed heterogeneous DGI (HDGI),
which learns node representations in the graph by maximizing local-global mutual information. Graph autoencoders
learn latent representations by reconstructing the structural
information of graphs [14]. BLoG [15] utilizes local and
global regularization for recommended guided graph representation learning. Although GNNs have made significant
progress in areas such as biomedicine, material science, and
mechanics, and even extended to applications such as social
network analysis and drug discovery [16], advances in graph
anomaly detection by existing methods [2] rely mainly on

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1558-4127 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1624

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Overall framework.

purely unsupervised approaches, and still suffer from three
shortcomings:
First, local and global contextual information lacks effective utilization and integration. Using instance pairs derived
from node subgraph construction and contrast can enhance
anomaly detection by effectively attending to local node
information. However, this method extracts only the local
structural information of the target node, failing to capture and
apply its global structure effectively.
Second, existing autoencoder methods based on graph data
fail to fully utilize contextual information (e.g., subgraphs
or neighboring nodes), which is crucial for anomaly detection. Typically, these autoencoder methods aim to reconstruct
attributes or the entire graph structure for each node, disregarding contextual information.
Third, existing methods have inconsistent detection effects
on anomalies in the E-commerce field, and there is still room
for improvement.
To address these issues, it is imperative to transcend the
constraints of current studies, enhance the characterization
quality of network structural features, and adopt a more
effective, decoupled approach for extracting and integrating local and global structural information. Consequently,
this study introduces a model, termed GAAD, that constructs the local and global contexts of target nodes by
modeling their respective information and utilizes a selfsupervised learning strategy to allow the complementary
modules of contrast learning and attribute reconstruction to
fully discover and utilize the features and structures in the
data to compute each node’s anomaly score. To verify the
method’s efficacy, this study conducts thorough experiments
on seven datasets. The workflow of the model is illustrated in
Figure 1.
The method described above establishes a new selfsupervised graph anomaly detection model by integrating two
complementary modules, distinct from existing methods. The
primary contributions of this study are as follows:
1) A new graph anomaly detection model is proposed to
fully utilize the context information of graph data and
achieve a more comprehensive capture of anomaly patterns by modeling local and global context information
separately.

2) A self-supervised learning method is designed to solve
the anomaly detection problem in attribute networks.
This method can effectively utilize context integration to
integrate methods based on attribute reconstruction and
contrastive learning.
3) Extensive experiments are conducted on seven real-life
datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of GAAD.
Experimental results show that the performance of this
GAAD is better than the current algorithm, and its
anomaly detection effect is superior in the field of
E-commerce.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II
describes the problem definition; Section III introduces the
proposed anomaly detection model in detail; Section IV
discusses the experimental results; and Section V concludes
with a summary.
II. P ROBLEM D EFINITION
In this article, lowercase letters represent vectors and uppercase letters represent matrices. The attribute network is defined
as described below:
Definition 1 (Attribute Network): Given a graph G=(X, A)
to represent an attribute network. In this paper, X ∈ Rn×d
represents the attribute matrix of the attribute network, where
V = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) is the set of nodes (|V| = n), d represents
the feature dimension of the attribute matrix X, A ∈ Rn×n
represents the adjacency matrix of the attribute network if there
is a link between node i and node j, then Aij = 1, otherwise
Aij = 0.
Definition 2 (Anomaly Detection of Attribute Networks):
Given a graph G=(X, A), the goal is to learn an anomaly scoring function score(-), computing the score that the anomaly
for each node within G. The anomaly score characterizes the
degree of anomaly of a node. By ordering the anomaly scores
of all nodes in the graph, anomalous nodes can be detected
based on their location.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overall Framework
The overall framework of the GAAD method proposed in
this article is shown in Figure 1. The framework comprises

WU et al.: GAAD FOR E-COMMERCE APPLICATION BY CONTEXTUAL INTEGRATING CONTRAST

three components: graph view sampling, the complementary
modules of contrastive learning and attribute reconstruction,
and anomaly score computation. The first component, graph
view sampling, employs subgraph sampling and graph diffusion to capture local and global view subgraphs of the target
node. The second component constructs the complementary
modules of contrastive learning and attribute reconstruction
to fully exploit node and subgraph contextual information
for anomaly detection. Within this component, the attribute
reconstruction module utilizes the target node’s local and
global contextual information to reconstruct its feature vector.
If the selected node is anomalous, its features will not align
with those of the surrounding environment, resulting in a
significant disparity between the reconstructed and original
feature vectors. The contrastive learning module directly compares the target node with its surrounding context to ascertain
any incorrect links with neighboring nodes. This module
captures anomalies within the structural space. The third
component integrates the two complementary modules to compute the anomaly score through contrast and reconstruction
methodologies for reliable anomaly detection in E-commerce
applications. The subsequent sections of this chapter, from
Sections III-B–III-E, will delve into the three core components
of GAAD, with Section III-F outlining the algorithm.
B. Generation of Multiple Views
This study introduces two self-supervised learning objectives to leverage the target node’s extensive global contextual
information and form significant connections with its contextual surroundings, with each objective stemming from
distinct scales and dimensions. Initially, node-level identification employs GAE to reconstruct the target node’s feature
representation, which is then contrasted with the actual values
present within the attribute network. Throughout the construction phase, the sampling of multiple perspectives allows the
contrast module to investigate a variety of contextual data
during recognition. The general view is the network structure
obtained by reading from the dataset.
As depicted in Figure 1’s leftmost section, select the target
node in the initial view, select the pair of nodes and their
adjacent edges and nodes to form the local view subgraph, and
then use graph diffusion to obtain the global view. In the global
Select the target node in the view, select the pair of nodes
and their adjacent edges and nodes to form the global view
subgraph. In the generation target, the identification objects
are the original and reconstructed target nodes. Next, we will
introduce the method of generating two views:
1) Graph diffusion. The method involves graph diffusion,
employing PageRank (PPR), to capture global structural
information and obtain a global view.
2) Subgraph sampling. Random walk with restart (RWR) is
used to sample the view to obtain the view subgraph, which
ensures the preservation of the semantic information of the
underlying graph data.
C. Attribute Reconstruction Based on Local and Global
Graphs
In the context of graph data anomaly detection, traditional
deep autoencoders (DAE) can only reconstruct the attribute

1625

information of nodes, but cannot consider the underlying
topology of the nodes, which is not conducive to anomaly
detection of graph nodes. To overcome this constraint, as
depicted in the central portion of Figure 1, this paper designs
a graph autoencoder (GAE) consisting of two components:
an encoder and a decoder based on a graph neural network
(GNN).
GNN-based encoder. Given a graph view Gi of a target node
vi , use a GNN encoder to convert its high-dimensional node
features into a low-dimensional representation, the formula is:
Hi = GNNenc (Xi , Ai )

(1)

where Ai , Xi , and Hi Respectively represent the adjacency
matrix, feature matrix, and embedding matrix of Gi . GNNenc
is a graphical encoder consisting of multiple layers of GNNs.
To improve the efficiency and avoid the overfitting problem,
this paper adopts a single-layer GCN with random weights
as the main graph encoder. Therefore, Equation (1) can be
specifically expressed as:


(2)
Hi = GNNenc (Xi , Ai ) = σ Xi , Âi , W1
1
1
where Âi = (D)− 2 
Ai (D)− 2 , 
Ai = Ai + I. Specifically, σ (·)
represents a nonlinear activation function, and W1 is the matrix
of trainable parameters in the graph encoder.
GNN-based decoder. In the same way, a single-layer GCN
with random weights is used to construct the graph data
decoder. During the attribute reconstruction process, this paper
takes the node embedding matrix as input to reconstruct the
node features:


(3)
Xir = GNNdec (Hi , Ai ) = σ Xi , Âi , W2

where W2 is the matrix of trainable parameters in the graph
decoder, GNNdec has the same structure as the GNNenc and Xir
represents the reconstructed node feature matrix.
Attribute reconstruction anomaly detection. The attribute
reconstruction of view Gi is mainly based on the attribute
information of the local and global subgraphs centered on node
vi . To achieve attribute reconstruction based on contextual
information, this paper anonymizes the graph view of the
target node vi . As mentioned in this paper, this module can
better capture node-level exceptions in the attribute space. This
paper detects anomalies by minimizing the mean square error
(MSE) between the original and reconstructed features of the
target node in the graph view, as shown in Figure 1.
2
1  r
xi [−1, :], xi
N
N

Lrec =

(4)

i=1

where xir [−1, :] is the reconstructed feature vector for the
anonymous target node vi , and xi is the feature vector of the
target node vi , where xir can be obtained from Equation (2)
and Equation (3).
D. Contrastive Learning Based on Autoencoders
To fully exploit the structural information of the nodes, this
paper proposes a contrastive learning module that consists of
three different components, and uses an encoder and a readout
module to extract the low-dimensional embedding of the target

1626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

node and local subgraph and then compares the consistency of
the target node with its surrounding environment. This module
distinguishes the representation of target nodes and their local
subgraph representations within the embedding and structure
spaces, thereby placing greater emphasis on the surrounding
contextual information. The components of the module are as
follows:
GNN-based encoder. The contrastive learning module in this
paper selects the node feature vector and matrix of the target
node vi , along with the relevant graph view, as inputs. The
encoding of the graph view is depicted as in Equation (2),
whereas a different formula is employed for the transformation
of the target node’s feature vector:
ei = σ (xi W2 )

(5)

where ei is the embedding vectors of the target node vi , and xi
is the feature vectors of the target node vi . Due to the absence
of a lower-level graph structure for individual target nodes,
the graph adjacency matrix from Equation (3) is omitted in
Equation (5), and W2 is the same as in Equation (3).
Readout module. The goal of this module is to allow
embedding vectors ei to be directly compared to subgraphs,
with a variety of readout functions, such as average and
micropooling. This paper uses average pooling, which can be
expressed as:
M
1  
Hi j, :
gi =
M

(6)

j=1

where gi represents the graph-level embedding vector of the
view Gi , Hi [j, :] represents The embedding vector of vj in Hi ,
M is the number of nodes in the graph view.
Contrast modules. This module is the central element of
the contrastive learning module. It can obtain the degree of
difference between two vectors by comparing their embeddings in an instance pair. For contrast ei and gi , a contrast
module based on bilinear transformation is designed, where
the contrast score is defined as follows:


Si = σ ei W3 gTi
(7)
where W3 is a learnable scoring matrix. A sigmoid function is
used as a nonlinear transformation σ (·) of the above equation
to ensure that the discrimination score is within the range
[0, 1].
Anomaly detection with contrastive learning. Detection aims
to minimize the difference between the predicted Si and the
true label yi . Therefore, in this section, the binary crossentropy loss with Logits is used as the objective function,
which combines the Logits activation of the Sigmoid function
and the binary cross-entropy loss and can be a good measure
of the difference between the model’s prediction and the real
label.
1
yi log(Si ) + (1 − yi )log(1 − Si )
N
N

Lcon = −

(8)

i=1

E. Anomaly Score Computation
In the module of attribute reconstruction, the reconstruction of the target node’s attributes relies on both its local

(i.e., neighboring) and global contextual information, where
the degree of disparity between the reconstructed feature
vector and the original one serves as a metric for detecting
anomalies in the node. This paper uses L2-norm distance as the
scoring function for reconstructed anomalies. For node vi ∈ V,
the following function is defined:


frec (vi ) = γ ||xir [−1, :] − xi ||22
(9)
Among them, frec (vi ) is the attribute reconstruction anomaly
score of vi . The score is proportional to the degree of node
anomaly. In the above equation, xir [ − 1, :] is the reconstructed
eigenvector of vi , provided by Equation (3), where is γ a
scalar, to ultimately limit the attribute reconstruction anomaly
score to the range of [0, 1].
The attribute reconstruction module in this paper only
focuses on node discrimination in the attribute space without
directly utilizing the topological information of the graph.
To overcome this constraint, the contrastive learning module directly distinguishes between the target node and the
neighboring subgraphs within the embedding space, with the
contrast scores from Equation (7) naturally merging into a
unified score one. For node vi ∈ V, the contrast anomaly
scoring function is defined as:


fcon (vi ) = δ 
(10)
Si − Si
among fcon (vi ) is the contrast abnormality score of vi , where
Si and 
Si are the positive and negative contrast discrimination
scores respectively. If the node vi is normal, then Si should be
close to 1, while 
Si is likely to be close to 0. Otherwise, if node
Si should be close to 0.5. Therefore,
vi is anomalous, Si and 
the range of 
Si −Si is [–1, 0], but this paper introduces a scalar
δ to ultimately limit the contrast learning anomaly score to the
range of [0, 1].
Finally, the above two functions are combined to obtain the
final anomaly scoring function for the graph data to estimate
a node vi ∈ V of the anomaly:
f (vi ) = αfcon (vi ) + βfrec (vi )

(11)

Among them, α and β are two balancing factors to weigh
the importance of the contrastive learning module and the
attribute reconstruction module. In practice, this calculation is
repeated R times to obtain statistically stable anomaly scores
and finally the final anomaly score function.
score(vi ) =

1
f (vi )
R

(12)

F. GAAD Algorithm
Combining Equations (5) and (9), the final optimization goal
of this paper is:
L = αLcon + βLrec

(13)

where L is the final training loss. α and β are two balancing
factors identical to those in Equation (11).
The complete procedure of the proposed GAAD algorithm
is outlined in Algorithm 1. The time complexity of the
algorithm is O(Rnc(λ + c)), where c represents the number of
nodes on which the graph view is based, and λ represents the
average node degree in the graph.

WU et al.: GAAD FOR E-COMMERCE APPLICATION BY CONTEXTUAL INTEGRATING CONTRAST

Algorithm 1 The Proposed GAAD Algorithm
Input: Attribute graph G; Training rounds T; Subgraph size
S; Test round R.
Output: Anomaly score function of the graph: score(·)
1: Randomly initialize trainable parameters W1 ,W2 ,W3 ;
2: for t ∈ 1, 2, . . . , T do
3:
S ←− Randomly divide V into batches of size S;
4:
for batch s = (v1 , . . . , vB ) ∈ S do
5:
Sample local view subgraph and global view subgraphs for each node in s;
6:
Calculate node and its associated graph view embeddings via Eq. (2) and (5);
7:
Calculate the reconstructed feature vector of the node
in s via Eq. (3);
8:
Calculate the loss L via Eq. (4), (8), and (13);
9:
Back propagate and update the trainable parameters
W1 ,W2 ,W3 ;
10:
end for
11: end for
12: for vi ∈ V do
13:
for r ∈ 1, 2, . . . , R do
14:
Calculate f(vi ) for each round through Eq. (9), (10),
and (11);
15:
end for
16:
The final anomaly score(vi ) is calculated by Eq. (12);
17: end for
TABLE I
I NFORMATION OF THE DATASET. T HE F IRST T HREE DATASETS A RE
C ITATION N ETWORK DATASETS , THE L AST T HREE A RE S OCIAL
N ETWORK DATASETS , AND THE L AST O NE I S
AN E-C OMMERCE DATASET

IV. E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
In this section, this paper assesses the effectiveness of the
GAAD model proposed in this study through extensive experiments conducted on seven real-world benchmark datasets.
First, the datasets and experimental setups used for the
experiments are presented, second, a performance comparison
was conducted by evaluating our model against state-of-the-art
anomaly detection methods, and finally, ablation experiments
and parameter analyses are also performed in this paper.
A. Dataset
To evaluate the performance of GAAD and its comparison
algorithm, seven real-world graph datasets are used as benchmarks, including three social network datasets, three citation
network datasets, and one E-commerce dataset. A description
of these datasets is as follows:

1627

1) Citation Network. CORA, Citeseer, and ACM are three
citation datasets, which consist of scientific publications.
2) Social Network. BlogCatalog, Flickr, and Twitter are
three social network datasets, and their data come from
three social network platforms respectively.
3) E-commerce. Amazon is a product sales dataset, which
comes from Amazon, the largest online E-commerce
company in the United States. In this dataset, the nodes
are products, and the edges represent whether the two
products are purchased together. The characteristics of
each item are processed as node characteristics.
Since the above dataset does not contain ground truth
anomalies, the synthetic anomalies need to be injected into
the clean attribute network for evaluation. Table II also
summarizes the total number of anomalies as well as the
dataset statistics. The dataset is composed of nodes and their
connected edges, and its context information is the sampled
target node and its adjacent edges and nodes.
B. Experimental Setup
In this section, this paper will describe the experimental
setup, including the baseline methods for comparison, evaluation metrics, and fundamental parameter configurations.
This paper compares the proposed GAAD model with
seven different anomaly detection methods. The paper briefly
introduces these methods as follows:
AMEN [17] utilizes information from the target node
with its self-network to detect anomalies. Radar [18] detects
anomalies by assessing the consistency between residual
attributes and graphical information. ANOMALOUS [19]
detects anomalies by combining CUR decomposition and
residual analysis. DOMINANT [2] utilizes a graph autoencoder to combine the reconstructed adjacency matrix and
the attribute matrix, and calculates the reconstruction error
of nodes to detect anomalies. DGI [12] uses a bilinear
discriminator to score node anomalies by comparing nodes and
subgraphs. COLA [3] detects anomalies by using an encoder
model of GNN to learn node embeddings and determine the
consistency between the embedding and its neighboring subgraphs. Sub-CR [8] detects anomalies by learning embedded
representations of subgraphs and target nodes, followed by
multi-view contrast learning, and finally by attribute reconstruction errors in both views.
Evaluation metrics. This paper evaluates the anomaly detection performance of GAAD and its competitors using a
common benchmark AUC metric. AUC stands for the area
under the ROC curve, with values ranging from 0 to 1. A
higher AUC value indicates better detection performance.
Basic parameter settings. To improve performance while
ensuring efficiency, this paper sets the size of the subgraph
to 4, and a single-layer GCN model is employed as the GNN
encoder, with an embedding dimension set to 64. During the
training process, for the dataset, α is fixed at 0.8 or 1, then
β values are selected from {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1}, and the
ADAM optimizer is used for model training. In terms of
learning rate, it is set according to the characteristics of the
dataset. Specifically, Cora, CiteSeer, and Flickr use 0.001,

1628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE II
T HE AUC VALUES C OMPARISON ON S EVEN B ENCHMARK DATASETS

TABLE III
E FFECT OF D IFFERENT R EADOUT F UNCTIONS ON AUC VALUE

TABLE IV
E FFECT OF D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS ON AUC VALUES . S PECIFICALLY, GAAD-CON, GAAD-REC, AND GAAD-U NWEIGHTED
A RE R ESPECTIVELY U SED TO I NDICATE T HAT GAAD H AS N O ATTRIBUTE R ECONSTRUCTION M ODULE ,
C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING M ODULE , AND A NOMALY S CORE W EIGHTING

BlogCatalog, Twitter and Amazon use 0.003, while ACM
uses 0.0005. For different datasets, 400 Epochs (BlogCatalog,
Flickr, Twitter, and ACM) and 100 Epochs (Cora, CiteSeer,
and Amazon) were trained. During the test phase, 256 is used
as the sampling parameter R to obtain an accurate evaluation
of the model performance.
C. Results and Analysis
The GAAD proposed in this paper is compared with the
seven baseline methods in this subsection. The results for AUC
values are presented in Table II. The best-performing method
in each dataset is indicated in bold and the second best score
is underlined. Based on these results, this paper draws the
following conclusions:
In all datasets, the GAAD approach presented in this paper
surpasses the performance of all baseline methods. In the seven
datasets, the average AUC value of GAAD is 0.2375 and
0.1498 higher than the shallow methods AMEN and Radar
respectively. The average AUC value in the seven datasets
is higher than that of AMEN and Radar. It is 0.051 higher
than the best deep detection method in the baseline, demonstrating its ability to detect anomalies with high-dimensional
node features and complex structure graphs and its superior
detection effect in the e-commerce field. The main reason is
that GAAD captures abnormal patterns by jointly using selfsupervised methods of reconstruction learning and contrastive
learning.

The method proposed in this article demonstrates excellent detection performance and generalization ability. This
achievement is partly due to the GAAD method combining
two distinct self-supervised learning strategies, which work
together to achieve higher learning efficiency. The joint
application of this strategy can provide more comprehensive
information and help the model more effectively capture
abnormal patterns in the data, thereby significantly improving
detection performance.
This article repeatedly calculates the abnormality score of
each node multiple times to ensure that the final abnormality
score is statistically stable and finally detects abnormal nodes
based on the abnormality score. In summary, GAAD’s comprehensive performance and generalization capabilities make it a
compelling innovative work in the field of graph data anomaly
detection.
D. Ablation Experiment
In this subsection, the paper studies the impact of varying
different readout functions and the impact of various components of the proposed approach.
1) In the experiment, this paper examines the impact on
the model by altering the selection of various types of
readout functions. The readout functions here are min
pooling, max pooling, and weighted average pooling.
The experimental results are shown in Table IV. The
average pooling used in this paper has the best readout

WU et al.: GAAD FOR E-COMMERCE APPLICATION BY CONTEXTUAL INTEGRATING CONTRAST

Fig. 2.

1629

AUC values of GAAD with different weights of Alpha and Beta on Cora, Citeseer, and Twitter.

effect on the seven datasets compared with other readout
functions.
2) This paper considers the influence of different components in the model it designs. First consider two variants
of GAAD, where GAAD-REC only uses the attribute
reconstruction module to identify abnormal nodes and
GAAD-CON exclusively employs a contrastive learning module for the identification of anomalous nodes.
Finally, to evaluate the effectiveness of the designed
anomaly scoring function, this paper further constructs
GAAD-Unweighted, which means to obtain attribute
reconstruction and comparative learning anomaly scores
in an unweighted manner, that is, α = β = 1 in
Equation (13). The experimental results are shown in
Table IV and the following points were observed:
First, the complete GAAD algorithm achieves the best
performance, demonstrating that the two learning strategies in this paper’s method are complementary and
effective. Second, the weighting of the anomaly scoring
function is also helpful in detecting anomalies on the
seven datasets. Removing fractional weights results in
poor anomaly detection performance. The possible reason is that different components play different effects in
detecting anomalies, and α = β = 1 will lead to poor
final detection results. Through ablation experiments,
we can first conclude that the readout function used in
this article has the best readout effect and has better
generalization ability, which is beneficial to subsequent
anomaly detection work. Secondly, the effectiveness of
the combined method of attribute reconstruction and
contrastive learning used in this article in graph anomaly
detection is obtained. The combination of these two
learning strategies can better identify abnormal patterns
in the graph, and finally obtain the effectiveness of the
designed anomaly scoring function.
E. Parametric Study
In this subsection, this paper studies the impact of four
main parameters on the performance of the GAAD model: the
algorithm’s balancing factors α and β, test rounds, subgraph
size, and the embedding dimension.
1) Algorithm Balance Factor: In this experiment, this
paper explores how the adjustment of balancing factor α

and β influences anomaly detection performance. This paper
separately adjusts these two factors within the range of {0.2,
0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}, as shown in Figure 2. The results on the
selected dataset are shown here. The results can be obtained
to show that the AUC value tends to increase with α when β
is constant, and the to reach its peak AUC varies for different
datasets. Furthermore, the choice of β is highly dependent on
the specific dataset. For example, Citeseer requires a larger
value (β ≥ 0.6), while Twitter requires a smaller value (β ≤
0.6). Depending on the nature of the dataset and the results
show that, in practice, this article sets α = 0.8 for the Cora
dataset and BlogCatalog dataset, α = 1.0 for other datasets,
and sets the value of β to 0.6 for each dataset.
2) The Impact of Test Rounds: In this experiment, this
paper studies its effectiveness in the inference phase of GAAD
by modifying the test rounds. The value of R is chosen from
the set = {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 400}. The results can
be observed in Figure 3(a). As depicted in the figure, it is
evident that inadequate rounds of evaluation result in subpar
detection performance. As the number of test rounds increases,
the AUC for all datasets steadily increases, indicating the
need for an adequate number of rounds to mitigate bias
resulting from random sampling. However, when it is greater
than 256, there is no obvious increasing trend in AUC.
Therefore, maintaining the evaluation rounds at 256 for stable
performance.
3) The Impact of Subgraph Size Factors: This paper then
further explores the impact of subgraph size on AUC. GAAD
was run on seven datasets to test the anomaly detection
performance under the condition of subgraph size = {1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}. The results are reported in Figure 3(b).
From the figure, it can be seen from the figure that when
the subgraph size is small, the performance of GAAD sharply
increases with the increase of K and quickly reaches the
peak. However, when the subgraph size > 5, the performance
decreases as the subgraph size increases. The results indicate
that ensuring dependable detection performance hinges on
the critical decision of subgraph size. When the subgraph
size is small, it is difficult for the model to obtain enough
neighborhood information to detect anomalies, while when
the subgraph size is large, the subgraph samples unarticulated points around the target node into the subgraph
causing it to contain redundant information and affecting the
performance.

1630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 3.

Parameter sensitivity analysis of GAAD on seven benchmark datasets.

4) The Impact of Embedding Dimensions: The paper concludes by exploring the impact of embedding dimensions on
the encoder. How it affects the performance of the method
in this paper is obtained by varying the value of the embedding dimension, and the results are shown in Fig. 3(c). For
most datasets, when D ≤ 32, performance improves as the
embedding dimension increases. When D is larger, the AUC
of each dataset has a peak, Then as the embedding dimension
increases, the performance starts to decrease slightly. So for
most datasets, choosing 64 as the potential embedding is best.

V. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces a novel self-supervised graph autoencoder learning model, GAAD, for graph anomaly detection,
generating global and local subgraphs of target nodes to
more effectively capture the structural patterns associated with
anomalies. It processes local and global contextual information
and then models the structure and attributes of nodes to obtain
two key components, the attribute reconstruction module
identifies and reconstructs nodes with significant discrepancies, capturing anomalies in the attribute space, while the
contrastive learning module detects structural space anomalies. Ultimately, the integration of these two complementary
modules seeks to bolster the effectiveness of anomaly detection. Extensive experiments across seven real-world datasets
demonstrate that our method can swiftly and accurately
detect anomalies, enabling efficient anomaly detection in
E-commerce applications.However, the method is unable to
detect complex networks such as heterogeneous graphs and
dynamic graphs, etc. In the future, we will improve the method
to allow it to be applied to more complex network/graph data.

CR EDI T AUTHORSHIP C ONTRIBUTION S TATEMENT
Jinjie Wu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation,
Investigation, Experiment, Writing-original draft. Zhipeng
Qiu: Methodology, Writing-review & editing. Zhixia Zeng:
data collection, Writing-review & editing. Ruliang Xiao:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Writing-review
& editing, Project administration. Imad Rida: Methodology,
Investigation, Writing-Review. Shi Zhang: Writing-review &
editing.

R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Li and P. Yi, “A contrastive learning framework for detecting
anomalous behavior in commodity trading platforms,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13,
no. 9, p. 5709, 2023.
[2] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2019,
pp. 594–602.
[3] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
[4] J. Liu, F. Xia, X. Feng, J. Ren, and H. Liu, “Deep graph learning for
anomalous citation detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2543–2557, Jun. 2022.
[5] Y. Zhang, W. Liang, X. Yuan, S. Zhang, G. Yang, and Z. Zeng, “Deep
learning based abnormal behavior detection for elderly healthcare using
consumer network cameras,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early
access, Aug. 29, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3309852.
[6] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual
graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023.
[7] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[8] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2022,
arXiv:2205.04816.
[9] H. Zhao, M. Liu, S. Qiu, and X. Cao, “Satellite unsupervised anomaly
detection based on deconvolution-reconstructed temporal convolutional
autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Aug. 18,
2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3306428.
[10] X. Tang, S. Zeng, F. Yu, W. Yu, Z. Sheng, and Z. Kang,
“Self-supervised anomaly pattern detection for large scale industrial
data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 515, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2023.
[11] M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli, “A new model for learning
in graph domains,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2005,
pp. 729–734.
[12] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv:1809.10341.
[13] Y. Ren, B. Liu, C. Huang, P. Dai, L. Bo, and J. Zhang, “Heterogeneous
deep graph infomax,” 2020, arXiv:1911.08538.
[14] J. Li, G. Lu, Z. Wu, and F. Ling, “Multi-view representation model based
on graph autoencoder,” Inf. Sci., vol. 632, pp. 439–453, Jun. 2023.
[15] M. Li, L. Zhang, L. Cui, L. Bai, Z. Li, and X. Wu, “BLoG:
Bootstrapped graph representation learning with local and global regularization for recommendation,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 144, Dec. 2023,
Art. no. 109874.
[16] Y. Pan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, and M. Lu, “CSDTI: An interpretable
cross-attention network with GNN-based drug molecule aggregation for drug-target interaction prediction,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53,
pp. 27177–27190, Sep. 2023.
[17] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2016, pp. 207–215.
[18] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
[19] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “ANOMALOUS: A joint
modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
Proc. IJCAI, 2018, pp. 3513–3519.