416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Hierarchical-Instance Contrastive Learning for
Minority Detection on Imbalanced
Medical Datasets
Yiyue Li , Guangwu Qian, Xiaoshuang Jiang, Zekun Jiang , Wen Wen,
Shaoting Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, Kang Li , and Qicheng Lao

Abstract — Deep learning methods are often hampered by
issues such as data imbalance and data-hungry. In medical imaging, malignant or rare diseases are frequently
of minority classes in the dataset, featured by diversified
distribution. Besides that, insufficient labels and unseen
cases also present conundrums for training on the minority
classes. To confront the stated problems, we propose a
novel Hierarchical-instance Contrastive Learning (HCLe)
method for minority detection by only involving data from
the majority class in the training stage. To tackle inconsistent intra-class distribution in majority classes, our method
introduces two branches, where the first branch employs
an auto-encoder network augmented with three constraint
functions to effectively extract image-level features, and the
second branch designs a novel contrastive learning network
by taking into account the consistency of features among
hierarchical samples from majority classes. The proposed
method is further refined with a diverse mini-batch strategy,
enabling the identification of minority classes under multiManuscript received 24 July 2023; accepted 15 August 2023. Date of
publication 31 August 2023; date of current version 2 January 2024.
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2020YFB1711500 and
Grant 2020YFB1711503; in part by the 1.3.5 Project for Disciplines of
Excellence; and in part by the West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
under Grant ZYYC21004 and Grant ZYJC18010. (Yiyue Li and Guangwu
Qian contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: Qicheng
Lao; Kang Li.)
Yiyue Li and Zekun Jiang are with the Department of Pathology,
and the West China Biomedical Big Data Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China (e-mail:
yiyuelili@foxmail.com; zekun_jiang@163.com).
Guangwu Qian is with the Department of Computer Science, Sichuan
University-Pittsburgh Institute, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041,
China (e-mail: guangwu.qian@scupi.cn).
Xiaoshuang Jiang is with the Department of Ophthalmology, West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China (e-mail:
jiangxiaoshuang@wchscu.cn).
Wen Wen is with the Department of Ultrasound, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China (e-mail: wendywen072@
163.com).
Shaoting Zhang is with the Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Shanghai 200030, China (e-mail: rutgers.shaoting@gmail.com).
Kang Li is with the West China Biomedical Big Data Center, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China, and also with
the Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai 200030, China
(e-mail: likang@wchscu.cn).
Qicheng Lao is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing 100876, China,
and also with the Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai
200030, China (e-mail: qicheng.lao@bupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMI.2023.3310716

ple conditions. Extensive experiments have been conducted
to evaluate the proposed method on three datasets of
different diseases and modalities. The experimental results
show that the proposed method outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods.
Index Terms— Data imbalance, minority detection, hierarchical instance, medical image analysis.

I. I NTRODUCTION
RAINING a deep neural network (DNN) to perform well
requires a relatively balanced dataset, and imbalanced
ones may lead to a biased model towards the majority class
while ignoring the minority class [1]. In medical data, samples
in some specific or severe diseases are often insufficient, even
though these diseases are usually seen as of scientific interest
and essence [2].
Conventional methods for dealing with data imbalance are
re-sampling [3], [4], [5], [6], re-weighting [7], [8], [9], [10],
and synthesizing data [11] or labels [12]. Re-sampling is to
increase the number of minority samples. Re-weighting adjusts
the weights between the minority and majority classes, which
aims to re-balance these imbalanced data. However, most of
these conventional methods focus on re-balancing samples
among classes but still lack samples of minority classes,
which is inappropriate for clinical practice due to 1) Limited
contribution from rare cases of clinical significance in minority
classes [13]; 2) Poor performance on learning diverse cases.
Even after rebalancing, it is still unlikely to increase the underlying information of minority classes. Certain minority classes
(e.g., rare or malignant diseases) have a limited number of
samples and are mostly the class of interest and essence [14],
some of which are even unseen in some medical institutions.
Thus it is difficult to train a network based on such limited
data. Apart from the rare case issue, the diversity of cases also
poses difficulties for learning. In terms of minority classes,
besides the sample size issues, these cases in a minority class
(e.g., malignant) are accompanied by distribution diversity. For
instance, certain cancers vary considerably in terms of shape,
color, and location distributions [15]. Also, the consistency
of the majority class fails to be guaranteed in numerous
imbalanced medical scenarios. The majority class mainly
contains multiple sub-classes in clinical practice (e.g., several

T

1558-254X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LI et al.: HCLe FOR MINORITY DETECTION ON IMBALANCED MEDICAL DATASETS

sub-classes in a benign class). In this way, conventional methods distinguish sub-classes of the majority class and minority
class by learning their diverse features implicitly. Due to the
high diversity and lack of numbers in the imbalanced data, the
decision boundaries could be biased toward the majority class,
and thus it is challenging to distinguish minority classes.
In this paper, we propose a novel method Hierarchicalinstance Contrastive Learning (HCLe) for minority detection.
The HCLe requires only the majority class in the training
process to avoid training on the rare and diverse minority.
Unlike conventional methods of learning biased features,
it learns consistent features of the majority class. Due to
the influence of diverse cases, our proposed method has two
branches. Firstly, we introduce an image reconstruction branch
augmented with multi-constraint functions (i.e., SSIM, GMS,
and adversarial losses) to enhance the feature extraction ability.
This image reconstruction branch is derived from conventional encoder-decoder networks. Secondly, to address the
inconsistency issue of the majority class (e.g., high intra-class
variation [16]), our method uses a novel hierarchical-instance
contrastive learning branch to improve the consistency of
feature representation among majority samples. This branch
learns intra-class consistent features by sampling hierarchical
instances from sub-classes of the majority class as contrastive
pairs. Our hierarchical-instance contrastive learning network
shares some similarities with multi-instance contrastive learning (MICLe) [17] which also uses multiple instances for
contrastive learning. However, we emphasize to a greater
extent on the hierarchical relationship among the instances,
which can cope with the imbalanced data in a better way.
These two branches share the same feature embedding, thus
considering both feature representations and the similarity
within the majority class. In the inference stage, the minority
class (e.g., certain malignant diseases) is detected because
its distribution differs from the majority class. For instance,
melanoma (a skin cancer) has asymmetry, blurred irregularity, and uneven color distribution, different from benign
moles [18]. Although our method is inspired by anomaly
detection methods [19], [20], [21], [22], they are not designed
for imbalanced data and can only address issue #1 (i.e., limited
contribution from rare cases of clinical significance in minority
classes).
We evaluate our method with conventional and anomaly
detection methods on three imbalanced medical datasets with
different modalities. In brief, our main contributions are summarised as follows:
• We propose a new method HCLe to address data imbalance, which only requires the majority class in the
training process and learns the majority class’ consistent
features.
• The proposed HCLe has two branches, image reconstruction and hierarchical-instance contrastive learning.
These two branches share the same encoder for mining
the complementary information in both good image-level
features and intra-class similarity features.
• For the hierarchical-instance contrastive learning branch,
a novel strategy is introduced by minimizing the distance
among hierarchical samples of the majority class to keep

417

the intra-class feature similar. By designing a mini-batch
of contrast inputs, this method identifies minority classes
(e.g., certain malignant diseases) underlying the multiple
cases condition. Unlike many methods that are only
available for a single case to identify the malignant
disease, our approach can be applied for more complex
cases.
• Our method is compared with conventional imbalanced
methods and anomaly detection methods, is validated
on three imbalanced medical datasets (i.e., ISIC 2020,
BRACS, REFUGE) of different modalities and achieves
improved results in AUC, BACC, and F1-score evaluation
metrics.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Data Imbalance Methods
The current data imbalance solutions predominantly include
re-sampling, re-weighting, designing loss functions, and synthesizing data or labels. Re-sampling use over-sampling [4],
[23], [24] to increase the number of samples in the minority
classes or under-sampling [5], [25], [26] by removing samples
for majority classes, which often leads to either over-fitting or
under-fitting. Re-weighting adjusts the weighting factor in line
with the proportion of samples [7], [27], [28] or adopts weights
to the effective number of samples [8]. Some methods introduce new loss functions to change classification boundaries for
majority and minority classes [29], [30], and synthesizing data
or labels [12]. However, in certain medical contexts, where
minority classes are malignant or rare diseases, these methods
may have restrictions for medical practices for their diversity
and lack of labels [31].
B. Multi-Instance Contrastive Learning
1) Contrastive Learning: Contrastive learning methods,
based on self-supervised learning, MoCo [32], SimCLR [33], [34], BYOL [35], and SimSiam [36] transforms
unlabeled samples randomly, and result in two augmented
views of the same sample as contrastive positive pairs. Among
these methods, the core idea of MoCo and SimCLR is to
attract the positive pairs and repulse the negative pairs, which
benefit from a large number of negative data. BYOL and
Simsiam methods use positive sample pairs only as inputs for
contrastive learning networks. Furthermore, Li et al. [37] is
based on few-shot learning, utilizing a dual-path contrastive
learning approach to enhance the acquisition of generalized
feature embeddings. It distinguishes classes in natural images
using a small number of labeled examples per novel class.
Conversely, our anomaly detection based approach utilizes
a hierarchical-instance contrastive learning network to facilitate the acquisition of feature embeddings between majority
classes, without incorporating malignant samples during training. All of the above methods only use data augmentation
to construct positive sample pairs, and their application in
medicine is limited.
2) Multi-Instance Contrastive Learning: Different from conventional contrastive learning, Azizi et al. [17] proposed
the multi-instance contrastive learning (MICLe) method to

418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

deal with unlabeled medical images if multiple images of
each patient are available. They treat multiple instance pairs,
e.g., different viewpoints or different lighting conditions of the
same image, as contrastive medical sample pairs for the pretraining stage. The network learns invariant representation features from not only multiple data transformations of one image
but also different viewpoints or conditions of one medical
pathology. Vu et al. [38] introduced a MedAug method to use
patient metadata as contrastive positive pairs in chest X-rays,
so the same patient shares underlying pathologies, hence
improving the performance when compared to the ImageNet
pre-trained model. These MICLe-based methods are proven to
be effective and robust in medical applications. DA-CMIL [39]
integrated multi-instances into contrastive learning for chest
Computed Tomography (CT). It uses k instances from each
patient’s CT scan as multi-instance contrastive pairs and
validates the method’s effectiveness and robustness. However,
these methods neglect the hierarchical relationship and only
substitute their input in the contrastive learning pre-training
model.

multi-constraint functions, which aims to encode good representations to better reconstruct the input image (i.e., images
from the majority class), so that the encoded feature embeddings contain satisfactory image-level information for better
image reconstruction. 2) The hierarchical-instance contrastive
learning branch is a new strategy, which considers intra-class
similar representations, i.e., the consistency of intra-class
features encoded in the feature embedding. Notably, these two
branches share the same encoder and the network is trained
end-to-end.

C. Anomaly Detection
Anomaly detection is usually used to identify abnormal,
novel, or invisible data, and there are GAN-based [19], [21],
[22], auto-encoder based [20], [40], [41], knowledge distillation based [42], [43] models, and others [44], [45], [46].
AnoGAN [19] and AnoVAEGAN [20] used the GAN framework, the former was used to detect anomalies of retinal
OCT images, and the latter detected MRI brain lesions.
In recent anomaly detection methods, the primary focus lies
in learning the distribution of anomaly-free data through an
auto-encoder network, e.g., RIAD [47], SSM [48]. Most of
them learn normal images with good consistency. In the test
stage, abnormal images are detected due to their different
distributions. However, this series of methods may not be
well-suited for handling imbalanced data, as the consistency of
samples belonging to the majority class is relatively inadequate
when compared to anomaly-free samples. For imbalanced
medical data applications, ICOCC [49] method introduces
perturbed images generated by given samples, and performs in
a better way for learning the inherent features of a given class,
since the perturbed imagery can represent complexity and
specificity within classes. Nevertheless, they fails to consider
the similarity within the class.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
We propose a novel method HCLe to address certain
imbalanced medical conditions (e.g., minority classes are
malignant and rare diseases). It requires only the majority
class to participate in training and learns its distribution during
training. When inferring, the minority samples (e.g., melanoma
of skin diseases) can be detected for their distribution is
different from the majority ones (e.g., benign skin images).
With the sub-classes included in the majority, imbalanced
cases lead to high variation distributions of intra-class images
in the majority class. Therefore, we propose a method with two
branches (See Fig. 1) to address these issues: 1) The image
reconstruction branch is an auto-encoder framework with

A. Image Reconstruction Branch
Inspired by [47] and [48], we design the image reconstruction branch with multi-constraint functions to extract
good representations to reconstruct samples from the majority
class. In Fig. 1, first, the input image x is encoded as a
feature embedding e by the encoder E. Here it is expected
that the encoder E can extract good embeddings from each
image, and then a generator G is introduced to reconstruct
input x via the encoded embedding e. Finally, we utilize
multiple constraint functions to constrain the original image
and reconstructed image. The purpose of the encode-decode
process is to make the distance between the reconstructed
image x̂ and the original image x as close as possible.
Instead of traditional L2 loss as a constraint function, we not
only use a discriminator to improve the feature extraction and
reconstruction capabilities of the auto-encoder [31] but also
employ structure similarity (SSIM) [50], [51] and gradient
magnitude similarity (GMS) [47], [52] losses to extract great
image-level representations of the majority class and getting
plausible reconstruction results. The SSIM loss pays more
attention to global rather than local information [27], which
considers luminance, contrast, and anatomical features. GMSD
penalizes global variation of local structure between the reconstructed regions and the original image regions. SSIM and
GMS are pixel-level similarity metrics focusing on different
image properties.
B. Hierarchical-Instance Contrastive Learning Branch
In order to enable the network to consider consistent representations of intra-class samples, we introduce a
novel hierarchical-instance contrastive learning branch, which
extracts more consistent representations within the majority
class and adapts the network to multiple sub-classes per class.
Our hierarchical-instance contrastive learning branch is a
novel contrastive learning architecture and has two networks,
raw and contrast. The input of raw network is the original
input x, and the contrast network input x ′ is the image randomly sampled from the hierarchical instance of the majority
class instead of the image x. Different from data augmentation
of the same image (e.g., BYOL [35]) and different viewpoints
of the same patient (e.g., MICLe [34]) as contrastive input
pairs, this branch’s contrastive input pairs are generated from
their own sub-classes, which helps adapt contrastive learning
to multiple images of the majority class. Such multiple hierarchical instances are available in different sub-classes, patients
or images of the same underlying pathology, e.g., nevus
and keratosis images of benign skin data. This provides a

LI et al.: HCLe FOR MINORITY DETECTION ON IMBALANCED MEDICAL DATASETS

419

Fig. 1. Our framework consists of two branches, image reconstruction and hierarchical-instance contrastive learning, sharing the same input x and
encoder E to learn comprehensive information. The first branch (red box) is to extract good feature representations for image reconstruction using
a generator G, and introduces multiple constraints: GMS, SSIM, and adversarial loss (using a discriminator D). The other branch (blue box) takes
into account intra-class features, which alleviates the poor consistency of samples in clinical practice. This branch is a new hierarchical-instance
contrastive learning strategy containing two networks, raw and contrast. Both the raw network input x and the contrastive input x′ are from the majority
class but different samples at one time. Branch (B) maintains their instance similarity by minimizing the distance between the outputs of x and x ′ .
These outputs are generated by subjecting x to the encoding process with encoder E followed by projection with projector jθ , while x ′ is encoded
using encoder E1 and projected using projector jξ , respectively. More importantly, we extend HCLe to a diverse mini-batch version by designing the
mini-batch of contrastive inputs. In the inference stage, the feature embedding e of trained encoder E considers both intra-image and intra-class
information of the majority class, and then is fed to image reconstruction. A gradient magnitude similarity (GMS) is used to compute the detection
map and detection score.

satisfactory contrastive input to learn good intra-class similar
features for the contrastive learning network.
Given an image x, it is processed as embedding e via an
encoder E, which is shared in the training of two different
branches. In Fig. 1 (B), the raw network shows that the
embedding e is transformed to z θ by a projector jθ . At the
same time with the contrast network, the instance image x ′
sampled from the same training set D, but different from x,
e.g., a nevus and a keratosis images of the same benign skin
class represent x and x ′ , respectively. Then x ′ is encoded
and projected using encoder E 1 and projector jξ . The output
vector is denoted as z ξ ≜ jξ (E 1 (x ′ )). The architecture of
projector jθ , jξ is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [33].
We then use ℓ2 -norm to make z θ and z ξ to z θ = z θ /||z θ ||2
and z ξ = z ξ /||z ξ ||2 . We write the mean squared error between
the z θ and z ξ ,
Lθ,ξ = ||z θ − z ξ ||22 = ||I (x) − H (x ′ )||,

(1)

Here, we denote I (·) = jθ (E(·)) for the raw network and
H (·) = jξ (E 1 (·)) for the contrast network, and exchange the
input between the raw and the contrast networks to calculate
the symmetrized loss:
Lclass = ||I (x) − H (x ′ )|| + ||I (x ′ ) − H (x)||

(2)

Moreover, the raw network has weights θ at two stages: an
encoder E and projector jθ . The contrast network has a set of

weight ξ , and trains the raw network by offering regression
targets [35].
C. Diverse Mini-Batch HCLe Strategy
We further refine the HCLe to diverse mini-batch strategy
so that it can perform better in more complex conditions,
for example, a more realistic clinical scenario and the identification of the malignant diseases (minority class) from
multiple sub-classes of the majority class. For instance, the
benign class of the ISIC 2020 skin dataset has most samples
that contain multiple sub-classes, e.g., unknown, nevus, solar
lentigo, and the model can better identify the minority class
(e.g., melanoma) from these benign sub-classes. Moreover,
some of these cases are not of clinical significance, e.g., many
samples of the benign class can not be identified, which
is named unknown class. It does not make sense and is
resource-wasting to identify them. Thus they are all treated
as the majority class input for model training.
In these cases, for the new diverse mini-batch HCLe strategy, the inputs of the raw network are randomly sampled
a mini-batch of N examples and do not need any data
augmentation. For the contrast network input x ′ , if multiple
sub-classes of the majority class are available (distinguishing these sub-classes are meaningless and resource-wasting),
we ensure that each mini-batch N has sampled all subclasses (see Fig. 2). The proportion of each sub-classes in

420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

similarity in luminance l(x, x̂), contrast c(x, x̂), and structure
s(x, x̂):
SS I M(x, x̂) =l(x, G(E(x)))α c(x, G(E(x)))β s(x, G(E(x)))γ
(5)
where α, β and γ are constants for adjust weights.
b) Gradient magnitude similarity: GMS is unlike L 2 assuming independence between neighboring pixels, it penalizes
global variation of local structure between the reconstructed
regions and the original image regions. The image gradients
are sensitive to image distortions [52], especially the local
structures difference between original image and reconstructed
image [48], which is computed as follows:
q
(6)
g(x) = (x ⊗ h i )2 + (x ⊗ h j )2 ,
Fig. 2. An illustration of our diverse (right) mini-batch HCLe strategy.
If multiple sub-classes of the majority class are available, we design
the diverse mini-batch containing every sub-classes as contrast input.
Otherwise, we randomly select the mini-batch to the contrast network.

the mini-batch is based on their approximate proportions in
the training set. For instance, each mini-batch of ISIC 2020
dataset contains all benign cases, e.g., unknown, nevus, solar
lentigo, etc., as contrast inputs. Then the aim is to minimize
the distance between representations of the raw network
and the contrast network. Each updating step includes all
the sub-classes, shortening the distance between the multiple
sub-classes within the majority class, thus alleviating the problem caused by poor intra-class consistency. After the training
step of each batch size N , the multi-instance self-supervision
performs a stochastic optimization step to minimize:
N

1X
L(xk ,xk′ ) =
(||I (xk ) − H (xk′ )|| + ||I (xk′ ) − H (xk )||) (3)
n
k=1

D. Overall Framework
1) Training Stage: The image reconstruction branch incorporates three constraint functions: gradient magnitude similarity
(GMS) [47], [52], structure similarity (SSIM) [50], [51] and
adversarial losses. On the other hand, the hierarchical-instance
contrastive learning branch penalizes the network using Lclass .
a) Structure similarity index: Many auto-encoder based
methods using L 2 loss (e.g., ℓ2 -Autoencoder) as reconstruction
loss cannot reconstruct original images well, nor can they
obtain satisfactory anomaly maps since it evaluates each
pixel point independently without considering the association
of adjacent pixels [51]. Conversely, the structure similarity
loss pays more attention to global rather than local information [31], which considers luminance, contrast, and anatomical
information [50] to constrain image reconstruction. The structure similarity loss can be defined as:

L SS I M = −SS I M(x, x̂) = −SS I M(x, G(E(x)))

(4)

where E and G denotes the encoder directly to x and the
generator. Moreover, the SSIM index defines a distance measure between image and reconstructed image, considering their

where g(x) is the gradient map of original image x. ⊗ denotes
the convolution operation. h i and h j are 3 × 3 Prewitt
filters along the i and j dimensions. The gradient magnitude
similarity loss is the mean value of GMS map between image x
and reconstructed image x̂:
LG M S = −G M S(x, x̂) = −

2g(x)g(x̂) + c
,
g(x)2 + g(x̂)2 + c

(7)

where c is a constant to ensure the stability of the calculation
results and to help balance the noise region.
c) Adversarial loss: To further match the distributions of
the input, we use PatchGAN [53] to constrain the difference
between the original image x and the reconstructed image x̂,
which can be expressed as:
Ladv = E[log(1 − Dc (x̂))] + E[log D(x)].

(8)

Here, we introduce a discriminator Dc to try to distinguish
the fake data (reconstructed image) from a real data (original
image).
d) Objective function: Our method consists of two
branches. In the hierarchical-instance contrastive learning
branch, the input image’s embedding is fed into the raw
network. Simultaneously, in the image reconstruction branch,
the embedding is passed through the generator G of the
autoencoder network. Both branches are trained end-to-end.
To optimize our method, we employ five loss functions.
Therefore, we arrive at the objective function of our model:
L = λ1 L SS I M + λ2 LG M S + λ3 Ladv + λ4 Lclass

(9)

where λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , λ4 are the hyper-parameters. After the training step of each batch size N , the network performs a stochastic optimization step to minimize L of the hierarchical-instance
contrastive learning network, and update the weight by a
contrast decay rate τ ∈ [0, 1]. Moreover, a stop-gradient is
only applied in contrast network in Fig. 1 (B).
2) Inference Stage: The inference stage is illustrated
in Fig. 1. A test image x is fed to the encoder E and
generator G, which obtains a reconstructed image x̂. Then we
calculate the anomaly map by the GMS score map between the
original image x and the reconstructed image x̂. Since the network never sees the minority class (e.g., malignant diseases)
during training, different regions (e.g., malignant regions)

LI et al.: HCLe FOR MINORITY DETECTION ON IMBALANCED MEDICAL DATASETS

may not be reconstructed well. Hence, the distance between
the original image and the reconstructed image in the abnormal
region may be larger than the normal region. The GMS map
function is introduced as follows:
M( x, x̂) = 1 − G M S(x, x̂)

(10)

where M denotes a score function, G M S(x, x̂) is G M S maps.
To detect minority class, the detection score A is calculate
according to the GMS map of image x and reconstructed
image x̂. A higher detection score indicates that the image
is more likely to be malignant.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
Here, three imbalanced underlying diseases with different
modalities are compared in this paper.
1) ISIC 2020 [54]: A challenge dataset consisting of
33126 skin appearance images has been compiled for this
study, obtained from over 2000 patients. Among these images,
only 584 are malignant, whereas the remaining 32542 images
have been identified as benign. Nonetheless, it should be noted
that a substantial portion of the benign images (over 26000) are
classified as “unknown”, indicating that they are indeed benign
and yet present difficulties and lack meaningful classification.
For the purpose of training our models by employing this
dataset, we have utilized various imbalance ratios between
malignant and benign samples. Particularly, for the training set,
we have utilized ratios of 300:300, 300:1000, 300:2000, and
300:3000 for malignant to benign images, respectively. For the
test stage, the benign and malignant images are both 190 from
patients who are different from the training set. More importantly, the split of the testing dataset was hierarchical-instance
based and designed to simulate complex clinical scenarios in
which malignant lesions need to be identified from hierarchical
benign samples.
2) BRACS Datasets [55]: The BRACS dataset contains 4539 Regions of Interest (RoIs) from 547 breast carcinoma whole-slide images (WSIs), which H&E stained.
These RoIs were classified as normal, benign, Usual ductal
hyperplasia (UDH), Atypical Ductal Hyperplasia (ADH), Flat
Epithelial Atypia (FEA), Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS).
Distinguishing UDH, FEA, ADH, and DCIS is a big challenge,
since UDH, ADH, and DCIS share an intraductal growth
pattern, and FEA is easily confused with ADH and DCIS.
As a result, non-malignant (UDH, FEA, ADH) and malignant (DCIS) breast images are utilized in this project. Specifically, the aim is to detect malignant (DCIS) breast samples
from three non-malignant samples (UDH, FEA, ADH) that
share the most similar structural characteristics. Furthermore,
the training, validation, and test sets are partitioned using
official splits. The dataset exhibits an imbalance ratio of 2.1:1,
with the training set comprising a total of 2065 samples and
the test set containing 340 samples.
3) REFUGE Datasets [56]: This is a retinal fundus glaucoma
challenge dataset with highly imbalanced data for glaucoma
detection and optic disc segmentation. In this work, the official
splits of this dataset are utilized for fair comparisons. Specifically, this dataset has two distinct types of data imbalances:

421

class imbalance and rare cases. Particularly, the dataset contains a total of 800 samples with clinical ground truth labels,
and the training set consists of 400 samples, comprising
360 non-glaucoma samples and 40 glaucoma samples, resulting in an imbalanced ratio of 9:1. Similarly, the test set
comprises 400 samples, also demonstrating an imbalanced
ratio of 9:1. It should be highlighted that our approach does
not require the use of minority samples and relies solely on
majority class samples (e.g., 360) for training.
B. Experimental Setup
The model is implemented and developed in Python,
PyTorch toolbox. Our models are trained for 800 epochs. The
Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.001 for
the first 200 epochs, which is then reduced to 0.0002 until
convergence. The input image size is set to 224 × 224. For
the ISIC 2020 and BRACS datasets, we set λ1 : λ2 : λ3 :
λ4 = 0.5 : 1 : 1 : 0.5, and for the REFUGE dataset, we set
λ1 : λ2 : λ3 : λ4 = 1 : 1 : 1 : 0.5. All networks, including the
baseline models, were trained from scratch with a batch-size
of 48.
Comparison methods We compare our method with conventional supervised (e.g., re-sampling (RS), focal loss [57],
SEDC [13]) and anomaly detection (e.g., VAE-GAN [20],
f-AnoGAN [21], RIAD [47]) baselines. For conventional
supervised methods, we use ResNet-50 [58], ResNet-101,
Vgg16 [59], and DenseNet169 [60] as backbones respectively. In the case of comparison methods, all methods are
trained using an initial learning rate of 0.001 for the first
200 epochs, followed by a reduction to 0.0002 for the remaining 600 epochs until convergence. Re-sampling is sampled
with a probability that is inversely proportional to the sample size of its class. Similar to our method, VAE-GAN,
f-AnoGAN, and RIAD only use the majority class in the
training process. RIAD is trained using a varying region size
with K = {2, 4, 8, 16.}
C. Evaluation Metrics
In this project, we use three metrics, the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), F1-score and
balanced accuracy (BACC), to evaluate the classification performance of imbalanced data comprehensively. BACC has
been described as the average sum of the sensitivity and
specificity, and is more accurate for imbalanced data evaluation
than the Accuracy (ACC). The formula is equivalent to the
following:
n

B ACC =

T Pk
1X
n
T Pk + F Nk

(11)

k=1

where T P and F N denote true positives and false negatives,
and n is the number of classification classes.
V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, the performance of our method is compared
with the state-of-the-art methods on three different datasets.
Furthermore, the effect of different imbalance ratios on these

422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

TABLE I
O UR M ETHOD I S E VALUATED ON THE T HREE D IFFERENT M ODALITY DATASETS W ITH D IFFERENT I MBALANCE R ATIOS

TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON OF AUC, BACC, AND F1-S CORE M ETRICS B ETWEEN O UR P ROPOSED HCL E AND OTHER M ETHODS ON
ISIC 2020, BRACE AND REFUGE DATASETS . F OR E ACH TARGET TASK , W E S HOW THE AVERAGE P ERFORMANCE AND S TANDARD
D EVIATION ACROSS F IVE RUNS . F OR E ACH C OLUMN , THE TOP VALUE I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD FOR E ASY C OMPARISON

methods is evaluated. Finally, comprehensive ablation studies
are conducted to justify the rationality of the design of the
proposed HCLe.
A. Comparison Performance on Different Datasets
1) Results on ISIC 2020 Dataset: The performance of
our method, traditional imbalanced methods, and anomaly
detection methods on the ISIC 2020 dataset is reported
in TABLE II, and the imbalance ratio is extremely high
at 10:1 (in TABLE I). It can be seen from TABLE II
that our method achieves the best performances on BACC,
AUC, and F1-score compared to conventional supervised or
anomaly detection methods. Moreover, it increases the BACC,
AUC, and F1-score by 6.64%, 5.66%, and 6.95% respectively,
compared to the second-best baseline. This indicates that
our method is effective for the skin ISIC 2020 dataset with
interwoven imbalances, more serious imbalance ratio (10:1)
and high intra-class variation.
2) Results on BRACS Dataset: To validate the model’s
performance on different medical diseases, we also conduct
in-depth experiments on the breast pathology slides, which
have an inhomogeneous appearance and are coupled with
data imbalance. Moreover, the TABLE II indicates that our
method achieves the best performance on three evaluation
metrics, 76.57% of BACC, 82.63% of AUC, and 77.16% of
F1-score. Particularly in BACC and F1-score, they are 4.41%
and 4.75% higher than the second-highest score, respectively,
which demonstrates that our method HCLe can cope with
imbalanced breast pathological data well.
3) Results on REFUGE Dataset: The performance of our
method and state-of-the-art approaches on glaucoma diseases
is finally evaluated, and glaucoma is also a disease with a
highly imbalanced number of cases. Moreover, REFUGE is a

glaucoma fundus dataset with an imbalance rate of 9 and a
small number of samples, including training and testing sets.
Our model demonstrates great performance, with scores of
87.36%, 96.26%, and 74.76% on BACC, AUC, and F1 scores,
respectively. Furthermore, it outperforms all other methods,
securing the top rank in both AUC and F1-score metrics.
4) Results of Different Imbalance Ratios on the
ISIC 2020 Dataset: To further validate the effect of our

method with different imbalance ratios, we conduct more
experiments on the ISIS2020 dataset. The performance of
our method is compared with that of conventional and
anomaly detection methods, and experiments are designed,
starting with a 1:1 balanced ratio. The TABLE III (column
300:300 (1:1)) and Fig 3 illustrate that the conventional
method outperforms the anomaly detection methods in
all three evaluation metrics with a balanced ratio (1 : 1).
Nonetheless, by increasing the imbalance ratio to 3.3 : 1,
the performance of the conventional methods rises slowly.
Moreover, on the condition that the imbalance ratio becomes
6.7 : 1 or higher, the performance of the conventional method
starts to drop significantly. On the contrary, the anomaly
detection method indicates an upward trend from increasing
the imbalance ratio from 1 : 1 to 3.3 : 1 and 6.7 : 1. Notably,
our method outperforms the conventional method with an
imbalance ratio of 3.3 : 1 or higher.
B. Ablation Study
1) Effectiveness of Sharing Strategy: For the purpose of
evaluating the contribution of each component in our method,
we conduct experiments revealed in TABLE IV. ‘Imagelevel’ and ‘Intra-class’ denote image reconstruction branch
and hierarchical-instance contrastive learning branch. For the
‘Intra-class’ alone, the detection score to detect the minority

LI et al.: HCLe FOR MINORITY DETECTION ON IMBALANCED MEDICAL DATASETS

423

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE OF O UR HCL E M ETHOD IN C OMPARISON TO OTHER E XISTING M ETHODS , U SING T HREE D IFFERENT I MBALANCE R ATIOS
(300:300, 1000:300, 2000:300) ON THE ISIC 2020 DATASET. F OR E ACH TARGET TASK , W E S HOW THE AVERAGE P ERFORMANCE AND
S TANDARD D EVIATION ACROSS F IVE RUNS . F OR E ACH C OLUMN , THE TOP VALUE I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD FOR E ASY C OMPARISON

Fig. 3. The trend of different balance ratios in the three evaluation indicators with conventional and anomaly detection methods.

Fig. 4. Unsupervised pixel-level detection results of our proposed method. The green box indicates the majority class’s test images and anomaly
maps obtained by our method. The red box (the top raw) represents test images from the minority class, and ’Ionly ’ is anomaly maps obtained only
by the image reconstruction branch. ’I + Caug ’ presents two branches that share the same encoder E and use the data augmentation strategy.
The last row of the red box is anomaly maps from our method. The results of the three datasets (i.e., ISIC 2020, REFUGE, BRACS) demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in accurately detecting malignant regions. However, from the first column of failure cases, it indicates occasional
misclassification of clinical markings regions (highlighted by the red arrows) as malignant regions by the proposed framework. Similarly, the last two
columns of the failure cases show that our method occasionally misclassifies regions with altered edge brightness (highlighted by the red arrows)
as anomalies.

class was obtained by adopting the output from the E x
in Fig. 1. In the case of ‘share E’, it refers to ‘image-level’
and ‘intra-class’ branches sharing the same encoder E. When

these two branches do not share the encoder E, the detection
score is calculated by summing score maps from the two
branches.

424

TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDIES FOR F RAMEWORK D ESIGN ON T HREE DATASETS .
‘I MAGE - LEVEL’ AND ‘I NTRA - CLASS ’ D ENOTE I MAGE R ECONSTRUCTION
AND H IERARCHICAL -I NSTANCE C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING B RANCHES .
‘S HARE E ’ M EANS ‘I MAGE - LEVEL’ AND ‘I NTRA - CLASS ’ B RANCHES
S HARING THE S AME E NCODER E ; OTHERWISE , T HESE T WO
B RANCHES A RE N OT S HARED. F OR E ACH TASK , THE
TOP VALUES A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD
FOR E ASY C OMPARISON

The results are indicated in TABLE IV, where both
the ‘Image-level’ alone and the ‘Intra-class’ alone achieve
extremely limited performance. However, training with the
concatenation of the two branches results in higher performance. Furthermore, the shared encoder E substantially
strengthened the performance, as evidenced by the improvements in BACC, AUC, and F1-score for the ISIC 2020 dataset,
which are 0.0789, 0.0973, and 0.0893, respectively. This conclusion is also validated in the other two datasets, indicating
the effectiveness of the sharing strategy.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT S TRATEGIES OF THE
HCL E B RANCH ON T HREE DATASETS . ‘AUGMENTATION ’ I NDICATES
THE U SE OF T RADITIONAL DATA AUGMENTATION T ECHNIQUES IN THE
HCL E N ETWORK . ‘R ANDOM HCL E ’ R EPRESENTS C ONTRASTIVE
S AMPLES S ELECTED E NTIRELY AT R ANDOM . ‘D IVERSE HCL E ’
M EANS D IVERSE M INI -B ATCH HCL E S TRATEGY, W HICH
E NSURES T HAT E ACH M INI -B ATCH H AS S AMPLED A LL
S UB -C LASSES . F OR E ACH TASK , THE TOP VALUES
A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD FOR E ASY C OMPARISON

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF T HREE I MAGE -R ECONSTRUCTION
C ONSTRAINT F UNCTIONS IN THE HCL E M ETHOD ON T HREE
DATASETS . F OR E ACH TASK , THE TOP VALUES A RE
H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD FOR E ASY C OMPARISON

2) Effectiveness of Diverse Mini-Batch Strategy in HCLe:

Here, we compare three strategies i.e., data augmentation,
Random HCLe, and Diverse HCLe. For the data augmentation
strategy, widely adopted techniques such as Flip, Gaussian
blur, and Color jitter are applied to the inputs x and x ′ of
the raw network and contrast network. Besides, the remaining
experimental settings are kept the same for a fair comparison.
Furthermore, two additional HCLe strategies are compared:
1) Random HCLe: randomly select contrastive pairs from
hierarchical instances of the majority class, i.e., the contrastive network input x ′ random selected from the training
set. 2) Diverse HCLe: For the contrastive network input x ′ ,
we sample each mini-batch of N samples containing all
sub-classes of a majority class according to their approximate
proportions in the training set.
As can be seen from TABLE V, compared with the
data augmentation strategy, HCLe strategies achieve superior
performance, which indicates HCLe strategies can leverage
unlabeled data of the training set to improve the performance significantly in three datasets. Furthermore, if multiple sub-classes are available, the diverse HCLe strategy
can steadily improve the minority detection performance
(e.g., ISIC 2020 dataset from 0.8024, 0.8346 and 0.7991 to
0.8263, 0.8665 and 0.8290 in BACC, AUC and F1-score).
In the REFUGE dataset, where a sub-class is lacking in the
majority class, both the random and diverse HCLe strategies
yield the same results. These quantitative results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the diverse HCLe strategy in the prediction
task, as it enables more accurate detection of malignant

diseases (the minority class), and cannot be substituted by data
augmentation or random strategies.
3) Effectiveness of Image Reconstruction Constraint Functions: TABLE VI compares the effectiveness of these constrain

functions. When using multiple constraint functions (Ladv ,
L SS I M , and LG M S loss), the model performs best on all
metrics in ISIC 2020 datasets, and it performs best on two
metrics in BRACS and REFUGE datasets. Specifically, our
multiple constraints increase the BACC, AUC, and F1-score in
ISIC 2020 dataset by 0.0237, 0.0316, and 0.0132 respectively,
compared to the second-best baseline. TABLE VI confirms
that multiple constraint functions are effective for medical
images of different diseases and modalities.
C. Significant Difference Analysis
We conducted a comprehensive assessment to analyze the
statistical significance of the achieved performance improvement. Specifically, the statistical significance of the proposed
HCLe versus other methods including baseline approaches
and alternative strategies of our method, is examined by
the paired t-test. A p-value less than 0.05 indicates that
the method performs significantly better than the baseline
method. Based on the results presented in the TABLE VII,
it demonstrates that all improvements are statistically significant. These results further demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed HCLe.

LI et al.: HCLe FOR MINORITY DETECTION ON IMBALANCED MEDICAL DATASETS

TABLE VII
S TATISTICAL S IGNIFICANCE (p-VALUE ) OF THE P ROPOSED HCL E
C OMPARED W ITH OTHER M ETHODS ( I . E ., B ASELINE M ETHODS AND
OTHER S TRATEGIES OF O UR A PPROACH ). T HE ‘Ionly ’ I S A NOMALY
M APS O BTAINED O NLY BY THE IMAGE R ECONSTRUCTION B RANCH .
‘I + Caug ’ P RESENTS T WO B RANCHES T HAT S HARE THE S AME
E NCODER E AND U SE THE DATA AUGMENTATION S TRATEGY

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, a novel approach was proposed to address
imbalanced conditions in certain medical diseases. The training stage only requires the majority class (e.g., normal or
benign data) to participate in the training stage, and the
minority class is detected because it is out of distribution in
the inference stage. To enhance the learning of the majority
class distribution, improving the feature extraction ability, and
addressing the inconsistency issue were deemed necessary, our
method employed two branches, namely image reconstruction and hierarchical-instance contrastive learning. The former
incorporated multi-constraint functions into the auto-encoder
network to facilitate better feature extraction. Meanwhile,
the latter introduced a new hierarchical-instance contrastive
learning strategy, which aimed to enhance the consistency
of feature representation among majority samples through
multi-instance contrastive learning.
Subsequently, we evaluate our method on three medical
datasets (i.e., ISIC 2020, BRACS, REFUGE) with different
modalities. The experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves improved performance in AUC,
BACC, and F1-score evaluation metrics compared with conventional and anomaly detection methods. On three datasets,
the HCLe strategy improves classification performance relative
to the data augmentation strategy. Moreover, according to the
HCLe, the diverse mini-batch strategy performs better than the
random mini-batch strategy.
Moreover, due to the generality of the proposed HCLe
method, the HCLe can be further extended to other imbalanced
medical image tasks and even try anomaly segmentation of
these imbalanced images. Although our method achieves great
performance, it still comes with some unresolved limitations.
For instance, it may not effectively detect certain malignant or
rare diseases in cases where the lesion area closely resembles
the benign tissue area, as their feature distributions exhibit
no obvious differences. In light of this, future research will
prioritize the segmentation and detection of these challenging
diseases.
R EFERENCES
[1] B. Krawczyk, “Learning from imbalanced data: Open challenges and
future directions,” Prog. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 221–232,
Nov. 2016.

425

[2] J. Sun, D. Wei, K. Ma, L. Wang, and Y. Zheng, “Unsupervised
representation learning meets pseudo-label supervised self-distillation:
A new approach to rare disease classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2021, pp. 519–529.
[3] A. More, “Survey of resampling techniques for improving classification
performance in unbalanced datasets,” 2016, arXiv:1608.06048.
[4] L. Shen, Z. Lin, and Q. Huang, “Relay backpropagation for effective
learning of deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016, pp. 467–482.
[5] M. Buda, A. Maki, and M. A. Mazurowski, “A systematic study of
the class imbalance problem in convolutional neural networks,” Neural
Netw., vol. 106, pp. 249–259, Oct. 2018.
[6] B. Kang et al., “Decoupling representation and classifier for long-tailed
recognition,” 2019, arXiv:1910.09217.
[7] C. Huang, Y. Li, C. C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Learning deep representation
for imbalanced classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 5375–5384.
[8] Y. Cui, M. Jia, T.-Y. Lin, Y. Song, and S. Belongie, “Class-balanced
loss based on effective number of samples,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9268–9277.
[9] C. Huang, Y. Li, C. C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Deep imbalanced learning
for face recognition and attribute prediction,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 2781–2794, Nov. 2020.
[10] B. Li, Y. Liu, and X. Wang, “Gradient harmonized single-stage detector,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 8577–8584.
[11] E. Schwartz et al., “δ-encoder: An effective sample synthesis method
for few-shot object recognition,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 31, 2018, pp. 1–11.
[12] A. Galdran et al., “Non-uniform label smoothing for diabetic retinopathy grading from retinal fundus images with deep neural networks,”
Translational Vis. Sci. Technol., vol. 9, no. 2, p. 34, Jun. 2020.
[13] R. Zhao, X. Chen, Z. Chen, and S. Li, “Diagnosing glaucoma on
imbalanced data with self-ensemble dual-curriculum learning,” Med.
Image Anal., vol. 75, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 102295.
[14] K. Napierala and J. Stefanowski, “Types of minority class examples and
their influence on learning classifiers from imbalanced data,” J. Intell.
Inf. Syst., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 563–597, Jun. 2016.
[15] T. Cai, H. He, and W. Zhang, “Breast cancer diagnosis using imbalanced
learning and ensemble method,” Appl. Comput. Math., vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 146–154, 2018.
[16] P. Yao et al., “Single model deep learning on imbalanced small datasets
for skin lesion classification,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 41, no. 5,
pp. 1242–1254, May 2022.
[17] S. Azizi et al., “Big self-supervised models advance medical image
classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 3478–3488.
[18] E. Nasr-Esfahani et al., “Melanoma detection by analysis of clinical
images using convolutional neural network,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (EMBC), Aug. 2016, pp. 1373–1376.
[19] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial
networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process.
Med. Imag. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 146–157.
[20] C. Baur, B. Wiestler, S. Albarqouni, and N. Navab, “Deep autoencoding
models for unsupervised anomaly segmentation in brain MR images,” in
Proc. Int. MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2019, pp. 161–169.
[21] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. SchmidtErfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44,
May 2019.
[22] K. Zhou et al., “Sparse-GAN: Sparsity-constrained generative adversarial network for anomaly detection in retinal OCT image,” in Proc. IEEE
17th Int. Symp. Biomed. Imag. (ISBI), Apr. 2020, pp. 1227–1231.
[23] J. Byrd and Z. Lipton, “What is the effect of importance weighting in
deep learning?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 872–881.
[24] B. Zhou, Q. Cui, X.-S. Wei, and Z.-M. Chen, “BBN: Bilateral-branch
network with cumulative learning for long-tailed visual recognition,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 9716–9725.
[25] N. Japkowicz and S. Stephen, “The class imbalance problem: A systematic study,” Intell. Data Anal., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 429–449, Oct. 2002.
[26] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284, Sep. 2009.
[27] Y.-X. Wang, D. Ramanan, and M. Hebert, “Learning to model the tail,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.

426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

[28] Z. Liu, Z. Miao, X. Zhan, J. Wang, B. Gong, and S. X. Yu,
“Large-scale long-tailed recognition in an open world,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 2532–2541.
[29] X. Zhang, Z. Fang, Y. Wen, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “Range loss for deep
face recognition with long-tailed training data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 5419–5428.
[30] K. Cao, C. Wei, A. Gaidon, N. Arechiga, and T. Ma, “Learning
imbalanced datasets with label-distribution-aware margin loss,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–18.
[31] H. Zhao et al., “Anomaly detection for medical images using selfsupervised and translation-consistent features,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 3641–3651, Dec. 2021.
[32] X. Chen, H. Fan, R. Girshick, and K. He, “Improved baselines with
momentum contrastive learning,” 2020, arXiv:2003.04297.
[33] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[34] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, K. Swersky, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “Big
self-supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 22243–22255.
[35] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[36] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2021, pp. 15745–15753.
[37] B. Li, E. Han Cui, Y. Li, D. Wang, and W. Kee Wong, “Dual path
structural contrastive embeddings for learning novel objects,” 2021,
arXiv:2112.12359.
[38] Y. N. T. Vu, R. Wang, N. Balachandar, C. Liu, A. Y. Ng, and
P. Rajpurkar, “MedAug: Contrastive learning leveraging patient metadata
improves representations for chest X-ray interpretation,” in Proc. Mach.
Learn. Healthcare Conf., 2021, pp. 755–769.
[39] P. Chikontwe, M. Luna, M. Kang, K. S. Hong, J. H. Ahn, and S. H. Park,
“Dual attention multiple instance learning with unsupervised complementary loss for COVID-19 screening,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 72,
Aug. 2021, Art. no. 102105.
[40] A. Vasilev et al., “q-space novelty detection with variational autoencoders,” in Computational Diffusion MRI. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2020, pp. 113–124.
[41] K. Zhou et al., “Encoding structure-texture relation with p-net for
anomaly detection in retinal images,” in Computer Vision–ECCV. Glasgow, U.K.: Springer, Aug. 2020, pp. 360–377.
[42] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191.
[43] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14902–14912.

[44] P. Liznerski, L. Ruff, R. A. Vandermeulen, B. Joe Franks, M. Kloft,
and K.-R. Müller, “Explainable deep one-class classification,” 2020,
arXiv:2007.01760.
[45] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9664–9674.
[46] C. Huang, H. Guan, A. Jiang, Y. Zhang, M. Spratling, and Y.-F. Wang,
“Registration based few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 303–319.
[47] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[48] C. Huang, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Selfsupervised masking for unsupervised anomaly detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, early access, May 19, 2020, doi:
10.1109/TMM.2022.3175611.
[49] L. Gao, L. Zhang, C. Liu, and S. Wu, “Handling imbalanced medical
image data: A deep-learning-based one-class classification approach,”
Artif. Intell. Med., vol. 108, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 101935.
[50] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, Apr. 2004.
[51] P. Bergmann, S. Löwe, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Improving unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity
to autoencoders,” 2018, arXiv:1807.02011.
[52] W. Xue, L. Zhang, X. Mou, and A. C. Bovik, “Gradient magnitude
similarity deviation: A highly efficient perceptual image quality index,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 684–695, Feb. 2014.
[53] P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image translation
with conditional adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 1125–1134.
[54] V. Rotemberg et al., “A patient-centric dataset of images and metadata
for identifying melanomas using clinical context,” Scientific Data, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 1–8, Jan. 2021.
[55] N. Brancati et al., “BRACS: A dataset for breast carcinoma subtyping in H&E histology images,” Database, vol. 2022, Oct. 2022,
Art. no. baac093.
[56] J. I. Orlando et al., “REFUGE challenge: A unified framework for
evaluating automated methods for glaucoma assessment from fundus
photographs,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 59, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 101570.
[57] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2999–3007.
[58] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[59] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
[60] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019,
pp. 6105–6114.