This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

1

I2RNN: An Incremental and Interpretable
Recurrent Neural Network for Encrypted Traffic
Classification
Zhuoxue Song, Ziming Zhao, Fan Zhang , Member, IEEE, Gang Xiong,
Guang Cheng, Member, IEEE, Xinjie Zhao , and Shize Guo
Abstract—Traffic classification occupies a significant role in cybersecurity and network management. The widespread of encryption
transmission protocols such as SSL/TLS has led to the dominance of deep learning based approaches. In cybersecurity, strong
adversaries often complicate their strategies by constantly developing emerging attacks. Meanwhile, security practitioners desire to
grasp the reasons for inference results. However, existing deep learning approaches lack efficient adaptation for incremental traffic
types and often have less interpretability. In this paper, we propose I2 RNN, an Incremental and Interpretable Recurrent Neural Network
for encrypted traffic classification. The I2 RNN proposes a novel propagation process to extract the sequence fingerprints from sessions
with local robustness. Meanwhile, this proposal provides interpretability including time-series feature attribution and inter-class
similarity portrait. Moreover, we design I2 RNN in an incremental manner to adapt to emerging traffic types. The I2 RNN only needs to
train an additional set of parameters for the newly added traffic type rather than retraining the whole model with the entire dataset.
Extensive experimental results show that our I2 RNN can achieve remarkable performance in traffic classification, incremental learning,
and model interpretability. Compared with other local interpretability methods, our I2 RNN exhibits excellent stability, robustness, and
effectiveness in the interpretation of network traffic data.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, incremental learning, interpretability, recurrent neural network

✦

1

I NTRODUCTION

T

RAFFIC classification is important to the entire
network for many different purposes, such as network
management, Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees, and
cybersecurity [1], [2], [3]. Over the last decades, the
volume of traffic starts to be encrypted by application-layer
encryption transmission protocols, such as Secure Socket
Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) [4], [5]. Such
encryption technology protects the privacy of Internet users,
yet it provides attackers chances to evade firewall detection
and circumvent surveillance systems. For example, an
attacker may exploit encryption technology to invade and
attack the system anonymously. That is to say, encryption
technology brings new challenges to traffic identification.

•

•

•
•

Zhuoxue Song, Ziming Zhao, Xinjie Zhao, and Shize Guo are
with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China. E-mail: {songzhuoxue,
zhaoziming}@zju.edu.cn.
Fan Zhang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China, with ZJUHangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311200, with the Key Laboratory of Blockchain
and Cyberspace Governance of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310027, and also with Jiaxing Research Institute, Zhejiang University,
Jiaxing, Zhejiang 314000, China. E-mail: fanzhang@zju.edu.cn.
Gang Xiong is with the Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail:
xionggang@iie.ac.cn.
Guang Cheng is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211189, China. E-mail:
chengguang@seu.edu.cn.

Manuscript received 17 Feb. 2022; revised 10 Nov. 2022. (Corresponding
authors: Fan Zhang and Xinjie Zhao.)

Therefore, the classification of encrypted traffic has attracted
great attention in both academia and industry [6].
Previous traffic classification methods can be roughly
divided into four main categories: port-based [7], payloadbased [8], [9], machine-learning-based (ML-based) [10],
[11], and deep-learning-based (DL-based) [12], [13]. The
wide adoption of traffic encryption techniques, such as
the SSL/TLS protocols, causes traditional port-based and
payload-based methods to nearly fail. The payload values
in packets can be considered as totally randomized after
cryptographic encryption [14], which are extremely difficult
(nearly impossible to some extent) for those port-based
and payload-based methods to handle. Therefore, many
researchers turn to ML-based and DL-based methods, which
have become the mainstream methods for encrypted traffic
classification nowadays.
The workflow of traffic classification with machine
learning mainly contains two phases, namely feature
engineering and model training [15]. The former is to design
and select statistical features from traffic flows, such as
the average packet length, the average interval of packet
arrival time, the maximum TCP window size, etc. The
latter is to feed the features into a specific classification
model, e.g., SVM [16]. Both phases will directly affect the
eventual performance and effectiveness of the classification.
Meanwhile, the ML-based method is especially dependent
on the so-called feature selection process which requires
the sophisticated experience of those experts in the area.
Therefore, many end-to-end or nearly end-to-end methods
based on deep learning were proposed as in demand [17],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

[18]. These methods directly use the raw traffic as input and
fully automate the feature extraction process.
Nonetheless, there are still some problems with existing
state-of-the-art (SOTA) DL-based methods.
(i) They are not suitable in incremental learning scenarios:
Incremental learning refers to sequentially learning from
data for new categories, which are available over time,
without accessing past data while preserving the learned
knowledge for old categories [19]. A fatal limitation of
current DL-based traffic classification methods lies in
assuming the training data for all categories are always
available, making them unsuitable in some real-world
situations, where new traffic types are always emerging.
In order to append a new capability of identifying an
additional traffic type, a common way in the previous
works is to retrain the whole model with the entire dataset,
which will consume a lot of computing time and memory
resources.
(ii) They lack interpretability in modeling traffic behavior:
An interpretable model allows us to understand how it
comes to specific conclusions [20]. These DL-based traffic
classification methods are designed as end-to-end, which
naturally lack interpretability. The calculation process is put
into a black-box setting, whose details are hard to infer.
Specifically, it is much more difficult to grasp the internal
cause of inference results.
In this paper, we propose I2 RNN, an Incremental
and Interpretable Recurrent Neural Network model for
encrypted traffic classification. The I2 RNN leverages
fingerprint learning from the raw session sequences rather
than manually designed features. A list of fingerprint
modules is trained in fingerprint learning. Each fingerprint
module is a long short-term memory unit with an encoding
layer. The fingerprint modules characterize the patterns
of sequential features and thus learn the fingerprints of
different traffic types. Particularly, (i) I2 RNN maintains a
set of specific yet independent parameters for each traffic
type. Therefore, it only needs to train an additional set of
parameters for the newly added traffic type. (ii) I2 RNN is
inherently interpretable with respect to time-series feature
attribution and inter-class similarity portrait. It determines
the traffic type by comparing the output losses of different
fingerprint modules. Therefore, by decomposing the process
of losses comparison, we can provide explanations for the
model classification results.
Our main contributions can be briefly summarized as
below:
•

•

•

•

We propose I2 RNN, an incremental and interpretable
recurrent neural network model for encrypted traffic
classification. It learns fingerprints from the raw
session sequences and holds local robustness.
I2 RNN can be updated in an incremental manner. It
only needs to train an additional set of parameters
for the newly added traffic type.
I2 RNN is an interpretable model. It can rank features
for each traffic type, identify important features
for classification, and depict the inter-class distance
between traffic types in specific dimensions.
I2 RNN achieves excellent results on the real-world
network traffic dataset and outperforms several

2

state-of-the-art methods.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
and Section 3 list some related works and preliminaries,
respectively. The detailed design of I2 RNN is introduced
in Section 4. Section 5 presents model interpretability.
In Section 6, we exhibit validation results. After a brief
discussion in Section 7, we conclude the paper in Section 8.

2

R ELATED W ORK

2.1

Traffic Classification

2.1.1 Unencrypted Traffic Classification
The basic idea of unencrypted traffic classification is
to exploit useful information from packet headers and
payloads. The port-based methods classify traffic by
checking the TCP/UDP port number at the transport
layer [7]. Unfortunately, port-hopping techniques [21] make
the port-based methods ineffective. The payload-based
methods [8], [22] inspect the contents in packet payloads
with a predefined rule set, and then use rule-matching
results as traffic decisions. The design of the rule set affects
the accuracy of the payload-based methods. In addition,
such approaches fail in encrypted traffic classification as the
payloads are encrypted.
2.1.2 Encrypted Traffic Classification
In 2014, Korczynski et al. proposed an encrypted traffic
classification method based on the first-order Markov
chain [23]. They used message-type sequences of encrypted
traffic to build a first-order Markov model for classification.
Subsequently, Shen et al. proposed a similar but improved
method based on the second-order Markov chain [24] with
new features including certificate length and the first packet
length. Chang et al. combined both message type sequences
and length sequences to build Markov models and got
better performance [25]. However, all those Markov-based
methods are with small orders (e.g., 1 or 2) and thus they
cannot deal with the long-term relationship.
In addition to the Markov chain, many other machine
learning algorithms were used in encrypted traffic
classification. Liu et al. proposed a semi-supervised
method for encrypted traffic classification with carefully
selected features which include the maximum, minimum,
and average of sent and received bytes [26]. Anderson
et al. took flow metadata, packet length distribution,
and time distribution into consideration and analyzed
encrypted malware traffic with the logistic regression
algorithm [27]. However, these ML-based methods are
especially dependent on feature selection which relies on
sophisticated experience.
In recent years, the research on encrypted traffic
classification is evolving towards the direction of deep
learning. In 2019, Chang et al. applied the recurrent neural
network to the encrypted traffic classification problem
and propose the Flow Sequence Network (FS-Net) [12].
The FS-Net is an end-to-end classification model that
learns representative features from the raw packet size
sequences of encrypted traffic. Unlike FS-Net, TSCRNN [28]
learned from raw payloads. In 2020, Wenbo et al. proposed
the Flow-Based Relation Network (RBRN), which uses

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

the meta-learning approach to address the problems
of encrypted traffic classification including imbalanced
network data, model generalization, and overly dependent
on data size [17]. In 2021, Shen et al. utilized different
graph structures (e.g., spindle-shaped, fish-shaped) as input
features for traffic classification [29]. In 2022, Lin et al.
proposed a new traffic representation model called ETBERT, which utilizes pre-training transformers and the
contextualized datagram representation to classify the
encrypted traffic [30]. However, these DL-based methods
usually lack interpretability and cannot conduct the learning
incrementally.
Our work incorporates the idea of learning traffic
fingerprints. However, unlike the previous work modeling
the fingerprints of traffic with Markov chains, we adopt
LSTM to learn the fingerprints of traffic, which can deal
with the long-term relationship. Our work is an end-to-end
traffic classification network that learns fingerprints from
the raw session sequences. Compared with the previous
deep-learning-based work in traffic classification [31] and
anomaly detection [32], we focus on incremental learning
and model interpretability.
2.2

Incremental Learning

A variety of strategies have been explored to train the
model incrementally [33], [34], [35]. Li et al. proposed
Learning without Forgetting (LwF), which uses the new
data to supervise the learning of the new tasks and to
provide unsupervised output guidance on the previous
tasks [33]. Further, Dhar et al. introduced Learning
without Memorizing, which extends LwF by adding a
distillation term based on attention maps [34]. Yanan
et al. proposed an incremental method for the instance
segmentation task, which uses multi-teacher networks and
achieves excellent performance on instance segmentation
datasets [35]. However, previous work on incremental
learning mainly focuses on computer vision tasks. The
data format of network traffic is significantly different from
that of images. Therefore, existing incremental learning
techniques cannot be applied directly to network traffic
classification. It is both challenging and meaningful to
explore incremental learning models for network traffic
classification.
2.3

There are some well-known local interpretability methods
like LIME [39], SHAP [40], feature permutation [41], etc.
However, previous model interpretability algorithms are
mainly applicable to tabular data. The network traffic data,
however, is time series. Existing model interpretability
methods do not consider the temporal characteristics of
data. Thus they may be incapable of interpreting the
network traffic classification task.

3

P RELIMINARIES

3.1

Problem Definition

The traffic classification in this paper refers to classifying
the encrypted traffic of sessions into specific traffic types
with raw features of packets. Assume that there are N
samples and M types of traffic in total. Let the sequence
(p)
(p)
(p)
of the p-th sample be x(p) = [L1 , L2 , ..., LT ], where T
(p)
is the time sequence length of each sample and Li ∈ Rd
is the packet feature at time step i. The traffic type of
x(p) is denoted as y (p) , 0 ≤ y (p) < M . We consider an
incremental learning scenario and aim to build an endto-end incremental model ψ(x(p) ) to predict a label yˆp
that is exactly the real label yp . Suppose that there are
total S sequential stages in the learning process. We define
stage s as introducing the new class C s using the dataset
Ds = {(x, y)|y ∈ C s }. The training samples and labels are
defined as X s = {x|(x, y) ∈ Ds } and y s = {y|(x, y) ∈ Ds },
respectively. Especially, y i ∩ y j = ∅ for i ̸= j . At stage 0, a
classification model ψ 0 (x(p) ) is trained on dataset X 0 with
m0 classes. For stage j P
a model ψ j (x(p) ) is trained to classify
j
on accumulated M = q=0 |mq | classes.
3.2

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
Output

LSTM Unit

LSTM Unit

...

Softmax

LSTM Unit

Input
Sequence

(a) Traditional LSTM For Classification

Model Interpretability

The model interpretability can be classified as global
interpretability and local interpretability. The global level
of interpretability is to give a holistic view of the input
features. The output of the global interpretability is usually
feature ranking and selection results. Previous feature
selection algorithms can be roughly divided into three ways:
filter-based, wrapper-based and embedded. Filter-based
feature selection algorithms remove features suspected to be
irrelevant based on metrics such as mutual information [36].
Wrapper-based feature selection algorithms iteratively select
features through retraining the model across different
feature subsets [37]. Embedded feature selection algorithms
select important features as the model is trained [38]. The
local level of interpretability is about understanding the
importance of each feature in a single prediction of a model.

3

Output

Output

LSTM Unit

LSTM Unit

Output

...

LSTM Unit

Comparator

Input
Sequence

(b) Fingerprint LSTM For Classification
Fig. 1. Comparison between traditional LSTM and fingerprint LSTM.

The LSTM [42] is one of the most popular recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) [43] to model sequential data.
LSTM can infer the current state based on the previous
state and the current input. Therefore, LSTM can remember
past information, which is naturally suitable for sequence
modeling. The main weak point of the vanilla version of
RNN is the vanishing/exploding gradient problem which
means cannot retain long-term information [44]. By adding
gate units with different functions, the LSTM solves the
problem. It can control the information transformation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022
Incremental Learning

Classiﬁcation

Feature Input
Sessions

4

Fingerprint Learning

Feature Tensors

Unknown Trafﬁc Data

Fingerprint List
Fingerprint Module

Trafﬁc Data of
Type A

...

Encoding
Layer

...

LSTM Unit

Sessions
...

LSTM Unit

...

Fingerprint Module

Trafﬁc Data of
Type B
Original
(Stage

...

Encoding
Layer

...

)
Loss

Incremental
(Stage )

Trafﬁc Data of
New Type

Fingerprint Module

...

...

Encoding
Layer

LSTM Unit

Comparator

Fig. 2. Overview of I2 RNN.

between the hidden states and track the states of the input
sequences without using separate memory cells.
Traditionally, as shown in Fig. 1a, when LSTM is used
for classification tasks, the input sequence is first fed into
the LSTM unit. Secondly, the output of the last time step
of the LSTM unit is given to the fully connected layer.
The classification results can be get after the calculation
of the softmax layer. However, in this paper, we use our
proposed fingerprint LSTM instead of traditional LSTM. As
shown in Fig 1b, the fingerprint LSTM tries to capture the
fingerprints of different types. It calculates and compares the
loss between the output of the current state and the input of
the next time step. In the classification stage, the prediction
results are determined by the fingerprint LSTM with the
minimum loss. There are two main benefits of fingerprint
LSTM. First, the traditional LSTM only uses the output of
the last time step for the calculation of the fully connected
layer. Therefore, the traditional LSTM model tends to learn
the features of the subsequent input. It can be easily affected
by noise in the later-arrived packets. In the contrast, the
learning process of the fingerprint LSTM makes the output
of each time step (except the last time step) as close as
possible to the input of the next time step. This process
makes full use of all packets in a session and thus has
local robustness. Second, a fingerprint LSTM module only
characterizes the packet sequence of a specific traffic type.
The modeling process will not be influenced by other traffic
types. In the contrast, traditional LSTM may have a bias
towards traffic types with a large number of samples.

4

P ROPOSED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ETHOD

4.1

Overview

In Section 1 and Section 3, we have discussed the limitations
of current encrypted traffic classification methods, which
motivate us to carry out further studies. Here we briefly

summarize the limitations and motivations as the following
two points.
(i) Current methods for encrypted traffic classification are not
suitable for incremental learning. These methods assume the
training data for all categories is available at the time of
initial training. However, it will always emerge new attacks
in real-world situations. This motivates us to design an
incremental model.
(ii) Current methods for encrypted traffic classification are not
interpretable. The inference process of these methods is under
a black-box setting and lacks interpretability. However,
we need to understand how the model comes to specific
conclusions and what the model learns.
Based on the above limitations and motivations, we
propose the I2 RNN. The two main design principles are as
follows:
(i) I2 RNN learns the fingerprints of traffic and is interpretable.
The training process of I2 RNN does not directly implement
a traditional classification task. Instead, each LSTM unit
learns the fingerprint (behavioral characteristics) of the input
samples. In other words, at each time step, the current
output of each LSTM unit is as close as possible to
the next input of the sequence. This learning process is
different from the typical classification task which calculates
cross-entropy loss at the last time step as described in
Section 3. We term this training process fingerprint learning.
By such replacement, our I2 RNN has local robustness
and is adaptive to imbalanced data. Moreover, we can
rank time-series features, identify import features in
prediction and calculate the inter-class distance between
different traffic types based on the learning process. These
capabilities enhance the interpretability of I2 RNN and will
be demonstrated in Section 5.
(ii) I2 RNN is an incremental model. It contains multiple
independent fingerprint modules. Each module maintains
a set of parameters and corresponds to the fingerprint of a
specific traffic type. Therefore, we only need to train a set of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

additional parameters for the newly introduced traffic type.
Such a design indicates that I2 RNN could be deployed as an
incremental model.
The overview of I2 RNN is depicted in Fig. 2. The
whole process of I2 RNN includes incremental learning
and classification. Further, the workflow of incremental
learning can be divided into feature input and incremental
fingerprint learning. We will discuss each part in detail
below.
4.2

Feature Input

The first part is feature input. In this process, we extract
feature tensors from raw traffic data. We first split the
raw traffic data of each traffic type into sessions and then
perform feature extraction on each packet in sessions.
For formalization, suppose we have raw traffic data D
and we split it into N sessions. Each session is a sample
and is composed of bi-directional packets with the same IP,
port, and transport layer protocol. The feature tensors are
extracted from the first T packets in each session and are
composed of the packet feature vectors. Each packet feature
vector consists of packet length, direction, the interval of
arrival time, and values of fields in the packet header, e.g.,
TTL (Time To Live), TCP flags, and TCP window size.
Therefore, the feature tensor of the p-th sample can be
(p)
(p)
(p)
denoted as x(p) = [L1 , L2 , ..., LT ], where T is the time
(p)
sequence length of each sample and Li
∈ Rd is the ddimensional packet feature vector at time step i.
Particularly, the flexibility of our feature input is that
we can select different features and different time sequence
lengths for each traffic type, i.e., d and T can be different
for various traffic types. In other words, the feature input
process is not dependent on the fixed number of traffic
types. When a new traffic type is added, we can select
the appropriate features and time sequence length for this
newly added traffic type without affecting those of existing
traffic types. This property of the feature input process
creates the conditions for incremental fingerprint learning.
4.3

Incremental Fingerprint Learning

The second part is incremental fingerprint learning. In this
process, we learn the fingerprints of different traffic types in
an incremental manner.
Different from the model training process of typical
classification tasks with LSTM, I2 RNN aims to train a model
which can learn fingerprints (behavioral characteristics) of
each traffic type. We call this process fingerprint learning.
As described in previous sections, we use fingerprint LSTM
instead of traditional LSTM to model the packet sequence
in sessions of a traffic type, which has local robustness and
is suitable for an imbalanced dataset.
In addition, we add an encoding layer before fingerprint
LSTM to constitute a fingerprint module. The encoding
layer takes the original feature tensors as input and
generates the latent representations. It simply uses a linear
layer with the tanh activation function. There are two
benefits of adding an encoding layer. (i) Some fields in
the packet headers are categorical features, e.g., TCP Flags
(SYN, ACK, etc). The encoding layer can transform these

5

features into numerical features, which are more convenient
for computation. (ii) There may be redundant information
in the original features. The encoding layer can reduce the
redundant information, which helps the model learn the
fingerprints of network traffic better.
Moreover, the I2 RNN maintains a fingerprint list. As
depicted in Fig. 2, there are multiple fingerprint modules
in the fingerprint list. Each fingerprint module maintains an
independent set of parameters that corresponds to a traffic
type. This means that I2 RNN is designed in an incremental
learning manner. In other words, the only thing that needs
to be done for having the ability to recognize a new traffic
type is to introduce an additional fingerprint module to
the fingerprint list and to train this module with the new
traffic data. This provides I2 RNN the capability to classify
new traffic types, without retraining existing fingerprint
modules.
The entire algorithm of incremental fingerprint learning
is exhibited in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Incremental Fingerprint Learning.
Input: X s , ψ s−1
1: Create a new fingerprint module [ρs , Ωs ]
2: Initialize the parameters of [ρs , Ωs ] randomly
3: for x(p) ∈ D s do
4:
e(p) ← ρs (x(p) )
5:
a(p) ← Ωs (e(p) )
(p)
(p)
1 PT −1
6:
L(x(p) ) ← T −1
t=1 ||at − Lt+1 ||
7:
Calculate the gradient of parameters of [ρs , Ωs ]
8:
Update the parameters of [ρs , Ωs ]
9: end for
10: ψ s ← append [ρs , Ωs ] to the fingerprint list of ψ s−1
Output: ψ s

In an incremental learning scenario, we introduce a
new traffic type using training samples X s . After the
incremental fingerprint learning, the previous stage model
ψ s−1 becomes ψ s , which has the ability to classify the new
traffic type. The first step of incremental fingerprint learning
is to create a new fingerprint module, which consists of an
encoding layer ρs and a fingerprint LSTM Ωs (line 1). Then
we randomly initialize the parameters of each component
of the fingerprint module (line 2). In each iteration, we
sequentially feed the training samples into the encoding
layer and the fingerprint LSTM (lines 4-5). The learning
(p)
process aims to make the output at as close as possible to
(p)
the next input Lt+1 at t-th time step, where 1 ≤ t ≤ T − 1
(line 6). Therefore, the loss function of the p-th sample can
be set as follow:

L(x(p) ) =

T −1
1 X (p)
(p)
||a − Lt+1 ||
T − 1 t=1 t

(1)

After the calculation of loss, we can obtain the gradient
of the parameters of the fingerprint module with
backpropagation (line 7). Then we update the parameters of
the fingerprint module (line 8). We can get the new model
ψ s after iterations over all training samples (line 10).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

4.4

6

Traffic Classification

The third part is the traffic classification. When the
unknown traffic data arrives, we first process the data
with feature input, which converts the raw traffic data
into feature tensors. Then we feed feature tensors to each
fingerprint module in the fingerprint list that is trained in
the incremental fingerprint learning part. Each fingerprint
module calculates the loss defined in Eq. (1). Since each
fingerprint module has learned the fingerprint of a specific
traffic type, it will output a small loss for traffic with
exactly the same type while giving a relatively large loss
for the sample of other traffic types. Consequently, the
unknown traffic is classified as the corresponding type of
the fingerprint module with the minimum loss. This process
is represented as a comparator in Fig. 2. To formulate this
process, suppose that Li (x(p) ) represents the output loss of
p-th unknown traffic sample calculated by i-th fingerprint
module in the fingerprint list. We can classify the sample
as yˆp by determining the specific i which makes Li (x(p) )
minimum,
yˆp = arg min Li (x(p) )
(2)

Outputs

...

...

LSTM Unit

LSTM Unit

...

...

Loss
Calculation

LSTM Unit

Loss

Comparator
Input
Sequence

...

...

...
Zoom In

...
...

...

...
Sum

1

?
=

Sum

T-1

?
=

?
=

2

...
T

...

...

...

...

i
...
...

5

...

M ODEL I NTERPRETABILITY

In the previous section, we have described the design
of I2 RNN. In this section, we elaborate on the model
interpretability of I2 RNN from the aspects of feature
attribution and inter-class distance between traffic types.
5.1

...

Sequence Feature Attribution

Feature attribution is an important part of model
interpretability, which can be divided into global-level
attribution and local-level attribution. The result of the
global level attribution is usually the feature ranking of a
specific type, while the local level attribution mainly gives
the importance of each feature in the prediction of a single
sample.
However, existing feature attribution methods are
mainly applicable to tabular data and are not designed
for network traffic data, which is time series. If we want
these existing feature attribution algorithms to handle the
network traffic data, we need to convert the time-series
data to tabular data. A common way to accomplish the
above transformation is to reshape the time sequence data.
For example, assume the time sequence data a has a total
of T time steps, and each time step is a d-dimensional
feature vector. We can use b = a.reshape(1, T × d)
to reshape the time sequence data a to tabular data b
with NumPy [45]. However, this way has two shortages.
(i) This transformation considers features at each time step
individually and ignores the relationship between the time
sequence data. (ii) Current feature ranking methods need a
long computation time and have a scalability problem to
handle the high-dimensional reshaped data [46].
To address the feature attribution of network traffic data,
we propose an effective sequence feature attribution method
based on I2 RNN. The interpretability of I2 RNN focuses on
the influence of features on fingerprints in terms of time
sequence. Therefore, I2 RNN provides a new perspective
that illustrates the attribution of sequence features.

Fig. 3. Internal computational process of I2 RNN.

Our feature attribution method stems from the
decomposition of the internal computational process of
I2 RNN. Fig. 3 illustrates the internal computational process
of I2 RNN when feeding traffic sequence data. As mentioned
in Section 4, each fingerprint module is trained to learn
the fingerprint (behavioral characteristics) of a specific traffic
type and the classification result of the unknown traffic
is decided by the fingerprint module with the minimum
loss. At each time step, the fingerprint module outputs
the prediction of the next time step based on the previous
input. The loss is computed according to Eq. (1). Actually,
Eq. (1) is equivalent to first calculating the L2 distance
between the output vector and the next input vector at
each time step and then summing the distance of each
(p)
(p)
dimension. Specifically, each dimension of at − Lt+1
jointly contributes to the overall loss in Eq. (1). Therefore,
for a specific traffic type, compared the loss at a certain
dimension of the corresponding fingerprint module with
losses of other fingerprint modules at the same dimension,
if the loss at this dimension is smaller and thus has a larger
loss difference, we can say this dimension contributes more
to the final prediction and thus ranks higher. This is the
basic idea of our feature attribution method. Practically, we
feed data of a specific type to all the fingerprint modules in
the fingerprint list of I2 RNN. We calculate the sum of loss
difference in each dimension among fingerprint modules
and use it to represent the feature importance.
For formalization, we first define the single-dimensional
loss of a sample as

SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) =

T −1
1 X (p)
(p)
|a [K] − Lt+1 [K]|
T − 1 t=1 J,t

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

M −1

FL(x

(p)

1 X
, K) =
ReLU (SL(x(p) , ψJ , K)
M J=0

(4)

− SL(x(p) , ψI , K))
The I -th fingerprint module only learns the fingerprint
of traffic type I , which is the corresponding type of
sample x(p) . Consequently, if I ̸= J , the overall loss
LI (x(p) ) is supposed to be less than LJ (x(p) ), and K th dimension loss SL(x(p) , ψI , K) should be less than
SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) correspondingly. Therefore, FL(x(p) , K) is
usually a positive value. We use ReLU [47] to get the nonnegative part. A larger value indicates that the feature at this
dimension contributes more to the difference in the overall
loss that the traffic classification relies on. Thus we consider
the value FL(X I , K) as the significance of the feature at the
K -th dimension of a sample x(p) .
Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) define the feature importance of
a single sample, which offer local interpretability. For the
global interpretability of I2 RNN, we can sum the feature
importance of all the samples belonging to traffic type I ,
X
SL(X I , ψJ , K) =
SL(x(p) , ψJ , K)
(5)
ˆ =I
y (p)
I

FL(X , K) =

X

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

(a) Feature ranking for each traffic type.
direction
frame.interval
frame.len
ip.flags.df

ip.flags.mf
ip.ttl
tcp.flags.syn
tcp.flags.fin

tcp.flags.ack
tcp.flags.push
tcp.flags.reset
tcp.flags.urg

tcp.window_size
udp.length
icmp.type
icmp.code

Benign
#0
Botnet
#4764
DDoS
#5133
DoS
#33838
FTP Patator
#86237
Port Scan
#87435
SSH Patator
#135479
Brute Force
#136373
0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Feature Importance

0.8

1.0

(b) Feature importance for classification of traffic samples.
Fig. 4. An example of feature attribution results.

FL(x

(p)

, K)

(6)

ˆ =I
y (p)

Fig. 4 shows an example of the feature attribution
results. Fig. 4a depicts the feature ranking results for each
traffic type. Each row represents a specific traffic type. Each
column stands for a specific feature. The numbers inside
the square represent the feature ranking (smaller is higher).
These results are interpretable from the perspective of attack
principles. For example, from Fig. 4a, we can see that the
direction is the significant feature for DDoS and DoS. This
is because the communication pattern of these two traffic
types is mainly the attacker (the client) sending a flood of
packets to the server. Fig. 4b shows the feature importance
of samples, illustrating which features contribute more to
the classification results. The numbers on the y-axis are
indexes of the selected sample on the dataset. It facilitates us
to understand how the model comes to the final prediction
results. Take the FTP Patator #86237 as an example, we
can see that the frame.len plays an important role in the
classification. This is mainly because the purpose of the FTP
Patator is to keep trying to decipher the password of the FTP
server. Meanwhile, the packet length of the authentication
process in FTP is always a fixed value.
5.2

t
fram
t
t tcp tcp t cp.w
diree.intframip.flaip.flag cp.flatgcp.fclap.flag.flags.flagcsp. .flagindowudp.leicmpicmp
ctio erva e.le gs.d s.m ip.t s.sy gs.fi s.ac .pus rese s.ur _siz ngt .typ .cod
n l n f f tl n n k h t g e h e e
Benign 10 14 12 4 13 7 9 8 5 6 15 16 11 1 3 2
Botnet 13 12 11 5 14 4 7 9 6 8 16 15 10 3 1 2
DDoS 1 15 12 9 13 3 11 8 6 7 14 16 5 10 2 4
DoS 2 16 12 4 14 3 9 11 6 8 13 15 7 10 1 5
FTP Patator 6 13 1 11 16 3 14 4 9 5 8 15 2 12 7 10
Port Scan 9 6 5 13 15 4 10 8 12 11 14 16 2 7 3 1
SSH Patator 3 16 8 14 15 2 12 6 11 4 10 13 1 9 5 7
Brute Force 10 13 12 8 14 4 11 6 5 7 16 15 9 3 1 2

Feature Ranking

where SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) represents the K -th dimensional
loss when feeding sample x(p) into the J -th fingerprint
module in the fingerprint list. Subsequently, we can
calculate the loss difference between fingerprint modules in
the K -th dimension of a sample x(p) (abbreviated as feature
loss) as follows,

7

Inter-Class Distance between Traffic Types

According to our design of fingerprint learning, the
fingerprint module will output a larger loss if we feed
traffic data whose type is not the corresponding type of the
fingerprint module. In other words, the loss is the distance

between the input traffic and the expected traffic of the
fingerprint module. In the previous section, we have defined
the single-dimensional loss SL(X I , ψJ , K) in Eq.(5), which
is the K -th dimension of the output loss when feeding traffic
data of type I into the J -th fingerprint module. Based on
this, we define the inter-class distance from traffic type I to
traffic type J at dimension K as

DI(I, J, K) = ReLU (SL(X I , ψJ , K) − SL(X I , ψI , K))
(7)
The inter-class distance actually reflects the similarity
between traffic types. Considering that the distance is
always the non-negative value, we use ReLU to extract
the non-negative part. If we take each traffic type as a
point and express the distance between the traffic types
as an edge between the points, we can draw the distance
map on a two-dimensional plane. Note that in general
DI(I, J, K) ̸= DI(J, I, K) and thus the distance map
should be a directed graph.
Fig. 5 shows an example of the inter-class distance
between traffic types. We use a larger linewidth to represent
a smaller inter-class distance. In each subfigure, the red
and blue lines indicate the largest and smallest inter-class
distances, respectively. Due to the page limitation, we only
present the inter-class distance in the dimension of direction
and in all features. We find the results are rational. For
example, we can see that Port Scan and Brute Force are
close in direction. This is mainly because the behavior of
these two traffic types is similar, i.e., attempting to access

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

(
a)Di
s
t
anc
ei
ndi
r
ec
t
i
on.

(
b)Di
s
t
anc
ei
nal
l
f
eat
ur
es
.

Fig. 5. An example of the inter-class distance between traffic types.

information about the server by sending massive packets
to the target in a short time. DoS and DDoS are close
to each other in all features due to their similar attack
behaviors. Particularly, Benign and Botnet are the closest in
direction because they are both bidirectional communication
between the client and servers. In contrast, DoS and Benign
are the farthest in direction as the DoS traffic is usually
from clients to the target server while Benign contains
bidirectional flows. Moreover, we can observe that Botnet
and Brute Force are the closest while Port Scan and SSH
Patator are the farthest in all features. Inspired by this result,
we try to group the traffic types with close distances to a
new individual type, which may reduce the struggle of the
model to distinguish between similar types and improve the
classification performance of the model. The details of this
experiment can be found in Section 6.4.3.

6

E VALUATION

In this section, we present the experimental settings and the
evaluation results of the proposed I2 RNN.
6.1

Experimental Settings

6.1.1 Datasets
We evaluate the proposed I2 RNN on two public
datasets CIC-IDS2017 dataset [48] and ISCXVPN2016 traffic
dataset [49], respectively. The first dataset contains the
hybrid of encrypted and unencrypted network traffic across
five days, which can be divided into 8 classes, Benign,
FTP Patator, SSH Patator, DoS, Web Brute Force, Botnet,
Port Scan, and DDoS respectively. The second dataset
contains pure encrypted traffic, which is composed of
14 applications, e.g., Facebook, Netflix, Skype, etc. The
applications are encrypted with various security protocols,
including HTTPS, SSH, and proprietary protocols. Both two
datasets are imbalanced. For example, in the CIC-IDS2017
dataset, Port Scan accounts for 35.07%, while Botnet only
accounts for 0.27%. In the ISCXVPN2016 traffic dataset,
Email accounts for 16.89%, while SFTP only accounts for
0.65%.
6.1.2 Baselines
We compare I2 RNN against various baseline works for
encrypted traffic classification, including KNN [50], RF [51],
MLP [52], LSTM [6], and FS-Net [12].
We compare our global feature ranking method against
the mutual information feature ranking [36], RFE feature

8

ranking [37], and random forest feature ranking [38].
Since these methods cannot be performed on time-series
features directly, we first reshape the time-series data into
tabular data as mentioned in Section 5.1. Then we calculate
the feature importance on the reshaped data with these
methods respectively. Finally, we restore the results of feature
importance to the corresponding time-series features to
obtain the feature ranking of the original features. The
process restore is to accumulate the feature importance
of corresponding features on the reshaped data, for each
feature of the original time-series data.
In terms of local interpretability, we compare the
performance of our proposed method against well-known
methods, including LIME [39], SHAP [40], and Feature
Permutation [41].
6.1.3 Implementation Details
The time sequence length of each LSTM unit is set as
32. We set the dimension of the encoding layer as 8. The
dimension of hidden states of each fingerprint LSTM is set
as 16. The Adam optimizer [53] with a learning rate of
0.001 is used. Our proposed method I2 RNN is implemented
with PyTorch. We use scikit-learn [54] to implement other
compared methods. The compared local interpretability
methods are the implementation from Captum [55]. All
experiments in this paper are conducted using a 12-core PC
with an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1070 GPU, 128GB of RAM,
and Ubuntu 16.04 LTS.
6.1.4 Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate the classification performance of I2 RNN with
other baselines in terms of Accuracy (AC), Precision (PR),
Recall (RC), and F1-Score (F1) [17]. Macro Average [56]
is used to avoid biased results due to imbalance between
multiple categories of data by calculating the mean value of
AC, PR, RC, and F1 of each category.
The performance of local interpretability will
be evaluated in terms of stability, robustness, and
effectiveness [20].
6.2

Evaluation of Classification

In this section, we evaluate I2 RNN and baseline
classification methods with the 5-fold cross-validation.
6.2.1 Effectiveness of the Fingerprint Learning
In order to show the effectiveness of fingerprint learning,
we plot the distribution of losses output by each fingerprint
module when feeding traffic data of different types. Each
subfigure in Fig. 6 shows the kernel density estimation
(KDE) [57] of the distribution of losses (due to page
limitation we do not show all results). The losses of samples
whose types are exactly the corresponding type of the
fingerprint module (red rectangle part) are significantly
lower than that of other types (x-axis). It demonstrates that
each fingerprint module in the fingerprint list of I2 RNN can
learn the fingerprint of the corresponding traffic type well. In
other words, the core idea of I2 RNN described in Section 4
is effective.
Table 1 and Table 2 show the classification results.
It is clear that I2 RNN achieves significant classification

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

(
d)Por
tScan

(
c)FTPPat
at
or

(
b)DoS

(
a)Beni
gn

9

(
e)SSHPat
at
or

Fig. 6. KDE of losses output by fingerprint modules when feeding different types of traffic data on CIC-IDS2017.

Method
I2RNN
I2RNN w/o EL
KNN [50]
RF [51]
MLP [52]
LSTM [6]
FS-Net [12]

AC
0.9897
0.9769
0.9579
0.9698
0.9699
0.9649
0.9526

PR
0.9864
0.9752
0.8886
0.9692
0.9699
0.7961
0.4721

RC
0.9859
0.9729
0.8891
0.9621
0.9693
0.8560
0.4439

F1
0.9861
0.9766
0.8886
0.9629
0.9630
0.8124
0.4218

TABLE 2
Comparison Results of Different Classification Methods on
ISCXVPN2016 dataset
Method
I2RNN
I2RNN w/o EL
KNN [50]
RF [51]
MLP [52]
LSTM [6]
FS-Net [12]

AC
0.9393
0.8922
0.8799
0.8712
0.8503
0.8813
0.5230

PR
0.9068
0.8683
0.7692
0.8742
0.6992
0.5213
0.0924

RC
0.9178
0.8693
0.7094
0.8647
0.6745
0.5132
0.1122

F1
0.9013
0.8490
0.6924
0.8634
0.5540
0.5006
0.0859

6.2.2 Local Robustness of the Fingerprint Learning
We compare the local robustness of the fingerprint learning
of I2 RNN and traditional classification with LSTM when
having noise in packet sequence. We add a Gaussian noise
ϵ N (0, 1) with different perturbation ratios β ∈ [0, 1] to the
last two packets in the packet sequence of a session. The
experiment results are shown in Fig. 7. When gradually
increasing the perturbation ratio from 0.0 to 1.0, we find
the accuracy and F1-Score of the fingerprint LSTM change
slightly while the performance of the traditional LSTM
drops sharply. This result indicates our fingerprint LSTM
has local robustness and is more stable in face of noises in
sessions.

95
F1-Score (%)

Accuracy (%)

98

90

97

85

96
95

80

Traditional LSTM
Fingerprint LSTM

0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

750.00

1.00

Traditional LSTM
Fingerprint LSTM

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

Fig. 7. Comparison results of traditional LSTM and fingerprint LSTM on
CIC-IDS2017 with different perturbation ratios β .

6.2.3

Ablation Study of the Encoding Layer

To verify the effectiveness of the encoding layer, we train a
variant version of I2 RNN without the encoding layer (EL),
which is termed as I2 RNN w/o EL in Table 1 and Table 2. We
can see that the I2 RNN with the encoding layer has a better
performance than the variant version of I2 RNN without
the encoding layer. This result indicates that the encoding
layer has effects on categorical feature transformation and
redundant information reduction.
6.3
6.3.1
Size

Evaluation of Incremental Learning
Comparison of Training Time and Preserved Data

Fig. 8 presents the comparison of the training time and the
size of data needed to be preserved when giving different
numbers of incremental data. Compared to the traditional
LSTM, our proposed fingerprint LSTM is more efficient in
training time and the size of data needed to be preserved
under an incremental learning scenario.

2.5
2.0

Traditional LSTM
Fingerprint LSTM

25

Traditional LSTM
Fingerprint LSTM

20

1.5

15

1.0

10

0.5
0.0

30
Preserved Data Size (GB)

TABLE 1
Comparison Results of Different Classification Methods on
CIC-IDS2017 dataset

99

Train Time (×103s)

performance and outperforms all other methods in both
traffic datasets. The KNN, RF, and MLP are designed
to learn from the tabular data. They cannot model the
context information in the sequence data and thus perform
worse than I2 RNN. The I2 RNN has a better classification
performance than LSTM and FS-Net, especially in F1-Score.
It is mainly because both datasets are imbalanced. The
I2 RNN leverages the advantage of fingerprint learning, i.e.,
each fingerprint module is only responsible for identifying
one traffic type. Thus it will not be confused by different
traffic fingerprints and is suitable for imbalanced data.

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Incremental Data Num. (×104)

5
0

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Incremental Data Num. (×104)

Fig. 8. Comparison of training time and size of data needed to be
preserved with different numbers of incremental data.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

TABLE 3
Classification Performance (F1-Score) Under Different Incremental
Learning Scenarios
Scenario
+Benign
+Benign & Botnet
+Benign & Botnet
→+DDoS & DoS

6.4

Total
0.9861
0.9861

New
0.9899
0.9886

Old
0.9855
0.9852

0.9861

0.9891

0.9829

Evaluation of Interpretability

For the model interpretability of I2 RNN, we first evaluate
the global and local interpretability respectively, and then
the effectiveness of inter-class distance.
6.4.1

Effectiveness of Global Feature Ranking

To examine the effectiveness of features ranked by different
methods, we first partition the ranked features into two
equal groups, that is, each group has 8 features. Then
we use features in each group to classify the traffic.
The results are shown in Fig. 9a. We can observe that
the first group of I2 RNN has a better F1-Score than the
second group. This indicates that the feature ranking of
I2 RNN is effective. Moreover, we validate the effectiveness
of feature ranking by selecting a different number of
features according to feature ranking results to perform
classification tasks. Fig. 9b and 9c show the experiment
results. Compared with other feature ranking methods, our
method can achieve higher classification performance with
the same number of features. This suggests that our feature
ranking method can choose the important features of timeseries data and is more effective than other feature ranking
methods. Particularly, using our feature ranking method
can achieve classification performance similar to using all
features with only half the number of original features.

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

All

Group 1

Group 2

1.0
0.9

Accuracy

F1-Score

We verify the classification performance of I2 RNN under
different incremental learning scenarios. We consider three
incremental scenarios including the addition of one traffic
type, the addition of multiple traffic types at once, and
the sequential addition of multiple traffic types. We first
sort the names of traffic types in alphabetical order. In
each incremental scenario, we select the first few traffic
types as the incremental traffic types and the remaining
traffic types as the initial types. Then we train the model
to learn new traffic types according to the incremental
scenarios. Table 3 shows the experiment results. In Table 3,
the symbol plus (+) means that the corresponding type
is added for incremental learning. The new means traffic
types newly added during incremental learning and the
old means traffic types before incremental learning. We
observe that as long as the trained traffic types are the same
(including those gradually added for incremental learning),
the performance of the I2 RNN will be the same. This
indicates that incremental learning of I2 RNN has the same
effect as the training model with full data at once. In other
words, our incremental learning algorithm of I2 RNN does
not cause a degradation in classification performance.

Finally, we also compare the time cost of different feature
ranking methods and the results are shown in Fig. 9d. We
can see that I2 RNN uses the shortest time to rank features
while other methods need a longer time to handle or are
even impossible to get results in a tolerable time (see a red
cross in RFE). We argue that the efficiency of the feature
ranking method is also a part of the interpretable evaluation,
which allows users to have quick feedback and a good user
experience.

0.8
MI
RF
I2RNN

0.7
MI

RF
Method

I2RNN

(a)

2

4

6 8 10 12 14 16
Feature Num.
(b)

0.95
0.90

F1-Score

6.3.2 Classification Performance in Different Incremental
Scenario

10

0.85
MI
RF
I2RNN

0.80
0.75

2

4

6 8 10 12 14 16
Feature Num.
(c)

X
(d)

Fig. 9. Experiment results of global model interpretability.

6.4.2 Performance Comparison of Local Interpretability
We compare the performance of the local interpretability
of I2 RNN with LIME [39], SHAP [40], and feature
permutation (PERM) [41] in terms of stability, robustness,
and effectiveness [20]. Stability is the fundamental metric
of local interpretability. The explanation results generated
in a critical security system should be stable. That is, the
feature importance must not be seriously influenced by
the slight fluctuation of the model (e.g., n epochs = 95,
n epochs = 100, and n epochs = 105). Robustness is used to
measure how similar the explanation results are for similar
instances, i.e., the feature importance of samples of the same
class should be similar, while the feature importance of
samples of different classes should be as distinct as possible.
Effectiveness is the measure of whether the explanation
results are important to the decision-making. In other
words, if the explanation results are really the decision basis
for an individual prediction, then after the elimination of
such features, the classification result would be changed.
Fig. 10 illustrates the performance comparison of
local interpretability in terms of stability, robustness, and
effectiveness under different top-k features. From the figure,
we can observe that:
•

•

The I2 RNN shows the best stability, robustness,
and effectiveness compared to other methods under
different top-k features.
The ranking of the four local interpretability
approaches in term of the stability metric is I2 RNN

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

LIME
SHAP
PERM
I2RNN

LIME
SHAP
PERM
I2RNN

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
k

Robustness

Stability

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

some dimensions or in all features), while the performance
significantly decreases if we group traffic types with large
distances. These results indicate that our inter-class distance
is rational, which captures the relationships between traffic
types.
TABLE 4
Experiment Results of Different Grouping Strategies

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
k

(a) Stability

Grouping Strategy
Botnet & Brute Force
DDoS & DoS
Benign & DDoS
Port Scan & SSH Patator

(b) Robustness

Effectiveness

0.95
0.90
LIME
SHAP
PERM
I2RNN

0.85
0.80

2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
k
(c) Effectiveness
Fig. 10. Performance comparison of local interpretability.

•

•

6.4.3

> PERM > SHAP > LIME. The stability of I2 RNN
is above 0.8 when k ≥ 6, indicating that explanation
features hardly change when slightly modifying the
model.
The ranking of the four local interpretability
approaches in term of the robustness metric is I2 RNN
> PERM > SHAP > LIME. With the increase of k , the
robustness of the four methods decreases. For SHAP
and LIME, their robustness scores are lower than 0.2,
and they hardly change under various k values. The
robustness of PERM is less than 0.5. These indicate
that PERM, SHAP, and LIME cannot capture the core
differences between traffic types especially when k is
small.
The ranking of the four local interpretability
approaches in term of the effectiveness metric is
I2 RNN > LIME ≥ SHAP > PERM. The effectiveness
of LIME and SHAP is very similar. For I2 RNN, the
effectiveness starts to be stable when k > 8. This
indicates important features of I2 RNN are in the top
half of the ranked features, which results in little
change of predicted label with higher k values.
Effectiveness of Inter-Class Distance

To validate whether inter-class distance effectively
characterizes the similarity between traffic types, we
group traffic types with close distance as an individual
traffic type. As depicted in Fig. 5, Botnet and Brute Force
are the closest in all features and thus we group them into
an individual type. We also group DDoS and DoS which
are close in all features. For a fair comparison (i.e., taking
out the factor of category reduction), we also group traffic
types with large distances. We group Port Scan and SSH
Patator which are the farthest types in all features. Benign
and DDoS are also grouped as an experiment for large
distances. The results are shown in Table 4. We can observe
that the performance is improved if we group traffic types
that have small inter-class distances (i.e., they are close in

11

7

Distance
0.65
1.28
2.67
7.49

AC (%)
99.95
99.64
91.24
79.71

F1 (%)
98.90
98.81
85.31
80.84

D ISCUSSION

2

I RNN with fingerprint learning has shown a great
advantage in encrypted traffic classification. It can be
deployed as a model capable of efficient incremental
learning to cope with the ever-increasing types of traffic
in the real world. The global level feature ranking and
selection help eliminate unnecessary features and alleviate
the computational overhead. Moreover, researchers and
users can understand the deep insights for the model’s
predictions from the local feature interpretation with high
stability, robustness, and effectiveness. Besides, I2 RNN
profiles the differences and relations between traffic types
with the inter-class distance portrait. Users can group
similar traffic types to improve classification performance in
practice. Below, we discuss the identification of new traffic
types, model scalability, and limitations.
Where do the new traffic types come from? Though
I2 RNN focuses on coping with the incremental learning
scenario, with the ability to incrementally learn new types
without accessing past data and retraining the model, it is
natural to think about where the new traffic types come
from. Currently, the newly labeled data for updating the
model are manually proposed by the same party who uses
the model for detection. We can obtain new application
types by collecting relevant information in the application
markets such as App Store and Google Play. New types
of attacks may be reported by researchers after analyzing
system logs and traffic data. Some arts [58], [59] also propose
open-set recognition for encrypted traffic classification,
which focus on automatically recognizing and labeling
new traffic types. I2 RNN could leverage these methods to
improve the identification of new traffic types and build a
more automatic incremental learning process.
What is the scalability of the model? As the number
of fingerprint modules increases, the scalability of the
I2 RNN may become a concern for users. Here we clarify
the scalability of I2 RNN in terms of space and time. In
terms of space, each fingerprint module is lightweight
and does not take up too much disk space. For example,
the number of parameters of each fingerprint module
trained on ISXCVPN2016 is only 5334. The size of the
hard disk space occupied by each fingerprint module is
only 23.17 KB. Therefore, even if the fingerprint module
continues to increase, there will be no obvious scalability
problem in space. In terms of time, since each fingerprint

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

module is independent, the network traffic data can be
simultaneously fed into each fingerprint module for parallel
computation. Therefore, the computing capacity practically
depends on the maximum number of parallel threads
the CPU allowed. Furthermore, this computational process
can be extended to distributed computing clusters using
the idea of MapReduce [60]. Fingerprint modules can be
deployed on multiple computing nodes. When new traffic
data arrives, each computing node can calculate the loss for
the input traffic in parallel. After waiting for all computing
nodes to complete the calculation, we can aggregate all
losses and give the final prediction results by comparing
the outputs of each fingerprint module. Therefore, even if
the fingerprint module keeps increasing, the model will also
maintain good scalability in time.
Limitations and Future Work. There are still two
limitations of I2 RNN. The first limitation is that the
fingerprint may be outdated over time as the behavior
of the corresponding traffic type may vary at different
times. Future work can develop some systematic strategies
to periodically update the fingerprint modules in I2 RNN.
The second limitation is that hyper-parameters of I2 RNN
are configured empirically. Future work can investigate
the sensitivity of hyper-parameters, and provide brief
guidelines about how to configure them.

8

C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have presented I2 RNN, an incremental and
interpretable recurrent neural network model for encrypted
traffic classification. The I2 RNN learns fingerprints from
the raw session sequences, which has local robustness.
The I2 RNN considers an incremental learning scenario. It
only needs to train an additional set of parameters for
the newly added traffic type rather than retraining the
whole model. Moreover, the I2 RNN is an interpretable
model, which provides the feature attribution globally
and locally. It can also depict the similarity between
traffic types through inter-class distance. The evaluation
results on two public datasets demonstrate that our
I2 RNN can achieve remarkable performance in terms of
encrypted traffic classification, incremental learning, and
model interpretability. In performance comparison with
well-known local interpretability methods, our I2 RNN
exhibits excellent stability, robustness, and effectiveness in
the interpretation of network traffic data. In future work,
we plan to investigate effective techniques for identifying
new types of traffic automatically and updating the learned
fingerprints to keep pace with the time evolution of traffic.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by National Key R&D
Program of China (2020AAA0107700), by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (62072398), by AlibabaZhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies,
by Zhejiang Key R&D Plan (2021C01116), by Leading
Innovative and Entrepreneur Team Introduction Program
of Zhejiang (2018R01005), and by Research Institute of
Cyberspace Governance in Zhejiang University, by National
Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information

12

System Security, by State Key Laboratory of Mathematical
Engineering and Advanced Computing, and by Key
Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of Henan
Province.

R EFERENCES
[1]

H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and X. Cao, “An efficient feature
generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection
techniques for traffic classification,” Computer Networks, vol. 132,
pp. 81–98, 2018.
[2] T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Independent
comparison of popular dpi tools for traffic classification,”
Computer Networks, vol. 76, pp. 75–89, 2015.
[3] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Appscanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted
network traffic,” in 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE, 2016, pp. 439–454.
[4] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (tls)
protocol version 1.2,” 2008.
[5] A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, “The secure sockets layer (ssl)
protocol version 3.0,” RFC 6101, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[6] L. Vu, H. V. Thuy, Q. U. Nguyen, T. N. Ngoc, D. N. Nguyen,
D. T. Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz, “Time series analysis for
encrypted traffic classification: A deep learning approach,” in 2018
18th International Symposium on Communications and Information
Technologies (ISCIT). IEEE, 2018, pp. 121–126.
[7] J. McPherson, K.-L. Ma, P. Krystosk, T. Bartoletti, and
M. Christensen, “Portvis: a tool for port-based detection of
security events,” in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM workshop on
Visualization and data mining for computer security, 2004, pp. 73–81.
[8] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, and
K. Hanssgen, “A survey of payload-based traffic classification
approaches,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16,
no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, 2013.
[9] A. W. Moore and K. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate
identification of network applications,” in International Workshop
on Passive and Active Network Measurement. Springer, 2005, pp.
41–54.
[10] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
in automated traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2021,
pp. 3366–3383.
[11] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust
smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic
analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, 2017.
[12] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “Fs-net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in IEEE INFOCOM
2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1171–1179.
[13] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
“Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification
using deep learning,” Soft Computing, pp. 1–14, 2017.
[14] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey
of methods for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,”
International Journal of Network Management, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–
374, 2015.
[15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution
neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE, 2017, pp. 43–48.
[16] J. Platt, “Sequential minimal optimization: A fast algorithm for
training support vector machines,” 1998.
[17] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, “Learning to classify: A
flow-based relation network for encrypted traffic classification,”
in Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, 2020, pp. 13–22.
[18] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2img: A sequenceto-image based approach towards ip traffic classification using
convolutional neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1271–1276.
[19] B. Cui, G. Hu, and S. Yu, “Deepcollaboration: Collaborative
generative and discriminative models for class incremental
learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 2, 2021, pp. 1175–1183.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

[20] M. Fan, W. Wei, X. Xie, Y. Liu, X. Guan, and T. Liu, “Can we
trust your explanations? sanity checks for interpreters in android
malware analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, vol. 16, pp. 838–853, 2021.
[21] F. Constantinou and P. Mavrommatis, “Identifying known
and unknown peer-to-peer traffic,” in Fifth IEEE International
Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA’06). IEEE,
2006, pp. 93–102.
[22] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Wang, “Unsupervised
traffic classification using flow statistical properties and ip packet
payload,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 79, no. 5,
pp. 573–585, 2013.
[23] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting
to classify encrypted traffic,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2014-IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2014, pp. 781–789.
[24] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification
of encrypted traffic with second-order markov chains and
application attribute bigrams,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1830–1843, 2017.
[25] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “Mampf:
Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute markov
probability fingerprints,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM 26th International
Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–10.
[26] H. Liu, Z. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Semi-supervised encrypted traffic
classification using composite features set,” Journal of Networks,
vol. 7, no. 8, p. 1195, 2012.
[27] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s
use of tls (without decryption),” Journal of Computer Virology and
Hacking Techniques, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 195–211, 2018.
[28] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “Tscrnn: A novel classification scheme
of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for
efficient management of iiot,” Computer Networks, vol. 190, p.
107974, 2021.
[29] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate
decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic
analysis using graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[30] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “Etbert: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training
transformers for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proceedings of
the ACM Web Conference 2022, 2022, pp. 633–642.
[31] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[32] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “Deeplog: Anomaly
detection and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,”
in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and
communications security, 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
[33] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 40,
no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, 2017.
[34] P. Dhar, R. V. Singh, K.-C. Peng, Z. Wu, and R. Chellappa,
“Learning without memorizing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp.
5138–5146.
[35] Y. Gu, C. Deng, and K. Wei, “Class-incremental instance
segmentation via multi-teacher networks,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 2, 2021, pp.
1478–1486.
[36] A. Kraskov, H. Stögbauer, and P. Grassberger, “Estimating mutual
information,” Physical review E, vol. 69, no. 6, p. 066138, 2004.
[37] I. Guyon, J. Weston, S. Barnhill, and V. Vapnik, “Gene selection
for cancer classification using support vector machines,” Machine
learning, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 389–422, 2002.
[38] G. Louppe, “Understanding random forests: From theory to
practice,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.7502, 2014.
[39] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “”why should I trust
you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, August 13-17,
2016, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[40] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
model predictions,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 30, 2017.

13

[41] A. Altmann, L. Toloşi, O. Sander, and T. Lengauer, “Permutation
importance: a corrected feature importance measure,”
Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1340–1347, 2010.
[42] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[43] D. Mandic and J. Chambers, Recurrent neural networks for prediction:
learning algorithms, architectures and stability. Wiley, 2001.
[44] Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi, “Learning long-term
dependencies with gradient descent is difficult,” IEEE transactions
on neural networks, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 157–166, 1994.
[45] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman et al., “Array programming with
numpy,” Nature, vol. 585, no. 7825, pp. 357–362, 2020.
[46] Q. Zou, J. Zeng, L. Cao, and R. Ji, “A novel features ranking
metric with application to scalable visual and bioinformatics data
classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 173, pp. 346–354, 2016.
[47] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
boltzmann machines,” in Icml, 2010.
[48] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
characterization.” ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, 2018.
[49] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A.
Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using
time-related,” in Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on
information systems security and privacy (ICISSP). sn, 2016, pp.
407–414.
[50] D. McGaughey, T. Semeniuk, R. Smith, and S. Knight, “A
systematic approach of feature selection for encrypted network
traffic classification,” in 2018 Annual IEEE International Systems
Conference (SysCon). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[51] Y. Zhai and X. Zheng, “Random forest based traffic classification
method in sdn,” in 2018 International Conference on Cloud
Computing, Big Data and Blockchain (ICCBB). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[52] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile
encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” in 2018
Network traffic measurement and analysis conference (TMA). IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–8.
[53] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[54] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg,
J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,
and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[55] N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, M. Martin, E. Wang, B. Alsallakh,
J. Reynolds, A. Melnikov, N. Kliushkina, C. Araya, S. Yan et al.,
“Captum: A unified and generic model interpretability library for
pytorch,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07896, 2020.
[56] C. Liu, W. Wang, M. Wang, F. Lv, and M. Konan, “An efficient
instance selection algorithm to reconstruct training set for support
vector machine,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 116, pp. 58–73,
2017.
[57] B. W. Silverman, Density estimation for statistics and data analysis.
Routledge, 2018.
[58] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Encrypted
traffic classification of decentralized applications on ethereum
using feature fusion,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 27th International
Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–10.
[59] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknownapplication filtering and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier
update,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications. IEEE, 2020, pp. 397–405.
[60] J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “Mapreduce: simplified data processing
on large clusters,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 51, no. 1, pp.
107–113, 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022

Zhuoxue Song received the B.S. degree
in computer science and technology from
Hangzhou Dianzi University, in 2021. He is
currently working toward the M.S. degree in the
security of cyberspace at Zhejiang University.
His main research interests include encrypted
traffic classification and intrusion detection.

Ziming Zhao received the B.S. degree
in computer science and technology from
Shijiazhuang Tiedao University, in 2019. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the
security of cyberspace at Zhejiang University.
His main research interests include network
security and intrusion detection.

Fan Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of
Connecticut, Mansfield, CT, USA, in 2011. He
is currently a Full Professor with the College of
Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, and also with the
Alibaba–Zhejiang University Joint Institute of
Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou. His research
interests include system security, hardware
security, network security, and cryptography.

14

Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in traffic engineering from Southeast
University, Nanjing, China, in 1994, the M.S.
degree in computer application from the Hefei
University of Technology, Hefei, China, in 2000,
and the Ph.D. degree in computer network from
Southeast University, in 2003. He is currently a
Full Professor with the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Southeast University. He has
authored or coauthored seven monographs and
more than 100 technical papers, including top
journals and top conferences. His research interests include network
security, network measurement, and traffic behavior analysis.

Xinjie Zhao received the B.S., M.S., and
Ph.D. degrees from Ordnance Engineering
College, Shijiazhuang, China, in 2006, 2009,
and 2012, respectively. He is currently with the
College of Computer Science and Technology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. His
main research interests include side channel
analysis, fault analysis, and combined analysis
in cryptography. Dr. Zhao won the best paper
award in COSADE 2012.

Shize Guo received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
from Ordnance Engineering College, China, in
1988 and 1991, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
in 1994. He is currently with the College of
Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. His main research
interests include information technology and
information security.

Gang Xiong is currently a Full Professor and
Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
China. He has authored more than 60 papers in
refereed journals and conference proceedings.
His research interests include network and
information security. He is a member of the 3rd
Communication Security Technical Committee of
China Institute of Communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.