IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

7147

K-GetNID: Knowledge-Guided Graphs for Early
and Transferable Network Intrusion Detection
Minxiao Wang, Ning Yang , Member, IEEE, and Ning Weng , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Developing early and transferable Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDSs) is essential for robust network
security. Early detection prevents further damage, while
transferable NIDSs enables reuse across diverse networks.
For Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)-based
NIDSs, transferability significantly reduces data collection and
annotation costs for timely attack mitigation. Current DLbased early intrusion detection studies often focus on identifying
attacks from the first few packets, neglecting the crucial
aspect of adjustable early detection. Additionally, most DLbased NIDS methods overlook transferability during both design
and evaluation phases. To address these limitations, we propose
K-GetNID, a knowledge-guided graph learning-based NIDS
that excels in both early and transferability. We introduce a
Heterogeneous Temporal Graph (HTGraph) to represent the
dynamic feature series of network flows, providing enough
information for early detection. Additionally, we construct this
HTGraph format based on prior knowledge about feature
types and correlations to assist the neural network in learning
general and transferable knowledge for intrusion detection.
We develop a corresponding Heterogeneous Temporal Graph
Neural Network (HTGNN) model to learn from the HTGraph
format. Furthermore, an Adjustable Early Detection Decoder
is designed to enhance the generalization of the proposed
model to the input distribution shifts caused by early detection.
Experiments on CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15 datasets show
that K-GetNID matches the performance of deep learning
methods, excelling in adjustable early intrusion detection and
transferability.
Index Terms— Intrusion detection systems, graph neural
networks, transferability, early detection, deep learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

E

ARLY and transferable NIDSs play a crucial role in
addressing the challenges posed by the dynamic and
diverse nature of network environments for ensuring network
security. An investigation into potential solutions for network
intrusion detection suggests that NIDSs utilizing ML and
DL models could prove highly effective [1], [27]. However,
existing ML/DL models still encounter limitations, pose open
questions, and face unique challenges in the context of NIDS
Manuscript received 22 December 2023; revised 24 June 2024;
accepted 16 July 2024. Date of publication 22 July 2024; date of
current version 29 July 2024. This work was supported in part by Dr.
Yang’s SIUC Startup and NSF under Award 2018919. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Dr. Z. Berkay Celik. (Corresponding author: Ning Yang.)
Minxiao Wang and Ning Weng are with the Computer Engineering Program,
School of ECBE, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale,
IL 62901 USA (e-mail: minxiao.wang@siu.edu; nweng@siu.edu).
Ning Yang is with the Information Technology Program, School of Computing, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale, IL 62901 USA
(e-mail: nyang@siu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3431932

tasks [30], [33], such as the diversity of traffic caused by
different network environments and the fixed and biased
parameter selection during the training stage may not be
suitable for the deployment scenario.
For transferability, given the broad application scenarios
of NIDSs, a DL-based NIDS model trained for one scenario
should be easily adaptable or fine-tuned for another. However,
the high cost associated with collecting and annotating a
NIDS dataset for each scenario is often unaffordable. In the
context of early intrusion detection, a proficient NIDS model
should demonstrate the ability to detect intrusions early and
generalize to distribution shifts in inputs. Early intrusion
detection involves discerning whether network traffic flows are
benign or malicious in the initial stages, leading to changes in
input patterns and providing only a partial view of the original
input traffic. These alterations in input significantly degrade
the inference accuracy of trained NIDS models.
Although early intrusion detection challenges current DLbased NIDSs, it is essential so that correct counterattack
responses can be implemented before an attack can inflict
more damage [3], [29]. Early intrusion detection also offers
additional benefits, such as saving time in collecting raw
packets and extracting features. Additionally, we observe that
many existing DL-based NIDS models [4], [13], [21], [23],
[29] could be capable of early intrusion detection if trained
with early detection data, and their early detection accuracy is
only slightly degraded [36]. Therefore, the real challenge in
early intrusion detection lies in the trade-off between accuracy
and response speed, which cannot be further adjusted after
the training stage. In particular, the trained NIDS models
are not generalized to distribution shifts caused by early
detection [35].
Learning early and transferable NIDS models requires
these models to identify attack behavior patterns that remain
consistent across varying application scenarios and input
domains. Consequently, we contend that training models to
capture the correlations among numerous input items (such
as features in tabular format) is more crucial than learning
the absolute values of independent input items. While handpicked features, grounded in extensive domain knowledge
from network security experts, significantly contribute to
distinguishing different types of traffic. However, the use of
a tabular format in feature-based methods poses a challenge
due to the existence of heterogeneous and sparse relationships
among feature values’a current open research question [19].
Utilizing Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)-based models, which
are fully connected, is difficult to learn feature correlations

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

7148

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

from scratch [2]. Furthermore, the tabular format fails to
provide temporal information, rendering tabular-based NIDS
methods insufficiently generalized to handle dynamic inputs,
such as early intrusion detection.
The
recent
state-of-the-art
tabular
model
FTtransformer [12] improves the performance of deep models
on tabular data by separately embedding numerical and
categorical features and modeling the embeddings with
the Transformer model. Additionally, the FT-transformer
model demonstrates effectiveness in the NIDS field [37].
Splitting different types of features and modeling the feature
embeddings with the self-attention mechanism [34] addressed
the mentioned heterogeneous and sparse relationship issues
but not tackle the lack of temporal information. Feature
series-based methods can provide temporal information to
NIDS, but extending the temporal dimension increases the
size of each data sample significantly compared to the tabular
format. Consequently, applying the Transformer in feature
series format incurs high time complexity and memory usage.
Despite efforts to enhance the efficiency of Transformers on
time series, as seen in models like Informer [44], performing
self-attention on a large scale of multivariate time series
(multiple feature series) remains inefficient. Recognizing
the limitations of tabular and feature series formats has
motivated the design of a new type of NIDS data format that
incorporates prior knowledge to overcome these shortcomings.
An alternative data format to tabular and feature series is
the graph structure, as both provide numerical and relational
information, allowing the incorporation of prior knowledge.
For example, provenance-based studies against Advanced
and Persistent Threats (APTs) such as UNICORN [14] and
HOLMES [24], use graph structures to analyze the correlation
among actions or events for detecting attacks. For example,
in the NIDSs on enterprise networks, graph embedding
learning [18], [28] show the effectiveness for detecting lateral
movement of APTs. Graph formats and graph neural networks
possess the capability to explicitly capture inter-temporal and
inter-variable relationships, a challenge that traditional and
other deep neural network-based methods frequently struggle
with [17]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is
no existing graph-based NIDS that is flow-based. Drawing
inspiration from the successful application of HTGraph in
other fields [10], [22], this paper investigates the use of
HTGraph to represent network flow for NIDS design.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework, as shown in
Fig. 2, which incorporates prior knowledge into a NIDS design
using heterogeneous temporal graphs and neural network
models. The proposed heterogeneous graph data format is
utilized to represent each network flow, incorporating highlevel prior knowledge such as feature types and dependence
between features. Additionally, we extend the heterogeneous
graph to a HTGraph by recording dynamically updated
features. For this HTGraph format, we design a corresponding
HTGNN-based NIDS model.
Furthermore, edges based on prior knowledge can reduce
the computational load in feature series format by narrowing
the self-attention calculation space from global to the
predefined edge range. The results demonstrate that the

proposed HTGNN model, trained with attention restricted by
the graph format, achieves better transferability than existing
methods. To enable adjustable early intrusion detection in
the inference stage, we further designed an Adjustable
Early Detection Decoder to train the HTGNN model for
generalization to input distribution shifts caused by early
detection. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
1) Novel NIDS traffic representation format and
detection model: developed a comprehensive NIDS
system by integrating a HTGraph with an HTGNNbased NIDS model. The HTGraph format includes
edges that capture feature correlations and temporal
dependencies, while the HTGNN aggregates feature
information through the pre-defined edges based on prior
knowledge.
2) Improving NIDS transferability: the proposed
HTGraph format and HTGNN NIDS model leverage
prior knowledge to guide modeling the correlations
among input elements, enhancing attention calculation
efficiency. The results of transfer learning demonstrate
that the simplified attention-based model exhibits better
transferability.
3) Enhancing generalization to early intrusion detection: the designed Adjustable Early Detection Decoder
enables the proposed HTGNN model to generalize to
the distribution shifts caused by early detection. The
results demonstrate that the proposed NIDS model can
still maintain its detection accuracy under distribution
shifts in the inference stage.
In the remainder of this paper, we introduce related works
in Sec.II and preliminary in Sec.III. We describe the entire
pipeline of our proposed framework in Sec.IV, including
network flow HTGraph construction, the HTGNN-based NIDS
model, and the Adjustable Early Detection Decoder. In Sec.V,
we present the evaluation results and analysis. Finally,
we provide our conclusion in Sec.VI.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
This section introduces feature-based NIDSs and the
graph-based NIDSs. We also summarize the similarities and
differences between our work and existing works.
A. Feature-Based Network Intrusion Detection
Nowadays, flow-based NIDSs typically consists of a
preprocessing module that converts traffic flows into samples
with a particular data format and a detection module that
predicts classes of traffic flows based on the format [25], [39],
[43]. This field is predominantly dominated by the tabular
data format, specifically the feature vector. Feature-based
methods [38] extract pre-defined features from traffic flows
and feed these features into neural network models. However,
the tabular format lacks temporal information, making it
unsuitable for adjustable early intrusion detection. Besides
the tabular format, another existing feature-based format is
the feature series. He et al. [15] introduced a MultimodalSequential data format in their work. Doriguzzi-Corin et al.
developed a sampling window-based packet sequences data

WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS

7149

Fig. 1. The different NIDS data formats. The network traffic can be constructed in different formats to leverage the different DL models and different types
of information in them. This figure presents the differences among Tabular, Feature Series, existing topology graph, and the proposed graph.

TABLE I
C OMPARISON W ITH E XISTING F EATURE -BASED
N ETWORK I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS

format for DDoS detection in their study [7]. While the feature
series format is similar to the feature vector as they both use a
pre-defined feature set, the feature series format also records
the dynamic trends of all the features as packets arrive. Feature
series-based methods typically adopt learning methods, such
as Transformer and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), which
are also used in the field of time series learning.
B. Graph-Based Network Intrusion Detection
In recent years, there has been a significant amount
of research focused on NIDSs that utilize graph analysis.
Shen et al. [32] introduce the Traffic Interaction Graph
(TIG) as a comprehensive representation of encrypted
DApp flows, incorporating multidimensional features within
bidirectional client-server interactions. Yao et al. [41] design
spatial-temporal deep learning on network communication
graphs, using the graph structure as the additional prior
information. Zola et al. [45] propose a pipeline for working
with network traffic data, extracting temporal graph-based
(node) features and finally detecting malicious nodes (IPs).
Lo et al. [20] propose E-GraphSAGE, a GNN approach that
allows capturing both edge features of a graph as well as
the topological information for network intrusion detection in
IoT networks. Duan et al. [8] propose a Dynamic Line Graph
Neural Network (DLGNN)-based intrusion detection method
with semi-supervised learning. The DLGNN extracts dynamic
lines (edges) features by learning from flow statistics features

TABLE II
C OMPARING A DOPTED G RAPH S TRUCTURE W ITH E XISTING
G RAPH -BASED N ETWORK I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS

in each snapshot. Hu et al. [16] propose a graph embedding
method to model the packet interactions in network traffic for
NIDS.
Most existing graph-based NIDS convert network traffic
flows into a dynamic IP address graph. Their primary advantage lies in the ability of the graph structure to incorporate
the “global” topology of cyberspace and provide insights
into the evolutionary patterns of host-to-host communication
interactions. These graph-based methods focus on the global
view of the interaction among hosts and classify whether graph
nodes (hosts) behave maliciously.
C. Differences From Existing Work
As shown in Fig. 1, most of the existing Graph-based
NIDS works represent the hosts in the network as the nodes
of the graph, and the communication between two hosts is
represented as an edge. The packet trace records or the network
traffic flow records are considered as the interactions among all
nodes in the graph along the time dimension. In our method,
we define the dynamically updated features in the Feature
Series format as the nodes of the graph. When only one
packet arrives, our graph has N nodes to represent the N
different features. For each arriving packet, the graph will add
N nodes to represent the updated features. In our graph, the
edges connect nodes along the feature’s spatial and temporal
dimensions.

7150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE III
S UMMARY OF S YMBOLS AND D ESCRIPTIONS

Although our work also adopts a graph structure, it should
be noted that our method is fundamentally different from
the existing graph-based NIDS methods [16], [20]. Instead
of utilizing network topology information or packet-sending
interactions, K-GetNID employs a heterogeneous temporal
graph to model different correlations among dynamic feature
series. Therefore, K-GetNID is a feature-based NIDS method
to represent flow behaviors and classify the entire graph
as benign or malicious flow. Graph formats and graph
neural networks have the capability to explicitly model intertemporal and inter-variable relationships, a task that traditional
and other deep neural network-based methods often find
challenging [17].
III. P RELIMINARY

x
x
Gθembed
(H T Graph f low (T, f i,t
)) → h i,t
1

(1)

where x refers to feature types, V x refers to the set of nodes
belonging to type x, E homo refers to the edges connect pairs of
homogeneous nodes, E heter refers to the edges connect pairs
of heterogeneous nodes, E temp refers to the temporal edges.

(2)

x refers to a flow’s x type ith dynamic statistics
where f i,t
feature at time t.
Another model G pr ed aims to learn parameters θ2 to predict
whether the flow is malicious or not, as given in Equation (3).
The prediction is based on the updated HTGraph, in which
x
nodes’ representations are replaced by embedding vectors h i,t
obtained from Equation (2),
pr ed

In this section, we introduce the concepts related to using
HTGraphs to formalize the NN application for flow-based
NIDS. Specifically, an HTGraph is generated to represent
a network traffic flow for the GNN-based NIDS model to
classify whether the flow is malicious or not. The expertdefined heterogeneous features, dynamically extracted with the
flow’s packets arriving, are included as nodes in the graph.
The correlation among different features and the sequential
relationships of the same feature are represented by spatial
and temporal edges of an HTGraph. All defined notations are
summarized in Table III.
Following the definition in [42], the heterogeneous graph
can be defined as G = (V, E, OV , R E ), where V represents
nodes with different types, E represents edges, OV is the set
of object types and R E is the relation types.
Definition: Given a network flow f low, which consists
of a series of packets pkt1 , pkt2 , . . . , pktn , statistical
features ( f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f m )t are dynamically updated for NIDS
prediction. Our goal is to predict f low is malicious or benign
at duration T through learning on a heterogeneous temporal
features graph H T Graph f low (T ), which is constructed from
dynamic statistical features as given in Equation (1),
H T Graph f low (T ) = (V x , E homo , E heter , E temp )

Our framework aims to embed the heterogeneous and weak
correlated features f into representation vectors e ∈ Rd ,
where d is the dimension of embedding vectors. Therefore,
the embedding model G embed seeks to learn parameters θ1 as
follows:

Gθ2

x
(H T Graph f low (T, h i,t
)) → pr ediction

(3)

x refers to the learned embedding for feature nodes
where h i,t
vi,t .

IV. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
In this section, we introduce the design of our proposed
framework. First, we present the overview structure of
the whole framework in Sec. IV-A. We describe how to
construct a heterogeneous temporal graph format to represent
network traffic in Sec. IV-B. Then we illustrate the design of
heterogeneous temporal graph neural networks for NIDS in
Sec. IV-C. Finally, we delve into the details of the Adjustable
Early Detection Decoder in Sec. IV-D.
A. Framework Overview
In the following, we introduce our heterogeneous temporal
GNN-based framework for NIDS, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
The framework comprises six key steps: features extraction,
relation definition, HTGraph construction, HTGNN model,
Adjustable Early Detection Decoder, and heterogeneous
knowledge fusion and classification.
First, when presented with a network flow, we record
the dynamically updated features as sequences with new
packets arriving. These pre-defined features are heterogeneous and have different scales or units. Based on
strong relations created for the same type of features
(homogeneous features), these homogeneous nodes assemble

WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS

7151

Fig. 2. Our proposed NIDS Framework. It incorporates prior knowledge (features types and correlations) in NIDSs design using HTGraph and HTGNN
models.

into a sub-graph. By considering multiple varying features,
an HTGraph is generated, which consists of nodes representing
heterogeneous features at different times. We also define
three types of edges to establish correlation among features:
“Heter-Correlation edge”, “Homo-Correlation edge” and
“Temporal edge”.
Subsequently, with the constructed HTGraph, multiple
HTGNN layers are designed to generate node (features)
embeddings. Corresponding to the three edge types, three
types of GNN layers independently aggregate information
through each type of edge. During this step, most information
is still aggregated among homogeneous neighbors. Finally,
we employ the Adjustable Early Detection Decoder to generate
embedding for each type of feature. A fusion network is
then applied to combine heterogeneous embeddings (learned
knowledge) for further prediction.
B. Network Flow HTGraph Construction
Data pre-processing is widely recognized as an essential
stage in anomaly detection and is found to predominantly rely
on expert domain knowledge for identifying the most relevant
parts of network traffic and constructing the initial candidate
set of traffic features [6]. Compared with feature vectors,
graphs are more flexible, allowing us to create correlations
among features and depict features’ dynamic updating trends
as packets arrive. In this work, we enhance traditional traffic
features by representing network flow in the form of an
HTGraph. In this section, we introduce the traffic feature set
used in this paper and then present the details of constructing
an HTGraph with those features.
1) Statistical Features: Feature extraction is a crucial step
in all knowledge discovery tasks, including NIDS. From
multiple published NIDS datasets, we find that the chosen
feature sets differ significantly. Rather than delving into
optimizing the feature set to maximize relevance with labels,
our focus is on enhancing the effectiveness of a fixed feature
set by formatting features in a new structure.
One aspect of improvement involves using a dynamically
updated feature sequence instead of a single feature value.
We anticipate that the feature sequence can provide more
temporal information to better distinguish and classify
network traffic as normal or anomalous. Fortunately, extracting
the mentioned feature sequence doesn’t incur significant
computational resources. Because during dataset creation or
the practical NIDS detection process, the feature extraction
programs, such as NetFlow, Argus, and CICFlowMeter, always

Fig. 3.
Heterogeneous temporal graph-based representation of NIDS’s
feature-based traffic flow. (The feature types used by the CIC-IDS-2017
dataset are used as introducing examples.)

update features with new packets arriving. Another aspect is
constructing multiple feature sequences into a graph, with
details introduced in the following Sec. IV-B2.
In this work, we utilize the statistical feature set provided in
the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset [31], comprising 80 features. These
features encompass different attribute types, value scales, and
a mix of discrete and continuous variables (heterogeneous).
First, because we have already adopted feature sequences
instead of a single feature value, the 80 features can be
simplified to 28 features by discarding some excess features,
such as tot_l_ f w_ pkt, f w_ pkt_l_max, f w_ pkt_l_min,
f w_ pkt_l_avg, f w_ pkt_l_std, which represent total, maximum, minimum, average, and standard deviation size of
packets in the forward direction. These are replaced by
one feature sequence: “each packet size in the forward
direction. Then, based on feature types, we categorize
the 28 features into 5 types: “time” (3), “packets” (8),
“binary” (9), “bulk” (6), and “window” (2). The details
about statistical features used in this work are shown
in Table VIII.
We would like to remark that the chosen feature set is not
tied to the method, the features and feature types can all be
customized. The utilization of specific features of CIC-IDS2017 and the following graph construction on those features
are just examples to explain the concepts and methods.

7152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

d) Temporal edge (E temp ): We further take temporal
dependency into account. Since we have already extended
features to feature sequences, which record the updated
features after the packet arrives. Hence, the neighbors in the
x and f x
same features, such as f i,t
i,t+1 , have temporal relation
x
ei,(t,t+1) , where t is packet arriving sequence number instead
of actual time and i is the sequence of features in type
x. Therefore, the temporal edge is represented as E temp =
x
{ei,(t,t+1)
|x ∈ {times, packets, binar y, bulk, win}}. In contrast to the homo-edge and heter-edge, where edge connections
show binary direction correlations, temporal edges are
unidirectional. Messages can only be shared from the early
nodes to late nodes.
Fig. 4. Heter-correlation edges decided by the usages of basic feature series.
(The features used by the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset are used as introducing
examples.)

2) HTGraph Construction: As we analyzed before, the
challenges posed by heterogeneous and weakly correlated
features motivate us to seek a more suitable format for
representing network flows. This shift aims to achieve better
intrusion detection performance by modeling heterogeneous
spatial dependencies among different types of features.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, the extracted feature sequences
are transformed into HTGraph structure H T Graph f low (T ).
Following the definition in Equation (1), the HTGraph consists
of four components: V x , E homo , E heter , E temp .
a) Nodes (V x ): First, we consider the dynamically
updated statistical features ( f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f m )t as nodes, and
their values are nodes’ initial values. Then, based on the
feature types, corresponding nodes are divided into x different
types. In this work, the number of node types x is 5, which
are “times”, “packets”, “binary”, “bulk”, and “window”.
b) Homo-correlation edge (E homo ): In H T Graph f low ,
the homo-correlation edges are those links between homogeneous nodes (nodes of the same type but representing
different features), shown as the blue links in Fig. 3. Although
homo-correlation edges share the same color, they actually
have different types, which are the same as the connected
nodes’ type. Indeed homo-correlation edge is represented as
x
E homo = {e(i,
j),t |x ∈ {times, packets, binar y, bulk, win}}.
Because features of the same type have similar value
scales or the same unit, they naturally exhibit strong
correlations.
c) Heter-correlation edge (E heter ): In addition to
homogeneous correlation, there are also correlations between
heterogeneous features. Heter-correlation edges represent links
between heterogeneous nodes (nodes in different types), shown
as the green links in Fig. 3. As shown in Fig. 4, we define
the heter-correlations based on the shared input components
for feature calculation. For calculating the feature series in the
left column of Fig. 4, we use 6 basic feature series listed on the
right part, which are the packet length series, packet header
length series, packet direction series, timestamp series, flag
series, and TCP window size series. Heterogeneous feature
series sharing the same basic feature series are considered
correlated.

Algorithm 1 The Function of Graph Construction
Input: Network traffic f low = { pkt1 , pkt2 , . . . , pktT }
Output: H T Graph : (V x , E homo , E heter , E temp )
function G RAPH CONSTRUCT( f low)
for t = 1 T do
sub f low(t) = { pkt1 , pkt2 , . . . , pktt }
( f 1 , . . . , f m )t = F EATURE E XTRACT(sub f low(t))
Split f 1 , . . . , f m into 5 sets:
{·}times , {·} pkt , {·}bin , {·}bulk , {·}win
for set x in the 5 sets do
for i = 1 T si ze(set x ) do
x ∈ set x
V x ← f i,t
x
x
x)
E temp ← ei,(t−1,t)
to connect ( f i,t−1
, f i,t
x
x
x
E homo ← e(i,
j),t to connect ( f i,t , f j,t )
end for
for set y in the rest 4sets do
for i = 1 T si ze(set x ), j = 1 T si ze(set y ) do
x , f y sharing the same basic feature
if f i,t
i,t
then
x,y
x, fy
E heter ← e(i, j),t to connect f i,t
j,t

C. Heterogeneous Temporal Graph Neural Networks
In this section, we formally present our HTGNN designed
to address the challenges posed by heterogeneous features
and early intrusion detection. HTGNN model comprises
two main parts: (1) dynamic features graph embedding;
(2) heterogeneous knowledge fusion. Fig. 5 illustrates these
two components. The first part extracts node embedding
by learning knowledge from the constructed heterogeneous
temporal feature graphs. Leveraging the graph structure
allows us to model correlations among different features
(nodes). In the second part, all node embeddings from each
subgraph are aggregated to acquire heterogeneous knowledge
for the overall graph classification task, specifically predicting
whether the flow is malicious or benign.
1) Dynamic Features Graph Embedding: The key idea
of GNN is aggregating information from neighbor nodes
through edges. However, as we mentioned in Sec.IV-B2,
the nodes’ initial values are recorded features, and these
features are heterogeneous. Directly aggregating features from
different types of nodes poses a challenge for neural networks.

WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS

7153

Fig. 6. Multi-head GATv2 in Homo-GNN for “packets” type subgraph,
x denotes the node embedding feature, which represents the ith statistical
h i,t
feature in x type at time t and e(.) is attention coefficient function. This
example shows how node embedding for statistical feature pkts_s_series_bw
is updated through multi-head attention. The attentions are learnable weights,
which denote the correlations between feature pairs. (The features used by
the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset are used as introducing examples.)

Fig. 5.

HTGNN-based NIDS model.

To address this issue, we design the dynamic features graph
embedding module to encode the heterogeneous features as
a fixed-size embedding, which is more suitable for further
exchanging among heterogeneous nodes. Therefore, the first
stage of homo-encoding only aggregates features through
homo-correlation edges and temporal edges to encode
the nodes as same-size vectors. With these vectors, the
second stage of heter-encoding incorporates heter-correlation
edges and aggregates embedding through all three types
of edges.
Specifically, we employ independent GATv2 [5] graph
neural networks for different types of edges to capture distinct
information based on the temporal and semantic dependencies
between dynamic features (see Table.III).
x
E homo = {e(i,
j),t }
x1 ,x2
E heter = {e(i,
j),t }

x
E temp = {ei,(t,t+1)
}

a) GATv2: For a given HTGraph’s subgraph, defined
by a set of edges {e} representing a specific knowledge
relationship, an independent GATv2 neural network is
employed to learn the embedding of feature nodes. For a
node in the subgraph, its learned embedding is denoted as
h i,t . In each GATv2 layer, the embedding h i,t is updated to a
′ through adaptive attention aggregation,
new representation h i,t

as described by Equation (4).


n
X
K
′
ai,k j W k h j,t 
h i,t
= ⊕ 
k=1

(4)

j=1

where K is a number of heads, j represents the neighbor
nodes of node i, t denotes the temporal dimension, ⊕
represents concatenation, W x,k is the corresponding learnable
weight matrix, a x,k
are attention coefficients computed using
j
Equation (5).

ai, j = softmaxj e(h i,t , h j,t )
e(h i,t , h j,t ) = a⊤ LeakyRelu(W [h i,t ⊕ h i,t ])

(5)

b) An example of GATv2 for homo-subgraph: For each
type of subgraph, which consists of all nodes from the
same type, we adopt a multi-head to learn knowledge among
homogeneous statistical features to encode corresponding
nodes’ embedding features. Fig. 6 shows the operation
G AT v2homo( packets) for the subgraph with “packets” type
nodes.
2) Heterogeneous Knowledge Fusion: Following the application of multiple HTGNN layers, the subsequent step
is shrinking the sub-graph node embeddings into a subgraph embedding. One simple alternative is to use the
sub-graph pooling layer to generate a comprehensive summary
embedding for each distinct feature type. In this work,
we employ a Transformer decoder-based module to merge
the node embeddings into a summary embedding; more
details will be introduced in the following section. This

7154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 7. Adjustable Early Detection Decoder. N independent learnable queries
extracted sub-graph representations for intrusion detection. The temporal mask
is used for restricting different queries within different observation window
sizes.

summary embedding is then directed towards a fusion layer,
where it is combined with other types of heterogeneous
knowledge to generate the final classification. The process
of integrating each distinct feature type into the fusion layer
ensures the comprehensive amalgamation of all available
knowledge sources, resulting in a more accurate and informed
classification outcome.
D. Adjustable Early Detection Decoder
Early intrusion detection poses a challenge as the NIDS
receives limited information about rapidly flowing traffic.
We define the threshold determining the detection’s earliness
as the observation window, which dictates the number of
packets in the input traffic. With varying observation windows,
shifts in the distribution of input traffic data can present a
challenge to the generalization of the NIDS model. To adapt
the NIDS model’s response time after deployment, two key
considerations arise (1) the need for an adjustable neural
network component to govern the observation window, and (2)
ensuring the NIDS model can generalize effectively to varying
observation windows.
To fulfill these requirements, we propose an Adjustable
Early Detection Decoder designed to extract multiple representations corresponding to different observation windows.
As shown in Figure 7, a Transformer Decoder [34]
structure is adopted as the required adjustable neural network
component. An Adjustable Early Detection Decoder follows
each homogeneous sub-graph before the Heterogeneous
Knowledge Fusion and classification modules. Within the
Adjustable Early Detection Decoder, two inputs are utilized:
the learnable queries and the sub-graph node embeddings.

Learnable queries are responsible for scoring the importance of
different nodes in the input sub-graph relative to the traffic type
based on the information in different observation windows.
To compute dot-product attention, the node embeddings of the
spatial-temporal sub-graph are mapped into one dimension.
Subsequently, the dot products of each query vector with all
key vectors are calculated. The attention map results from the
matrix multiplication between N learnable queries and S × T
keys.
During training, a masking mechanism is employed to
ensure that the attention mechanism attends to the nodes
within the observation windows. We choose increasing
observation windows for different queries so that we can
train different queries to extract features for different degrees
of early detection. For instance, the first query can only
observe the first 8 packets’ information, the second from
the first 16, and the last one from all. As traffic flows
may have a flexible number of packets denoted as T ,
setting the observation window size uniformly for the i-th
query as i×T
N , i = 1, 2, . . . N proves challenging due to
the unpredictable observation window size for each query.
To address this, we choose observation window sizes from
powers of 2. In particular, the observation window size for
the i th query as

i ×T
i ×T
 j
2 , if
≥ 2 j and
< 2 j+1
Obser W in i =
N
N
 T, if i = N .
(6)
Next, we set the first S × Obser W in i elements of the onedimension mask for the i th query to be 1 and the remaining
S × (T − Obser W in i ) elements to be 0.
Thanks to the Adjustable Early Detection Decoder, the
output of the proposed NIDS model for a single traffic flow
is extended to N classification results, each corresponding
to different observation windows. In the training stage, these
multiple results are used to calculate the loss for updating the
model at the same time. This implies that the proposed NIDS
model is trained to enable different degrees of early detection.
After the NIDS model is deployed, users can adjust the degree
of early detection by selecting a query without the need to
retrain the NIDS model with early detection data.
V. E VALUATION AND R ESULTS
In this section, we present a detailed evaluation of the
proposed HTGraph-based traffic flow data format and the corresponding HTGNN-based NIDS model. First, we introduce
the experiment setup in Sec. V-A. Then, we compare the
proposed method with other existing data formats and the
NIDS models in aspects of (1) general detection performance
(in terms of accuracy and F1 score et al.) and (2) model
transferability against domain change in Sec. V-C. Furthermore, we conduct an ablation study to show the impact of
different types of edges in the proposed HTGraph in Sec. V-B.
Finally, we evaluate the early detection performance to show
the proposed HTGNN-based NIDS model is generalized to
varying intrusion detection response times in Sec. V-E.

WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS

Fig. 8.
The ratio of each class in the resampled CIC-IDS-2017 and
UNSW-NB15 datasets. For each class, we choose up to 6000 samples, which
have more packets in flow.

7155

Fig. 9. The distribution of the packet number per flow for the CIC-IDS-2017
and UNSW-NB15 datasets.

A. Experiment Setup
Experimental Environment. To train models, we use a
high-performance computer running Ubuntu 18.04 on 3.30GH
Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-9820X CPU with 128 GB main memory
equipped with two NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4070 Ti GPUs. All
models are built with Pytorch 2.0.1 and PyG [11] 2.3.0, then
are trained on two GPUs by using the DistributedDataParallel
module.
CIC-IDS-2017 dataset is made up of benign flows and
14 classes of malicious flows. For our paper, we used the
improved version of CIC-IDS-2017 as described in [9]. Due
to the limited number of samples available, we excluded four
malicious classes from our analysis: Heartbleed (11 samples),
Web Attack-XSS (27 samples), Web Attack-SQL Injection
(12 samples), and Infiltration (32 samples). Therefore, in our
experiment, the training and testing data comprised a total
of 11 classes, 1 for benign flows and 10 for malicious
flows.
UNSW-NB15 dataset [26] consists of benign flows
and 9 classes of malicious flows, which include Fuzzers,
Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, Exploits, Generic, Reconnaissance,
Shellcode, and Worms. The hybrid of real modern normal
activities and synthetic contemporary attack behaviors are
generated by the IXIA PerfectStorm tool.
Evaluation Metrics The intrusion detection task in this
work is an imbalance multi-class classification task. Therefore,
we evaluate the overall intrusion detection performance in
terms of weighted Accuracy (ACC), weighted Detection Rate
(DR), weighted False alarm rate (FAR), and weighted F1 score
(F1). The “weighted” refers to calculating the mean of the
metrics for each class, with consideration given to each class’s
proportion of a class’s support to the total support across all
classes.
In this work, we use and re-process the raw Pcap data
from both CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15 datasets, for three
main purposes: (1) constructing the proposed graph data
format to represent network traffic flow; (2) comparing it
with other existing formats, such as tabular data, and feature
series; (3) studying the early detection problem. For the
graph and feature series formats, we extract the dynamic
feature series defined in Table VIII. As for the tabular
format, we adopt the feature set defined in the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, which is also the comprehensive version of the
feature set in Table VIII. The classes’ sampling proportions
on two datasets are reported by Fig. 8. The distributions of
the packet number per flow for two datasets are reported
by Fig. 9.

Fig. 10.
Validation accuracy with various edges combinations on
CIC-IDS-2017.

Fig. 11.
Validation accuracy with various edges combinations on
UNSW-NB15.

B. Impact of Different Edges
To analyze the effectiveness of our heterogeneous temporal
graph format design, we conduct an ablation study comparing
variant combinations of different types of edge connections.
Since changes in edge connections do not affect the HTGNN
structure but influence the message passing through graph
edges, we evaluated the impact of different edges by training
the same HTGNN structure from scratch with different edge
connections.
Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 present validation accuracy curves during training on CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15, respectively.
Clearly, applying all types of edge has the best performance
across different datasets. When considering only using one
type of edge, the homo-edge has more impact on model
training than the heter-edge and temp-edge on both datasets.
Moreover, using only the homo-edge connection can achieve
even better performance than the combined heter-edge and
temp-edge. In addition, for all edge combinations, if there
is a homo-edge, they all have better performance than the
combinations without a homo-edge.

7156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON R ESULT W ITH E XISTING TABULAR AND F EATURE S ERIES F ORMATS -BASED M ETHODS

The performance difference on the two datasets is notable:
the heter-edge-only case outperforms the temp-edge-only case
on CIC-IDS-2017 but performs worse than the temp-edgeonly case on UNSW-NB15. A similar situation also happens
with the two combinations of homo-edge plus heter-edge and
homo-edge plus temp-edge. Therefore, the results show the
heter-edge has a larger impact on CIC-IDS-2017, while the
temp-edge has a larger impact on UNSW-NB15. However,
the homo-edge consistently has the most significant impact.
The lesser impact of heter-edge and temp-edge is attributed
to other components, such as AE Decoder and HK Fusion
modules, to some degree play the same role as fusing the
heterogeneous and temporal features.
C. Detection Performance
In this section, we compare the detection performance
among three different traffic representation formats, which are
tabular, feature series, and the proposed graph. For both tabular
and feature series formats, we compare with one specific NIDS
model and one state-of-the-art DL model corresponding to the
format.
Table IV illustrates the general intrusion detection performance comparisons on datasets CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSWNB15. Overall, almost all formats and models achieved
nearly perfect performance (ACC) on CIC-IDS-2017 but
exhibited relatively poorer performance (around 0.8 ACC) on
UNSW-NB15.
On the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset, the proposed HTGNN model
achieved accuracies of 0.9827 and 0.9934 (the highest) when
utilizing 1 query and 8 queries in the AE Decoder, respectively.
The two Transformer-based methods, FT-transformer (for
tabular) and Informer (for feature series), both slightly
outperform the 1 query case HTGNN but lagged behind its
performance with 8 queries. Among other NIDS models, the
Lucid model, based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
for feature series, and the LuNet model, incorporating both
CNN and LSTM for tabular format, were also considered.
On the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the proposed HTGNN model
achieved accuracies of 0.8532 and 0.8612 with 1 query and
8 queries in the AE Decoder, respectively. The FT-transformer
model achieves 0.8613 accuracy and 0.8627 F1 score (the
highest) slightly outperforming both the 1 query and 8 queries
HTGNN.
From Table IV, three main observations emerge: (1) the
proposed HTGNN model, utilizing the HTGraph format,
achieves comparable general classification performance with
state-of-the-art DL models for both tabular and feature series

Fig. 12. The validation accuracy curves when re-training the last layer of
CIC-IDS-17 models on UNSW-NB15 for 20 epochs.

formats; (2) employing multiple queries in the AE Decoder
enhances general performance beyond the 1 query baseline;
(3) self-attention-based methods (FT-transformer, Informer,
and our HTGNN using graph attention and Transformer
Decoder) outperform CNN or LSTM-based methods in general
performance.
D. Domain Adaptation Performance
To assess the transferability of the trained models,
we conducted a domain adaptation task, specifically evaluating
the ability to transfer models trained solely on CIC-IDS-2017
to UNSW-NB15. Since Table IV indicates that the CICIDS-2017 dataset is comparatively easier than UNSW-NB15,
we focused on the domain adaptation task from CIC-IDS2017 to UNSW-NB15 (from an easier to a more challenging
dataset) to showcase model transferability. We did not explore
the reverse case. Throughout the transfer learning process,
we maintained frozen parameters for all models, except for
their last dense layers.
Fig. 12 shows validation accuracy curves during the
retraining of the output layers for all models listed in Table IV
on the UNSW-NB15 dataset for 20 epochs. The combination
of HTGraph format and HTGNN model demonstrates quicker
adaptation to the new dataset compared to the other data
formats and models. In Fig. 12, the HTGraph+HTGNN
curve exhibits a significantly superior starting point, with
around 0.73 accuracy for the first epoch, in contrast to

WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS

7157

TABLE V
D OMAIN A DAPTATION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON . A LL M ODELS H AVE B EEN T RAINED ON THE CIC-IDS-17. T HEN W E R E -T RAIN THE L AST L AYER
ON THE UNSW-NB15 AND F REEZE THE R EST L AYERS . T HE A RROWS S HOW THE D EGRADED P ERFORMANCE C OMPARING W ITH THE TABLE IV

TABLE VI
S YMMETRICAL PAIRS E XPERIMENTS T RAIN AND T EST NIDS M ODELS W ITH THE S AME O BSERVATION W INDOW
S IZE TO S HOW THE M ODEL C APABILITY OF E ARLY D ETECTION

TABLE VII
A SYMMETRICAL PAIRS E XPERIMENTS T RAIN AND T EST NIDS M ODELS W ITH D IFFERENT O BSERVATION W INDOW
S IZES TO S HOW THE M ODEL G ENERALIZATION TO E ARLY D ETECTION

the Tabular+FT-Transformer, which starts around 0.66. The
HTGraph+HTGNN consistently outperforms other methods
throughout the retraining process.
We show the details of the final transfer learning
performances and the relevant performance decline, compared
with direct training on UNSW-NB15 in Table V. Besides
the proposed methods, we observed the other self-attentionbased methods also exhibit good transferability. We attribute
the robust transferability of self-attention-based models to the
mechanism’s focus on modeling correlations among various
input items, such as the features in the tabular format.
This emphasizes the importance of learning relationships
among input items rather than absolute value scales.
Moreover, the prior knowledge-guided HTGraph format
and the associated HTGNN model help streamline the
learning scope of these relations, contributing to enhanced
transferability.
E. Early Detection Evaluation
In the early detection evaluation experiments, we assess
two key aspects: the model’s capability for early detection
and its generalization to early detection scenarios. To evaluate
the model’s early detection capability, we employ symmetrical pairs of dataset versions with different observation
window sizes (i.e., 16, 64, 256) for training and testing

NIDS models. To assess the model’s generalization to
early detection, we utilize asymmetrical pairs of dataset
versions.
In the initial evaluation, we explore the NIDS models’
early detection capability by reducing both training and
testing observation window sizes. In this symmetrical case,
less temporal information can be observed by the NIDS
models which cause moderate performance degradation
on both CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15 datasets across
all formats and models in Table VI. Notably, there is
only around a 1% accuracy degradation on CIC-IDS-2017
when the observation window sizes are reduced from
1024 to 16.
Combining the findings on edge effectiveness presented
in Fig.10, we assume the CIC-IDS-2017 should have
some significant patterns that are independent of temporal
information. Hence, the temp-edge has the least impact in
Fig. 10, and the reduction in observation window sizes causes
only a slight degradation, as indicated in Table VI. Moreover,
the decreasing trends in UNSW-NB15 are more pronounced
than those in CIC-IDS-2017. This disparity is also evident in
Fig. 11, where the temp-edge has a more significant impact
on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. The proposed HTGNN method,
especially when using 8 queries in the AE Decoder, can
maintain its performance on both datasets, and the 1 query
case is also comparable to the FT-Transformer. Therefore,

7158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE VIII
S TASTICAL F EATURES

we believe the proposed HTGNN exhibits good early detection
capability, and the AE Decoder can further enhance this
capability.
In the asymmetrical case, we assess the models’ generalization to early versions of input data. All models are trained with
a 1024 observation window size on both CIC-IDS-2017 and
UNSW-NB15, and their baseline performance is presented in
Table IV. As the observation window sizes of training and
testing data differ (asymmetrical), the trends of decreasing
detection accuracy results across all formats and models
become more pronounced than in the symmetrical case. The
results demonstrate that even though training and testing
data have different observation window sizes, the proposed
HTGNN methods exhibit greater generalization to distribution
shifts caused by the decreasing observation window size
compared to other methods.

F. Discussion on Computational Complexity
Compared with the Tabular and Feature Series formats,
the proposed HTGraph format obviously will introduce
additional computation for building the graph structure. In our
experiments, our graph has N × T nodes, where N = 28 is
the number of features and T is the number of packets, the
number of temporal edges is 28 × (T − 1), the number of
home-edges is (32 + 82 + 92 + 62 + 22 ) × T , the number of
heter-edges is (4 × 3 + 4 × 1 × 4 + 3 × 5 × 6) × T (, based on
Fig. 4). Therefore, in the case of early detection where T is
relevant small, the graph will not increase much computational
complexity. In addition, the home-edges and heter-edges in
each timestamp can also be pre-calculated.

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a novel approach to incorporating
prior knowledge into the design of early and transferable
NIDS. Our approach involves leveraging a heterogeneous
temporal graph format that encodes prior knowledge about
NIDS feature types and their interdependence. Additionally,
we propose a corresponding graph neural network model,
called HTGNN, capable of classifying network flows in the
HTGraph format. An Adjustable Early Detection Decoder is
introduced to further enhance generalization to early detection.
Our experiments on the CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15
datasets demonstrate that our proposed method achieves
comparable performance (98.27% and 85.32%) with stateof-the-art deep learning methods in terms of accuracy
and F1 score et al. At the same time, our proposed
method demonstrates enhanced transferability. When adapting
the model trained on CIC-IDS-2017 data to the UNSWNB15 dataset—accomplished by retraining only the last
layer for 20 epochs—there’s only a 1.05% drop. This
improvement is observed in domain adaptation tasks and a
better ability to generalize to changes in input distribution
caused by early detection. Notably, the dynamic packet
number of traffic does not significantly impact performance.
In future research, we aim to collaborate the proposed
traffic flow-level (features) graph with the existing network
topology graph-based NIDSs. In the future collaborating graph
NIDS, the proposed K-GetNID is suitable for distributed
deployment in different nodes in the whole network
topology (based on its transferability) and can efficiently
extract traffic embeddings (based on its early detection
ability).

WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS

NIDS
APT
ML
DL
HTGraph
HTGNN
MLP
LSTM
CNN
TIG
DLGNN
ACC
DR
FAR

VII. A PPENDIX
Network Intrusion Detection System.
Advanced and Persistent Threat.
Machine Learning.
Deep Learning.
Heterogeneous Temporal Graph.
Heterogeneous Temporal Graph Neural
Network.
Multi-Layer Perceptron.
Long Short-Term Memory.
Convolutional Neural Networks.
Traffic Interaction Graph.
Dynamic Line Graph Neural Network.
Accuracy.
Detection Rate.
False alarm rate.
R EFERENCES

[1] G. Apruzzese et al., “The role of machine learning in cybersecurity,”
Digital Threats, Res. Pract., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–38, Mar. 2023.
[2] V. Borisov, T. Leemann, K. Seßler, J. Haug, M. Pawelczyk, and
G. Kasneci, “Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 7499–7519,
Jun. 2024.
[3] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapé, “Network anomaly detection methods in IoT environments
via deep learning: A fair comparison of performance and robustness,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103167.
[4] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
“A hierarchical hybrid intrusion detection approach in IoT scenarios,”
in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Taipei, Taiwan,
May 2020, pp. 1–7.
[5] S. Brody, U. Alon, and E. Yahav, “How attentive are graph attention
networks?” 2021, arXiv:2105.14491.
[6] J. J. Davis and A. J. Clark, “Data preprocessing for anomaly based
network intrusion detection: A review,” Comput. Secur., vol. 30,
nos. 6–7, pp. 353–375, 2011.
[7] R.
Doriguzzi-Corin,
S.
Millar,
S.
Scott-Hayward,
J. Martínez-del-Rincón, and D. Siracusa, “LUCID: A practical,
lightweight deep learning solution for DDoS attack detection,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 876–889, Jun. 2020.
[8] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a
dynamic line graph neural network for intrusion detection with
semisupervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
pp. 699–714, 2023.
[9] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intrusion
detection dataset: The CICIDS2017 case study,” in Proc. IEEE Secur.
Privacy Workshops (SPW), May 2021, pp. 7–12.
[10] Y. Fan et al., “Heterogeneous temporal graph transformer: An intelligent
system for evolving Android malware detection,” in Proc. 27th
ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
pp. 2831–2839.
[11] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with
PyTorch geometric,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop Represent. Learn. Graphs
Manifolds, 2019, pp. 1–9.

7159

[12] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, V. Khrulkov, and A. Babenko, “Revisiting
deep learning models for tabular data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 18932–18943.
[13] I. Guarino, G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, and
A. Pescapé, “On the use of machine learning approaches for the early
classification in network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Meas. Netw. (MN), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
[14] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN:
Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,”
2020, arXiv:2001.01525.
[15] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel multimodalsequential approach based on multi-view features for network intrusion
detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183207–183221, 2019.
[16] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
[17] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” 2023,
arXiv:2307.03759.
[18] J. Khoury, D. Klisura, H. Zanddizari, G. D. L. T. Parra, P. Najafirad,
and E. Bou-Harb, “Jbeil: Temporal graph-based inductive learning to
infer lateral movement in evolving enterprise networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), Oct. 2023, p. 9.
[19] T. Liu, Z. Qian, J. Berrevoets, and M. van der Schaar, “Goggle:
Generative modelling for tabular data by learning relational structure,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–12.
[20] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “EGraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manag. Symp., Budapest,
Hungary, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–9.
[21] M. López-Vizcaíno, F. J. Novoa, D. Fernández, V. Carneiro, and
F. Cacheda, “Early intrusion detection for OS scan attacks,” in Proc.
IEEE 18th Int. Symp. Netw. Comput. Appl. (NCA), Sep. 2019,
pp. 1–5.
[22] W. Luo et al., “Dynamic heterogeneous graph neural network for realtime event prediction,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 3213–3223.
[23] P. Manso, J. Moura, and C. Serr ao, “SDN-based intrusion detection
system for early detection and mitigation of DDoS attacks,” Information,
vol. 10, no. 3, p. 106, Mar. 2019.
[24] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and
V. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through
correlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE
Symp. Security Privacy (SP), May 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
[25] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[26] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “The evaluation of network anomaly detection
systems: Statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set and the
comparison with the KDD99 data set,” Inf. Secur. J., Global Perspective,
vol. 25, nos. 1–3, pp. 18–31, Apr. 2016.
[27] E. Grumbling and A. Johnson, Implications of Artificial Intelligence
for Cybersecurity: Proceedings of a Workshop. Washington, DC, USA:
National Academies Press, 2020.
[28] R. Paudel and H. H. Huang, “Pikachu: Temporal walk based dynamic
graph embedding for network anomaly detection,” in Proc. NOMS
IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., Apr. 2022, pp. 1–7.
[29] M. Pivarníková, P. Sokol, and T. Bajtoš, “Early-stage detection of cyber
attacks,” Information, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 560, Nov. 2020.
[30] E. Quiring et al., “DoS and don’ts of machine learning in computer
security,” in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., Boston, MA, USA, 2022,
pp. 3971–3988.
[31] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. ICISSp, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[32] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[33] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security
Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316.
[34] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.

7160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

[35] M. Wang, N. Yang, D. H. Gunasinghe, and N. Weng, “On the robustness
of ML-based network intrusion detection systems: An adversarial and
distribution shift perspective,” Computers, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 209,
Oct. 2023.
[36] M. Wang, N. Yang, and N. Weng, “Exploring the impact of early
detection on DL-based NIDSs models,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Annu.
Ubiquitous Comput., Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON),
Oct. 2023, pp. 0684–0691.
[37] M. Wang, N. Yang, and N. Weng, “Securing a smart home with a
transformer-based IoT intrusion detection system,” Electronics, vol. 12,
no. 9, p. 2100, May 2023.
[38] P. Wu and H. Guo, “LuNet: A deep neural network for network intrusion
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI), Jul. 2019,
pp. 617–624.
[39] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
[40] R. Xu, G. Wu, W. Wang, X. Gao, A. He, and Z. Zhang, “Applying
self-supervised learning to network intrusion detection for network
flows with graph neural network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 248, Jun. 2024,
Art. no. 110495.
[41] Y. Yao, L. Su, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “STDeepGraph: Spatial–
temporal deep learning on communication graphs for long-term
network attack detection,” in Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur.
Privacy Comput. Commun./13th IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng.
(TrustCom/BigDataSE), Aug. 2019, pp. 120–127.
[42] C. Zhang, D. Song, C. Huang, A. Swami, and N. V. Chawla,
“Heterogeneous graph neural network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2019, pp. 793–803.
[43] Y. Zhang, X. Chen, L. Jin, X. Wang, and D. Guo, “Network intrusion
detection: Based on deep hierarchical network and original flow data,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 37004–37016, 2019.
[44] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long
sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 35, 2021, pp. 11106–11115.
[45] F. Zola, L. Segurola-Gil, J. L. Bruse, M. Galar, and R. Orduna-Urrutia,
“Network traffic analysis through node behaviour classification:
A graph-based approach with temporal dissection and data-level
preprocessing,” Comput. Secur., vol. 115, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 102632.

Minxiao Wang received the B.S. degree in
electronic and communication engineering and
the M.S. degree in electronic and information
engineering from the Civil Aviation University
of China in 2014 and 2018, respectively. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical
Engineering, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale, IL, USA. His research interests
include developing machine learning and deep
learning models for diverse applications related
action recognition, object detection, and network and intrusion detection.

Ning Yang (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
degree in computer engineering from the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst, USA, in 2006,
and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
from Southern Illinois University Carbondale, USA,
in 2020. She is currently an Assistant Professor with
the School of Computing, Information Technology
Program, Southern Illinois University Carbondale.
Her research interests include network security, the
Internet of Things, and machine learning.

Ning Weng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and in
electrical and computer engineering from Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, China,
in 1996, the M.S. degree in electrical and computer
engineering from the University of Central Florida,
Orlando, in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
and computer engineering from the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, in 2005. He is currently
a Full Professor with the School of Electrical,
Computer, and Biomedical Engineering, Southern
Illinois University Carbondale. He is engaged in research and teaching in
the areas of computer networks and security. His research interests include
scalable system design for deep packet inspection and many-field packet
classification, quality of information modeling, and deep leaning models for
network intrusion detection. He has been active as a Program Committee
Member of several professional conferences, including IEEE INFOCOM and
ACM SAC. At Southern Illinois University, he has received three times for
Outstanding Teacher Award of the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering.