3166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Label-Free Multivariate Time Series
Anomaly Detection
Qihang Zhou , Student Member, IEEE, Shibo He , Senior Member, IEEE, Haoyu Liu ,
Jiming Chen , Fellow, IEEE, and Wenchao Meng , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Anomaly detection in multivariate time series has
been widely studied in one-class classification (OCC) setting. The
training samples in this setting are assumed to be normal. In more
practical situations, it is difficult to guarantee that all samples
are normal. Meanwhile, preparing a completely clean training
dataset is costly and laborious. Such a case may degrade the performance of OCC-based anomaly detection methods which fit the
training distribution as the normal distribution. To overcome this
limitation, in this paper, we propose MTGFlow, an unsupervised
anomaly detection approach for Multivariate Time series anomaly
detection via dynamic Graph and entity-aware normalizing Flow.
MTGFlow first estimates the density of the entire training samples
and then identifies anomalous instances based on the density of
the test samples within the fitted distribution. This relies on a
widely accepted assumption that anomalous instances exhibit more
sparse densities than normal ones, with no reliance on the clean
training dataset. However, it is intractable to directly estimate
the density due to the complex dependencies among entities and
their diverse inherent characteristics, not to mention detecting
anomalies based on the estimated distribution. In order to address
these problems, we utilize the graph structure learning model to
learn interdependent and evolving relations among entities, which
effectively captures the complex and accurate distribution patterns
of multivariate time series. In addition, our approach incorporates the unique characteristics of individual entities by employing
an entity-aware normalizing flow. This enables us to represent
each entity as a parameterized normal distribution. Furthermore,
considering that some entities present similar characteristics, we
propose a cluster strategy that capitalizes on the commonalities of
entities with similar characteristics, resulting in more precise and
detailed density estimation. We refer to this cluster-aware extension
as MTGFlow_cluster. Extensive experiments are conducted on six
widely used benchmark datasets, in which MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster demonstrate their superior detection performance.
Index Terms—Multivariate time series, anomaly detection,
unsupervised learning.

Manuscript received 16 April 2023; revised 4 November 2023; accepted 27
December 2023. Date of publication 4 January 2024; date of current version 10
June 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
Program of China under Grants U1909207 and U21B2029. Recommended for
acceptance by Y. Tong. (Corresponding author: Shibo He.)
Qihang Zhou, Shibo He, Jiming Chen, and Wenchao Meng are with the
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China (e-mail: zqhang@zju.edu.cn; s18he@zju.
edu.cn; cjm@zju.edu.cn; wmengzju@zju.edu.cn).
Haoyu Liu is with the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China, and also with
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Games, Hangzhou 310052, China (e-mail: haoyu_liu@
zju.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3349613

I. INTRODUCTION
ULTIVARIATE time series (MTS) are commonly found
in various contexts, such as smart factories where data
is produced by multiple devices, and smart grids where monitoring data is generated by various sensors [1]. Anomalies in
MTS refer to unusual patterns or behaviors that occur at a
particular time or over a specific period of time [2], [3], [4],
[5]. Previous methods mainly center on developing one-class
classification (OCC) models, which rely solely on normal data
to detect anomalies [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. The fundamental
assumption of them is that the training dataset with all normal
samples can be easily obtained [12]. However, the premise
that the training dataset contains all normal samples may not
always hold true in real-world applications [13], [14], [15], [16],
[17], [18]. This leads to noisy training datasets with a mixture
of normal and abnormal data instances. Using these training
datasets will result in overfitting of the model to noisy labels [19].
As shown in Fig. 1(a), this degrades the performance of those
OCC-based methods [20], [21]. Therefore, it is rewarding to
develop unsupervised MTS anomaly detection methods based
on the dataset with absolute zero known labels.
Density estimation is a promising approach for unsupervised
anomaly detection because they do not depend on the assumption
that training datasets are all normal. As presented in Fig. 1(b),
it detects an abnormal sample based on the widely accepted
hypothesis that abnormal instances exhibit sparse densities than
the normal, i.e., abnormal samples are typically in the lowdensity regions while normal samples are in the high-density
regions [22], [23], [24]. Previous works have attempted this
strategy for time series prediction and the key challenge lies
in the accurate density estimation of the distribution. In [25],
[26], [27], time series density is modeled as the parameterized
probability distribution, while it is still challenging to model a
more complex data distribution [28].
More recently, GANF [29] explores the density estimation
to tackle MTS anomaly detection task. In their design, the static
directed acyclic graph (DAG) is leveraged to model intractable
dependence among multiple entities, and normalizing flow is
employed to estimate an overall distribution for all entities together [30], [31]. Although GANF has achieved state-of-the-art
(SOTA) results, it may suffer from two drawbacks. First, rather
than a static inter-relationship, in real-world applications, the
mutual dependencies among entities could be evolving. For
instance, in a water treatment plant, when the motorized valve is

M

1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of OCC-based and density-based methods on a
dataset with mixed normal and abnormal data. Left: OCC-based methods are
vulnerable to noisy labels, leading to inaccurate decision boundaries. Right:
Unlike OCC-based methods, density-based methods estimate the density of the
test samples, where anomalies are located in low-density regions. Note that the
deeper the color, the higher the density.

turned on, it causes the water level to rise. And when the water
level exceeds a certain threshold, the motorized valve is closed.
These interactions between the actuator of the motorized valve
and the water level sensor are strongly coupled. Meanwhile, due
to different work conditions, the water level needs to rise for
storing water or decrease for draining water. Such relationships
are not set in stone, and thus the static graph structure fails to
capture this evolving feature. Question 1: Since dependencies
among multi-entities are mutual, is there a better choice to model
complicated dependencies than the probabilistic model DAG?
Second, entities usually have diverse working mechanisms, leading to diverse sparse characteristics when anomalies occur. And,
GANF projects all entities into the same distribution. Question 2:
Individual anomalous time series from different entities present
diverse sparse characteristics. Is it suitable to map all these
individual time series to the same latent space (i.e., normal
Gaussian distribution)?
In this paper, we propose MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster,
unsupervised anomaly detection methods for MTS anomaly detection, to answer the above two questions. First, considering the
evolving relations among entities, we introduce graph structure
learning to model these changeable interdependencies. To learn
the dynamic structure, a self-attention module [32] is plugged
into our model for its superior performance on quantifying pairwise interaction. Second, we introduce an entity-aware normalizing flow to handle the diverse inherent characteristics among
entities. This approach enables us to model entity-specific density estimation, allowing each entity to be associated with a
unique target distribution. Consequently, we can estimate the
densities of various entities independently. Moreover, the characteristics of entities are strongly connected to their positions
in common scenarios. In industrial IoT, sensors within the same
production line or workshop have common characteristics due
to their exposure to the same industrial processes and operating
conditions [33]. For example, temperature and humidity sensors
monitor the same area [3], [34]. Similarly, the common wind
speed sensors in wind turbines exhibit similar wind speeds and
variations in the same regions [35]. In the domain of transportation, traffic flow sensors along the same stretch of highway or
road will exhibit similar patterns because they are influenced by

3167

similar traffic conditions and weather [36]. Identifying the common information makes for fine-grained representation learning
for downstream tasks [37], [38]. Motivated by this, we propose
to cluster these entities into different groups. Each group is
assigned to the same target distribution while also preserving
the distinctiveness among different groups. This results in the
creation of MTGFlow_cluster. Such a clustering strategy enables
us to efficiently handle entities with similar properties and
better model their respective density distributions. Incorporating
these proposed technologies provides a powerful framework for
tackling the complicated characteristics among diverse entities.
However, this fine-grained density estimation of MTGFlow and
MTGFlow_cluster multiplies memory overhead as the number
of entities/clusters increases. We share entity/cluster-specific
model parameters to reduce model size. As a result, MTGFlow
and MTGFlow_cluster achieve more fine-grained density estimation without extra memory consumption.
Finally, all modules of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster
are jointly optimized for overall performance, and maximum
log likelihood estimation (MLE) is used to train them. We
explore MTGFlow and its extension in various settings including unsupervised and OCC settings. By comparing empirical
results of these two settings, MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster
are found to be robust to anomaly contamination and adapted
to more general scenarios. Experiments are conducted on six
public datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of MTGFlow
and MTGFlow_cluster, which make progress over the state-ofthe-art (SOTA) methods [15], [29], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43],
particularly outperforming 5% on SWaT. Besides, we attempt
to apply MTGFlow to univariate series (i.e., UCR dataset [44]),
and it still attains superior results.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
r We propose MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster for unsupervised MTS anomaly detection. It essentially enables
anomaly localization and interpretation without any labels.
r We model the complicated dependencies among entities
into the dynamic graph, capturing the complex and evolving mutual dependencies among entities.
r Aiming at different sparse characteristics existing in individual entities, entity-aware normalizing flow is introduced
to produce entity-specific density estimation.
r Considering the characteristics of entities are strongly connected to their positions, we propose MTGFlow_cluster,
which exploits cluster-aware normalizing flow to capitalize
on the commonality of these entities and keep the uniqueness among entities with different characteristics.
r Experiments on six datasets with seven baseline methods demonstrate the superiority of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster, which outperform the SOTA methods.
It is worth mentioning that a conference version of this
research was presented in [45]. The conference paper does
not involve any priors. To consider the diverse characteristics
of entities, MTGFlow maps all entities to unique distributions
for anomaly detection. In reality, many entities in industrial or
smart grids usually present similar characteristics [46], [47]. For
example, water level sensors are used to detect the water level in
the same area but in different locations. The cluster information

3168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

is readily available, and mapping similar characteristics into
the different distributions is not an optimal choice. Therefore,
we propose MTGFlow_cluster to perform more fine-grained
density estimation, which not only considers the diverse characteristics among entities but also introduces a clustering strategy
that capitalizes on the commonalities of entities with similar
characteristics. Given the cluster prior, this approach has the
potential to further improve anomaly detection performance.
Moreover, we supplement the experiments about the OCC setting and univariate time series for the overall evaluation. In
addition, more illustrations and visualizations are provided to
make a comprehensive analysis of our proposed methods.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we introduce recent work in the field of
time series anomaly detection, with a particular focus on graph
structure learning and normalizing flow techniques.

domain and find graph anomalies lead to a shift of spectral energy
distributions. They generate band-pass filters to capture this
energy shift and further perform anomaly detection. However,
In real scenarios, the prior graph structure is hard to provide.
Therefore, it is important to learn the underlying graph structure
via the graph embedding itself [57]. GDN [9] learns a directed
graph via node embedding vectors. According to the cosine
similarity of embedding vectors, top-K candidates of each node
are considered to have dependencies. They rely on either the
label supervision or normal training dataset. In the field of
unsupervised anomaly detection of MTS, some recent work
attempts to explore this area. GANF [29] uses a DAG to model
the relationships between multiple sensors and then learns the
structure of the DAG through continuous optimization while
applying a simplified constraint to facilitate backward propagation. Our work, namely MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster,
models the mutual complex dependencies as a fully connected
dynamic graph via a self-attention mechanism, so that a much
more flexible relation among entities can be represented.

A. Time Series Anomaly Detection
Anomaly detection for time series is a classical research
topic, which has been extensively investigated under OCC setting [48]. Temporal correlation is one of the most important
features of time series [49]. Compared with the normal, anomalous time points and sequences often present unusual temporal
correlations. To model the distribution of normal time series,
DeepSVDD [40] maps training data into preset hypersphere,
assuming that anomalous data lie outside this space during the
test. EncDecAD [50] leverages LSTM [51] to extract sequence
features and designs the reconstruction task to detect anomalies. USAD [43] and DAEMON [8] use adversarial learning
to promote reconstruction quality. Considering the much more
complex temporal dependence of MTS, OmniAnomaly [7] constructs informative stochastic representations for more robust
performance. More recent works [10] and [52] utilize Transformer [32] for anomaly detection, leaning on the superiority
modeling capacity of the self-attention mechanism for longrange relations.
However, all these works are based on the assumption that
a sufficient training dataset with all normal instances can be
acquired, which is very hard for real-world applications since
each instance should be manually checked carefully. Additionally, once there exist abnormal instances in the training data,
the performance of these OCC-based detection methods could
be severely degraded [20], [21]. Therefore, instead of fitting the
distribution of normal training datasets, Dai and Chen propose
GANF [29] to detect MTS anomalies in an unsupervised manner.
Inspired by them, we propose MTGFlow to facilitate the learning
capacity and improve detection performance.
B. Graph Structure Learning for Anomaly Detection
Given a graph structure, graph neural networks [53], [54] have
achieved great success in modeling intrinsic structure patterns.
Wang et al. [55] extend the OCSVM to graph anomaly detection,
combining the powerful representation ability of GNN. Tang et
al. [56] analyze the anomaly detection from the graph spectral

C. Normalizing Flow for Anomaly Detection
Normalizing flow is a powerful technique for density estimation, and it has proven successful in image generation applications [30], [31]. Recently, it has also been applied to anomaly
detection tasks under the assumption that anomalies occur in
low-density regions, as seen in the works of DifferNet [58] and
CFLOW-AD [59]. These approaches utilize normalizing flow to
estimate the likelihoods of normal embedding and identify image defects by detecting embeddings that lie far from the dense
region. GANF is a great approach to employ normalizing flow
for unsupervised anomaly detection in MTS data. We build on
this research direction by incorporating an entity/cluster-aware
normalizing flow design to increase model capacity.
III. PRELIMINARY
We provide a brief introduction to normalizing flow in this
section to better understand MTGFlow and its extension.
A. Self-Attention
Transformer [32] achieves unprecedented success for natural language processing (NLP), which largely benefits from
self-attention superiority in modeling relations of input sequences. Give an input sequence, X = (x1 , x2 , . . ., xK ), where
xi ∈ RD , and K and D are the sequence length and embedding
dimension, respectively. Self-attention applies linear projections
to get the query Query ∈ RK×D and key Key ∈ RK×D via
learnable parameter matrices W Query ∈ RD×D and W Key ∈
RD×D . After projections, attention scores are derived by the
scaled dot product between Query and Key, and a Softmax
function is utilized to normalize the scores to (0,1).
Query = XW Query and Key = XW Key ,


QueryKey T
√
Attention_matrix = Sof tmax
, (1)
D

ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

3169

This design allows for flexible modeling of pairwise relationships within the neural network architecture. And, the resulting
attention matrix serves as the quantification of these relationships.

context, following [29], we focus on detecting window-level
anomalies in this paper. That is when there exists an abnormal
point in the chosen window, the window label is marked as the
anomaly. Note that the time series is normalized by z-score from
different entities.

B. Normalizing Flow
Normalizing flow is an unsupervised technique for estimating density, achieved by mapping the original distribution to
an arbitrary target distribution using a sequence of invertible
affine transformations. When density estimation on original
data distribution X is intractable, an alternative option is to
estimate z density on target distribution Z. Specifically, suppose
a source sample x ∈ RD ∼ X and a target distribution sample
z ∈ RD ∼ Z. Bijective invertible transformation Fθ aims to
achieve one-to-one mapping z = fθ (x) from X to Z. According
to the change of variable formula, we can get



∂fθ 

(2)
PX (x) = PZ (z) det T  .
∂x
∂fθ
Benefiting from the tractable jacobian determinants | det ∂x
T |.
The objective of flow models is to achieve ẑ = z, where ẑ =
fθ (x). Parameters θ of fθ can be directly estimated by MLE as
follows

θ∗ = arg max(log(PX (x)))
θ





∂fθ 
. (3)
= arg max(log PZ (fθ (x)) + log det T 
∂x
θ
Design of fθ is an important topic in flow models. The core is
to improve the flow model transferability under the premise of
the tractable jacobian determinants. Representative flow model
like RealNVP [30] utilizes the affine coupling, while MAF [31]
applies autoregressive functions.
Flow models are able to achieve more superior density estimation performance when additional conditions C are input [60].
This is because C can usually provide relevant priors to accurately characterize the source distribution, such as time and
position encoding [32]. Such the flow model is called conditional
normalizing flow, and its corresponding mapping is derived as
z = fθ (x|C). Therefore, the training objective is rewritten as




∂fθ 
.
θ∗ = arg max(log PZ (fθ (x|C)) + log det T 
∂x
θ
(4)
IV. METHOD
A. Problem Statement
Considering a MTS dataset D = (x1 , x2 , . . ., xK ) and xk ∈
RL , where K represents the total number of entities, and L
denotes the total number of observations of each entity. To
preserve temporal correlations of the original series, we use
a sliding window with size M and stride size S to sample
the normalized MTS. M and S can be adjusted to obtain the
training sample xc , where c is the sampling count. xc is short
for xcS:cS+M . Due to the fact that anomalies exhibit unusual
temporal patterns with their neighbors, introducing temporal
correlation to the input will benefit detection algorithms. In this

xk =

xk − mean(xk )
,
std(xk )

(5)

where mean(xk ) and std(xk ) represent the mean and standard
deviation of the k-th entity along the time dimension, respectively.
B. Overview of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_ cluster
The main concepts behind MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster
are to dynamically model mutual dependencies so that finegrained density estimation of the multivariate time series can
be obtained. This precise estimation allows for better detection
of low-density regions, even in datasets with high anomaly
contamination during training. The overview of MTGFlow and
MTGFlow_cluster can be seen in Fig. 2. Concretely, each entity’s temporal variations are modeled using an RNN, while a
graph structure learning module is used to model the dynamic
interdependencies. The RNN’s time encoding output is then
combined with the graph convolution operation, using the corresponding learned graph structure. These outputs are called
spatio-temporal conditions, as they contain both temporal and
structural information. In MTGFlow, these conditions are then
input into the entity-aware normalizing flow module to achieve
precise fine-grained density estimation. And MTGFlow_cluster
is designed to first cluster these entities and then estimate
the density via cluster-aware normalizing flow. As we do not
have the cluster prior, we utilize time series clustering methods
like KShape [37] to perform group assignments. Finally, the
deviations of ẑ and z are measured by log likelihoods, and
all modules of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are optimized
together using MLE.
C. Self-Attention Based Graph Structure Learning
In order to capture the mutual dependencies that exist between
entities in a multivariate time series, we employ self-attention to
learn a dynamic graph structure. Each entity is treated as a graph
node. Given the window sequence xc ∈ RK×M , we calculate
the query and key vectors for each node i as xci W Query and
xci W Key , where W Query ∈ RM ×M and W Key ∈ RM ×M are
the query and key weights, respectively. The pairwise relationship ecij between node i and node j at the c-th sampling count
is then obtained as follows:
ecij =

(xci W Query )(xcj W Key )T
√
.
M

(6)

The attention score acij is used to quantify the pairwise relation
from node i to node j, calculated by:
⎡
⎤
c
c
a
·
·
·
a
11
1K
⎢ .
exp(ecij )
.. ⎥
..
⎥
..
(7)
, Ac = ⎢
acij = K
.
. ⎦
⎣
c
exp(e
)
ij
j=1
c
c
aK1 · · · aKK

3170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster. Within a sliding window of size T , time series xc is fed to the RNN module to capture the
temporal correlations. Hidden states of RNN are regarded as time encoding, H c . Meanwhile, xc is also input to the graph structure learning module to capture
dynamic interdependencies among entities, which are modeled as adjacency matrix Ac . The spatio-temporal conditions C c are derived via the graph convolution
operation for H c and Ac . Finally, C c is used to help entity/cluster-aware normalizing flow model to produce entity/cluster-specific density estimation for the
distribution of time series.

The resulting attention score is used to construct the attention
matrix Ac , which serves as the adjacency matrix of the learned
graph. Since input time series are evolving over time, Ac also
changes to capture the dynamic interdependencies.
D. Spatio-Temporal Condition
To accurately estimate the density of multiple time series,
it is crucial to incorporate robust spatio-temporal contextual
information. This involves modeling the underlying structure as
a dynamic graph and considering both spatial and temporal correlations to effectively capture the features of the time series. We
use recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to capture temporal correlations. For a window sequence of k-th entity, xck , the time representation Hkt at time t ∈ [cS : cS + M ) is derived by Hkt =
RN N (xtk , Hkt−1 ), where RNN can be any sequence model
such as LSTM [51] and GRU [61], and Hkt is the hidden state of
RNN. To obtain the spatio and temporal information C t of all
entities at t, a graph convolution operation is performed through
the learned graph Ac . As mentioned in GANF, we also find that
history information of the node itself helps enhance temporal relationships of time series. Hence, the spatio-temporal condition
at t:
C t = ReLU (Ac H t W1 + H t−1 W2 )W3 ,

(8)

where W1 and W2 are graph convolution and history information
weights, respectively. W3 is used to improve the expression ability of condition representations. The spatio-temporal condition
C c for window c is the concatenation of C t along the time axis.
E. Entity/Cluster-Aware Normalizing Flow
Distributions of individual entities have discrepancies because of their different work mechanisms, and thus their respective anomalies will generate distinct sparse characteristics. If we
map time series from all entities to the same distribution N (0, I),

as does in GANF, then the description capacity of the model
will be largely limited, and the unique inherent property of each
entity will be ignored. Therefore, we design the entity-aware
normalizing flow zk = fθk (x|C) to make more detailed density
estimation, where x, C, k are the input sequence, condition
and the k-th entity, respectively. Technically, in MTGFlow, for
one entity, we assign the multivariate Gaussian distribution as
the target distribution. As for MTGFlow_cluster, due to the
absence of cluster priors, we leverage KShape for clustering
all entities and subsequently assign the same target distribution
to entities within a cluster. The covariance matrix of the above
target distribution is the identity matrix I for better convergence.
Moreover, in order to generate corresponding target distributions
Zk , mean vectors μk ∈ RM may be independently drawn from
N (0, I) [62]. However, in our experiments, we find it better
to keep each element of μk the same. Specifically, for the time
series of the entity k, the entity-aware density estimation is
given by:



∂fθk 
k

,
PXk (xk ) = PZk (fθ (xk |C)) det
∂xk T 
Zk = N (μk , I),
μk ∼ N (0, 1),

(9)

The cluster-aware density estimation is given by:



∂fθk 
,
PXk (xk ) = PZk (fθk (xk |C)) det
∂xk T 
Zk = N (μm , I) if k ∈ clusterm ,
μm ∼ N (0, 1),
{cluster1 , . . . , clusterm } = KShape {D} ,

(10)

Note that when the cardinality of all clusters is one, MTGFlow
is equal to MTGFlow_cluster. In such a case, model parameters

ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

3171

will increase with the number of entities/clusters. To mitigate
this problem, we share entity/cluster-aware normalizing flow
parameters across all entities. So, the density estimation for k
reads:



∂fθ 
.
(11)
PXk (xk ) = PZk (fθ (xk |C)) det
∂xk T 

where Q1 and Q3 are 25th and 75th percentile of Sc .
2) Anomaly Interpretation: Abnormal behaviors of any entity could lead to the overall abnormal behavior of the whole
window sequence. Naturally, we can get the anomaly score Sck
for entity k according to (12).

F. Joint Optimization
As described above, MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster combine graph structure learning and RNN to capture the spatio
and temporal dependencies on multiple time series. Then, derived saptio-temporal conditions are utilized to contribute to
entity/cluster-aware normalizing flow estimating the density of
time series. To avoid getting stuck in the local optimum for each
module, we jointly optimize all modules. The whole parameters
W ∗ are estimated via MLE.
∗

W = arg max log(PX (x))
N

N

K
k=1

1
≈ arg max
N K c=1
W

k=1

N

K

≈ arg max
W

1
N K c=1

log(PXk (xck ))


K

log

k=1




PZk (fθ (xck |Ckc )) det


∂fθ 
∂xck T 




∂fθ 
1 ˆc
2

− zk −μk 2 +log det c T 
2
∂x


k

+ Const ,
where N is the total number of windows, and Const is equal to
− T2 ∗ log(2π).
G. Anomaly Detection and Interpretation
Based on the hypothesis that anomalies tend to be sparse on
data distributions, low log likelihoods indicate that the observations are more likely to be anomalous.
1) Anomaly Detection: Taking the window sequence xc as
the input, the density of all entities can be estimated. The mean of
the negative log likelihoods of all entities serves as the anomaly
score Sc , which is calculated by:
Sc = −

1
K

K

1
k

K

log(PXk (xck )) =

k=1

K

Sck .

(14)

k=1

Since we map the time series of each entity into unique target
distributions, different ranges of Sck are observed. This bias will
assign each entity to different weights in terms of its contribution
to Sc . To circumvent the above-unexpected bias, we design the
entity-specific threshold for each entity. Considering different
scales of Sck , IQR is used to set respective thresholds. Therefore,
the threshold for Sck is given as:
T hresholdk = λk (Qk3 + 1.5 ∗ (Qk3 − Qk1 )),

(15)

where Qk1 and Qk3 are 25th and 75th percentile of Sck across all
observations, respectively. And λk is used to adjust T hresholdk
because normal observations in different entities also fluctuate
with different scales.

W

1
1
≈ arg max
N
K
W
c=1

Sc = −

log(PXk (xck )).

(12)

k=1

A higher anomaly score represents that xck is located in the lower
density region, indicating a higher possibility to be abnormal.
Since abnormal series exist in the training set and validation
set, we cannot directly set the threshold to label the anomaly,
such as the maximum deviation in validation data [9]. Therefore,
to reduce the anomaly disturbance, we store Sc of the whole
training set, and the interquartile range (IQR) is used to set the
threshold:
T hreshold = Q3 + 1.5 ∗ (Q3 − Q1 ),

(13)

V. EXPERIMENT
A. Experiment Setup
1) Dataset: The commonly used public datasets for MTS
anomaly detection in OCC are as follows:
r SWaT [63] is a collection of 51 sensor data from a realworld industrial water treatment plant, at the frequency
of one second. The dataset provides ground truths of 41
attacks launched during 4 days.
r WADI [64] is a collection of 123 sensor and actuator data
from WADI testbed, at the frequency of one second. The
dataset provides ground truths of 15 attacks launched over
2 days.
r PSM [65] is a collection of multiple application server
nodes at eBay with 25 features. The datasets provide
ground truths created by experts over 8 weeks.
r MSL [49] is a collection of the sensor and actuator data of
the Mars rover with 55 dimensions.
r SMD [7] is comprised of 28 small datasets from 28 machines at an internet company that records server metric
data like CPU utilization, at the frequency of one minute.
The dataset provides labeled anomalies for 5 weeks.
Since only normal time series are provided in these datasets
for training in OCC setting, we follow the dataset setting of
GANF [29] and split the original testing dataset by 60% for
training, 20% for validation, and 20% for testing in SWaT. For
other datasets, the training split contains 60% data, and the test
split contains 40% data. Dataset statistics are provided in Table I.
In addition, we also consider the common OCC setting for a
comprehensive evaluation. Under the OCC setting, the training
datasets are required to be normal data, so we use the original
training datasets of the above-mentioned datasets as training
datasets. Besides, Wu et al. [44] provides elaborate and challenging datasets (UCR) including 250-sub univariate datasets

3172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

TABLE I
STATIC AND SETTINGS OF FIVE PUBLIC DATASETS

from diverse real scenarios (e.g., from biology and industry).
For every sub-dataset, the training data is free of anomalies
and the test data has only one short-period anomaly. Therefore,
we follow the origin split for evaluation on UCR. Although
MTGFlow is designed to detect multivariate time series anomaly
detection, it can also be applied to univariate series. Note that
MTGFlow is equivalent to MTGFlow_cluster when detecting
univariate time series.
2) Implementation Details: For datasets of MTS, we set the
window size as 60 and the stride size as 10. As for univariate
dataset UCR, the duration of the anomalies is very short, and in
some cases only a dozen sampling points. Hence, the window
size is set as 10 for UCR. Adam optimizer with a learning rate
of 0.002 is utilized to update all parameters. One layer of LSTM
is employed to extract time representations in our experiment.
One self-attention layer with 0.2 dropout ratio is adopted to
learn the graph structure. We use MAF as the normalizing flow
model. In MTGFlow_cluster, KShape is used to perform the
whole time series clustering. The preset number of clusters is
20. For SWaT, one flow block and 512 batch size are employed.
For other datasets, we arrange two flow blocks for it and set the
batch size as 256. λ is set as 0.8 for thresholds of all entities.
The epoch is 40 for all experiments, which are performed in
PyTorch-1.7.1 with a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 24 GB GPU.1
3) Evaluation Metric: As in previous works, MTGFlow and
MTGFlow_cluster aim to detect the window-level anomalies,
and labels are annotated as abnormal when there exists any
anomalous time point. The performance is evaluated by the Area
Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUROC).
4) Baselines: To illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method, we compare the SOTA semi-supervised and unsupervised density estimation methods.
r DeepSAD [39]. A semi-supervised method maps normal
data into a preset hypersphere, and additional anomaly
labels are leveraged to improve the detection performance.
r DeepSVDD [40]. An OCC-based method maps normal
data into a preset hypersphere, and anomaly data are assumed to be located outside the hypersphere.
r ALOCC [41]. An OCC-based method reconstructs inputs
via GAN and declares anomalies according to the output
of the discriminator.
r DROCC [42]. An OCC-based method constructs robust
representations for normal data. Anomalies will deviate
from the learned representations.
1 Code is available at github.com/zqhang/MTGFLOW.

r USAD [43]. An OCC-based method leverages Autoencoder to reconstruct inputs. Anomaly data suffer poor
reconstruction quality.
r DAGMM [15]. A density estimation approach combines
Autoencoder and Gaussian Mixture Model. Samples with
high energy are declared as anomalies.
r GANF [29]. The density estimation approach joints DAG
and flow model, and data on low-density regions are identified as anomalies.
5) Performance:
a) Detection for multivariate time series: We list the AUROC metric results in Table II, which is the average of five runs,
in addition to the standard variance. Note that we do not provide
the AUROC curves of SMD because it consists of 28 small
datasets, where we test the performance on each of them and
average all the results. MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster have
superior performance over all the other seven baselines under
the unsupervised setting. To present an intuitive result, AUROC
curves are also presented in Fig. 3. Compared with MTGFlow
and MTGFlow_cluster, DeepSVDD and DROCC project all
training samples into the hypersphere so they cannot learn the accurate decision boundary distinguishing normal from abnormal
samples. Adversarial learning used by ALOCC and USAD and
the semi-supervised learning strategy in DeepSAD leverages a
more informative training procedure to mitigate the effect of
high anomaly contamination. As for DAGMM, it is restricted to
the distribution estimation ability of GMM for multiple entities.
Although GANF obtains a better result, its detection performance is still limited by inadequate dependence modeling and
indiscriminative density estimation. Due to a much more flexible
modeling structure, MTGFlow outperforms the above baseline
methods. Moreover, we study log likelihoods for anomalies
ranging from 2016/1/2 11:07:00 to 11:37:00 in Fig. 4. It is clear
that log likelihoods are high for the normal series but lower for
labeled abnormal ones (highlighted in red). This variation of log
likelihoods validates that MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster can
detect anomalies according to low-density regions of modeled
distribution. Meanwhile, to investigate the anomaly discrimination ability of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster, we present the
normalized Sc for GANF, MTGFlow, and MTGFlow_cluster
in Fig. 5. As it is displayed, for normal series, anomaly scores
of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are more closed at 0 than
those of GANF, and the overlap areas of normal and abnormal scores are also smaller, reducing the false positive ratio.
The larger score discrepancy corroborates MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster superior detection performance.

ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

3173

TABLE II
ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE OF AUROC(%) ON FIVE PUBLIC DATASETS

Fig. 3.

Fig. 4.

Comparison with advanced methods on ROC curves for four datasets.

Log likelihoods for anomalies on MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster.

Fig. 5. Discrimination comparison on SWaT between GANF, MTGFlow, and
MTGFlow_cluster.

For the OCC setting, MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster also
achieve promising performance. Interestingly, the performance
of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are close to that in the
unsupervised setting, while other baselines have a tremendous
performance improvement on different datasets. Specifically,
DeepSVDD has a significant gain from 66.8 AUROC% to 85.9

AUROC% on SWaT and from 67.5 AUROC% to 85.5 AUROC%
on PSM. Besides, DROCC also obtains the advancement from
75.6 AUROC% to 89.0 AUROC% on WADI. These observations reflect that the anomaly contamination severely degrades
the detection performance of the above OCC-based methods.
Therefore, such contrast illustrates that our method is more
robust to anomaly contamination and thus applicable to both
two scenarios.
Although MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are superior to
the baselines, we observe that MTGFlow_cluster does not consistently outperform MTGFlow according to the results. We
attribute this performance degradation (in the case of SWaT
and WADI datasets) to the inappropriate cluster assignments.
Because of the lack of prior clusters, we use KShape to provide
the pseudo cluster label. Although KShape is a highly accurate
and scalable time series clustering algorithm, the entity allocation is sensitive to the number of predefined clusters. If two
or more entities with distinct characteristics are clustered into
a group, MTGFlow_cluster will combine multiple underlying
data manifolds into a single distribution, thereby hindering the
accurate estimation for each entity. In our experiments, we apply
default parameters to all datasets, i.e., the number of predefined
clusters is set to 20 across different datasets such as SWaT and
WADI. This cluster number may be not optimal for all datasets.
To investigate the effect of cluster number, we perform a detailed
analysis in Section V-B2.
b) Detection for univariate time series: As for univariate
series, we evaluate our method on UCR with other baselines.
Since UCR has 250 sub-datasets, we first average the results

3174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 6. Log likelihoods for anomalies on UCR. Top: The original test data in respective sub-datasets are presented. Middle: The corresponding labels provided in
these sub-datasets are provided. Normal time points are labeled as 0, while abnormal ones are labeled as 1. Bottom: Log likelihoods are obtained from our method,
and the ground truths of abnormal points are highlighted in red.

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF AUROC(%) ON UCR

over these sub-datasets and then average the above results over
five runs with a standard variance. From Table III, our method
still obtains the best performance. As suggested in [44], We
visual the original data of three sub-datasets (i.e., the unexpected
acceleration of distorted walking and walking) and present the
obtained log likelihoods from our method in Fig. 6. From the
figure, anomalous points in 054_U CR and 162_U CR datasets
are not sudden extreme values, which may be identified via an
empirical threshold. Their values are in the normal range but exhibit an unusual pattern caused by the unexpected acceleration.
Furthermore, in addition to the difficulty mentioned above, the
duration of the anomaly in 248_U CR dataset is also very short
(i.e., just five abnormal points). These challenges make it more
difficult to detect such anomalies. Bypassing these problems,
our method estimates the density of data points rather than
focusing on their numerical values and successfully detects such
anomalies according to the figure. Moreover, we can observe that
anomalous points incur lower log likelihoods than normal points.
And, the prominent peaks show that MTGFlow can discriminate
anomalies clearly.
B. Ablation Study
To study the effectiveness of our proposed module, we perform several ablation studies, including module ablation, hyperparameter robustness, and anomaly ratio analysis. We mainly
focus on the analysis of MTGFlow because it is the special case
of MTGFlow_cluster, where the cardinality of each cluster is
one. As for the effect of cluster quantities, we will analyze it in
Section V-B2.
1) Module Ablation Study: To test the validity of each designed module, we give several ablation experiments. We denote MTGFlow without graph and entity-aware normalizing

TABLE IV
MODULE ABLATION STUDY (AUROC%)

Fig. 7. Comparison on normalized anomaly scores between MTGFlow and
MTGFlow/G.

flow as MTGFlow/(G, E), MTGFlow only without graph as
MTGFlow/G, and MTGFlow only without entity-aware normalizing flow as MTGFlow/E. Results are presented in Table IV,
where MTGFlow/(G, E) obtains the worst performance. It is
attributed to the lack of relational modeling among entities and
indistinguishable density estimation. Applying graph structure
learning to model pairwise relations, MTGFlow/E achieves
better performance. Also, considering more fine-grained density estimation, MTGFlow/G achieves an improvement over
MTGFlow/(G, E). Integrating these two modules, MTGFlow
accomplishes the best results. To provide a more intuitive result,
we visualize the normalized anomaly score distributions of MTGFlow and MTGFlow/G in Fig. 7. Such a dynamic graph design
can push anomaly scores of normal series to 0 and enlarge the
margin between normal and abnormal series. Also, we present
the normalized anomaly score distribution for normal and abnormal series in Fig. 8. We observe that the margin between
normal and abnormal samples in MTGFlow is larger than that

ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

3175

TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY OF HYPERPARAMETERS (AUROC%)

Fig. 8. Comparison on normalized anomaly scores between MTGFlow and
MTGFlow/E.

TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON MTGFLOW AND MTGFLOW_CLUSTER∗

Fig. 9.

Effect of the cluster number in MTGFlow_cluster.

in MTGFlow/E. This demonstrates that MTGFlow amplifies the
discrepancy between normal and abnormal samples with the
help of entity-specific density estimation.
2) Clustering Quantity Study: The pre-set cluster number is
important to the performance of MTGFlow_cluster. Hence, we
investigate the effect of the number of clusters on detection
performance under unsupervised and OCC settings. Since the
number of entities varies from different datasets, we assign different cluster numbers for them, as shown in Fig. 9. Take SWaT
for example, the detection performance reaches the peak when
the cluster number is 35. This illustrates that the appropriate
number of clusters can facilitate the detection performance for
both settings. If the number of clusters is unexpectedly small,
some entities with completely different characteristics are gathered into the same cluster and transformed into the same target
distribution. In this case, the detection performance will decrease, as presented by the cluster number from 35 to 30 in SWaT.
Conversely, when the number of clusters is excessive, too many
unnecessary target distributions need to be estimated, which may
also result in performance degradation, as shown by the cluster
number from 35 to 51 in SWaT. Similar phenomena are also
observed across other datasets. We refer to MTGFlow_cluster
as MTGFlow_cluster∗ when the appropriate cluster number is
assigned. As shown in Table VI, MTGFlow_cluster∗ achieves
better detection performance than MTGFlow.
3) Hyperparameter Robustness: We conduct a comprehensive study on the choice of hyperparameters, the results are

Fig. 10.

Effect of anomaly contamination ratio.

shown in Table V. Concretely, we conduct experiments with
various sizes for the sliding window and the number of the
normalizing flow blocks in Table V. When the window size is
small, such as 40, 60, and 80, the increase in the number of blocks
does not necessarily improve anomaly detection performance.
A larger model may cause overfitting to the whole distribution,
where abnormal sequences are undesirably located in highdensity regions of this distribution. When the window size is
large (i.e., 80, 100, and 120), the distribution to be estimated
is more high-dimensional so that model needs more capacity.
Therefore, detection performance derives the average gain with
blocks increasing due to more accurate distribution modeling.
4) Anomaly Ratio Analysis: To further investigate the influence of anomaly contamination rates, we vary training splits
to adjust anomalous contamination rates. For all the abovementioned datasets, the training split increases from 60% to 80%
with a 5% stride. We present an average result over five runs in
Fig. 10. Taking SWaT as an example, the corresponding anomaly
ratios of training datasets on SWaT are 17.7%, 16.7%, 15.7%,
14.6%, and 13.9%, respectively. The detection performance of

3176

Fig. 11.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Transformed distributions of multiple entities.

MTGFlow fluctuates in a small range, which shows MTGFlow
is robust to the degree of anomaly contamination ratio. The same
phenomenon can be seen in the rest datasets. Consequently,
we can conclude that the anomaly detection performance of
MTGFlow remains at a stable high level as the anomaly contamination ratio of the training dataset rises.
C. Result Analysis
In order to further investigate the effectiveness of MTGFlow,
we give a detailed analysis based on SWaT dataset.
1) Entity-specific Density Estimation: We further explore
whether the distributions of all entities are transformed into
different target distributions to verify our entity-aware design.
Since the window size is 60, the corresponding transformed
distributions are also 60-dimensional distributions. Every single
dimension of the multivariate Gaussian distribution is a Gaussian
distribution. For better visualization, we present the 0th dimension of the transformed distributions across the whole test dataset
in Fig. 11. Nine distributions of different entities are displayed.
It can be seen that these distributions have been projected as
unique distributions. Moreover, these distributions are successfully converted to preset Gaussian distributions with different
mean vectors. The one-to-one mapping models entity-specific
distributions and captures their respective sparse characteristics
of anomalies, thus mitigating the above-mentioned performance
sacrifice.
2) Dynamic Graph Structure: Interdependencies among entities are not guaranteed to be immutable. In fact, pairwise
relations evolve with time. Benefiting from self-attention, MTGFlow can model this characteristic into a dynamic graph
structure. We treat the attention matrix as the graph adjacent
matrix. An empirical threshold of 0.15 is set for the adjacency
matrix to show an intuitive learned graph structure in the test
split. In Fig. 12, the node size represents its node degrees,
the arrow direction represents the learned directed dependence
and the arrow width indicates the weight of the corresponding
interdependencies. The graph structure at 2016/1/1 14:00:00
is centered on the sensor P 201, while the edges in the graph

have completely changed and the center has shifted from P 201
to AIT 503 at 2016/1/2 7:00:00. This alteration of the graph
structure may result from changes in working condition of the
water treatment plant. Besides, two similar graph structures can
be found at 2016/1/2 13:00:00 and 2016/1/2 14:00:00. This
suggests that the graph structure will be consistent if the interdependencies remain unchanged over a period of time, possibly
due to repetitive work patterns of entities. In addition, the main
pairwise relations (thick arrow) at 2016/1/1 14:00:00 are similar
to the ones at 2016/1/2 14:00:00, both centered on P 201. It
indicates that the interdependencies on multiple sensors are
periodic. We also find mutual interdependencies from learned
graph structures, such as the edges between P 201 and AIT 201
at 2016/1/2 13:00:00. We summarize the findings:
1) Dynamic interdependencies among multiple entities.
2) Consistent interdependencies among multiple entities.
3) Periodic interdependencies among multiple entities.
4) Mutual interdependencies among multiple entities.
Therefore, it is necessary to use a dynamic graph to model
such changeable interdependencies.
3) Distinct Sparse Characteristics: To demonstrate that the
sparse characteristics vary with different entities, we study
changes of Sck along time on SWaT. As shown in Fig. 13, Sck
of AIT 201, P 102, F IT 502, AIT 502, P 403, and LIT 301 are
presented. The highlighted regions denote marked anomalies.
For a better illustration, we divide the anomalous regions as A1 ,
A2 , A3 , A4 , and A5 along the timeline. We can observe that
different entities react to different anomalies because of their
different work mechanisms. Specifically, AIT 201 and AIT 502
has obvious fluctuations at A4 , while P 102 reacts to A2 . In
addition, F IT 502 is sensitive to A4 and A5 , yet P 403 has
responses in the face of A2 and A4 . But LIT 301 is sensitive
to A2 , A3 , A4 , and A5 . Nevertheless, MTGFlow is still able to
accurately distinguish and detect these anomalies.

D. Experimental Summary
Without the requirement for any labeled data, MTGFlow and
MTGFlow_cluster have demonstrated their capabilities to identify anomalies by leveraging their intrinsic low data density in
Section V. We attribute the superior performance of MTGFlow
and MTGFlow_cluster to the following parts:
r Individual anomalous time series from different entities
present diverse sparse characteristics. Instead of mapping
all these individual time series to the same latent space,
we introduce an entity-aware normalizing flow to model
entity-specific density estimation. This allows each entity
to be associated with a unique target distribution, which
results in an improvement in performance by 4.1%AUROC
on SWaT and 1.6%AUROC on WADI.
r Since interdependencies among entities are not immutable,
they actually evolve over time. Rather than modeling such
interdependencies as static, we propose a dynamic graph
structure to capture these changeable interrelationships.
This innovation achieves the performance improvement of
2.4% on SWaT and 0.6%AUROC on WADI.

ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 12.

3177

Dynamic graph structure in MTGFlow.

for MTS and univariate series in both unsupervised and OCC
settings. The superior anomaly detection performance of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster is attributed to dynamic graph
structure learning and entity/cluster-aware density estimation.
In addition, we explore various interdependencies that exist
between individual entities from the learned dynamic graph
structure. And a detected anomaly can be understood and localized via entity anomaly scores. In the future, we plan to apply our
model to more flow models and further improve the practicality
of our approach.

REFERENCES

Fig. 13. Variation of log likelihoods for different entities on the whole testing
dataset (Anomalies are highlighted in red, and the blue line is the threshold
according to Sck ).

r In reality, the characteristics of entities are strongly connected to their positions in common scenarios. In contrast to the approach of mapping all entities to unique
distributions like MTGFlow, MTGFlow_cluster further
proposes the cluster-aware normalizing flow to obtain the
commonality of these characteristics while maintaining
inter-cluster uniqueness. This cluster strategy empowers
MTGFlow_cluster to outperform MTGFlow by 1.0%AUROC on SWaT and 1.1%AUROC on WADI.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster,
unsupervised anomaly detection approaches for MTS based on
the dataset with absolute zero known label. They first model
the distribution of training data and then estimate the density
of test samples, which are identified anomalies when they lie
in low-density regions of this distribution. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate their superiority, even
if there exists high anomaly contamination. MTGFlow and
MTGFlow_cluster achieve SOTA anomaly detection methods

[1] S. He, K. Shi, C. Liu, B. Guo, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “Collaborative sensing
in Internet of Things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1435–1474, Third Quarter, 2022.
[2] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection for discrete
sequences: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 823–839, May 2012.
[3] S. R. Gaddam, V. V. Phoha, and K. S. Balagani, “K-means+ID3: A novel
method for supervised anomaly detection by cascading K-means clustering
and ID3 decision tree learning methods,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 345–354, Mar. 2007.
[4] Z. Yang, L. He, H. Yu, C. Zhao, P. Cheng, and J. Chen, “Detecting PLC
intrusions using control invariants,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12,
pp. 9934–9947, Jun. 2022.
[5] H. Pu, L. He, P. Cheng, M. Sun, and J. Chen, “Security of industrial
robots: Vulnerabilities, attacks, and mitigations,” IEEE Netw., vol. 37,
no. 1, pp. 111–117, Jan./Feb. 2023.
[6] B. Schölkopf et al., “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1999, pp. 582–588.
[7] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[8] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and interpretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data
Eng., 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
[9] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[10] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer:
Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,”
2021, arXiv:2110.02642.
[11] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[12] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
[13] A. Goodge, B. Hooi, S. K. Ng, and W. S. Ng, “LUNAR: Unifying local outlier detection methods via graph neural networks,”
2021, arXiv:2112.05355.
[14] L. Zhang, J. Zhao, and W. Li, “Online and unsupervised anomaly detection
for streaming data using an array of sliding windows and PDDs,” IEEE
Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 2284–2289, Apr. 2021.

3178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

[15] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018, pp. 1–19.
[16] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent
outlier exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,”
2022, arXiv:2202.08088.
[17] S. Liu et al., “Time series anomaly detection with adversarial reconstruction networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 4293–4306, Apr. 2023.
[18] K. Zhang, C. Li, and Q. Yang, “TriD-MAE: A generic pre-trained model
for multivariate time series with missing values,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int.
Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 3164–3173.
[19] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals, “Understanding
deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 107–115, 2021.
[20] S. Wang et al., “Effective end-to-end unsupervised outlier detection via
inlier priority of discriminative network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2019, Art. no. 536.
[21] N. Huyan, D. Quan, X. Zhang, X. Liang, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao,
“Unsupervised outlier detection using memory and contrastive learning,”
2021, arXiv:2107.12642.
[22] M. Gupta, J. Gao, C. C. Aggarwal, and J. Han, “Outlier detection for
temporal data: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 26, no. 9,
pp. 2250–2267, Sep. 2011.
[23] G. Pang, L. Cao, and C. Aggarwal, “Deep learning for anomaly detection:
Challenges, methods, and opportunities,” in Proc. 14th ACM Int. Conf.
Web Search Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2021, pp. 1127–1130.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3437963.3441659
[24] R. Wang et al., “Deep learning for anomaly detection,” in Proc. 26th
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY,
USA, 2020, pp. 3569–3570. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3394486.3406481
[25] D. Salinas, V. Flunkert, J. Gasthaus, and T. Januschowski, “DeepAR:
Probabilistic forecasting with autoregressive recurrent networks,” Int. J.
Forecasting, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1181–1191, 2020.
[26] K. Rasul, C. Seward, I. Schuster, and R. Vollgraf, “Autoregressive denoising diffusion models for multivariate probabilistic time series forecasting,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8857–8868.
[27] S. Feng, K. Xu, J. Wu, P. Wu, F. Lin, and P. Zhao, “Multi-scale attention
flow for probabilistic time series forecasting,” 2022, arXiv:2205.07493.
[28] K. Rasul, A.-S. Sheikh, I. Schuster, U. Bergmann, and R. Vollgraf, “Multivariate probabilistic time series forecasting via conditioned normalizing
flows,” 2020, arXiv: 2002.06103.
[29] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2021, pp. 1–16.
[30] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation using real
NVP,” 2016, arXiv:1605.08803.
[31] G. Papamakarios, T. Pavlakou, and I. Murray, “Masked autoregressive
flow for density estimation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2017, pp. 2338–2347.
[32] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[33] P. P. Rodrigues, J. Gama, and J. Pedroso, “Hierarchical clustering of
time-series data streams,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 20, no. 5,
pp. 615–627, May 2008.
[34] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, and D. Pei, “Robust and rapid clustering of KPIs
for large-scale anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp.
Qual. Serv., 2018, pp. 1–10.
[35] G. Liu, J. Si, W. Meng, Q. Yang, and C. Li, “Wind turbine fault detection
with multimodule feature extraction network and adaptive strategy,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 3504613.
[36] A. Aboah, “A vision-based system for traffic anomaly detection using
deep learning and decision trees,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 4207–4212.
[37] J. Paparrizos and L. Gravano, “k-Shape: Efficient and accurate clustering
of time series,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2015,
pp. 1855–1870.
[38] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning representations for time series clustering,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’AlchéBuc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2019, pp. 3776–3786. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/
file/1359aa933b48b754a2f54adb688bfa77-Paper.pdf
[39] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv:
1906.02694.

[40] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[41] M. Sabokrou, M. Fathy, G. Zhao, and E. Adeli, “Deep end-to-end oneclass classifier,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 675–684, Feb. 2021.
[42] S. Goyal, A. Raghunathan, M. Jain, H. V. Simhadri, and P. Jain, “DROCC:
Deep robust one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2020, pp. 3711–3721.
[43] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.
[44] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks
are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
[45] Q. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Liu, S. He, and W. Meng, “Detecting multivariate time
series anomalies with zero known label,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2023, pp. 4963–4971. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/
AAAI/article/view/25623
[46] R. Moghaddass and J. Wang, “A hierarchical framework for smart grid
anomaly detection using large-scale smart meter data,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5820–5830, Nov. 2018.
[47] M. Ghafouri, M. Au, M. Kassouf, M. Debbabi, C. Assi, and J. Yan,
“Detection and mitigation of cyber attacks on voltage stability monitoring
of smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5227–5238,
Nov. 2020.
[48] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
survey,” 2019, arXiv: 1901.03407.
[49] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[50] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G.
Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
[51] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[52] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,”
2022, arXiv:2201.07284.
[53] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[54] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural
networks?,” 2018, arXiv: 1810.00826.
[55] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks for
anomaly detection,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., K. Chaudhuri,
S. Jegelka, L. Song, C. Szepesvari, G. Niu, and S. Sabato, Eds., 2022,
pp. 21 076–21 089. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v162/tang22b.html
[56] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph neural
networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural Comput.
Appl., vol. 33, pp. 12 073–12 085, 2021.
[57] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio,
“Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.10903.
[58] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but DifferNet: Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 1907–1916.
[59] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2022,
pp. 98–107.
[60] L. Ardizzone, C. Lüth, J. Kruse, C. Rother, and U. Köthe, “Guided image
generation with conditional invertible neural networks,” 2019, arXiv:
1907.02392.
[61] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoderdecoder for statistical machine translation,” 2014, arXiv:1406.1078.
[62] P. Izmailov, P. Kirichenko, M. Finzi, and A. G. Wilson, “Semi-supervised
learning with normalizing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
pp. 4615–4630.
[63] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur., Springer, 2016, pp. 88–99.
[64] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
pp. 25–28.

ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

3179

[65] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
pp. 2485–2494.

Haoyu Liu received the PhD degree from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, in 2021. He is currently
working with NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, Hangzhou. His
research interests include data mining and machine
learning, with particular interests in anomaly detection and crowdsourcing.

Qihang Zhou (Student Member, IEEE) received the
BS degree from the China University of Geosciences,
Wuhan, China, in 2020. He is currently working
toward the PhD degree in control science and engineering with the College of Control Science and
Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
His research interests include generative learning,
data mining, and anomaly detection.

Shibo He (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree in control science and engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2012. He is currently a professor with Zhejiang University. He was an
associate research scientist from March 2014 to May
2014, and a postdoctoral scholar from 2012 to 2014,
with Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
From 2010 to 2011, he was a visiting scholar with
the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada.
His research interests include Internet of Things,
crowdsensing, Big Data analysis, etc. He serves on
the editorial board of IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Springer
Peer-to-Peer Networking and Application and KSII Transactions on Internet
and Information Systems, and is a guest editor of the Elsevier Computer Communications and Hindawi International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks.
He was a general co-chair for iSCI 2022, symposium co-chair for the IEEE/CIC
ICCC 2022, IEEE GlobeCom 2020 and the IEEE ICC 2017, TPC co-chair for
i-Span 2018, a Finance and Registration chair for ACM MobiHoc 2015, a TPC
co-chair for the IEEE ScalCom 2014, a TPC vice co-chair for ANT 2013 and
2014, a track co-chair for the Pervasive Algorithms, Protocols, and Networks of
EUSPN 2013, a web co-chair for the IEEE MASS 2013, and a Publicity co-chair
of IEEE WiSARN 2010, and FCN 2014.

Jiming Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree
in control science and engineering from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, in 2005. He is currently
a professor with the Department of Control Science
and Engineering, the vice dean with the Faculty of
Information Technology, Zhejiang University. His research interests include IoT, networked control, wireless networks. He serves on the editorial boards of
multiple IEEE Transactions, and the general co-chairs
for IEEE RTCSA’19, IEEE Datacom’19, and IEEE
PST’20. He was a recipient of the 7th IEEE ComSoc
Asia/Pacific Outstanding Paper Award, the JSPS Invitation Fellowship, and the
IEEE ComSoc AP Outstanding Young Researcher Award. He is an IEEE VTS
distinguished lecturer. He is a fellow of the CAA.
Wenchao Meng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the PhD degree in control science and engineering
from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2015,
where he is currently with the College of Control Science and Engineering. His current research interests
include adaptive intelligent control, cyber–physical
systems, renewable energy systems, and smart grids.