IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

133

MCRe: A Unified Framework for Handling
Malicious Traffic With Noise Labels Based on
Multidimensional Constraint Representation
Qingjun Yuan , Gaopeng Gou, Yanbei Zhu, Yuefei Zhu , Gang Xiong, and Yongjuan Wang
Abstract— Due to the limitations of the existing annotation
methods, the prevalence of label noise can be caused in realistic
malicious traffic datasets, which has a significant impact on
the training and evaluation of deep learning-based intrusion
detection models. Recently, various methods have been proposed
to deal with noise-containing labeled datasets, and they can be
roughly divided into two categories: data cleaning and robust
training. However, the different processing ideas lead these
two types of methods to ignore the information in different
components of the dataset, resulting in a cliff-like drop in
performance under high noise conditions. To this end, this
study proposes a unified framework for handling noise malicious
traffic based on the multidimensional constrained representations
named MCRe, which unifies data cleaning and robust training
into an ideal representation function approximation. According to
the properties of the ideal representation function, information
integrity constraints, cluster separability constraints and core
proximity constraints are defined to drive MCRe to approximate
the ideal representation during iteration. These constraints
led MCRe to learn the individual, intra-class, and global
levels of distributed knowledge, thus avoiding irrational domain
knowledge extraction and ensuring strong label noise robustness
of the representation network. We validated MCRe on a dataset
that includes 22 types of realistic malicious traffic. Experimental
results show that MCRe can outperform the state-of-the-art
methods in both data cleaning and robust training downstream
tasks, achieving 85% pure sample rate and 82% classification
accuracy even under the condition of up to 90% noise labels.
In addition, the generalizability of MCRe was verified on several
public datasets. Finally, MCRe was also well-extended to enhance
other data cleaning and robust training approaches.
Index Terms— Malicious traffic detection, noise labels, data
cleaning, robust training, deep learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

RAINING models using realistic malicious traffic is
considered an effective way to reduce the impact

Manuscript
received
26
May
2023;
revised
29
August
2023 and 14 September 2023; accepted 18 September 2023. Date of
publication 25 September 2023; date of current version 20 November
2023. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2021YFB3101400 and in part
by the Blockchain System Security Key Technology Research of Henan
Province Major Public Welfare Project under Grant 2013002102000. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving
it for publication was Prof. Ghassan Karame. (Corresponding author:
Yongjuan Wang.)
Qingjun Yuan, Yanbei Zhu, Yuefei Zhu, and Yongjuan Wang are with the
Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Zhengzhou
450001, China (e-mail: pinkywyj@163.com).
Gaopeng Gou and Gang Xiong are with the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2023.3318962

of data cascading [1] on deep learning-based intrusion
detection systems (IDS). However, malicious traffic often
uses encryption and redundancy to obfuscate itself [2],
so annotators cannot accurately characterize the behavior
of novel attacks (i.e., 0day attacks), making the existing
annotation methods prone to mislabeling [3].
However, deep learning models are highly dependent on
large-scale, accurate-labeled data [4], [5], [6], [7]. The noisy
labels in real traffic datasets make them difficult to be used for
intrusion detection models [8]. To this end, various approaches
have been proposed to handle noisy labels, and they can be
roughly divided into two categories: data cleaning [9], [10],
[11], [12] and robust training [13], [14], [15], [16]. These
two categories differ in their objectives, as shown in Tab. I.
Particularly, data cleaning aims to output a purer dataset, while
robust training aims to output an accurate classification model
directly.
In the above approaches, optimization constraints consistent
with the task objectives are usually designed to help the
network achieve the preset goal, which could be referred to
as task-guided training. Such task-guided training allows the
network to ignore part of the domain knowledge in the dataset,
resulting in locking the model potential [17]. The details are
as follows:
In general, in order to obtain a purer dataset, data
cleaning focuses more on simple samples, resulting in a
large number of hard samples being discarded, making the
distributional properties of the cleaned dataset worse. For
instance, INCV [9] selects simple samples to update the
network in multiple iterations, and ULDC [12] determines
the label confidence of hard samples based on the locations
of simple samples, but is prone to misclassifying and
discarding hard samples. Such discarding of hard samples
leads to poor generalization of classifiers trained on cleaned
datasets [12].
In contrast, robust training focuses more on acquiring
global domain knowledge from hard samples, resulting in a
model with high accuracy [17]. For example, Co-teaching+
[15] selects the hard samples with disagreement in the
iterations to update network parameters efficiently and prevent
performance degradation. Unicon [19], on the other hand,
selects hard samples by the performance of simple samples
in the iteration. However, the models obtained by the robust
training approach are generally affected by noise labels, and
the accuracy of classifiers is generally poor when the noise
level is high [12].

1556-6021 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF T WO WAYS TO H ANDLE N OISE L ABELS

To solve the aforementioned problem, a simple idea is to
transform the task-guided training process [9], [10], [11], [12],
[13], [14], [15], [16] into an objective attribute-guided process,
thus avoiding selective learning of knowledge. We refer to
attribute-guided process, which is a method to guide the
updating of neural network parameters by measuring the
difference in attributes between that neural network and an
ideal data cleaning and robust training model. During training,
the neural network is guided to approximate the ideal model by
narrowing the differences in attributes from the ideal target,
making the resulting neural network suitable for both data
cleaning and robust training tasks. We theoretically analyzed
and summarized the attributes of ideal data cleaning and robust
training models, and translated them into a unified attributeguided framework.
Specifically, we propose MCRe, a unified framework
based on Multidimensional Constraint Representation that is
compatible with both data cleaning and robust training tasks.
MCRe theoretically transforms the problems of data cleaning
and robust training into a unified problem of approximating the
ideal representation function of traffic, which can be simply
formulated as follows.
G → Gidl .

(1)

By ideal representation Gidl , we mean a function that can
perfectly reconstruct samples in a low-dimensional decision
space and can project samples belonging to the same class
to similar positions on the decision space, thus achieving
ideal data cleaning or robust classification. To enable the
representation network G to approximate Gidl in iterations,
three types of attribute constraints are defined, namely
information integrity constraint, cluster separability constraint,
and core proximity constraint, based on the nature of the
ideal representation function. In this way, a unified and
efficient framework for malicious traffic data cleaning and
robust training is designed. In training, the three attribute
constraints collaborate to guide the network parameters update,
where the cluster separability constraint and the core proximity
constraint focus on learning from difficult and simple samples,
respectively, helping MCRe to maintain higher performance
under high noise conditions.
To the best of our knowledge, MCRe is the first framework
that combines data cleaning and robust training. The main
contributions are as follows:
• We proposed a unified framework for handling the
noise labels of malicious traffic, MCRe, consisting of a
representation solver and two downstream tasks. MCRe
first represented all traffic uniformly as vectors that
are robust enough to label noise, and then designed a

distance-based data cleaning and training algorithm based
on vector distribution in the decision space.
• We proposed a novel perspective to solve the problem of handling noise labels: attribute-guided ideal
representation approximation. We theoretically analysed
the attributes of the ideal function and designed three
different levels of constraints to help the representation
network learn individual, intra-class and global distributions simultaneously, guiding the representation network
to approximate the ideal representation during iteration,
thus achieving a robust representation of the traffic.
• Numerical results showed that MCRe outperforms other
state-of-the-art approaches in data cleaning and robust
classification model training under high noise conditions.
In addition, MCRe also had good generalisability and
extensibility.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we discuss the current status of noisy labels in traffic
data and summarize existing methods for handling noisy
labels. In Section III, we analyze the attributes of the ideal
representation function theoretically and introduce the three
constraints we proposed. In Section IV, we detail the proposed
MCRe. In Section V, we present the experiments and their
results. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Noise Labels in Traffic Datasets
Training intrusion detection models that use realistic
malicious traffic can ensure better model generalization and
has become a common approach in the industry. However,
due to the limited accuracy of existing annotation methods
[20], the completeness of annotation strategies [21] and the
misperception of traffic distribution by different annotators
[22], the dataset is prone to mislabeling. In addition, frequent
zero-day attacks pose a severe challenge to the accurate
labeling of realistic traffic [23]. These attacks are beyond the
knowledge of annotators and annotation systems, so traffic
is often difficult to label correctly. Similarly, variants of
known attacks, due to variations in certain attributes, can
easily interfere with the judgment of rule-based or IDS-based
automatic labeling systems.
Mislabeling is common in traffic datasets collected from
real networks. Models trained with such data are prone
to performance degradation during online detection, with a
possibility of generating a large number of false positives and
misses, limiting the application of deep learning models to
realistic IDS [24]. Specifically, the impacts on real systems
can be summarized as follows:

YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC

Model Evaluation and Selection: Evaluation of deep
learning models requires accurately labeled traffic that has
the same or similar distribution to the target environment
[25]. Traffic labelled incorrectly or obtained from isolated
environments cannot accurately assess and evaluate model
performance, so correct feedback cannot be provided to model
evaluators, which results in inappropriate models coming
online. Therefore, it is crucial to clean noisy traffic dataset
and obtain a purer dataset that can help IDS to assess and
evaluate the models accurately.
Domain Knowledge Extraction: Extracting domain knowledge also requires accurately labeled traffic. Inaccurately
labeled datasets can easily drive the model to learn something
wrong during iterations, ignoring some important features
or knowledge and thus affecting subsequent analysis and
predictions. However, models trained on complex and diverse
traffic collected in real networks have superior generalization
ability compared with models trained on closed datasets.
Therefore, it is also an important task to train accurate and
robust classifier models on realistic traffic data containing
noise labels.
B. Noisy Labels Handling
Inaccurate ground truth and non-stationary distribution of
traffic make it difficult for deep learning-based IDSs to identify
malware, leading to various cyber security incidents [8].
Therefore, it has become important for the real world to deal
with noisy labels in traffic datasets to form cleaner datasets
or to train robust traffic identification models. Depending on
the objectives, the existing methods can be divided into two
categories.
1) Data Cleaning: Distinguishe noise and pure samples
in the traffic dataset by identifying and evaluating instances
and labels, and output a dataset consisting of pure samples.
The evaluation of labels is mainly performed by measuring
the consistency in features of the samples [26] or density
distribution [10], [11] after the representation with the
observed labels. Although the above approaches have been
successful in reducing the proportion of noise labels in the
dataset, the data cleaning process often discards a large number
of outlier samples as well. However, the absence of these
samples can shift the global distribution, making it difficult
to accurately assess the generalisability of models with the
cleaned dataset.
2) Robust Training: Reduce the impact of untrustworthy
labels on model parameter updating by selective learning of the
global distribution, resulting in more accurate classifiers. The
performance of these models is improved mainly by designing
robust loss functions [27], [28] or network architectures
[14], [15], [19] that prevent supervised neural networks from
overfitting the noisy labels. However, when noise levels are
high, these models can struggle to acquire correct domain
knowledge, making it difficult to obtain positive feedback on
model parameter updates.
Due to the different objectives, there are certain differences
in the way the above approaches deal with noise labels.
For data cleaning, in order to improve the purity of the
dataset, more emphasis is often put on screening individuals

135

and excluding samples that cannot be identified. In contrast,
for robust training, noise samples are introduced more
aggressively during model training to ensure the generalization
of the model and accurate decision boundaries, and the impact
of noise samples is mitigated by relying on the robustness of
the model itself [29]. However, knowledge selectivity leads to
a dramatic drop in performance when these approaches face
high noise levels.
To this end, we propose a unified noise processing
framework named MCRe, which converts the problems of
data cleaning and robust training into an ideal function
approximation problem from an alternative perspective.
In addition, cluster separability and core proximity constraints
for MCRe are defined to help the representation network learn
individual and global knowledge in iterations, respectively,
thus maintaining good performance of MCRe under high-noise
conditions.
III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION & ATTRIBUTE
C ONSTRAINTS D ESIGN
In this section, the problem of representing traffic with noisy
labels is formulated.
Consider a C-classes traffic dataset with noisy labels and let
D := {(xi , ỹi )} N be a traffic dataset containing noisy labels,
where (xi , ỹi ) is a labeled sample, xi represents the i-th sample
and ỹi is the observed label corresponding to xi . For each xi ,
there is one and only one latent true label denoted by yi∗ , and
ỹi , yi∗ ∈ {1, 2, · · · , C}.
The main goal is to derive a representation function G that
can reconstruct traffic while creating a useful and meaningful
latent representation. G should avoid using noisy labels and
handle noisy labels appropriately, which helps to clean the
labels and train powerful classifiers with noisy labels.
First, the ideal representation under noisy labels is defined.
Definition 1: Ideal Representation: For D, the ideal representation is a mapping Gidl (x) := Rm → Rs such that for
all sample pairs xi , x j , there exists a constant ε > 0 that
satisfies the following condition:

d Gidl (xi ) , Gidl x j ≤ ε ⇔ yi∗ = y ∗j ,
(2)
where d is a function that measures the distance between two
samples. Common distance measurement functions include l1 ,
l2 , l p , l∞ , and cosine distance.
Traffic belonging to the same category, with similar
behavioral patterns, is distributed with certain a similarity in
the feature space. Under ideal conditions, the mapping distance
in the decision space is closer (≤ ε) for samples with the same
true labels, but farther (> ε) for samples that do not belong
to the same class. Furthermore, ε is used as a boundary to
divide clusters in the decision space, thus forming an ideal
decision boundary. Obviously, in this ideal situation, accurate
identification of all individuals in the dataset can be achieved,
realizing ideal data cleaning.
Therefore, to construct a function G that is as close to
Gidl as possible, we propose three conditional constraints from
a mathematical perspective to help G converge towards Gidl
during training.

136

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Constraint 1 Information Integrity Constraint: For any
xi ∈ D, there is
G ← arg min (H (xi ) − H (G (xi ))) , xi ∈ D,
G

(3)

where H (·) represents information entropy.
We argue that a good representation function should be as
informative as possible. Generally, however, the represented
traffic, which has lower dimensions, prompts the neural
network to learn the most informative features. In practice,
the dimension of the representation is usually set manually
as a hyperparameter. As G compresses the dimensionality of
traffic, some information will be inevitably lost.
Constraint 2 Cluster Separability Constraint: For any
xi , x j , xk ∈ D, if yi∗ = y ∗j ̸ = yk∗ , then it holds that

d G (xi ) , G x j ≤ d (G (xi ) , G (xk )) .
(4)
The cluster separability constraint is essentially a variant
of the ideal representation. By Eq. 2, it is clear that yi∗ ̸=
yk∗ ⇔ d (G (xi ) , G (xk )) ≥ ε. Together with yi∗ = y ∗j ⇔

d G (xi ) , G x j ≤ ε, it is easy to obtain Eq. 4.
A good representation function should be able to reconstruct
samples belonging to the same class as individuals with
spatial similarity in the decision space, making them far from
the other categories, which in turn helps to construct welldistinguished decision boundaries.
Constraint 3 Core Proximity Constraint: For every xi ∈ D,
∗
there exists a virtual full confidence sample x(yi ) , such that

 
XC X
G ← arg min
d G (xi ) , G x(k)
∗
G

k=1

xi wher e yi =k

(5)
A full confidence sample is a sample that is credibly
attributed to a specified class. A good representation function
should make each sample as close as possible to the projection
of the full confidence sample of the class, so that the samples
are better aggregated in the decision space.
We believe that to construct a suitable representation
function, the above three constraints must be satisfied,
or satisfied as far as possible.
IV. A RCHITECTURE OF MCR E
The architecture of MCRe is shown in Fig. 1 and consists of
a noise traffic characterization network and two corresponding
downstream task layers. The former is the central component
where MCRe constructs a mapping function G that satisfies
the multidimensional constraints. The representation network
should have the following properties: 1) feature representations
should retain as much input information as possible;
2) samples with the same true labels are should be closer
to each other while farther away from classes with different
labels; and 3) samples with the same true labels should be
closer to the full confidence samples within the class. In order
to help the representation network obtain the above properties,
we design the corresponding constraint generating networks
to measure and adjust the current representation network, and
optimize the parameters of the feature representation function
by back propagation. As for the two downstream tasks of
data cleaning and robust training, the distance-based cleaning

and classification layers are connected to the representation
network and the corresponding dataset or classification model
is output. In this section, the details and meaning of these
components will be explained.
A. Deep Representation
The goal of representation is to reconstruct traffic in a
low-dimensional decision space, aggregating similar samples
and separating dissimilar samples to provide a more intuitive
view for downstream tasks, such as traffic cleaning and
identification. In this study, a 7-layer, fully-connected encoder
is used as the deep representation. It has a simple structure
and strong plasticity, and is more receptive to feedback from
the three constraints.
The deep representation is defined as follows.
ui = G(xi ; θG ),

(6)

where θG represents the parameters corresponding to G and ui
represents the representation of xi in the decision space.
The feedback of each of the three constraints on the network
is determined by measuring the distribution of u in the decision
space. In each iteration, G will update θG according to the
integration loss generated by the three constraints, as follows.

(7)
θG ← θG − η∇L D; θG ,
where η denotes the learning rate and L is defined by:
L = Liic + Lcsc + Lcpc +Lcls ,

(8)

where Liic is given by Eq. 19, Lcsc is defined by Eq. 26, Lcpc
is obtained by Eq. 30, and

Lcls = C E ỹ, F (u) ,
(9)
where C E denotes the cross-entropy loss, and F is a
fully connected classifier head. It has been shown that the
representation network before the classification head does not
significantly overfit to the label noise [30], [31]. Therefore,
the use of noise labels (or even random labels [32]) can also
have a facilitating effect on the representation network.
B. Network of Information Integrity Constraint
As given in Eq. 3, the information integrity constraint
requires that the transformations have as small information
lost as possible. To satisfy the information integrity constraint,
we design a decoding network G −1 that is symmetric with the
representation network, and it forms a classic self-encoder
structure with the representation network.
For a given G and G −1 , the information reduced by G can
be quantified as
H (x) − H (u) = I (x; u) − H (u |x ) ,

(10)

where I (x; u) denotes the mutual information between u and
x.
And since both x and G are deterministic, H (u |x ) = 0, so
H (x) − H (u) = I (x; u) ,
Further, it can be obtained that




H (u) − H G −1 (u) = I u; G −1 (u) .

(11)

(12)

YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC

Fig. 1.

Architecture of MCRe.

Then


H (x) − H G

−1




(u) = I (x; u) + I u; G −1 (u) .

(13)

In addition, since I (·) ≥ 0, it can be written that



min H (x) − H G −1 (u)
 

= min (I (x; u)) + min I u; G −1 (u)
 

= min (H (x) − H (u)) + min I u; G −1 (u) .
(14)

Therefore, H (x) − H G −1 (u) has a minimal value when
and only when both H (x) − H (u) and I u; G −1 (u) have
their minimum
values.

 Thus, it
can be written that
arg min

G ,G −1

H (x)−H G −1 (u)

=arg min (H (x) − H (u)) .
G ,G −1

(15)
In addition, since G and G −1 are symmetric, G −1 (u) can be
considered as an estimate of the distribution of x. Therefore,
it holds that
 


arg min (H (x)−H (u))=arg min H x, G −1 (u) + H (x)
G ,G−1

G ,G −1

(16)
Again, since H (x) is necessarily >0 and for a given D, the
value of H (x) is constant.
 

arg min (H (x)− H (u))= arg min H x, G −1 (u) .
G ,G −1

137

G ,G −1

(17)

In summary, the goal of the information integrity constraint
is to minimize the value of Eq. 17, which
 

G ← arg min H x, G −1 (u) .
(18)
However, for traffic vectors in a high-dimensional space,
calculating their cross-entropy is a challenging task; therefore,
in this study, the Binary Cross-Entropy is adopted, and the
information integrity loss of samples in each iteration is
calculated by

Liic D; θG , θG −1
|D|

n


1 XX
xi j log x̂i j + 1 − xi j log 1 − x̂i j , (19)
=
|D|
i=1 j=1

where xi j is the j-th component of xi , and x̂ = G −1 (G (x)).
C. Network of Cluster Separability Constraint
According to Eq. 4, the goal of the cluster separability
constraint is to separate the mixed samples near the cluster
boundaries to form clear and accurate decision boundaries.
Therefore, as shown in Fig. 2, the representation function
should achieve two goals: (1) compress the distance between
samples attributed to the same cluster, reducing the radius of
the cluster; (2) expand the distance between samples attributed
to different clusters, increasing the distance between clusters,
First, the samples are divided into different clusters in the
decision space based on their projection distances, which are
denoted by {clus1 , clus2 , · · · , clusC }. Similar to FINE [11],

138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 2.

Cluster separability constraint.

the Euclidean distance is selected in this study to measure the
separability. The distance between xi and x j is calculated by

d xi , x j = ui − u j 2
(20)
Fig. 3.

To achieve the first goal, the average distance of each sample
to other samples in the same cluster is calculated. Assume that
xi ∈ clusk ; then, the average distance from xi to the other
samples in the cluster can be expressed as follows:
dxini =

1
|clusk | − 1

X


d xi , x j .

(21)

x j ∈clusk

To achieve the second goal, the closest distance of each
sample to the other cluster boundaries is calculated. For
computational purposes, we calculate the distance from the
sample to the nearest sample that does not belong to the
cluster. Then the distances to other clusters can be expressed
as


= min d xi , x j x j ∈
/ clusk .
(22)
dxout
i
From a practical perspective, using absolute distances to
measure cluster separability is not completely consistent with
the goal of formulating an ideal representation. Therefore, the
two goals are unified as a ratio of the difference to measure
to the deviation of each sample from the ideal representation,
as follows:
δxi =

− dxini
dxout
i
dxout
i

(23)

where δxi denotes the difference between the distance of xi
to the other clusters and the distance to the current cluster; it
indicates how easily xi can be correctly distinguished under
the representation of G. In order to ensure convergence of the
above equation, it is normalized as follows

m
δxnor
= N or m δxi .
(24)
i
Therefore, at each iteration, the cluster separability
constraint for G can be expressed by


1 X nor m
G ← arg max
δxi ; G
(25)
|D|
Furthermore, the loss of cluster separability can be obtained
by

1 X nor m
Lcsc D; θG =1 −
δxi
|D|

(26)

Core proximity constraint.

D. Network of Core Proximity Constraint
Eq. 5 shows that the core proximity constraint requires
G to project every sample as close as possible to the full
confident sample of the class to which the sample truly
belongs. Therefore, the representation function should drive
the projection of the sample close to its full confidence sample.
The corresponding constraint is related to two following steps:
full confidence sample selection and constraint generation.
1) Full Confidence Sample Selection: A full confidence
sample is a sample that is fully identified as belonging to
a particular class. In this subsection, we identify the center
of the simple sample as the full confidence sample for this
class, as shown in Fig. 3. Unlike the unlabeled clustering
centers generated in Sec. IV-C, the full confidence samples
in this section denote the cores of the classes with observed
labels. First, the simple samples are selected in each class
according to their distribution in the decision space; then, the
full confidence samples in each class are calculated according
to the distribution of the simple samples. It has been a common
strategy for obtaining label information to avoid the effect of
labels on the construction of the representation function under
high noise conditions.
Simple samples represent samples that are far from
boundaries, belong to a certain class with a high probability,
and tend to have a small loss in classification tasks. Coteaching [14] and Co-teaching+ [15] select simple samples
using supervised classifiers, and a similar idea is adopted
in this study. Specifically, a fully-connected classifier F is
defined in the decision space, and it is determined whether
the sample is a simple sample based on its output as follows.
xi ∈ Sim k , i f ỹi = arg max Fk (ui ) ,
k

(27)

where Sim k is the set of simple samples labeled with k, and
Fk (ui ) is the score classified by xi as k. That is, we consider
a sample to be a simple sample when the original label has a
higher score than the other labels. In fact, there could be some
outlier samples classified in Sim k , but because their number
is usually relatively small, they do not affect the classification
result.
Further, samples in Sim k are projected into a lower
dimensional space z to reduce the computational cost of full
confidence samples computing and improve the robustness

YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC

of sample representations. The second projection on the
representation layer has been a common scheme and is widely
used in classical models such as MoCo [33]. The experimental
results have been available to demonstrate the effectiveness.
We use the momentum prototype of all samples in Sim k as
the full confidence sample zk of the flow for category k, which
is defined by


zk ← N or m mzk + (1 − m) zi , zi ∈ Sim k ,
(28)
where zi is the projection of ui in the z-space. In this paper, m
is set to 0.999. In each iteration, the full confidence samples
are updated to the mean of weighted samples in the z-space.
2) Constraint Generation: The main goal is to search
for an embedding space where samples belonging to the
same class cluster are around their full confidence samples;
namely, samples closer to zk have lower losses when network
parameters are updated, thus driving samples towards the full
confidence samples.
At each iteration, the core proximity constraint of can be
expressed by

1 X
min zi − zk
.
(29)
G ← arg min
2
G ,F |D|
Then, in each iteration, the core proximity loss of G can be
quantified as


1 X
min C E zi , zk
(30)
Lcpc =
|D|
E. Downstream Tasks
In general, downstream tasks include data cleaning and
robust training. In Tab. I, these two tasks are described in
detail. For the two tasks, a simple data cleaning method named
MCRe-dc and a robust training method named MCRe-cls
are designed based on the distance metric of samples in the
decision space constructed by MCRe.
1) MCRe-dc: According to the distance distribution of
samples in the decision space constructed by MCRe, the
suspected noise samples are determined, and sample removal
and label correction are performed. In this study, the
confidence of labels is calculated using the difference in
distance between the samples and the full confidence samples.
During data cleaning, the mislabeling of samples with high
confidence values is considered, and samples without high
confidence attribution classes are discarded.
Specifically, we set a fixed sample discard ratio and discard
samples that are far from the full confidence samples (i.e.,
samples with low label confidence). This is one of the simplest
data cleaning methods and is widely adopted [40]. In this
paper, we focus on whether MCRe based on multidimensional
constrained representations has the potential to perform well in
data cleaning, and therefore only the simplest fixed threshold
scheme is adopted. In practice, more effective data cleaning
schemes can be selected based on specific objectives.
2) MCRe-Cls: MCRe-cls accesses and trains a classification
layer on the representation layer of MCRe and then outputs
a classification model. In this study, a simple Kmeans
classifier is used to divide traffic into clusters. The traffic is
identified using the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm, which matches
the clusters to their corresponding labels.

139

V. E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
In this section, the effectiveness and robustness of
MCRe were verified by comparison with other comparative
approaches in the two downstream tasks.
A. Datasets and Noise Settings
1) Private Dataset: A dataset containing 22 types of
encrypted malicious traffic named Malicious_TLS was
constructed to evaluate the performance of MCRe. In this
dataset, all traffic was encrypted with TLS and thus behaved
similarly. Consequently, cleaning and identifying such TLS
traffic would also be a more difficult task when noise labels
were present. In addition, all malicious traffic was collected
from real edge network devices. The traffic was captured
over a four-year period from 2018 to 2021 and labeled with
precise threat intelligence to ensure Ground Truth. Also, all
benign traffic was encrypted using TLS. Note that no public
dataset currently contained such a wide variety of realistic
malicious encrypted traffic. Anyone can fetch the dataset by
visiting https://github.com/gcx-Yuan/Malicious_TLS. In particular, to prevent privacy, we erased IPs, ports, timestamps,
payloads, etc. from the traffic. Semantic, statistical and spatiotemporal features of these traffic are also extracted.
2) Public Datasets: We also verified the effectiveness
of MCRe on the CICIDS-2017 [36] intrusion detection
dataset. Specifically, rather than extracting features from raw
traffic, we use the features offered. In addition, to evaluate
the generalizability of MCRe, we validated it on several
public malicious traffic datasets, including NSL-KDD [34],
UNSW-NB15 [35], LITNET-2020 [37], IOT-23 [38], and
CICMalDroid-2020 [39].
3) Noise Settings: Similar to ULDC [12], we set up
two types of scenarios: asymmetric scenarios and symmetric
scenarios, based on different traffic labeling strategies in the
real world.
Asymmetric noise was usually labeled by multiple independent labeling entities that determine the labels of samples
through strategies such as voting. Different labeling strategies
will result in different distributions of label noise. Of these,
labeling strategies that reduce false positives [24] have been
the most common because they maximize the availability of
the system. In this case, a large amount of malicious traffic will
be labeled as benign, and only a small amount of benign traffic
will be labeled as malicious. We defined this as an asymmetric
scenario, where only a portion of the malicious traffic labels
was flipped to benign.
Symmetrical noise is usually labeled by a single or few
entities, and in that case, a large amount of malicious traffic
will be labeled as benign, but also, a large amount of benign
traffic will be labeled as malicious. The quality of labels
depends entirely on the capacity of entities and results in
different ratios of noise labels. In short, in symmetric noise
scenarios, all traffic labels have a certain probability of
flipping.
In this study, the range of noise label ratios was set to
[0.1,0.9] to explore the robustness of different approaches
under harsh high noise conditions. Fig. 4 shows the label
conversion matrix for the 40% noise ratio case for both
scenarios. The horizontal axis represents observed noise labels

140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE II
P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

Fig. 4. Label conversion matrix of 40% asymmetric (left) and symmetric
(right) noise.

and the vertical axis represents latent true labels. The first
row and column are labeled as benign and the other rows and
columns are labeled as certain malicious traffic. The left is the
asymmetric noise scenario, where 40% of the samples in each
class of malicious traffic are randomly selected and their labels
are set to benign. The right represents the symmetric noise
scenario, where in addition to flipping the malicious traffic
labels as in the asymmetric noise scenario, 40% of the benign
traffic is selected and its label is randomly set to certain kind
of malicious traffic.
4) Experimental Setup: We evaluated the performance of
two typical downstream tasks on the datasets injected with
noise. In the data cleaning task, the entire dataset was injected
with noise and then fed to MCRe to output a dataset with
a reduced percentage of noise. In the robust training task,
the dataset was divided into training and validation sets
according to the ratio of 7:3; labels of some of the sample
labels in the training set were flipped and fed to MCRe for
training; meanwhile, the samples in the validation set were not
involved in training and did not contain noise labels, so they
were used only to evaluate the performance of the output
classifier. In all experiments, five independent experiments
were conducted, in which the training and validation sets
were randomly divided. Specifically, in each experiment, the
average of the final five epochs was taken as the ultimate
result.
All experiments were carried out on the same platform
equipped with an Intel 9700K@3.60GHz, 32GB RAM, and
an NVIDA GeForce RTX 3090.
B. Experimental Analysis of Data Cleaning
MCRe-dc cleaned the dataset based on the projected
distance of the traffic in the decision space. First, MCRe-dc

calculated the distances of the samples from the full
confidence sample in each class on the decision space.
Then, based on the distance ratio, the confidence of the
labels was calculated. Finally, a fixed threshold was set,
and all samples with confidence below the threshold were
removed.
MCRe-dc was compared with the following state-of-the-art
data cleaning methods:
• INCV [9]: INCV trained a supervised classifier on the
noisy dataset, and then cleared the samples which the
classifier determined were different from their observed
labels;
• CL [10]: CL trained a supervised classifier on the noisy
dataset and judged the confidence of each sample label
based on the output of the classifier, and then removed
the samples with low confidence;
• FINE [11]: FINE was based on metric learning and
removed samples suspected of having noisy labels;
• ULDC [12]: ULDC was based on an unsupervised neural
network that evaluated the confidence of sample labels
and removed samples with low confidence.
Tab. II, III, IV and V show the performance of MCRe-dc for
cleaning datasets with different noise ratios in asymmetric and
symmetric scenarios on Malicious_TLS and CICIDS-2017,
respectively. Based on the results, the following conclusions
could be drawn:
1. Of all the approaches, MCRe-dc achieved the best noisy
label cleaning results: Looking longitudinally at each column,
there was a significant advantage in the percentage of pure
data in the dataset cleaned by MCRe-dc when the noise
level was above 20%. In particular, the percentage of pure
data was above 85% in both scenarios when the noise level
reached 90%, which was more than 25% higher than results
of the other approaches. In the other comparative approaches,
(a) INCV, CL, and FINE’s effectiveness depended on the
performance of the supervised classifier, again was limited
by the label quality; (b) although ULDC was based on an
unsupervised network, its label confidence assessment process
relied on label information. As a result, their performance
dropped significantly at high noise levels. In contrast, MCRe
employed a conservative label trust strategy to ensure stable
performance.
2. Of all the approaches, MCRe-dc exhibited the best
robustness: Looking at each row of the table horizontally, all
the approaches reduced the effectiveness of data cleaning as
the percentage of noise increased. Of these, MCRe-dc showed

YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC

141

TABLE III
P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

TABLE IV
P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

TABLE V
P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

the most consistent performance with only an 12% decrease,
compared with the other approaches that showed a decrease
of at least 40%. As the proportion of noise labels increased,
the overly open strategy of adopting label information led to a
stronger influence on the other related approaches, resulting in
a significant reduction in the quality of data cleaning. MCRedc, on the other hand, reduced the dependence on labels
through three different levels of constraints, which provided
it with superior robustness.
3. Of all the approaches, MCRe-dc was found to be the most
statistically significant: We conducted a T-test on the results
of data cleaning. T-test is frequently employed to analyzing
the significance of differences between two statistical sets.
Tab. VI presents the T-test results of MCRe-dc compared to all
other methods under a 90% noise level, where a larger t and a
smaller p indicate a more significant difference. In all cases,
the p-value was below 0.001, demonstrating a statistically
significant deviation of MCRe-dc from the other methods.
Given that the mean values of MCRe are consistently higher,
it can be inferred that MCRe is statistically superior to the
other methods.

C. Experimental Analysis of Robust Training
In this subsection, we will identify traffic and output a
classifier based on its projected distance in the decision
space. MCRe-cls was compared with several traffic identification models trained by other approaches, which were as
follows.
• INCV, CL, FINE, and ULDC: Retrain a supervised
classifier with the cleaned training set, and then identify
the traffic in the validation set;
• MentorNet [13]: Select some pure samples to train a small
guidance network to guide classifier training;
• Co-Teaching [14]: Train two networks with different
initial states in parallel and make them select pure
samples from each other;
• Co-Teaching+ [15]: Similar to Co-Teaching, but more
inclined to select disagreement samples for another
network;
• Co-Learning [16]: Train a two-headed encoder that avoids
fitting noise labels to the network by means of consistency
constraints on both heads.

142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE VI
T-T EST R ESULTS FOR MCRe- DC

TABLE VII
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

TABLE VIII
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

Tab. VII, VIII, IX and X show the performance of MCRecls in asymmetric and symmetric scenarios on Malicious_TLS
and CICIDS-2017, respectively. From the classification results,
the following conclusions could be drawn:
1. At low noise levels (≤asym-10% or ≤sym-20%), MCRecls was only slightly lower at most only 1.4% than that
of the best-performing approach: The design strategy of
MCRe’s careful acquisition of labels caused that its backbone
acquired less information than the other supervised methods
at low noise levels, which resulted in a slightly lower
performance as well; this result was in line with our design
expectations.

2. At high noise levels (>asym-10% or >sym-20%), MCRecls performed significantly better than the other approaches:
In particular, when noise levels reached 90% in both scenarios
and datasets, MCRe-cls achieved the highest accuracy,
which was 20% higher than the other approaches. The
above results demonstrated the effectiveness of the multiple
constraints designed in this study; this allowed the trained
representation function to approximate the ideal function
better and helped the classifier to identify malicious traffic
under label noise conditions. We also assessed the statistical
significance of MCRe-cls results compared to other methods
at a noise level of 90%, as presented in Tab. XI. Similar to

YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC

143

TABLE IX
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

TABLE X
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

MCRe-dc, MCRe-cls exhibited a p-value below 0.001 for all
cases, demonstrating superior performance compared to other
methods.
3. MCRe-cls exhibited the best robustness to label noise:
Looking at each row of the table horizontally, the MCRecls decreased the least as the percentage of noise increased.
In particular, when the noise level increased to 70%, the
accuracy of MCRe-cls decreased by 4%. When the noise level
increased to 90%, the accuracy of MCRe-cls was reduced
by up to 18%, which was much smaller than that of the
best-performing comparison approach. Due to the fact that
MCRe-cls selected an unsupervised distance-based classifier
that relied on representation functions rather than observed
labels to classify traffic, the impact of noisy labels on classifier
accuracy was mitigated. In addition, full confidence samples
were constructed based on simple samples (rather than all
samples), which also reduced the effect of noisy labels.
D. Ablation Analysis
In this subsection, we will check whether the three
constraints designed for MCRe are necessary by ablation
analysis. Specifically, we compared the performance of MCRe
and its variants, including (1) the complete MCRe, (2)
the MCRe that does not satisfy the information integrity

constraint, named MCRe∼iic, (3) the MCRe that does not
satisfy the cluster separability constraint, named MCRe∼csc,
and (4) the MCRe that does not satisfy the core proximity
constraint, named MCRe∼cpc.
Fig. 5 shows the performance of MCRe and its variants
for six different scenes, including asym-0.2, asym-0.5, asym0.8, sym-0.2, sym-0.5 and sym-0.8, where each corner of the
radar plot represents a corresponding scene, and the center
and edge correspond to 50% and 100%, respectively. By the
difference in the area of the four hexagons, we can easily
compare the importance of the three constraints and analyze
the roles they play in different scenarios and tasks. We can
draw the following conclusions:
1. All three constraints were beneficial for noise traffic
representation: Of all the models, the complete MCRe
achieved the best results in all scenarios and tasks. The
proposed three constraints were designed to compress the
value space of G in terms of information integrity, cluster
separability and core proximity, driving the samples toward
the correct cluster in the decision space, thus mitigating the
effect of noisy labels.
2. The core proximity constraint was the most helpful among
all constraints for MCRe to tolerate noisy labels: As the
proportion of noisy labels increased, the performance of all
three MCRe variants showed significant degradation of varying

144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE XI
T-T EST R ESULTS FOR MCRe-C LS

Fig. 5.

Ablation results. (a) Percentage of pure samples in data cleaning tasks. (b) Accuracy in robust training tasks.

TABLE XII
C OMPARISON OF MCRe AND I TS VARIANTS

degrees. MCRe cpc had the greatest degradation among all
variations, with a classification accuracy of only about 70%.
The results were in line with our design expectations, as Lcpc
was only relevant to simple samples, and a conservative
adoption strategy was used for labels to maintain higher
classification accuracy in high-level noise scenarios.
To represent the effect of the three constraints on the
directed optimization of the representation network more
intuitively, we plotted Fig. 6 to show the process of MCRe
approximation to the ideal representation function during
training. In particular, in this experiment, two high-level noise
scenarios, asym-0.8 and sym-0.8, were selected. As presented
in Fig. 6a, the accuracy of the model increased with
epoch, and the representation network of MCRe increasingly
approximated the ideal representation function.
The binary cross-entropy curves between the original input
and the output of the decoder are shown in Fig.6b. The
curve indicated changes in information loss during MCRe
representation, and the lower the entropy was, the smaller the
information loss was, but the better the information integrity
of the representation network was. As shown in Fig. 6b,

in both asym-0.8 and sym-0.8 scenarios, the information loss
decreased with the epoch, which ensured better performance
of MCRe (see Fig. 6a).
Fig. 6c and Fig. 6d show the variation curves of the
normalized mutual information (NMI) and adjusted rand index
(ARI) of the traffic representations, respectively. The ARI
and NMI have been commonly used as metrics for clustering
algorithms. Their values closer to one indicate that clusters
are more effective and can group more similar samples into
the same clusters. In this experiment, the ARI and NMI
were adopted to measure the cluster separability of MCRe.
As shown in Fig. 6c and Fig. 6d, the ARI and NMI gradually
increased with epoch, proving that the representation model of
MCRe gradually converged and produced clusters with good
separability.
The results in Fig. 6e show the trend of the average distance
of the traffic to the corresponding full confidence samples
in the z-space. The smaller the distance was, the closer the
samples reconstructed by MCRe were to the core of the
class and the further they were from the decision boundary.
In addition, as displayed in Fig. 6e, the mean distance showed
a decreasing trend with the epoch increases, indicating that
the projection of the traffic into the decision space was closer
to the full confidence samples within the class, which helped
MCRe to identify mislabeling better.
E. Generalizability Analysis
In this subsection, we trained classifiers on several public
malicious traffic datasets to evaluate the generalization of
MCRe. The results in Tab. II, III, VII, and VIII showed
that the classification accuracy of MCRe was positively
correlated with data cleaning, so the generalization of MCRe

YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC

145

TABLE XIII
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF MCRe-C LS ON D IFFERENT DATASETS IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS

TABLE XIV
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF MCRe-C LS ON D IFFERENT DATASETS IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS

TABLE XV
CL V S . MCRe+CL

TABLE XVI
C O -T EACHING V S . MCRe+C O -T EACHING

could be evaluated based on by its classification accuracy.
The datasets used in this subsection included: (1) traditional
Internet traffic datasets such as NSL-KDD [34], UNSWNB15 [35], and LITNET-2020 [37]; (2) IoT traffic datasets
such as IoT-23 [38]; and (3) mobile Internet datasets such as
CICMalDroid-2020 [39].
Tab. XIII and XIV show the accuracy of MCRe on different
datasets. Due to the small variety in some of the datasets,
the upper limits for the proportion of noise in asymmetrical
and symmetrical scenarios were set to 80% and 50%,
respectively. Experimental results demonstrated that MCRe
achieved high accuracy on all datasets. In particular, MCRe
achieved an accuracy of higher than 87% when the proportion
of asymmetric noise was as high as 80% or the proportion of
symmetric noise was as high as 50%. The results showed that
MCRe had good generalisability and could identify not only
encrypted malicious traffic, but also unencrypted and mixed
malicious traffic.

F. Extensibility Analysis
In this subsection, we examined whether MCRe has
excellent extensibility. That is, whether MCRe is compatible
with other classical models, and enhances their data cleaning
and traffic identification performance. Due to the excellent
code integration of CL and Co-teaching, they were selected
for validation. Specifically, the representation layer of MCRe
was plugged into the input layers of CL and Co-teaching
respectively, and their output results were evaluated.
Tab. XV and XVI respectively show the results of MCRe
for the two models in different scenarios for the corresponding
tasks. We can conclude as follows.
1. MCRe had good extensibility: By simply concatenating
models, MCRe could be used in combination with other
models, such as CL and Co-teaching, to process noise traffic.
In fact, MCRe could be considerd as a data pre-processing
process for other models. MCRe represented raw traffic as a

146

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

training, which balances individual and global knowledge
acquisition, resulting in a more robust performance ceiling for
high-level label noise scenarios. Even at 90% noise labels,
MCRe can achieve a pure sample percentage of 85% and a
classification accuracy of 82%. In addition, MCRe is highly
generalizable and capable of handling noise labels in various
scenarios, including traditional and novel Internet scenarios.
Finally, MCRe is also extensible, allowing connectivity to
other data cleaning and robust training models and enhancing
their performance.
In the future, we will focus on the application of MCRe
in specific scenarios and special conditions, such as online
environment detection, few-shot detection, and unknown
attack detection.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their
valuable comments that helped to improve this manuscript.
R EFERENCES

Fig. 6. Variations of MCRe metrics vs epoch. (a) Classification accuracy;
(b) Binary cross-entropy; (c) Normalized mutual information; (d) Adjusted
rand index; (e) Mean distance to the core of the class.

more robust feature vector and passed it on to other models
for data cleaning or model training. In future work, we may
consider encapsulating MCRe into a callable API to provide
supports for other models more conveniently.
2. At high noise levels, MCRe showed a significant
enhancement to CL and Co-teaching: The MCRe enhanced
approaches were more effective than the original when the
noise levels exceeded 20% and 50%, respectively. In particular,
for CL, the percentage of pure data increased by more than
40% when the noise level was 90%; meanwhile, for Coteaching, traffic was identified with a 16% improvement
in accuracy. The above results indicated that robust traffic
representation could help other models handle noise labels
better, reduce reliance on label quality, ensure stable
performance under high noise conditions, and output cleaner
datasets or more accurate identification models.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a unified framework for data cleaning
and robust training named MCRe is proposed for realistic
malicious traffic. MCRe drove the representation network
to approximate the ideal representation in iterations by
applying information integrity constraints, cluster separability
constraints and core proximity constraints. Compared to the
state-of-the-art approaches, MCRe employs attribute-guided

[1] N. Sambasivan, S. Kapania, and H. Highfill, “Everyone wants to do the
model work, not the data work: Data cascades in high-stakes AI,” in
Proc. CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst., 2021, pp. 1–15.
[2] Z. Wang, K. W. Fok, and V. L. L. Thing, “Machine learning for
encrypted malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets and comparative study,” Comput. Secur., vol. 113, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 102542.
[3] J. Zhang, F. Li, and F. Ye, “Autonomous unknown-application filtering
and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405.
[4] X. Lin, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram
representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic
classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642.
[5] P. Lin, K. Ye, and Y. Hu, “A novel multimodal deep learning framework
for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2022.
[6] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[7] C. Dong, Z. Lu, Z. Cui, B. Liu, and K. Chen, “MBTree: Detecting
encryption RATs communication using malicious behavior tree,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3589–3603, 2021.
[8] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
2017, pp. 1723–1732.
[9] P. Chen, B. Liao, and G. Chen, “Understanding and utilizing deep neural
networks trained with noisy labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2019, pp. 1062–1070.
[10] C. Northcutt, L. Jiang, and I. Chuang, “Confident learning: Estimating uncertainty in dataset labels,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 70,
pp. 1373–1411, Apr. 2021.
[11] T. Kim et al., “Fine samples for learning with noisy labels,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 24137–24149.
[12] Q. Yuan et al., “ULDC: Unsupervised learning-based data cleaning
for malicious traffic with high noise,” Comput. J., Apr. 2023,
Art. no. bxad036, doi: 10.1093/COMJNL/BXAD036.
[13] L. Jiang et al., “MentorNet: Learning data-driven curriculum for very
deep neural networks on corrupted labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 2304–2313.
[14] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks
with extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 31, 2018, pp. 8536–8546.
[15] X. Yu et al., “How does disagreement help generalization against label
corruption?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 7164–7173.
[16] C. Tan et al., “Co-learning: Learning from noisy labels with selfsupervision,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2021,
pp. 1405–1413.

YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC

[17] H. Song et al., “Learning from noisy labels with deep neural networks:
A survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access,
Mar. 7, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3152527.
[18] H. Wei et al., “Open-set label noise can improve robustness against
inherent label noise,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34,
2021, pp. 7978–7992.
[19] N. Karim et al., “UNICON: Combating label noise through uniform
selection and contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 9676–9686.
[20] A. Fahad, A. Almalawi, Z. Tari, K. Alharthi, F. S. Al Qahtani,
and M. Cheriet, “SemTra: A semi-supervised approach to traffic
flow labeling with minimal human effort,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 91,
pp. 1–12, Jul. 2019.
[21] Z. Yang et al., “WTAGRAPH: Web tracking and advertising detection
using graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP),
May 2022, pp. 1540–1557.
[22] M. Kim and I. Lee, “Human-guided auto-labeling for network traffic
data: The GELM approach,” Neural Netw., vol. 152, pp. 510–526,
Aug. 2022.
[23] J. Zhang et al., “Autonomous unknown-application filtering and labeling
for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun. (INFOCOM), Jun. 2020, pp. 397–405.
[24] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,”
in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security), 2022,
pp. 2783–2800.
[25] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust
network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023.
[26] Z. Zhu, Z. Dong, and Y. Liu, “Detecting corrupted labels without
training a model to predict,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
pp. 27412–27427.
[27] R. Wang, T. Liu, and D. Tao, “Multiclass learning with partially
corrupted labels,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 6,
pp. 2568–2580, Jun. 2018.
[28] E. Arazo et al., “Unsupervised label noise modeling and loss correction,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (PMLR), 2019, pp. 312–321.
[29] D. Arpit et al., “A closer look at memorization in deep networks,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 233–242.
[30] A. Iscen et al., “Learning with neighbor consistency for noisy labels,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
pp. 4672–4681.
[31] D. Ortego et al., “Multi-objective interpolation training for robustness to
label noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2021, pp. 6606–6615.
[32] H. Maennel et al., “What do neural networks learn when trained with
random labels?” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 19693–19704.
[33] K. He et al., “Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[34] L. Dhanabal and S. P. Shantharajah, “A study on NSL-KDD dataset
for intrusion detection system based on classification algorithms,” Int.
J. Adv. Res. Comput. Commun. Eng., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 446–452,
2015.
[35] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), 2015, pp. 1–6.
[36] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[37] R. Damasevicius et al., “LITNET-2020: An annotated real-world
network flow dataset for network intrusion detection,” Electronics, vol. 9,
no. 5, p. 800, May 2020.
[38] A. Parmisano, S. Garcia, and M. Erquiaga. (2020). A Labeled Dataset
With Malicious and Benign IoT Network Traffic. [Online]. Available:
https://mcfp.felk.cvut.cz/publicDatasets/IoT-23-Dataset
[39] D. S. Keyes et al., “EntropLyzer: Android malware classification and
characterization using entropy analysis of dynamic characteristics,” in
Proc. Reconciling Data Analytics, Autom., Privacy, Secur., Big Data
Challenge (RDAAPS), 2021, pp. 1–12.
[40] K. M. Al-Gethami, M. T. Al-Akhras, and M. Alawairdhi, “Empirical
evaluation of noise influence on supervised machine learning algorithms
using intrusion detection datasets,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021,
pp. 1–28, Jan. 2021.

147

Qingjun Yuan received the M.Eng. degree from
Strategic Support Force Information Engineering
University, China, in 2016. He is currently with the
Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
Technology. His research interests include network
security and side channel attack.

Gaopeng Gou received the bachelor’s, M.Eng., and
Ph.D. degrees from Beihang University in 2005,
2008, and 2014, respectively. He is currently a
Full Professor with the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
His research interests include network security and
network anomaly detection.

Yanbei Zhu received the M.A.S. degree from the
Beijing Institute of Technology, China, in 2019.
She is currently with the Henan Key Laboratory
of Network Cryptography Technology. Her research
interests include network security and complex data
analysis.

Yuefei Zhu received the Ph.D. degree from the
Zhengzhou Information Science Technology Institute, China, in 1990. He is currently a Professor with
the Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
Technology, China. He is the Main Designer of
the Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) PublicKey Algorithm SM2. His research interests include
cryptography and network security.

Gang Xiong is currently a Full Professor and a
Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
He has authored more than 60 papers in refereed
journals and conference proceedings. His research
interests include network and information security.
He is a member of the 3rd Communication Security
Technical Committee of the China Institute of
Communications.

Yongjuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree from
Information Engineering University in 2009. She
is currently with the Henan Key Laboratory
of Network Cryptography Technology. Her main
research interests include cryptographic analysis and
cyberspace security.