IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

3829

MetaCluster: A Universal Interpretable
Classification Framework
for Cybersecurity
Wenhan Ge , Zeyuan Cui , Junfeng Wang , Binhui Tang , and Xiaohui Li , Member, IEEE
Abstract— Rising cyber threats have created an immediate
demand for Deep Learning (DL) in cybersecurity. Nevertheless,
the opaque nature of DL models poses challenges in deploying,
collaborating, and assessing their effectiveness in less reliable
cybersecurity environments. Despite eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) playing a role in enhancing cybersecurity analytics,
the limited task scope, the propensity for data overfitting, and the
stochastic explanations hinder its broader application. To fill the
gap, this paper introduces a generic interpretable classification
framework, named MetaCluster. MetaCluster generates semantic prototypes for features, patterns, and domains at varying
granular levels by following three fundamental steps: embedding
representations, acquiring prototypes, and aggregating semantics.
These mechanisms guarantee that MetaCluster achieves critical
information extraction and reliable classification at minimal
cost. The experiments encompass cybersecurity classification
tasks and assess the interpretability of the framework. These
tasks encompass malware family classification, threat behavior
analysis, and malicious traffic identification. In particular, when
compared to other DL models, MetaCluster exhibits a significant
reduction in parameter consumption by 79.52% to 91.78%, and
boosts operational speed up to 71.37%, while its F1 scores remain
stable or slightly increase. Additionally, MetaCluster possesses
the ability to assess and visually represent the significance of
image, text, and statistical features. This capability leads to a
reduction of Mean Squared Error (MSE) between expected and
actual predictions by 0.0101 to 0.1020.
Index Terms— eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), cybersecurity, interpretable classification, model lightweight, general
framework.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE escalating cyber threat landscape has inflicted substantial losses on internet applications, ranging from data
breaches and service outages to facility failures. According to
Manuscript received 27 October 2023; revised 26 January 2024;
accepted 22 February 2024. Date of publication 4 March 2024; date of
current version 2 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U2133208 and Grant
62101368, in part by the Sichuan Youth Science and Technology Innovation
Team under Grant 2022JDTD0014, and in part by the Sichuan Science
and Technology Program under Grant 2022YFG0168. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication
was Dr. Andrew Clark. (Corresponding author: Junfeng Wang.)
Wenhan Ge, Zeyuan Cui, and Junfeng Wang are with the College of
Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China (e-mail:
wangjf@scu.edu.cn).
Binhui Tang and Xiaohui Li are with the School of Cyber Science and
Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2024.3372808, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3372808

Fortinet’s report [1], ransomware variants saw a nearly 100%
increase in 2022 compared to 2021, resulting in losses of $600
million in the first half of 2021. The primary impediment to
efficient and effective cyber threat analysis lies in the disparity
and asymmetry between cyber attackers and defenders. This
inequity is evident in the discrepancies in time and cost,
the uncertainty surrounding attack occurrences, and cognitive
biases [2]. It’s worth highlighting that Deep Learning (DL)
approaches can rectify this imbalance. They can automate
processes to reduce costs, enhance threat perception, and leverage multi-source Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) to enrich
insights [3], [4]. However, there are advantages and disadvantages just as there are two sides to the sword. Adversaries can
employ countermeasures, such as using adversarial samples
to evade detection [5], [6], or injecting backdoor samples to
compromise and steal data [7]. Therefore, there is an urgent
demand for cybersecurity methods that can be detected,
monitored, and trusted [8].
Researches in the field of explainable cybersecurity analysis
typically involve three methodologies: reliance on general
frameworks, the use of attention mechanisms, and the
application of rule generation. General frameworks in
cybersecurity [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] often
consist of simplified network approximations like LIME [16]
and SHAP [17]. These frameworks may also incorporate
adversarial-based feature sampling [18], [19]. General frameworks offer versatility across multiple tasks but may yield
unstable outcomes, reduced precision, and the need for additional parameters or training. Attention mechanisms [20],
[21], [22], utilizing attention networks, focus on the influence
of distinct features on subsequent tasks. They often require
supplementary visualization tools to clarify the extent of
feature focus [23], [24], [25], [26]. Unlike general frameworks,
attention mechanisms are relatively straightforward, as their
interpretability is inherent within the original model. However,
complex models like GPT [27] and GLM [28] can lose interpretability, leading to epistemic illusions. Rule generation
is an intuitive approach involving the translation of features
into human-readable language rules to formulate security
decisions. Decision Trees (DT) [29], [30], [31] and detection
rules [32], [33], [34], [35] fall into this category. While rule
generation is transparent, the alignment with human comprehension may not always match machine suitability [36].
Consequently, rule generation often leads to precision loss
and issues related to boundary ambiguity. Additionally, prior

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3830

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

knowledge of engineering significantly influences the method’s
performance.
Based on the aforementioned summary, it indicates that the
interpretability of cybersecurity is still in its early stages of
development. There are three main reasons for this:
a) Single-Task Limitation: Some explanation models may
not be universally applicable to multi-tasks, as they primarily focus on interpreting the specific data structures in
input features. Even the most generalized versions of LIME
and SHAP may pose challenges and mistakes when using
the TensorFlow2.0 framework.
b) Data Overfitting: Issues such as data imbalance and the
black-box nature of neural networks can introduce noisy
semantics along unknown pathways, disrupting the classification of normal semantics and leading to parameter
redundancy, causing the model to become overfitted to the
current dataset [37].
c) Stochastic Explanation: Due to factors like stochastic gradient descent and stochastic initialization, existing
explanation methods may not always yield reliable and
stable results [38]. At the same time, a large number of
explanations rest on human identification [25], [39] and
lack quantitative assessment indicators.
Therefore, it is imperative to prioritize a generalizable
framework ensuring the lightweight and highly accurate classification and quantitative interpretation for cybersecurity
interpretive analysis.
To address this gap, this paper introduces MetaCluster, a general classification framework based on semantic
prototype aggregation. MetaCluster is designed to enhance
interpretability across various cybersecurity tasks and address
the following Research Questions (RQ):
RQ1. How to establish a lightweight, highly accurate, generalizable, and interpretable framework for all kinds
of cybersecurity classifications?
RQ2. How to quantitatively assess the interpretation
of results for a more reliable model that meets
expectations?
Firstly, MetaCluster transforms any input data type into
3-dimensional vectors through embedding operations to
answer RQ1. Secondly, inspired by the Prototype Network
(PN) [40] of meta-learning, MetaCluster assumes that there
exists a set of semantic prototypes of each granularity feature
to guide its contribution to the classification process. Therefore, MetaCluster repeats the three basic steps of “embedding
features, finding prototypes, and aggregating similar features”
to filter and merge the features of each network layer in the
classification process into high-level features, forming a prototype decision process. Finally, to answer RQ2, MetaCluster
provides the Mean Squared Error (MSE) as a measure of the
gap between the model prediction and the standard expectation
when using main and none semantics. The contributions of this
paper are as follows:
1) This paper proposes a generalized interpretive framework
for explaining most of the cybersecurity classification
tasks, which can be used to derive the contribution of
arbitrary input features to the classification results and
produce highly accurate and efficient recognition results.

2) A set of assessment methods is designed to verify the
quality of the results produced. By forming prototypes of
the categories, we validate the ability of models to differentiate key information. And, by inputting blank noise,
the models have been tested to resist noise interference.
3) We conduct experiments with multiple data sources from
multiple scenarios. The results show that our model
compresses a large portion of computational space and
time while guaranteeing highly accurate recognition. It is
believed that the method in this paper can be adopted for
richer scenarios.
The paper is structured as follows: Section I provides
an overview of the need for interpretative analysis in
network security and outlines the study’s contributions.
Section II explores the relevant literature on prototype networks and similar models in the context of interpretability
research. Section III elaborates on the methodology and
its implementation in this study. Section IV covers the
empirical experimentation phase, including classification and
explication tasks across various network security analysis
scenarios. Finally, Section V summarizes the entire manuscript
comprehensively.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Explainable Artificial Intelligence
Before diving into a detailed presentation of relevant
work, it’s essential to clarify the concept of eXplainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI). XAI can be broadly categorized into two key aspects: global interpretability and local
explainability [41].
Global interpretability entails understanding the algorithmic logic underlying a neural network model. This type of
interpretability aligns with natural laws and human reasoning processes. Models like Decision Trees (DT) [42], naive
Bayes [36], [43], Markov decision processes [44], and Monte
Carlo decision-making [45] adhere to this approach.
Local explainability, on the other hand, focuses on explaining individual examples by assessing the importance and
contribution of features and highlighting the relationship
between features and the model’s decision. Local explainability emphasizes the input-output relationship, often neglecting
the internal logic of the network’s decision-making process. This makes it well-suited for most black-box models.
However, this focus on individual instances can introduce challenges such as result instability, dependence on sample quality
and difficulty in establishing a unified basis for generalization [18], [19], [20]. Typical methods for local explainability
include LIME [16], which modifies feature representations to
observe corresponding changes in outcomes, and SHAP [17],
which explores the contribution of groups of features to
outcomes through feature games.
B. XAI for Cybersecurity
As discussed in Section I, current efforts in interpreting
cybersecurity can be broadly categorized into three cases.
These include: the Case explanations using a general explanatory framework, the Attention mechanisms with embedded

GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

feature attention modules, and the Rule generation that produces rules comprehensible to humans. The first two methods
of these are currently the mainstream approaches, as they are
effective and do not necessitate complex expert knowledge
integration.
1) Case Explanation: In the field of cybersecurity, the
primary XAI frameworks are mainly LIME and SHAP. For
instance, Alani [9] and Kinkead [10] respectively applied
SHAP and LIME in malware analysis. Suryotrisongko [12]
used both LIME and SHAP for botnet identification, while
Psychoula [13] employed LIME and SHAP for fraud detection.
Moreover, LIME and SHAP have found applications in other
domains such as spam file retrieval [11] and network intrusion
detection [15], [46], where their explainability features have
been leveraged.
Further, more researches have been done to emphasize
information variability based on LIME and SHAP. TRUSTXAI [37] statistically counts the most important variables by
assuming Gaussian distributions and input-output information
entropy. SeqMask [25] measures the impact of different feature
masks on the classification results by counting the change in
KL scatter. SATG [20] and Aditya [47] respectively use an
adversarial-based approach to explore and explain the boundaries of understanding attack cases and textual semantics.
While the utilization of a nested XAI framework provides
explanatory foundations for most tasks, its instability often
necessitates additional expert analytical procedures [18], [19],
[20]. Therefore, there exists a growing demand for an XAI
framework that enables the transfer of explanatory assessment
feedback to the original model.
2) Attention Mechanism: Self-interpretable attention mechanisms present another avenue in XAI. The integration of
attention empowers neural networks to naturally revisit contextual relationships and determine feature importance.
The Transformer methodology [23], [24], [26] introduced
attention to the analysis of malware and CTI, resulting in
improved accuracy. SATG [20] explores the contributions of
the self-adversarial central attention mechanism in recognizing
sufficient and necessary behavioral patterns during attacks.
ViT-NeT [22] integrates prototype match into visual transformers to facilitate the segmentation of salient features in images.
Attention mechanisms introduce a bias in feature selection,
but an excessive accumulation of attention layers can complicate subsequent explanations. Large-scale language models
like GPT [27] and GLM [28], which adhere to the Transformer
architecture, are still in the early stages of determining their
underlying reasoning processes.
3) Rule Generation: Rule generation is a method that
can represent the model’s decision-making process comprehensively, with the DT being a prominent example of the
way. Mahbooba [29] utilized DT as an explanatory approach
in intrusion detection systems. Similarly, Wang et al. [30]
employed the DT method for mobile malware traffic detection.
Verkerken et al. [48] also used Random Forests (RF) as a
layered detector in unknown attack detection.
More advanced approaches such as Neural DT [49],
Deep Neural DT [31], and Neural Decision Forest [50] use
neural networks to determine the decision tree’s partition

3831

domains, guiding inputs with varying distributions into different branches for classification.
While rule generation allows neural networks to categorize feature combinations with similarities, this tree-like
partitioning can affect the model’s decision-making process,
especially in cases of sequences with varying lengths and
image categorization, particularly in multi-label classification. ProtoPNeT [51] introduces semantic prototypes to filter
features and replace strongly segmented regions of input
features, resulting in softer importance scores and improved
model applicability and generalization. ProtoTree [52] and
ViT-NeT [22] extend ProtoPNeT’s single-level semantic prototype comparison into a binary comparison tree to distinguish
between critical and minor features. This deepens the model’s
decision pathways but also increases resource consumption.
4) Summary: Although the XAI in cybersecurity analysis
is in its early stages, the integration of deep learning and
interpretability methodologies has become a pivotal aspect
of XAI research. This paves the way for the exploration of
multifaceted cybersecurity XAI frameworks as an inevitable
trajectory in this field.
The core concept of MetaCluster lies in its bottom-up
one-way decision graph with granularity-by-granularity generalization. In contrast to traditional DT structures, this approach
permits the sharing of sibling nodes. It places a greater
emphasis on preserving the matching and filtering of feature
prototypes at each level, rather than relying on the common
attention mechanism. Differing from expert matching rules,
MetaCluster generates a step-by-step granularity of feature
importance distribution for DL.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
As discussed in Sect. I, MetaCluster primarily addresses the
questions related to RQ1: Universal Classification Framework
and RQ2: Quantitative Interpretation Assessment. The RQ1
will be addressed in Sect. III-A, while the RQ2 will be
answered in Sect. III-B.
A. MetaCluster Model
Ensuring interpretability of the process entails making every
neural network layer interpretable, while the lightweight model
requires minimizing noise semantics as feasible. By combining
the characteristics of graph learning and PN, MetaCluster
converts all embedding operations throughout the classification process into prototypical network operations. It utilizes
the similarity of “layer prototypes” as guidance for “graph
aggregation”, creating aggregated features that are involved in
subsequent embedding transformations. As a result, each layer
of the MetaCluster neural network comprises three core steps:
feature embedding, meta-generation, and meta-aggregation.
The structure of the MetaCluster Model is in Fig. 1. The
formal expressions for these steps are as follows:

f t (lt (xt−1 , pt ) · xt−1 )
(1a)
xt = gt (xt−1 ) =
lt (xt−1 , pt ) · f t (xt−1 )
(1b)
where xt ∈ R|xt |×vt represents the output of layer t as well as
the input for layer t +1. f t (·) : R|xt−1 |×vt−1 → R|xt |×vt denotes

3832

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 1. MetaCluster model structure. MetaCluster accepts many types of input, such as images, text, and tables. It transforms the input into a formal input
model in the form of Rw×v . Each layer of MetaCluster follows the three basic steps of “feature embedding, prototype finding, and semantic aggregation” to
form a progressively constrained feature filtering mechanism to predict categories.

the embedding method, which can be any standard neural
network layer. pt ∈ R|xt |×vt−1 corresponds to the semantic
prototype for each layer. In the original PN, semantic prototypes are obtained by averaging sample features. However,
in MetaCluster, as the exact number of semantic prototypes is
unknown, pt is randomized and requires adjustments through
forward propagation.

pt · xt−1 T


(2a)

 ∥x ∥ · ∥ p ∥
t−1
t
lt (xt−1 , pt ) = σ ◦
(t)

LN( pt Wk · (xt−1 Wq(t) )T ) + bt (2b)


 −∥ p −x ⊗W ∥/τ +b
t
e t t−1 t
(2c)
lt (xt−1 , pt ) : R|xt−1 |×vt−1 × R|xt |×vt−1 → R|xt |×|xt−1 | represents the process of establishing “meta-aggregation,” which
can be achieved through cosine similarity (eq. (2a)), attention
mechanisms (eq. (2b), LN is short for Layer Normalization),
or L2 norm distance (eq. (2c)), among other techniques. Where
(t)
τ represents the temperature coefficient. Wq ∈ Rvn−1 ×dk and
(t)
v
×d
Wk ∈ R n−1 k are query and key weights for attentions.
Wt ∈ Rvt−1 denote the weight matrices for the xn−1 ’s vectors
respectively. bt ∈ R is the bias. ⊗ is the element-wise multiply
function. σ could be any kind of activation methods like relu,
min-max-scale, tanh, softmax, or none.
The complete MetaCluster model is constructed through the
stacking of MetaCluster layers, with slight modifications to the
input of the first layer and the output of the final layer. The
following formula is responsible for transforming any input X
into an acceptable form x0 ∈ R|x0 |×v0 .

w×h×c

(3a)
 Flatten(Conv2D(X )), X ∈ R
s
x0 = Embedding(X ),
X ∈N
(3b)


v
ReshapeRv →R1×v (X ), X ∈ R
(3c)
There are generally three input modalities for cybersecurity classification problems: images, sequences, and feature
sets. When the input X ∈ Rw×h×c represents images

(where w denotes width, h denotes height, and c denotes the
number of channels), convolution and flattening operations
will be employed for transformation. When the input X ∈
Ns represents sequences (with s being the sequence length),
transformation is accomplished through word embedding or
sentence embedding. When the input X ∈ Rv corresponds to
feature sets (with v denoting the number of vectors), reshaping
is utilized to convert Rv into R1×v .
The output of MetaCluster consists of a probability set PY ∈
R|Y | for classification labels Y . Assuming this output is from
the n-th layer of the MetaCluster, there are two methods to
obtain PY (in Formula (4a) and Formula (4b)). Both of them
can be activated using σ (·), with available activation options
including identity, sigmoid, softmax, or others.

ln (xn−1 , pY ),
if |xn−1 | = 1 (4a)
PY = σ ◦
f n (ln (xn−1 , pY ) · xn−1 ), if |xn−1 | > 1 (4b)
The first method is the original PN approach, where,
assuming the penultimate layer contains only one semantic
prototype, xn−1 ∈ R1×vn , the labels that surpass a certain
threshold are determined solely by comparing the similarity
between the input features xn−1 of the last layer and the
prototypes pY ∈ R|Y |×vn corresponding to the labels in Y .
The second method does not necessitate the assumption of
having only one prototype but instead employs a function
f n (·) : R|Y |×vn−1 → R|Y |×1 to transform the features into
probability outputs. Here, pY ∈ R|Y |×vn−1 is still the label
prototypes set.
B. Interpretability & Explainability
The answer to RQ2 implies the need to design metrics
to measure the reliability and stability of the interpretation
results. In fact, the interpretation process of MetaCluster can
be decomposed into two stages: feature explanation and pattern
interpretation. The feature explanation is used to get the

GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

3833

Fig. 2. The interpretation process of MetaCluster. Since semantic aggregation occurs in each MetaCluster layer, the structure of the model with softmax
activation can be equated to a tree structure with level-by-level feature upward aggregation in the global view. The structure possesses both explainable and
Interpretable properties. Explanation indicates that any feature can obtain a contribution to the classification result. Interpretation indicates that an invariant
inference path can be obtained for any classification task.

interpretation results and the pattern interpretation is used
to measure the reliability and stability of the interpretation
results. The difference between this two explanations will be
taken as an example of a simple two-layer model as shown in
Fig. 2.
Feature explanation is the process of transforming all
lt (xt−1 , pt ) by individually abstracting them and continuously
linking them to form x0 → xn . Although there is an embedding operation f t (·) in the original MetaCluster model, the
elements before and after the embedding can correspond to
each other since each embedding only modifies the vector
vt and not the number of features |xt−1 | or | pt |. Then a
one-way feature interpretation tree or graph with xt as the
node and lt (xt−1 , pt ) as the edge can be obtained. It is also
possible to obtain an arbitrary label Y on the x0 attention score
s(x0 ) ∈ R|x0 |×|Y | , here the PY ∈ R|Y |×1 is the predictions of
the model:
s(x0 ) = l1 (x0 , p1 ) · · · lt (xt−1 , pt ) · · · ln (xn−1 , pY )PY

(5)

Pattern interpretation achieves quantitative interpretability
by constructing links to decision patterns. A simple approach
to obtain highly reliable and stable interpretation measurements is to verify that the model can categorize feature
prototypes for each class into the correct belongings. Also,
considering that the explanation cannot be far-fetched, empty
feature prototypes must be recognized as empty labels.
It is worth noting that for a given MetaCluster prediction
model, where pt , f t (·), lt (·) are not varying with samples.
In this way, if the pt decision tree or graph can be constructed by constructing the pt decision tree or graph for
each layer of necklaces, it will be possible to represent the
fundamentals and logic of the classification task. The formulation plt is the edge connecting the pt samples and satisfies

the following equation:

g1 (xY ),
if t = 1
plt =
gt ( plt−1 ), otherwise

(6a)
(6b)

where xY ∈ R|Y |×w×v is the feature prototype of each label Y .
Unlike label prototype pY in the last layer, X Y emphasizes
the feature prototypes obtained in the embedding space corresponding to the original x0 without any embedding and
aggregation. This concept is similar to the “average face” [53]
in the field of face recognition, which can reflect the “average”
characteristics of a classification. Because the number of xY
and the number of labels Y are the same, as well as to
build |Y | decision paths to |Y | categories, the model output
pln ∈ R|Y |×|Y | of the xY prototypes is expected to be close to
the unit matrix I|Y |×|Y | . At this time, each feature prototype
has been precisely matched to each classification. Thus it exists
MSE: eq. (7) so that the smaller loss pl is, the more accurate
the xY and the model are.
∥ pln − I|Y |×|Y | ∥2
loss pl =
(7)
|Y |
In particular, plt can also accept inputs of all-0 vectors or
matrices, i.e., [0]w×v . In this case, the default is that the model
accepts the task of predicting the null semantics and should
output an all-0 prediction. Then the loss pl at this point will
be adjusted to the following prediction process. The smaller
(0)
loss pl is, the greater the model’s immunity to interference.

g1 ([0]w×v ), if t = 1
(8a)
(0)
plt =
gt ( plt−1 ),
otherwise
(8b)
(0)

loss pl = ∥ pln(0) − [0]|Y | ∥2 = ∥ pln(0) ∥2
(0)

(9)

loss pl and loss pl can also serve as metrics for evaluating
other classification models if they are not used in the training

3834

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE I
DATASETS FOR D IFFERENT C LASSIFICATION TASKS

TABLE II
G ENERAL E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

process. When loss pl is smaller, the model is more able
to differentiate the core semantic prototypes into distinct
categories, proving a more reliable and believable prediction.
(0)
A smaller loss pl signifies that the model is better able to resist
external interference and noise.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Settings
The experiments primarily focus on answering RQ1:
Universal Classification Framework and RQ2: Quantitative
Interpretation Assessment. RQ1 requires classification analysis
that is multi-tasked and multi-input. RQ2 demands that the
explanations and examinations in Sect. III-B exist for each
experimental species. Thus, the experiments will be partitioned
into several cybersecurity classification scenarios. They are
malware classification with image input, ATT&CK classification with CTI text input, and malicious traffic classification
with feature sets. The datasets for these three scenarios are
given in Table I.
For the malware classification task, we used the Drebin
datasets. Drebin classification involves identifying malicious
programs from Android packages, primarily in binary format.
To process the input data, we will utilize Markov image
processing [54] in conjunction with eq. (3a).
ATT&CK classification dissects attack tactics and techniques defined by Mitre ATT&CK1 from unstructured Cyber
Threat Intelligence (CTI). To handle the unstructured CTIs,
we’ll employ a sequence-based approach and DistilBERT2
embedding as outlined in eq. (3b).
For malicious traffic classification, the statistical feature
dataset of CIC-IDS-2017 [55] was selected. This dataset is
based on uniform features, and we’ll employ eq. (3c) as the
input processing method. In the data processing, we transform
it to exclude the BENIGN type of traffic in favor of one-hot
coding due to the excessive number and the lack of maliciousness of BENIGN tags. Specifically, when the prediction result
is all zeros, it is considered consistent with the BENIGN label.
The experiments’ general settings are summarized in
Table II. The meta-cluster-layers’ settings like “Meta num
|xt |”, “Meta-cluster-layer num”, and “Meta weight vt ” are
chosen by the hyper-parameter optimization framework for
TensorFlow models named keras_tuner.3 We will assess the
classification results using metrics such as Precision, Recall,
and F1, while also considering the model’s size and processing speed. The interpretation of results will involve feature
1 https://attack.mitre.org/
2 https://huggingface.co/distilbert-base-uncased
3 https://tensorflow.google.cn/tutorials/keras/keras_tuner

attention maps or other visualization techniques by eq. (5)
and eq. (8).
The DL and machine learning models in Table III will be
used for experimental comparisons. The methods in the upper
half of the table are traditional methods, while the methods
in the lower half are XAIs. Due to the different types of
inputs in the three experiments, not all methods will be used
as comparisons for the same set of experiments.
B. Malware Classification
1) Classification Analysis: As Drebin is processed as
Markov images for input, it primarily involves image classification techniques. The following methods have been selected
in this sub-section, with each method utilizing the sigmoid(·)
activation for outputting: ViT, MLP, MalPurifier, ResNet,
Conv-BiLSTM, ProtoTree, ProtoPNet, *-PN, *-DNDT, and
*-NeT.
The classification results of the aforementioned comparative
methods and MetaCluster are presented in Table IV. In the
case of MetaCluster, the implementation of f t (·) is indicated
within parentheses.
According to the results in the table, it can be observed that
MetaCluster achieves a higher F1 score and less processing
time. While most of the decision tree explanation models have
reduced their accuracy compared to the original models. This
advantage can be attributed to MetaCluster’s meta-aggregation
mechanism. On one hand, it helps compress model size to
avoid redundant computation of similar features. On the other
hand, it ensures that the features generated by f t (·) can participate relatively “completely” in subsequent computations.
Simultaneously, it can be also observed that MetaCluster
using Conv1D outperforms the model using Dense layers.
Referring to the definitions of Query and Key in ViT, this
difference may be attributed to MetaCluster’s feature fusion
based on the similarity of features, while Conv1D’s fusion
relies on spatial connectivity. In this classification task, a single
pass of spatial correlation in image input may not independently provide all the necessary features for classification.
Therefore, using Conv1D can better leverage the cooperative
advantage of neighboring local features, leading to an improvement in classification performance.
2) Feature Explanation: Fig. 3 provides explanations of
Drebin’s features when using MetaCluster (Dense), ConvDNDT, ProtoPNet, ProtoTree, Conv-NeT and ViT-NeT.

GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

3835

TABLE III
T HE E XPERIMENTAL C OMPARISON M ETHODS

TABLE IV
D REBIN C LASSIFICATION R ESULT A FTER M ARKOV I MAGE P ROCESSING .
T HE S PEED I S M EASURED IN M S /S TEP. S OME OF THE NAMES H AVE
B EEN S HORTENED TO S AVE S PACE , T HEY A RE : CRNN FOR
C ONV-B I LSTM AND MC FOR M ETAC LUSTER

The figure uses the feature attention maps to show the output
(eq. (5)) of the models for part of the classifications.

Each row in the subgraphs represents the feature focus of
the model on a class of samples. Different rows correspond
to the results of the seven malware classes as “Plankton,
GinMaster, FakeDoc, FakeInstaller, Opfake, BaseBridge, and
Kmin”. The more stable the interpretation method, the more
similar the area of the feature interests in the same class, and
the more significant the discrepancy between the patterns over
different classes. Based on this hypothesis, it can be found that
MetaCluster’s explanation possesses significant variability.
Although there is more than one feature attention under the
same class, MetaCluster has more different distributions of
features of interest for any class than Conv-DNDT, ProtoPNet, ProtoTree, and Conv-NeT. And the feature distributions
between classes are highly consistent. Even based on prototype
similarity measures, the feature maps of Conv-DNDT, ProtoPNet, and ProtoTree are not intuitive and easy to differentiate.
This may be due to the fact that the prototypes of these three
are only related to the convolved feature x0 , which makes
the attention relatively distracting and the visualization not
obvious. On the contrary, ConvNeT and ViT-NeT’s attentions

3836

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 3. The feature explanation for Drebin. Each row shows a type of different examples of image feature attention. A good feature attention is the one with
large differences between classes and small differences within classes. This is reflected in the graph by the similarity of peers and significant differences in
the same column. In this way, it seems that MetaCluster has relatively good feature attention.

are focused while the feature attention differentiation across
classes is not as clear as MetaCluster.
This indicates that MetaCluster can better categorize features and generate a direct mapping of features to classification
results, which has both between-class variation and withinclass uniformity. Therefore, it can be considered that the
decision process generated by MetaCluster is stable and

direct, which conforms to the repeatability principle of
interpretability.
3) Pattern Interpretation: The xY used here is the result of
averaging by class for samples in the training and testing sets:
x
xY = [ |x|
|x ∈ X, model(x) = y] y∈Y . For MetaCluster the
output y is pln , and pln is replaced by model(xY ) for other
models. eq. (7) also applies to other models as well. When

GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

TABLE V
T HE PATTERN I NTERPRETATION ’ S loss pl FOR M ALWARE
C LASSIFICATIONS . I F loss pl OF A M ODEL I S C LOSER TO 0,
I TS P REDICTIONS OF THE C ATEGORY P ROTOTYPES FOR
E ACH C LASS A RE C LOSER TO THE U NIT M ATRIX ,
I NDICATING T HAT I T I S THE M ORE S UITABLE IN
S TABLE S EMANTIC G ENERALIZATION

TABLE VI
(0)
loss pl

FOR

D IFFERENT M ODELS IN M ALWARE C LASSIFICATION .
(0)

A S MALLER loss pl S IGNIFIES T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER E QUIPPED
TO R ESIST E XTERNAL I NTERFERENCE . S OME OF THE M ODEL
NAMES H AVE B EEN S HORTENED TO S AVE S PACE . T HEY A RE
CRNN FOR C ONV-B I LSTM AND MC FOR M ETAC LUSTER

eq. (7) is small, the resulting matrix should look more like the
unit matrix, so it is only necessary to compare this matrix to
get an idea of how well the model fits xY .
Table V shows the loss pl for different models. The loss pl
measures the ability of the model to correctly predict xY .
The smaller loss pl is, the more the model is able to predict
the corresponding categorization using the standard, desired
semantics. In this example, MetaCluster obtains relatively
small results, signaling MetaCluster’s outstanding ability to
grasp standard semantics in images. At the same time, MetaCluster’s loss difference between the training and testing
datasets is small, which can be assumed that MetaCluster has
the ability to find core semantics and extensions.
(0)
Table VI is the loss pl prediction of each model for all
(0)

classes in Drebin with all-zero matrix. The loss pl of ViT-PN,
ProtoPNet, ProtoTree, and MetaCluster is below 0.5, while
the other models are greater than 0.5. Meanwhile, the standard
deviation of MetaCluster (Dense) is the smallest. It shows that
MetaCluster is more resistant to noise interference.

3837

C. ATT&CK Classification
1) Classification Analysis: The primary task in utilizing
the ATT&CK textual dataset revolves around the generation
of word vectors through the application of text embedding
techniques. In this regard, DistilBERT4 is employed as the
chosen method for text embedding. Given that sequences serve
as input, conventional text classification methodologies are
typically considered as baseline approaches for comparative
purposes, including CNN, BiLSTM, TextRCNN, BiLSTMMHA, Transformer, SATG, *-NeT, ProtoTree, ProtoPNet,
*-DNDT.
Due to the different abstraction levels of tactics and
techniques, MetaCluster will respectively participate in the
experiment using Dense, Conv1D, and Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) as its f t (·). Since GRU causes all semantics to
be displaced, only the aggregation-after-embedding approach
(eq. (1a)) is considered for the implementation of MetaCluster
when GRU is used as f t (·).
The results of the experiments are shown in Table VII.
It can be found that MetaCluster is able to achieve higher
F1 values using fewer parameters and at a faster speed, both
when it comes to tactics and techniques categorization. The
possible reason for this is that the use of prototype aggregation
can change the reasoning process to be simpler and more
efficient. Among them, when classifying tactics, it can be
found that TextRCNN-NeT and MetaCluster (GRU) using
cyclic recursion and aggregation ideas are able to achieve
higher F1, suggesting that models that aggregate full-text
contextual semantics are able to express the abstraction of
tactics more fully. On the contrary, MetaCluster with Conv1D
and BiLSTM-MHA-NeT are able to obtain better results when
categorizing technologies, suggesting that localized information is more able to dominate the recognition of technologies.
2) Feature Explanation: We enumerate the keyword extraction of a specific CTI text by various models. The keywords
are identified by the rule that the normalized score is higher
than 50%. The results are shown in Table VIII. The statements
in the table are from the CTI report [68], and the TTPs tags
to which it belongs are T1071: Application Layer Protocol
and TA0011: Command and Control (C2). According to the
semantic constraints of the tags provided by Mitre,5 the
manually extracted keywords mainly contain DNS and C2.
From the results in the table, although most of the models
provide sufficient attention to DNS and C2, some of the
models that classify well, such as TextRCNN-Net, BiLSTMMHA-Net, Conv-Net, etc., all produce redundant attention to
other non-important words. The reason for this may be the
use of CNN or RNN structures. Although complex models
are able to synthesize the context, the semantics are shifted
imperceptibly, thus making unimportant information tainted
with important semantics as well.
Among the explanations of all models, SATG, TransformerNeT, and MetaCluster do not focus on redundant information
and have relatively good classification results, indicating that
the methods based on the attention mechanism are able to
4 https://huggingface.co/distilbert-base-uncased
5 https://attack.mitre.org/versions/v8/ techniques/T1071/004/

3838

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE VII
ATT&CK C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS FOR C YBER T HREAT I NTELLIGENCE . T HE S PEED I S M EASURED IN M S /S TEP

TABLE VIII
T HE N ORMALIZED W ORDS S CORES ( EQ . (5)) FOR A S ENTENCE IN [68]. T HE L ABELS FOR THE S ENTENCE A RE T1071: A PPLICATION L AYER P ROTOCOL
AND TA0011: C OMMAND AND C ONTROL (C2). T HE B OLDER S CORES OF W ORDS A RE H IGHER T HAN 50%. MSE I S THE M EAN S QUARED
E RROR B ETWEEN THE H UMAN AND THE M ODEL . I F THE G AP OR MSE B ETWEEN THE H UMAN ’ S P REDICTION AND THE M ODEL’ S
P REDICTION I S S MALL , I T M EANS T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER A BLE TO ACQUIRE K EYWORDS
T HAT A RE R ECOGNIZED AS O FFENSIVE BY H UMANS

form explanations efficiently and understandably. Throughout,
MetaCluster’s attention to all non-important words is almost
0.0, indicating that MetaCluster is able to form better explanations for text categorization.
More instances in text explanation of MetaCluster can be
found in Fig. 4.
3) Pattern Interpretation: To obtain the average text xY for
CTI, we counted the TF-IDF scores of the words (DistilBert’s
tokens) in all tactical categorizations and selected the top |X |
words in each category as the result. The tactical category
was chosen because the number of samples in the tactical
category is much larger than the technical, which would make
the sampling results more natural.
Table IX shows the loss pl of the different models for the
classification of tactics. The loss pl measures the ability of the
model to correctly predict xY . The smaller loss pl is, the more
the model is able to translate standard, expected CTI semantics
into corresponding behavioral categories. In this example,

MetaCluster obtains relatively small results, indicating that
MetaCluster has mastered the standard definition of ATT&CK.
(0)
Table X shows the loss pl results of predicting all-zero
inputs to tactics using different models. From the results,
we can see that *-NeT’s model can partially suppress
the abnormal prediction of the original model, for exam(0)
ple, the average loss pl of BiLSTM-MHA is 0.7153, while
BiLSTM-MHA-NeT’s is 0.3669. However, the prediction of
MetaCluster for all classifications is close to 0, reaching a
(0)
loss pl of 0.0070. This indicates that MetaCluster can suppress
the expression of classification without semantic input, making
the model more reliable.
D. Traffic Classification
1) Classification Analysis: Due to the temporal statistical
characteristics provided by the malicious traffic dataset, the
following models with sigmoid activation will be chosen for

GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

Fig. 4.

3839

Other examples for explanations of MetaCluster (Dense).

TABLE IX
T HE PATTERN I NTERPRETATION ’ S loss pl FOR ATT&CK TACTICS
C LASSIFICATIONS . I F loss pl OF A M ODEL I S C LOSER TO 0,
I TS P REDICTIONS OF THE C ATEGORY P ROTOTYPES FOR
E ACH C LASS A RE C LOSER TO THE U NIT M ATRIX ,
I NDICATING T HAT I T I S THE M ORE S UITABLE
IN S TABLE S EMANTIC G ENERALIZATION

TABLE X
(0)
loss pl

FOR

D IFFERENT M ODELS IN ATT&CK C LASSIFICATION .
(0)

A S MALLER loss pl S IGNIFIES T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER
E QUIPPED TO R ESIST E XTERNAL I NTERFERENCE . S OME OF
THE M ODEL NAMES H AVE B EEN S HORTENED TO S AVE
S PACE , T HEY A RE RCNN FOR T EXT RCNN, RANN FOR
B I LSTM-MHA, AND MC FOR M ETAC LUSTER

TABLE XI
T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS . T HE S PEED I S M EASURED
BY M S /S TEP. MC I S S HORT FOR M ETAC LUSTER

comparison: DT, RF, LinerSVC, MLP, CtxAtt, DNDT and
*-NeT.
Table XI shows the prediction metrics of different models.
From the results in the table, it can be seen that DT and
RF are the most powerful models for this dataset, followed
by MetaCluster. The reason for this may be that DT is
more suitable for distinguishing the decision boundaries of
the features. MetaCluster, although not as good as DT, still

maintains higher F1, lower space and time consumption among
other deep learning methods.

3840

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 5. The importance of categorical features in traffic dataset. The different colored bars are how much attention the model pays to different features of
the same classification. If the score is much greater than 0, it means that the feature is relevant and more important to the classification.

2) Feature Explanation: Since MetaCluster will reshape
X ∈ Rv to become x0 ∈ R1×v , and eq. (5) will place all
of the attention on the first dimension of x0 , this inevitably

results in the use of the original x0 with only one score left.
This will lead to not being able to get the attention of the
features in v, and therefore the x0 transformation is needed.

GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

One approach, like in LIME [16], is to break up the features
into different sets and use these sets to see if the predictions are
correct. Therefore, we use the Mask unit matrix Iv×v and the
original x0 to multiply by element, and the individual features
of x0 are broken up into different sets x f ∈ Rv×v to achieve
the selection of important features. The formula is as follows:
 (1)

x0
···
0

.. 
..
x f = x0 ⊗ Iv×v =  ...
(10)
.
. 
0

···

3841

TABLE XII
T HE PATTERN I NTERPRETATION ’ S loss pl FOR T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATIONS .
I F loss pl OF A M ODEL I S C LOSER TO 0, I TS P REDICTIONS OF THE
C ATEGORY P ROTOTYPES FOR E ACH C LASS A RE C LOSER TO THE
U NIT M ATRIX , I NDICATING T HAT I T I S THE M ORE S UITABLE
IN S TABLE S EMANTIC G ENERALIZATION

(v)

x0

At this point, we then substitute both x0 and x f into
MetaCluster to obtain the desired classification y0 ∈ R1×l and
the classification results of independent features y f ∈ Rv×l ,
as shown in eq. (11). We want that the y f of the high
importance x f should be as close as possible to y0 , so the
v×1 for each feature is calculated using eq. (12).
score s P
f ∈R
v (y f )
∈ R1×l is the base score for each class (cf. the
where
v
ybase definition in [17]). abs(·) takes absolute values for the
normalized x0 . Under this requirement, when s f is positive and
has a large absolute value, it means that the feature is effective
for y0 classification. When s f is close to 0, it means that the
feature has no effect. When s f is negative and the absolute
value is large, the feature may helpful for non-y0 classification.

TABLE XIII
(0)

loss pl

FOR

D IFFERENT

M ODELS

IN

T RAFFIC

C LASSIFICATION .

(0)
A S MALLER loss pl

S IGNIFIES T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER
E QUIPPED TO R ESIST E XTERNAL I NTERFERENCE

y0 = MetaCluster(x0 ), y f = MetaCluster(x f )
(11)
P
P
(y
)
(y
)
f
0 T
s f = abs(LN(x f ))ReLU(y f − v
)(y0 − l
)
v
l
(12)
Fig. 5 shows how much attention LIME and MetaCluster
pay to each feature. The left and right columns respectively
show the average feature importance for each category for
the 0th to 500th and the 500th to 1000th test samples. The
top, middle and bottom rows are the feature importance scores
obtained using the LIME [16] on MLP, LIME on MetaCluster
and MetaCluster itself. It can be found that compared to LIME,
the method in this paper is able to obtain a more obvious and
stable level of feature attention, as well as a more obvious
differentiation of features in different classes. It shows that
the feature explanation of MetaCluster is stable and obvious.
3) Pattern Interpretation: Since a statistical feature dataset
was chosen, it is assumed that the features of each classification obey a polynomial normal distribution. The expectation
of the distribution, i.e., the average of the features of each
sample, is considered as the “average feature prototype” xY
for each classification. Bringing this feature prototype into the
model prediction yields the degree of model fitness for each
class of features. The closer the prediction is to a unit matrix,
the more robust and reliable the model is.
Table XII shows the loss pl profile of the traffic. The smaller
the loss pl , the more the model is able to correspond the
average features from the normal distribution to the malicious
categorized species. In this case, MetaCluster unsurprisingly
obtains relatively small results, demonstrating the ability to
understand standard semantics.
(0)
From Table XIII, it can be seen that MetaCluster’s loss pl
is the closest to 0 when predicting null semantics. indicating
that MetaCluster can resist the noise effect well.

V. C ONCLUSION
Addressing the need for a universal, stable, convenient,
and efficient interpretable framework in cybersecurity, this
paper introduces MetaCluster, a generic classification interpreter framework based on prototype semantic aggregation.
MetaCluster filters, combines, and expresses classification
semantics by generating feature prototypes at different granularity levels and constructing dynamic graph learning layers.
We validate the applicability of MetaCluster to multiple interpretable classification tasks through three sets of experiments:
malware, ATT&CK, and malicious traffic classification.
According to the experimental results, MetaCluster outperforms other deep learning models by achieving more accurate,
stable, and explanatory classification predictions with lower
time and space consumption. Specifically, in the classifications
of malware, attack tactics, attack techniques, and malicious
traffic, MetaCluster improves F1 values by 0.0148, 0.0275,
0.0023, and −0.0093, reduces parameter count consumption
by 91.78%, 88.54%, 79.52%, and 88.57%, and increases operation speed by 0.0%, 64.00%, 71.37%, and 0.0%, respectively.
Additionally, MetaCluster can provide the importance of
image, text, and statistical features, and it effectively resists
noise interference on classification. On the malware, the tactics, and the traffic dataset, the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of
prediction and expectation for the standard category prototypes
is reduced by an average of 0.0099, 0.1020, and 0.0903,
respectively. And the MSE on non-semantic predictions is
reduced by 0.0157, 0.0872, and 0.0101.

3842

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

In summary, MetaCluster is a self-interpreting lightweight
classification model designed to offer interpretation and stability testing for various cybersecurity tasks. It is well-suited
for deployment in low-reliability cyberattack scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1] Fortinet. (Nov. 2023). Cyber Threat Predictions for 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.fortinet.com/content/dam/fortinet/assets/whitepapers/wp-threat-prediction-2023.pdf
[2] J. Zhao, M. Shao, H. Wang, X. Yu, B. Li, and X. Liu, “Cyber threat
prediction using dynamic heterogeneous graph learning,” KnowledgeBased Syst., vol. 240, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 108086.
[3] N. Sun et al., “Cyber threat intelligence mining for proactive cybersecurity defense: A survey and new perspectives,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1748–1774, 3rd Quart., 2023.
[4] B. Tang et al., “Advanced persistent threat intelligent profiling technique:
A survey,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 103, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 108261.
[5] D. Li, Q. Li, Y. Ye, and S. Xu, “Arms race in adversarial malware
detection: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 1–35,
Nov. 2021.
[6] Y. Jakhotiya, H. Patil, J. Rawlani, and D. S. B. Mane, “Adversarial attacks on transformers-based malware detectors,” 2022,
arXiv:2210.00008.
[7] Y. Du, B. Prebot, X. Xi, and C. Gonzalez, “A cyber-war between bots:
Human-like attackers are more challenging for defenders than deterministic attackers,” in Proc. Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., 2023,
pp. 856–865.
[8] M. Beechey, K. G. Kyriakopoulos, and S. Lambotharan, “Evidential
classification and feature selection for cyber-threat hunting,” KnowledgeBased Syst., vol. 226, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 107120.
[9] M. M. Alani and A. I. Awad, “PAIRED: An explainable lightweight
Android malware detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 73214–73228, 2022.
[10] M. Kinkead, S. Millar, N. McLaughlin, and P. O’Kane, “Towards
explainable CNNs for Android malware detection,” Proc. Comput. Sci.,
vol. 184, pp. 959–965, 2021.
[11] J. C. S. Reis, A. Correia, F. Murai, A. Veloso, and F. Benevenuto,
“Explainable machine learning for fake news detection,” in Proc. 10th
ACM Conf. Web Sci. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2019, pp. 17–26.
[12] H. Suryotrisongko, Y. Musashi, A. Tsuneda, and K. Sugitani, “Robust
botnet DGA detection: Blending XAI and OSINT for cyber threat
intelligence sharing,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 34613–34624, 2022.
[13] I. Psychoula, A. Gutmann, P. Mainali, S. H. Lee, P. Dunphy, and
F. Petitcolas, “Explainable machine learning for fraud detection,” Computer, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 49–59, Oct. 2021.
[14] P. R. G. Hernandes et al., “Phishing detection using URL-based XAI
techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Series Comput. Intell. (SSCI), 2021,
pp. 1–6.
[15] Z. A. E. Houda, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “‘Why should i trust your
IDS?’: An explainable deep learning framework for intrusion detection
systems in Internet of Things networks,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc.,
vol. 3, pp. 1164–1176, 2022.
[16] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?’:
Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining. New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[17] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Red Hook,
NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2017, pp. 4768–4777.
[18] B. Mittelstadt, C. Russell, and S. Wachter, “Explaining explanations
in AI,” in Proc. Conf. Fairness, Accountability, Transparency. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Jan. 2019,
pp. 279–288.
[19] C. Rudin, “Stop explaining black box machine learning models for
high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead,” Nature
Mach. Intell., vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 206–215, May 2019.
[20] W. Ge, J. Wang, T. Lin, B. Tang, and X. Li, “Explainable cyber
threat behavior identification based on self-adversarial topic generation,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 132, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 103369.
[21] S. Islam et al., “A comprehensive survey on applications of transformers for deep learning tasks,” Exp. Syst. Appl., vol. 241, May 2024,
Art. no. 122666.

[22] S. Kim, J. Nam, and B. C. Ko, “ViT-NeT: Interpretable vision transformers with neural tree decoder,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
vol. 162, K. Chaudhuri, S. Jegelka, L. Song, C. Szepesvari, G. Niu, and
S. Sabato, Eds. Jul. 2022, pp. 11162–11172.
[23] F. Ullah, A. Alsirhani, M. M. Alshahrani, A. Alomari, H. Naeem, and
S. A. Shah, “Explainable malware detection system using transformersbased transfer learning and multi-model visual representation,” Sensors,
vol. 22, no. 18, p. 6766, Sep. 2022.
[24] M. Q. Li, B. C. M. Fung, P. Charland, and S. H. H. Ding, “I-MAD: Interpretable malware detector using galaxy transformer,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 108, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102371.
[25] W. Ge and J. Wang, “SeqMask: Behavior extraction over cyber threat
intelligence via multi-instance learning,” Comput. J., vol. 67, no. 1,
pp. 253–273, Jan. 2024.
[26] C. Liu, J. Wang, and X. Chen, “Threat intelligence ATT&CK extraction based on the attention transformer hierarchical recurrent neural
network,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 122, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 108826.
[27] T. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds. Red Hook, NY,
USA: Curran Associates, 2020, pp. 1877–1901.
[28] Z. Du et al., “GLM: General language model pretraining with autoregressive blank infilling,” in Proc. 60th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics. Dublin, Ireland: Association for Computational Linguistics,
May 2022, pp. 320–335.
[29] B. Mahbooba, M. Timilsina, R. Sahal, and M. Serrano, “Explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) to enhance trust management in intrusion
detection systems using decision tree model,” Complexity, vol. 2021,
pp. 1–11, Jan. 2021.
[30] S. Wang et al., “TrafficAV: An effective and explainable detection of
mobile malware behavior using network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[31] Y. Yang, I. G. Morillo, and T. M. Hospedales, “Deep neural decision
trees,” 2018, arXiv:1806.06988.
[32] H. Asad and I. Gashi, “Dynamical analysis of diversity in rule-based
open source network intrusion detection systems,” Empirical Softw. Eng.,
vol. 27, no. 1, p. 4, Jan. 2022.
[33] S. Guruprasad and R. D’Souza, “Development of an evolutionary
framework for autonomous rule creation for intrusion detection,” in Proc.
IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. (IACC), Feb. 2016, pp. 534–538.
[34] N. Fallahi, A. Sami, and M. Tajbakhsh, “Automated flow-based rule
generation for network intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 24th
Iranian Conf. Electr. Eng. (ICEE), May 2016, pp. 1948–1953.
[35] R. Muthuregunathan and S. R. Rajesh, “Efficient snort rule generation using evolutionary computing for network intrusion detection,” in
Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Comput. Intell., Commun. Syst. Netw., Jul. 2009,
pp. 336–341.
[36] F. Charmet et al., “Explainable artificial intelligence for cybersecurity: A
literature survey,” Ann. Telecommun., vol. 77, pp. 789–812, Oct. 2022.
[37] M. Zolanvari, Z. Yang, K. Khan, R. Jain, and N. Meskin, “TRUST XAI:
Model-agnostic explanations for AI with a case study on IIoT security,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2967–2978, Feb. 2023.
[38] E. Tjoa and C. Guan, “A survey on explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI): Toward medical XAI,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 4793–4813, Nov. 2021.
[39] M. Al-Shouha and G. Szucs, “PIC-XAI: Post-hoc image captioning
explanation using segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Symp. Appl.
Comput. Intell. Informat. (SACI), May 2023, pp. 000033–000038.
[40] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for fewshot learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 30, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
Associates, 2017.
[41] Y. Zhang, P. Tino, A. Leonardis, and K. Tang, “A survey on neural
network interpretability,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 726–742, Oct. 2021.
[42] A. J. Myles, R. N. Feudale, Y. Liu, N. A. Woody, and S. D. Brown,
“An introduction to decision tree modeling,” J. Chemometrics, vol. 18,
no. 6, pp. 275–285, Jun. 2004.
[43] K. P. Murphy, “Naive Bayes classifiers,” Univ. Brit. Columbia, vol. 18,
no. 60, pp. 1–8, 2006.
[44] M. L. Puterman, “Chapter 8 Markov decision processes,” in Stochastic
Models (Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science),
vol. 2. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1990, pp. 331–434.

GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK

[45] F. James, “Monte Carlo theory and practice,” Rep. Prog. Phys., vol. 43,
no. 9, p. 1145, Sep. 1980.
[46] P. Barnard, N. Marchetti, and L. A. DaSilva, “Robust network intrusion
detection through explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),” IEEE Netw.
Lett., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 167–171, Sep. 2022.
[47] A. Kuppa and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Adversarial XAI methods in cybersecurity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 4924–4938, 2021.
[48] M. Verkerken et al., “A novel multi-stage approach for hierarchical
intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 3915–3929, Sep. 2023.
[49] R. Balestriero, “Neural decision trees,” 2017, arXiv:1702.07360.
[50] S. R. Bulo and P. Kontschieder, “Neural decision forests for semantic
image labelling,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2014, pp. 81–88.
[51] C. Chen, O. Li, A. Barnett, J. Su, and C. Rudin, “This looks
like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition,” 2018,
arXiv:1806.10574.
[52] M. Nauta, R. van Bree, and C. Seifert, “Neural prototype trees for
interpretable fine-grained image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 14933–14943.
[53] T. Valentine, “A unified account of the effects of distinctiveness, inversion, and race in face recognition,” Quart. J. Experim. Psychol. Sect. A,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 161–204, May 1991.
[54] B. Yuan, J. Wang, P. Wu, and X. Qing, “IoT malware classification based
on lightweight convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3770–3783, Mar. 2022.
[55] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[56] D. Arp, M. Spreitzenbarth, M. Hübner, H. Gascon, and K. Rieck,
“DREBIN: Effective and explainable detection of Android malware in
your pocket,” in Proc. NDSS, Feb. 2014, pp. 1–15.
[57] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, Z. Chen, and S. Yu, “MalPurifier: Enhancing
Android malware detection with adversarial purification against evasion
attacks,” 2023, arXiv:2312.06423.
[58] M. Hearst, S. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, and B. Scholkopf, “Support
vector machines,” IEEE Intell. Syst. Appl., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 18–28,
Aug. 1998.
[59] H. Taud and J. Mas, Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2018, pp. 451–455.
[60] K. Grosse, N. Papernot, P. Manoharan, M. Backes, and P. McDaniel,
“Adversarial examples for malware detection,” in Proc. Comput. Secur.
ESORICS, S. N. Foley, D. Gollmann, and E. Snekkenes, Eds. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 62–79.
[61] Y. Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification,”
in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP),
A. Moschitti, B. Pang, and W. Daelemans, Eds. Doha, Qatar: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Oct. 2014, pp. 1746–1751. [Online].
Available: https://aclanthology.org/D14-1181
[62] Y. You et al., “TIM: Threat context-enhanced TTP intelligence mining
on unstructured threat data,” Cybersecurity, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 3, Dec. 2022.
[63] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[64] N. Rani, B. Saha, V. Maurya, and S. K. Shukla, “TTPHunter: Automated
extraction of actionable intelligence as TTPs from narrative threat
reports,” in Proc. Australas. Comput. Sci. Week. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, Jan. 2023, pp. 126–134.
[65] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[66] X. Sun, L. Li, L. Bo, X. Wu, Y. Wei, and B. Li, “Automatic software
vulnerability classification by extracting vulnerability triggers,” J. Software, Evol. Process, vol. 36, no. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. e2508.
[67] H. Alkahtani and T. H. H. Aldhyani, “Botnet attack detection by using
CNN-LSTM model for Internet of Things applications,” Secur. Commun.
Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–23, Sep. 2021.
[68] R. Falcone and B. Lee. (Mar. 2017). The Oilrig Campaign: Attacks
on Saudi Arabian Organizations Deliver Helminth Backdoor. [Online].
Available:
https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/the-oilrig-campaignattacks-on-saudi-arabian-organizations-deliver-helminth-backdoor/

3843

Wenhan Ge received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in computer science and technology from Sichuan
University, China, where he is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree. His research interests include cyber
threat intelligence, natural language processing, and
explainable artificial intelligence.

Zeyuan Cui is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. His
research interests include cyber threat analysis,
machine learning in security contexts, and intelligent
decision-making.

Junfeng Wang received the M.S. degree in
computer application technology from Chongqing
University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Chongqing, in 2001, and the Ph.D. degree in
computer science from the University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
in 2004. From July 2004 to August 2006, he was
a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Institute of
Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Since
August 2006, he has been a Professor with the
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
His recent research interests include network and information security, spatial
information networks, and data mining. He serves as an associate editor for
several international journals.

Binhui Tang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Sichuan University. She is an Associate Professor
with Chengdu Jincheng College. Her recent research
interests include APT analysis, cyber threat intelligence mining, cyber-space attacks, and defensive
confrontation.

Xiaohui Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the College
of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively. She is currently a Teacher with the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research
interests include network and information security,
such as wireless networks, satellite networks, the
Internet of Things, and cyber threat intelligence,
with an emphasis on the design of efficient transport protocols, routing protocols, and intelligence
analysis.