2460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

M ETA ROCK ETC: Adaptive Encrypted Traffic
Classification in Complex Network Environments
via Time Series Analysis and Meta-Learning
Jianjin Zhao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Qi Li , Yueping Hong , and Meng Shen , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Encrypted Traffic Classification (ETC) is crucial
for network security management and Quality of Service (QoS)
improvement. There have been many attempts to tackle various ETC tasks, however, which generally suffer from task
dependency and limited adaptability, falling short of meeting practical requirements. Under the realistic assumptions of
complex network environments, diverse encryption techniques
and ever-changing application landscapes coexist. It is highly
desirable to learn the generic encrypted traffic representations
to investigate the common knowledge across different ETC tasks
and rapidly adapt to the dynamic shifts. To fill the gap, we
propose M ETA ROCK ETC, a generic encrypted traffic classification framework, which extracts protocol-agnostic features to
learn the common knowledge and rapidly adapt to novel ETC
tasks and evolving network environments. In M ETA ROCK ETC,
we first model packet length sequences of encrypted sessions
as multivariate time series and perform random convolution
kernel transformations to summarize discriminatory behavioral
patterns across channels. By integrating M ETA ROCK ETC into
an advanced Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) framework, we learn a task-adaptive loss function to facilitate better
generalization and transferability across diverse ETC tasks.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of
M ETA ROCK ETC in both across-task and few-shot scenarios,
highlighting its potential to provide a practical solution for
encrypted traffic classification in real-world scenarios.
Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, time series analysis, meta-learning.

Manuscript received 29 May 2023; revised 28 October 2023; accepted
23 December 2023. Date of publication 5 January 2024; date of current
version 15 April 2024. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62172055, 61972039 and
U20B2045; in part by the China National Funds for Excellent Young Scientists
under Grant 62222201; in part by the Beijing Nova Program under Grants
Z201100006820006 and 20220484174; in part by the Beijing Natural Science
Foundation under Grants M23020, L222098 and 7232041; in part by the
National Defense Basic Scientific Research Program of China under Grant
JCKY2021602B002; in part by the Ningxia Natural Science Foundation under
Grant 2022AAC03620; and in part by the BUPT Scientific and Technological
Innovation Capacity Improvement Project under Grant 2021XD-A09. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for
publication was Y. Diao. (Corresponding author: Qi Li.)
Jianjin Zhao, Qi Li, and Yueping Hong are with the School of Cyberspace
Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China (e-mail: jianjinzhao@bupt.edu.cn; liqi2001@bupt.edu.cn;
hongyp@bupt.edu.cn).
Meng Shen is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: shenmeng@
bit.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3350080

I. I NTRODUCTION
S ONE of the most defining features of modern networks,
the extensive deployment of encryption mechanisms in
network communications plays a crucial role in preserving
user privacy and ensuring data integrity. According to the
Google Transparency Report [1], over 98% webpages were
loaded over HTTPS in Chrome by platform in 2022. Yet,
the proliferation of encrypted traffic brings great challenges
to network traffic analysis, unveiling severe security concerns
for potential hidden threats. Encrypted Traffic Classification
(ETC), holding great significance for network security management and Quality of Service (QoS) improvement, and
serving as a preliminary step in threat identification, has
emerged as a critical area of interest for both industry and
academia.
Meanwhile, there have been many attempts to address
diverse ETC tasks (e.g., application classification, threat
detection, device identification and website fingerprinting), achieving considerable progresses. For instance,
Pham et al. [2] derive aggregated, temporal, statistical and
categorical features to model the communication behaviors
for mobile application classification. Fu et al. [3] aim to
detect malicious traffic encrypted by TLS protocol and extract
key information from TLS handshake messages such as
TLS version and cipher suites. Sivanathan et al. [4] extract
extensive statistical features and protocol-related features
(e.g., DNS, NTP and TLS) to distinguish IoT devices.
Wang et al. [5] leverage adversarial domain adaptation to
fingerprint websites over few traffic. An emerging trend of
ETC solutions appears to be more generic to handle different
ETC tasks. Meng et al. [6] make an initial trial to learn
general packet representation for diverse ETC tasks utilizing
both encrypted and unencrypted data.
Unfortunately, prevalent research falls short in addressing
the complexities inherent to practical network environments.
Under realistic network assumption for encrypted traffic classification, diverse encryption techniques cater to different
applications, raising the question: How to devise generic
traffic representation for multiple ETC tasks? Moreover, with
the continuous evolution of the network landscape, security
solutions deployed ought to be adaptable to the corresponding
dynamic shifts. In this context, we define complex network
environments as those characterized by the coexistence of
diverse encryption techniques and ever-changing application

A

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

landscapes. Previous studies generally share two common
deficiencies in the face of complex network environments: (1)
current features are often either overly excessive [4], [7] or
protocol-dependent [8], [9], limiting their effectiveness against
various encryption techniques (e.g., VPN, Tor and SSL/TLS);
and (2) the model abilities are restricted to specific datasets
or tasks [10], requiring frequent time-consuming retraining to
tackle environment and task shift in practical applications.
To overcome the limitations and provide a practical solution
for encrypted traffic classification, in this paper, we aim
to extract protocol-agnostic features from encrypted sessions
with minimal computational cost and develop a generic ETC
framework with the ability to rapidly adapt to unknown
tasks and evolving environments. We are motivated by recent
advances in time series analysis [11], [12], [13] and metalearning [14], [15], [16]. The per-packet feature sequences of
encrypted sessions are naturally time series data. Also, metalearning technique can enable models to rapidly adapt to novel
tasks. To this end, we model per-packet feature sequences as
multivariate time series and perform time series analysis to
efficiently summarize sequential information for subsequent
ETC tasks. Then we follow Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
(MAML), a meta-learning framework, to learn a task-adaptive
loss function, achieving better generalization across diverse
ETC tasks.
Formally, we propose a generic encrypted traffic classification framework, namely M ETA ROCK ETC, aimed at
learning generic knowledge from different ETC tasks to
build internal representation for encrypted sessions that are
broadly suitable to tackle complex network environments.
Specifically, we first extract packet length sequences from
encrypted sessions and extend them as multivariate time
series to enrich the representations. Then we perform random
convolution kernel transformations on the multivariate time
series by random channel sampling and summation operations
to capture discriminatory behavioral patterns. To achieve better
generalization, we build two meta-networks to learn a taskadaptive loss function during inner-loop optimization in the
MAML manner. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
the superiority of M ETA ROCK ETC in both across-task and
few-shot scenarios.
In sum, the main contributions of this paper are summarized
as follows:
• We enrich simple per-packet features (i.e., packet lengths
and directions) as multivariate time series. Through
random convolution kernel transformations, we effectively summarize the discriminatory behavioral patterns
of encrypted traffic across different channels.
• We present a novel meta-learning framework to derive
generic encrypted traffic representations. By designing
a task-adaptive loss function, we investigate common
knowledge across diverse ETC tasks and facilitate fast
adaptation in complex network environments to satisfy
the practical requirements.
• We develop a generic encrypted traffic classification
framework, namely M ETA ROCK ETC, and comprehensively evaluate it on various datasets and scenarios.

2461

Extensive experimental results demonstrate the superiority of M ETA ROCK ETC in both across-task and few-shot
scenarios.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the related work is reviewed. In Section III, the
preliminaries of our work is introduced. In Section IV, our
proposed M ETA ROCK ETC is presented. The performance
evaluations of M ETA ROCK ETC are provided in Section V.
The limitations and potential future directions are discussed
in Section VI. Finally, we conclude in Section VII.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we review the relevant studies in the
following three aspects: encrypted traffic classification, time
series classification and meta-learning.
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification
Encrypted traffic classification, aiming to classify the category of encrypted traffic from various applications, services or
devices, is a crucial technique in network security management
and QoS improvement. We briefly review those that are closely
related to our work, which can be roughly divided into five
categories according to analysis goals.
1) Application Classification: Mobile or Web application
classification is crucial in traffic engineering. In this context, Taylor et al. [17] present APPS CANNER to fingerprint
mobile applications from encrypted traffic. This approach
derives 54 statistical features (e.g., minimum, maximum,
mean and variance) per network flow and employ a Random
Forest classifier for application classification. Liu et al. [18]
propose FS-N ET, an end-to-end ETC model following a multilayer encoder-decoder structure. FS-N ET learns sequential
features from raw flow sequences (e.g., packet length and
message type). Shen et al. [19] develop a Graph Neural
Network (GNN)-based ETC model, namely G RAPH DAPP.
This model represents packet length sequences as Traffic
Interaction Graphs (TIGs), and employs graph classification
to identify decentralized applications. Xu et al. [10] propose
ETC-PS, which models packet length sequences of encrypted
sessions as traffic paths and extracts path signature features for
classification. The efficacy of ETC-PS has been demonstrated
in various ETC tasks (e.g., HTTPS, VPN and Tor traffic
classification).
2) Threat Detection: Early-stage studies on threat detection
primarily focus on SSL/TLS traffic. Anderson et al. [8],
[20], [21] first propose extracting features from unencrypted
handshake messages for encrypted malicious traffic detection.
This pioneering work has since served as a foundation for
subsequent investigations. Zhao et al. [9] construct encrypted
traffic graph to model the behavior similarities and service correlations among encrypted sessions, and employ an improved
Graph Attention Network (GAT) to characterize the reliability
and stability of encrypted sessions for threat detection in
SSL/TLS traffic. Fu et al. [22], [23] present W HISPER, a realtime malicious traffic detection system by frequency domain
analysis. Notably, the features employed in W HISPER are not

2462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE I
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR W ORK AND THE E XISTING S TUDIES

confined to specific protocols, rendering it more versatile.
W HISPER has achieved satisfactory detection accuracy and
efficiency across a range of datasets.
3) Device Identification: Network devices, typically IoT
devices, are mass deployed in contemporary era. It is necessary for network administrators to be aware of connected
IoT devices and monitor corresponding network behaviors.
Sivanathan et al. [4] extract extensive features, including
volume and time distribution, DNS and NTP queries and
cipher suites in SSL/TLS handshake messages to distinguish
the network behaviors of various IoT devices. Duan et al. [24]
form the frequency distribution of unique packet lengths as
features and utilize k-NN algorithm for IoT device identification. Kostas et al. [7] propose I OTD EV ID, which integrates
feature selection techniques and a genetic algorithm to rigorously select features, achieving high identification accuracy of
IoT devices at packet level. Zhao et al. [25] consider simple
per-packet features and design a shuffle&split organization
scheme to tackle the data imbalance problem in IoT environment and perform time series analysis to realize efficient IoT
device identification.
4) Website Fingerprinting: Website fingerprinting poses
a significant threat by potentially exposing the sensitive
information regarding users’ browsing behaviors within
encrypted traffic. Rimmer et al. [26] conduct a comprehensive
exploration of deep learning techniques to learning traffic
patterns for website fingerprinting. Sirinam et al. [27] leverage
a robust architecture of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
to perform website fingerprinting attacks against defenses.
Shen et al. [28] extract distinctive block, sequence and
statistical features for efficient fine-grained website fingerprinting. Sirinam et al. [29] propose to utilize triplet networks
for N-shot learning in website fingerprinting to tackle the
adverse effects of realistic scenarios. Wang et al. [5] further
perform website fingerprinting over few encrypted traffic
by leveraging adversarial domain adaptation to be more
practical.
5) Generic: There have been several efforts not limited to
specific ETC tasks but aiming to learn common knowledge
with great generalization potential. Meng et al. [6] introduce a novel contrastive learning paradigm to derive generic
packet representation for various traffic classification tasks.
Guarino et al. [30] delve into meta-learning, transfer learning
and contrastive learning to foster better representation learning

in encrypted traffic analysis. Shen et al. [31] present a comprehensive survey on machine learning-based encrypted traffic
analysis, highlighting the prevailing challenge of achieving
generalization and transferability. Due to network heterogeneity, parameter variation and temporal drift, it is highly desirable
that the classifier can be flexibly transferred to different
datasets and tasks.
Unfortunately, a common limitation of many existing studies is that the extracted features are often too complex and
protocol-dependent, rendering them unable to tackle different
encryption techniques. While some studies utilize generic
features and evaluate model performance on different ETC
tasks, they typically retrain the model on different datasets,
which is really resource-consuming and impractical in realworld environments.
To intuitively present the superiority of our work, we
map the key differences in Table I. Specifically, we take
advantages of time series analysis and meta-learning to
develop M ETA ROCK ETC, a generic encrypted traffic classification framework that achieves exceptional generalization
across various ETC tasks. Rather than frequently retraining,
M ETA ROCK ETC learns common knowledge from different
ETC tasks and can rapidly adapt to unknown ETC tasks and
evolving environments, providing a more practical solution for
encrypted traffic classification.

B. Time Series Classification
Time series data, which consists of quantitative values
arranged in chronological order, is ubiquitous across various
domains. Numerous studies have focused on Time Series
Classification (TSC) problems by analyzing ordered attributes.
As discussed in [32], these approaches can be roughly
divided into five categories: distanced-based, interval-based,
shapelet-based, dictionary-based and ensemble approaches.
Distance-based approaches typically combine distance metrics
with a One Nearest Neighbor (1-NN) classifier as the baseline,
where many novel distance metrics including Dynamic Time
Warping (DTW) distance and its variants [33], [34], [35]
are proposed. Interval-based approaches [36], [37] identify
those intervals with discriminatory sub series instead of
using the whole series. Shapelets [38] denote the locationirrelevant, representative sub series for each class. Relevant

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

studies [39], [40] primarily focus on efficient shapelet discovery. Dictionary-based approaches count the frequencies
of repetitive sub series to distinguish time series. Ensemble
approaches [41] integrate multiple types of the above models
to achieve better performance. In addition to these studies, ROCKET [11] and its variants M INI ROCKET [12] and
M ULTI ROCKET [13] have emerged as revolutionary TSC
models for their high overall accuracy and remarkably fast
training time. In this work, we utilize the multivariate variant
of M ULTI ROCKET to capture the discriminatory behavioral
patterns of encrypted sessions.

2463

TABLE II
N OTATIONS IN T HIS PAPER

C. Meta-Learning
Meta-learning, or learning to learn, has emerged as a
prominent solution for learning common prior knowledge
across tasks and facilitating rapid adaptation to new tasks,
which has achieved considerable success in the realm of fewshot learning applications. One such technique, recognized
for its simplicity and state-of-the-art performance, is ModelAgnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) [14]. MAML aims to learn
good initialization parameters for the base model such that
after applying a small number of gradient steps with respect
to the support set, the adapted model can achieve strong generalization performance on the query set. MAML is a simple
yet elegant optimization-based meta-learning framework that
can be integrated with any gradient-based models. Subsequent
works have built on the foundation of vanilla MAML, proposing a series of improvements to achieve better generalization.
Antoniou et al. [15] propose various modifications on MAML
to improve the stability, generalization performance, convergence speed and computational overhead. Baik et al. [42], [43]
further enhance the fast adaptation of MAML by learning
adaptive hyper-parameters or loss function. In this work, we
resort to an advanced MAML framework by learning taskadaptive loss functions for the backbone neural networks to
acquire generic knowledge across various ETC tasks. This
work is designed to be generic and capable of rapidly adapting
to unknown ETC tasks and dynamic environments.
III. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we present the task definition in general
meta-learning algorithms, briefly introduce MAML, one of the
most popular optimization-based meta-learning approach, and
provide the problem formulation of our work in detail. The
notations used in this paper are summarized in Table II.
A. Task Definition
Meta-learning algorithms typically assume a distribution of
tasks, denoted as p(T ), from which a collection of tasks
{Ti }T
i=1 is sampled. Each task Ti consists of a support set
DiS for the base model to obtain task-specific knowledge
Q
and a query set Di for the adapted model to evaluate the
generalization performance. Both the support set and the query
set comprise pairs of inputs and outputs: DiS = {(xis , yis )}K
s=1
and DiQ = {(xiq , yiq )}M
.
q=1

For a more rigorous evaluation of meta-learning models,
all tasks are split into two distinct sets: the meta-training set
and the meta-testing set. It should be noted that both the two
sets do not share any tasks. Meta-learning models acquire the
ability of adapting to new tasks during the meta-training phase
and evaluate their generalization performance during the metatesting phase.
B. Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning
As perhaps the most popular optimization-based metalearning algorithm, MAML has achieved remarkable success
across diverse learning problems. Its objective is to learn
good initialization parameters for the base model, enabling the
adapted model to perform well on new tasks after only a few
gradient updates on a few-shot dataset.
Formally, MAML takes a network fθ with parameters θ
as the base model. It adopts bi-level optimization framework
including inner-loop and outer-loop optimizations to learn the
best initialization for the base model.
Inner-loop Optimization: Given task Ti and its associate
support set DiS , the base model is fine-tuned using its initial
weights θ. This task-specific tuning involves a fixed number
of updates via gradient descent. Specifically, each task undergoes J inner-loop updates in total. At step j, the inner-loop
optimization is denoted as:


θi,j +1 = θi,j − α∇θi,j L DiS ; θi,j ,

(1)

where θi,0 /θ denotes the initial model weights, α denotes the
inner-loop learning rate and L(DiS ; θi,j ) is the loss on the
support set DiS after j updates. Once J inner-loop optimization
steps are completed, we obtain task-specific weights θi /θi,J
for each task Ti .
Outer-loop Optimization: Given task Ti and its associate
query set DiQ , the initialization parameters θ are evaluated
using the task-specific parameters θi on the unseen query set.
The outer-loop update serves as the feedback for updating the
initialization weights θ, facilitating the model to learn a better
initialization that can generalize across various tasks, which is

2464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 1. The overall framework of M ETA ROCK ETC: (a) Highly Efficient Packet Analyzer; (b) Multivariate Time Series Generator; (c) Random Convolution
Kernel Transformer; (d) Task-adaptive Meta-classifier.

denoted as:
  Q 
θ ← θ − β∇θ
L Di ; θ i ,

(2)

Ti

where β denotes the outer-loop learning rate and L(DiQ ; θi )
Q
is the loss on the query set Di with task-specific weight θi .
C. Problem Formulation
In this paper, we aim to investigate common encrypted
traffic representation that are broadly suitable to various ETC
tasks and can rapidly adapt to the dynamic shift in complex
network environments. Under realistic network assumptions,
ETC models may severely degrade due to network heterogeneity, parameter variations and temporal drift, necessitating
frequent and resource-intensive model retraining to meet
practical needs.
Meta-learning has recently emerged as a promising
approach to enable model to learn common prior knowledge
shared across tasks and rapidly generalize to novel tasks
under few-shot regime. We consider utilizing meta-learning to
develop a generic and practical ETC solution that not only
generalizes well to unknown ETC tasks, but also rapidly adapts
to the evolving network environments.
Our proposed solution, namely M ETA ROCK ETC should
exhibit proficiency in both across-task and few-shot scenarios.
In across-task evaluation, M ETA ROCK ETC extracts common
knowledge from ETC task A using meta-learning, and then
transfers the extracted knowledge to ETC task B. The transferability to unknown ETC tasks can be evaluated by performance
comparison under different label rates. In few-shot evaluation,
M ETA ROCK ETC is directly assessed on specific ETC tasks in

N-way k-shot settings to evaluate the performance in few-shot
regime.
To achieve this, we consider protocol-agnostic per-packet
features of encrypted sessions as natural time series data. We
utilize random convolution transformations to extract multiscale communication patterns as raw features, which requires
no training process and is highly efficient. Then we follow
an improved MAML framework to learn task-adaptive loss
function to learn genetic representations investigating common
knowledge and enabling rapid adaptation to unknown ETC
tasks.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Framework Overview
In this section, we present our generic encrypted traffic
classification framework, M ETA ROCK ETC. M ETA ROCK ETC
first extracts per-packet feature sequences and extends these
sequences to generate multivariate time series. Then it performs a series of random convolution kernel transformations
to capture the local and global sequential information of the
multivariate time series from the ordered packets. To tackle the
complex and time-evolving network environments, we design
a task-adaptive meta-classifier to achieve better generalization
and transferability across various ETC tasks. The performance
of M ETA ROCK ETC is evaluated in across-task and few-shot
scenarios. As illustrated in Fig. 1, M ETA ROCK ETC can be
mainly divided into the following four modules.
Highly Efficient Packet Analyzer processes high-speed
network traffic in complex network environments, aggregates packets into sessions and extracts per-packet feature
sequences. As a generic encrypted traffic classification framework, M ETA ROCK ETC is not restricted to specific encryption

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

protocols. To improve the efficiency and versatility of
M ETA ROCK ETC, the packet analyzer does not extracts any
features related to the application layer. In this work, we only
extract the bidirectional packet lengths as per-packet features.
Multivariate Time Series Generator extends per-packet
feature sequences by several transformations including
uplink/downlink-only packet reservation and cumulative sum
calculation, to obtain supplementary information and reveal
the underlying dynamics of network behaviors. These extended
feature sequences are modeled as multivariate time series for
subsequent transformations. The details of the multivariate
time series generator are presented in Section IV-B.
Random Convolution Kernel Transformer first generates
a collection of kernels with parameters initialized in a deterministic way, and then performs convolution operations. For
multivariate time series, the channels are randomly selected
per kernel during convolution operation and the results are
summed up to form the final convolution output. To capture the
discriminatory behavioral patterns of encrypted sessions, each
convolution output is summarized with four pooling operators.
We will comprehensively elaborate on the random convolution
kernel transformations in Section IV-C.
Task-adaptive Meta-classifier integrates a learnable loss
function into the inner-loop optimization in MAML. It builds
two meta-learners to perceive the state of the specific task,
where one meta-learner for learning a loss function and
the other for generating affine transformation parameters to
transform the learnable loss function to be task-adaptive.
During fine-tuning phase, a transfer learning technique namely
freezing is utilized to facilitate rapid adaptation. Following the
improved MAML framework, M ETA ROCK ETC learns common knowledge from different ETC tasks to build the internal
representation that are broadly suitable to tackle complex
network environments. The details of the task-adaptive metaclassifier are described in Section IV-D.

B. Multivariate Time Series Generator
The per-packet feature sequences of encrypted sessions
are naturally time-dependent variables, therefore, we acquire
them from the highly efficient packet analyzer and model
them as time series data. Moreover, existing studies [10] have
demonstrated that the raw feature sequences are insufficient to
achieve accurate encrypted traffic classification and proposed
some tricks (e.g., cumulative sum calculation and unidirectional packet reservation) to enrich feature sequences. In this
work, we also perform some transformations to enrich the
feature sequences and models them as multivariate time series.
Specifically, we reserve the first N packets for each
encrypted session and extract packet length sequence as
univariate time series. Then we reserve uplink and downlink
packets respectively and calculate their cumulative sums of
packet length sequences as multivariate time series to enrich
the expressive power. In each encrypted session, the lengths
of uplink and downlink packets are respectively set as positive
(+) and negative (−) to indicate the directions. Given the
original packet length sequence X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN }, the

2465

uplink/downlink-only packet length sequences (U /D) are
denoted as:

xi xi > 0
(3)
U = {u1 , u2 , . . . , uN }, ui =
0 xi ≤ 0
and


D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dN }, di =

0 xi > 0
xi xi ≤ 0,

(4)

where the packet lengths in opposite directions are set to zero.
With the original X, uplink-only U and downlink-only D,
we then calculate their corresponding cumulative sums X  , U 
and D  respectively by:
X




= CS(X ) = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN
}, xi =

i



U  = CS(U ) = {u1 , u2 , . . . , uN
}, ui =

D  = CS(D) = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dN
}, di =

xj ,

j =1
i

j =1
i


(5)

uj ,

(6)

dj ,

(7)

j =1

where the function CS(·) is to calculate the cumulative
sum of given packet length sequences, shedding light on
the specific payloads of content delivery or communication
patterns associated with particular websites or services.
In this way, we transform the original univariate time series
X into multivariate time series Y = [X ; U ; D; X  ; U  ; D  ]
for subsequent analysis. Here we take ISCX-VPN dataset as
an example and randomly sample an encrypted session to
illustrate the interactions and corresponding transformations in
Fig. 2.
C. Random Convolution Kernel Transformer
In this module, we extract discriminatory behavioral patterns from the multivariate time series by random convolution
transformations. Specifically, we first generate a large number
of random convolution kernels, which are effective in capturing both local and global information at multiple scales.
Then we perform the transformations on the multivariate time
series in parallel. For multivariate time series, the channels are
randomly selected per kernel during calculation and the corresponding convolution output are summed up for aggregation.
Finally, we derive the features with multiple pooling operators
to summarize the convolution outputs.
1) Convolution Kernels: It has been demonstrated that
though random convolution kernels are highly effective, comparable performance can be achieved in a more deterministic
and efficient way. To this end, our M ETA ROCK ETC follows
the most-deterministic setups in [12], [13]. The details of the
convolution kernels are as follows:
• Length and Weights: Kernel length is fixed to 9, with
weights restricted to two values (−1 and 2), where
three weights have the value 2 and six weights have the
value −1. There are in total C93 = 84 fixed kernels
determined for subsequent transformations.

2466

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

An example of multivariate time series generation from ISCX-VPN dataset.

•

Dilation: To expand the receptive field during convolutions, all kernels share a fixed set of dilations in the range
{20 , . . . , 2max }, with the exponent d drawn from a
|x|-1
), where |x| is
uniform distribution U (0, max = log2 |w|-1
input length, and |w| is kernel length (i.e., 9).
• Bias: For each kernel&dilation combination, we randomly sample one multivariate time series example and
randomly select the channels to compute the convolution
outputs and sum them up as the final output, the quantiles
of which is taken as corresponding bias values.
• Padding: Padding is alternated between kernel/dilation
combinations, such that half combinations enable zero
padding and half disable.
• Stride: Stride is fixed to one to ensure every data point
of the time series is traversed.
2) Convolution Transformations: With the generated convolution kernels, we perform transformations on the
multivariate time series to extract multi-scale patterns. Given
multivariate time series Y, convolution kernel with weight W,
dilation d and bias b, and selected channels C, the convolution
operation is denoted as:
⎞
⎛
|w|−1

 × w ⎠ + b,
y 
zc,i = W ∗ yc,i = ⎝
|w|−1
j
j =0

c, i+j ×d−

2

×d

(8)
where zc,i is the convolution output Z at position i of channel
c ∈ C computed by sliding dot production.
Then we sum up the convolution output of each channel
to obtain the final convolution output of multivariate time
series as:

zc,i .
(9)
Z = {z1 , z2 , . . .}, zi =
c∈C

3) Pooling Operators: Previous studies have demonstrated
that diversity is the key to improve accuracy in time series
classification. To obtain diverse representations, multiple pooling operators are utilized to summarize the convolution outputs
from different perspectives. For each convolution output Z,
four pooling operators are applied to compute features, including Proportion of Positive Values (PPV), Mean of Positive

Values (MPV), Mean of Indices of Positive Values (MIPV)
and Longest Stretch of Positive Values (LSPV).
PPV is first introduced in ROCKET [11] and has been
demonstrated to be exceptionally effective, which flexibly
reflects the proportion of matches between the input and the
given pattern. Whether the match is strong or weak depends
on the bias value. PPV is computed using Eq. (10).
1
I(zi > 0),
n
n

PPV(Z ) =

(10)

i=1

where n in the length of convolution output Z, and I(·) is an
indicator function such that I = 1 if the condition (zi > 0) is
true, otherwise I = 0.
MPV, MIPV and LSPV are three further pooling operators
proposed in M ULTI ROCKET [13]. MPV computes the mean
of the positive values in the convolution output, similarly to
PPV, which flexibly reflects the intensity of matches between
the input and the given pattern depending on the bias value.
MPV is computed using Eq. (11).
1  +
zi ,
MPV(Z ) =
m
m

(11)

i=1

where m is the number of positive values in convolution
output Z. MIPV computes the mean of indices of positive
values, which captures the relative locations of positive values
in convolution output Z. MIPV is computed using Eq. (12).
 1
m
I zi+ if m > 0
(12)
MIPV(Z ) = m i=1
−1
otherwise,
where I (·) is a function that returns the index of zi+ in
convolution output Z. LSPV counts the length of the longest
sub-sequences of positive values in convolution output Z.
LSPV is computed using Eq. (13).
LSPV(Z ) = max [j − i | ∀i ≤ k ≤ j , zk > 0].

(13)

The four pooling operators can effectively summarize
the convolution outputs for subsequent analysis and can be
computed with a slight overhead to meet the practical requirements. Here we provide a dummy example to present the
results of the four pooling operators with different convolution
outputs as shown in Table III.

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

TABLE III
A D UMMY E XAMPLE TO P RESENT P OOLING O PERATORS W ITH
D IFFERENT C ONVOLUTION O UTPUTS

D. Task-Adaptive Meta-Classifier
1) Overview: To handle the complex network environments, where large volumes of encrypted traffic contain
diverse sessions of different categories (e.g., applications,
services and encryption protocols), task-adaptive metaclassifier leverages the meta-learning technique for learning
common knowledge across various ETC tasks as generic
encrypted traffic representations.
Following bi-level optimization framework in MAML, it
mainly comprise one base model and two meta-learners.
The base model takes the discriminatory behavioral patterns
obtained from the previous module as input and further compress these patterns into lean features for classifications. The
two meta-learners replace the traditional fixed loss function
and take tasks states as input to serve as the task-adaptive loss
function in the inner-loop optimization. Both meta-learners are
modeled using neural networks and take task states as input
to enable task-adaptive loss function, where one meta-learner
parameterized by φ serves as a learnable loss function Lφ (·),
and the other meta-learner parameterized by ψ serves as a loss
function adapter Gψ (·).
Specifically, ti,j denotes the task state for task Ti at innerloop update step j, represented by the general loss values on
support set DiS and the weights of the base model. The loss
function adapter Gψ (·) first takes task state ti,j as input and
generates parameters γ and η for updating the learnable loss
function Lφ (·) to be task-adaptive as denoted in Eq. (14).
(γ, η) = Gψ ti,j ,

(14)

where γ and η are affine transformation parameters used to
transform the learnable loss function, as denoted in Eq. (15).
φ = γφ + η.

(15)

In this way, the inner-loop update of the original MAML in
Eq. (1) is modified to incorporate task states and update the
base model as denoted in Eq. (16).
θi,j +1 = θi,j − α∇θi,j Lφ ti,j ,

(16)

Correspondingly, the outer-loop update of the original
MAML in Eq. (2) is also modified to update both the base
model and meta-learners as denoted in Eq. (17).
  Q 
L Di ; θi , (17)
(θ, φ, ψ) = (θ, φ, ψ) − β∇(θ,φ,ψ)
Ti

where the initialization parameters θ, φ and ψ of the base
model and meta-learners are optimized to encode common
prior knowledge. Moreover, task-adaptive strategy during

2467

fine-tuning phase is designed to enable the task-adaptive metaclassifier to quickly adapt to different ETC tasks. The detailed
workflow of the task-adaptive meta-classifier is illustrated in
Fig. 3.
2) Backbone Architecture: In the previous module, we
adopt M ULTI ROCKET [13] to capture the discriminatory
behavioral patterns within encrypted sessions, which employs
an ensemble of numerous random convolution kernels, offering remarkable efficiency for the elimination of training
requirements. However, the utilization of an excessive number
of random kernels may lead to high feature dimensionality and
potential redundancy. To address this issue, we employ 4-layer
MLP (denoted as 4-MLP hereafter) with Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU) activation as the base model backbone architecture for
feature encoding. Additionally, we apply batch normalization
following ReLU activation to mitigate internal co-variate shift
and enhance generalization performance.
Let h l denote the input to the l-th layer of 4-MLP, which
is parameterized by weights w and bias b. The normalization
operation is denoted by BN(·) and the ReLU activation is
denoted by ReLU(·). Consequently, the output h l+1 of the
l-th layer can be denoted as:


h l+1 = BN ReLU(wh l + b) .
(18)
3) Meta-Learner Design: To enable the meta-classifier to
achieve better generalization across various ETC tasks, we
substitute the traditional fixed loss function with a taskadaptive loss function via two meta-learners. It has been
demonstrated that learning a better loss function for the
inner-loop optimization is essential for achieving superior
generalization in MAML. The meta-learners perceive task
states to produce task-adaptive loss values on the support
set during the inner-loop optimization. The task state ti,j
is formulated as the concatenation of mean of support
set losses L(DiS ; θi,j ) and layer-wise mean of base model
weights θi,j .
Specifically, both meta-learners are modeled by 2-layer
MLP with ReLU activation and take the task state as input.
One serves as learnable loss function Lφ , returning a scalar
value as loss value, while the other serves as loss function
adapter Gψ , producing parameters to perform layer-wise affine
transformations on the loss function parameters φ. The overall training procedure of the task-adaptive meta-classifier is
outlined in Algorithm 1.
4) Task-Adaptive Strategy: During the meta-training stage,
the task-adaptive meta-classifier acquires common knowledge
from various ETC tasks, building the internal representations
that are broadly applicable to complex network environments.
Here we provide a task-adaptive strategy that employs freezing, a straightforward transfer learning technique to facilitate
rapid adaptation to new or similar ETC tasks.
More specifically, we initially take the first few layers
from the previously trained meta-classifier and freeze them to
prevent compromising the weights and damaging the contained
information during subsequent training iterations. Next, we
add some new trainable layers atop the frozen layers and
learn to transform the previous features into predictions for

2468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 3. The detailed workflow of the task-adaptive meta-classifier. During meta-training phase, following MAML framework, it acquires common prior
knowledge from ISCX-Tor dataset in 5-way k-shot setting. In the inner-loop optimization, two meta learners respectively serve as the loss function adapter and
learnable loss function to return task-adaptive loss value for updating the base model. In the outer-loop optimization, the two meta-learners and the base model
are updated according to the original loss value. During fine-tuning phase, the well-trained base model are fine-tuned on specific datasets (i.e., ISCX-VPN,
CTU, and BetterNet-HTTPS datasets) and the freezing technique is applied for rapid adaptations on new ETC tasks.

new ETC tasks. We propose freezing the initial layers for
the first few epochs of training phase, and then unfreezing
them to retrain the meta-classifier. In this way, the metaclassifier progressively adapts the previous features to new
ETC tasks, achieving significant improvements in efficiency.
Notably freezing is applicable in both across-task and few-shot
scenarios. See Section V for more details.

TABLE IV
DATASET D ESCRIPTIONS

V. E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset: To comprehensively evaluate the performance
of M ETA ROCK ETC, we select six datasets: ISCX-VPN,
ISCX-Tor, CTU, 5GAD, Google-Home, and BetterNet-HTTPS
datasets, all of which are publicly available and extensively
applied for the evaluations of various ETC tasks. Table IV
summarizes the details of these datasets.
ISCX-VPN [44] dataset is a Virtual Private Networks
(VPNs) traffic dataset, including 7 categories (i.e., Browsing,
Email, Chat, Streaming, FTP, VoIP and P2P) in both VPN and
non-VPN.
ISCX-Tor [45] dataset is an Onion Router (Tor) traffic
dataset, including 7 categories (i.e., Browsing, Email, Chat,
Streaming, FTP, VoIP, P2P) in both Tor and non-Tor.

CTU [46] dataset is a HTTPS traffic dataset, including the
network traces during accessing Alexa Top 1000 websites.
5GAD [47] dataset consists of intercepted 5G network data
by a third-party attacker, including both normal and malicious
traffic. The data was generated in a simulated environment and
collected via an Internet-connected Linux machine running a
5G Core (5GC) network implemented with the open source
free5GC software.
Google-Home [48] dataset is a large-scale dataset collected
on Google Home. Using 5 automated voices rendered by
public text-to-speech APIs, Google-Home dataset consists of
150,000 traffic traces including 100 commands/classes and
1,500 traffic traces per class.

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

Algorithm 1: The Workflow of Task-Adaptive MetaClassifier
Require: Task distribution p(T )
Require: Inner-loop and outer-loop learning rates α, β
Require: Base model fθ , meta-learners Gψ , Lφ
Randomly initialize parameters θ, ψ and φ
while not done do
3
Sample a batch of tasks Ti ∼ p(T )
4
for all Ti do
5
Retrieve support set DiS = {(xis , yis )}K
s=1 , query
Q
q q M
set Di = {(xi , yi )}q=1 from Ti
6
Initialize θi,0 = θ
7
for j in number of inner-loop updates J do
8
Compute base model outputs on support set:
fθi,j (DiS ) = {fθi,j (xis )}K
s=1
9
Compute loss values on support set:
L(DiS ; θi,j ) = L(fθi,j (xis=1:K ), yis=1:K )
10
Perceive task state: ti,j = [L(DiS ; θi,j )||θi,j ]
11
Compute affine transformation parameters:
γi,j , ηi,j = Gψ (ti,j )
12
Transform loss function to be task-adaptive:
φi,j = γi,j φ + ηi,j
13
Compute task-adaptive loss values: Lφ (ti,j )
i,j
14
Perform inner-loop update on base model:
θi,j +1 = θi,j − α∇θi,j Lφ (ti,j )
i,j
15
end
16
end
17
Perform outer-loop update on base model and both
meta-learners:
(θ, φ, ψ) ← (θ, φ, ψ) − β∇(θ,φ,ψ) Ti L(DiQ ; θi,J )
18 end
1
2

BetterNet-HTTPS [49] dataset is another HTTPS traffic
dataset, including the network traces during crawling top 779
HTTPS websites via both Chrome and Firefox browsers.
We adhere strictly to the labeling scheme established
in [5], [10], [47]. For CTU and BetterNet-HTTPS datasets,
we retain only those encrypted sessions with Server Name
Indication (SNI) extension, and we use the processed hostnames (with numbers and special characters removed) as the
label of each encrypted session. For ISCX-VPN, ISCX-Tor,
5GAD, and Google-Home datasets, we assign labels based on
the filenames. However, within the browsing label category of
ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor datasets, there are traffic generated
when performing other activities such as streaming and VoIP.
To avoid ambiguity, We exclude such data in line with [10].
is
primarily
2) Implementation: M ETA ROCK ETC
developed in C++ (GCC version 11.4.0) and Python (version
3.7.10). To promote transparency and repeatability, we have
made our datasets and code public.1
To replicate real-world network conditions, we utilize tcpreplay (version 3.4.4) to playback these experimental traffic
1 https://github.com/MetaRockETC/MeTaRockETC

2469

datasets on specified interface. In highly efficient packet
analyzer, we leverage PcapPlusPlus (version 22.05), a versatile
C++ library with user-friendly APIs to perform real-time
traffic analysis and feature extraction, including capturing
packets by libpcap functionality, splitting packets by connections and parsing per-packet features within the IP layer. In the
following three modules, we leverage Pytorch [50] (version
1.4.0) to generate multivariate time series, conduct random
convolution kernel transformations, and perform task-adaptive
classifications for various ETC tasks.
3) Setup: All experiments are simulated on a DELL server
equipped with a 24-core Intel Xeon 6240R CPU @2.40GHz,
Ubuntu 20.04, 64 GB memory, and 2×NVIDIA Quadro
RTX 5000 GPUs. To ensure the robustness and generality,
the experiments are replicated 10 times to calculate the
average and standard variance of evaluation metrics. In each
experiment, we utilize ISCX-Tor dataset to establish a common prior knowledge base, and then fine-tune the model
respectively on the remaining datasets to assess the generalization and transferability from both across-task and few-shot
perspectives.
In the across-task scenario, we evaluate M ETA ROCK ETC
in both closed-world and open-world settings. In the closedworld setting, we test M ETA ROCK ETC and baseline models
when transferring to different ETC tasks under varying label
rates (i.e., 20%, 40%, and 60%). In the open-world setting, we
employ BetterNet-HTTPS dataset with many classes to distinguish encrypted sessions between monitored and unmonitored
classes, as outlined in [19].
In the few-shot scenario, all models are evaluated under
5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot settings. Specifically, for
baseline models tailored to specific ETC tasks using ML or DL
algorithms, we adapt them into the MAML framework. As for
generic ETC solutions using adversarial domain adaptation or
contrastive learning, we follow the original solutions to acquire
common knowledge and subject them to meta-testing.
In this manner, we fairly evaluate the performances of
M ETA ROCK ETC and all baseline models in both across-task
and few-shot scenarios.
B. Baseline Models
To thoroughly evaluate the generalization and transferability
of M ETA ROCK ETC, we select six state-of-the-art methods
as baseline models for comparisons. Among these, four are
tailored for specific ETC tasks (e.g., application classification
and website fingerprinting), utilizing ML or DL models. The
other two are generic ETC solutions that employ adversarial domain adaptation and contrastive learning for fast task
adaptation. It is notable that most of the selected methods are
open-source and we directly use the associated open-source
projects. For those that are not open-source, we have diligently
reproduced them, adhering to the hyper-parameter settings
detailed in the original papers. We fine-tune all baseline
models to achieve their best performance on our experimental datasets. Below is the brief overview of all baseline
models.

2470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

ETC-PS [10] is a generalized encrypted traffic classification method leveraging path signature features. It introduces
multiple transformations to enrich packet length sequences and
model them as traffic paths. Then ETC-PS extracts multi-scale
path signatures and employ traditional ML models to achieve
efficient classification. We reproduce ETC-PS based on the
original paper.
G RAPH DAPP [19] models bidirectional packet length
sequences as Traffic Interaction Graphs (TIGs) and turns
encrypted traffic classification into a graph classification
problem, where multi-layer perceptions are employed to
build a GNN-based classifier to identify decentralized applications through encrypted traffic analysis. We reproduce
G RAPH DAPP based on the original paper.
F LOW P IC [51] transforms network flows into images.
Specifically,the records of each packet (i.e., packet size, arrival
time) are mapped into 2D-histograms to be square images.
Then LeNet-5 style CNN is utilized to build encrypted traffic
classifiers. The open-source implementation of F LOW P IC is
available in [52].
FS-N ET [18] is an end-to-end model for encrypted traffic classification. It takes multi-layer bidirectional Gated
Recurrent Unit (bi-GRU) encoder and decoder to learn the representation of the flow sequence and reconstructs the original
sequence respectively. Both the encoder and decoder output are
combined for classification. The open-source implementation
of FS-N ET is available in [53].
AF [5] is a transfer learning-based website fingerprinting
technique that leverages adversarial domain adaptation over
few encrypted traffic. Specifically, it adopts a domain adversarial network architecture where a feature extractor and a domain
discriminator engage in a minimax game. The feature extractor
is attached with traditional machine learning classifiers to
facilitate practical website fingerprinting. The open-source
implementation of FS-N ET is available in [54].
PAC R EP [6] is a novel framework to learn generic packet
representation for various traffic classification tasks. PAC R EP
is optimized by contrastive loss from both positive and
negative samples to tackle both semantic and byte information
and learn the packet representations that are commonly effective in different traffic classification tasks. The open-source
implementation of FS-N ET is available in [55].

C. Across-Task Analysis
1) Closed-World Evaluation: In this subsection, we assess
the performance of M ETA ROCK ETC in the closed-world
setting under an across-task scenario. In the closed-world
setting, the classes of all encrypted sessions to be classified
are monitored and encrypted traffic classification is treated as
a general multi-class classification problem.
To validate the efficacy of M ETA ROCK ETC in facilitating fast adaptation to various ETC tasks, we compare
M ETA ROCK ETC with other baseline models using three
datasets with varying label rates (i.e., 20%, 40%, and 60%). In
this way, we can evaluate the performance of ETC solutions
with different amounts of available labeled data, enabling a

comprehensive evaluations of scalability, cost management,
and practicality within real-world applications. Specifically, we
utilize ISCX-Tor dataset to train the meta-classifier to acquire
common prior knowledge, and then fine-tune it on specific
datasets. The experimental results are summarized in Table V.
We can make the following observations.
1) Superior Performance of Generic ETC Solutions:
M ETA ROCK ETC, AF, and PAC R EP outperforms other
baseline models in most cases. These results align with
our expectations, considering that M ETA ROCK ETC,
AF, and PAC R EP are generic ETC solutions not confined
to specific tasks. They leverage common knowledge
across diverse ETC tasks, consistently exhibiting superior adaptability when transferring to unknown ETC
tasks with limited training data.
2) Technique Efficacy in Generic ETC Solutions: Notably,
M ETA ROCK ETC, employing meta-learning, AF, utilizing adversarial domain adaptation, and PAC R EP, relying
on contrastive learning, are basically the top three models. These models share a common strategy of learning a
generic feature encoder. M ETA ROCK ETC and AF share
structural similarities, where AF employs convolutional
neural networks, while M ETA ROCK ETC leverages random convolution transformations for feature encoding.
Moreover, both M ETA ROCK ETC and PAC R EP acquire
generic representations by designing specific loss functions. M ETA ROCK ETC take merits from AF, PAC R EP
and advanced time series technique (ROCKET and its
variants), achieving the best performances.
3) Exceptional Performance of Task-Specific GraphDAPP:
Among the baseline models designed for specific ETC
tasks, G RAPH DAPP is a special case, which constructs
Traffic Interaction Graphs (TIGs) with packet length
sequences and employs GNN for decentralized application classification. G RAPH DAPP surpasses generic ETC
solutions in several instances (e.g., 60% label rate on
ISCX-VPN dataset and 20% label rate on BetterNetHTTPS dataset). This exceptional performance is
attributed to the discriminative and generic nature of the
TIG representation across diverse ETC tasks.
4) Performance Variations Across Datasets: It is noteworthy that on BetterNet-HTTPS dataset with 20%
label rate, ETC-PS outperforms M ETA ROCK ETC. The
reason for the difference may be the larger number
of classes within the BetterNet-HTTPS dataset (950
classes) compared to other datasets (e.g., 12 and 59
classes). This higher class diversity may favor the path
signature representations of ETC-PS for this particular
dataset. However, as the label rate increase, these generic
ETC solutions outperform ETC-PS.
5) Performance Scaling with Label Rate: As the label rate
increases, the performances of M ETA ROCK ETC and
other baseline models improve, where F LOW P IC and
FS-N ET exhibit the most significant improvements. The
LeNet-5 style CNN of F LOW P IC and bi-GRU style
encoder and decoder of FS-N ET require substantial
amounts of labeled data. As such, their practicality in

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

2471

TABLE V
E FFECTIVENESS E VALUATION ON ISCX-VPN, CTU AND B ETTER N ET-HTTPS DATASETS

real-world environments may be limited. Furthermore,
even with enough labeled data available (i.e., 60% label
rate), M ETA ROCK ETC and the two other generic ETC
solutions still outperform these task-specific models.
This underscores the idea that the common knowledge
acquired does not affect the adaptability of models, but
enhances their ability to tackle novel ETC tasks.
2) Open-World Evaluation: In this subsection, we evaluate
the performance of M ETA ROCK ETC in the open-world setting
under an across-task scenario. In a more realistic way, the
goal of M ETA ROCK ETC is to distinguish between encrypted
sessions from monitored and unmonitored classes. In this

way, encrypted traffic classification is treated as a binary
classification problem.
Specifically, we use BetterNet-HTTPS dataset for openworld evaluation. The training part of BetterNet-HTTPS
dataset consists of 34,200 monitored encrypted sessions from
950 monitored classes and 4,750 unmonitored encrypted sessions from 500 unmonitored classes). The testing part consists
of 8,550 monitored encrypted sessions from 950 monitored
classes) and 17,641 unmonitored encrypted sessions from
819 unmonitored classes). Notably, the unmonitored encrypted
sessions in the training set are totally different from those in
testing set.

2472

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

The impact of the number of unmonitored classes in training set on TPR and FPR.
TABLE VI
5-WAY 1-S HOT AND 5-WAY 5-S HOT C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY ON THE F OUR E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS

Here we vary the number of unmonitored classes in the
training set from 50 to 500 to simulate the realistic scenario
and investigate the impact of more complex training data on
the model performance. As illustrated in Fig. 4, both the True
Positive Rate (TPR) and False Positive Rate (FPR) decrease
as the number of unmonitored classes in the training set
increases for M ETA ROCK ETC and other baseline models,
where M ETA ROCK ETC still performs best on both TPR and
FPR for 500 unmonitored classes, achieving an impressive
TPR of 84.95% and a low FPR of 2.23%. When the number of
unmonitored classes in the training set reaches 350, the TPR
and FPR of M ETA ROCK ETC stabilize as 85.04% and 2.37%
respectively.
Overall, these experimental results demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of M ETA ROCK ETC in the open-world
scenario, even when faced with an increasing number of
unmonitored classes during the training phase.

D. Few-Shot Analysis
For comprehensive evaluations in a few-shot scenario, we
compare M ETA ROCK ETC with five gradient-based baseline
models (i.e., G RAPH DAPP, F LOW P IC, FS-N ET, AF and
PAC R EP) integrated with MAML++ under two typical fewshot settings: 5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot classification.
Since there are only two classes in 5GAD dataset, we do
not use it for few-shot analysis. Given that the datasets are
organized into distinct tasks and balanced in N-way k-shot
settings, we utilize accuracy as the metric to present the
experimental results.

As presented in Table VI, M ETA ROCK ETC achieves average improvements of approximately 1.33% and 2.18% on
accuracy in 5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot settings, respectively, across four datasets. As with the experimental results
of across-task analysis, generic ETC solutions (i.e., AF and
PAC R EP) outperform other baseline models focusing on specific ETC tasks. Among these baseline models, G RAPH DAPP
achieves the best performance, which further prove that TIG
representation is effective in encrypted traffic classification
across tasks.
Additionally, though M ETA ROCK ETC does achieve the
best performances in most cases within the few-shot regime,
the improvements are not significant as expected. The reason maybe that we integrate all baseline models with
MAML++ for fair comparisons and the meta-learning techniques effectively fine-tune all baseline models, thus exhibiting
competitive performances to M ETA ROCK ETC. However, it is
noteworthy thatM ETA ROCK ETC consistently outperforms all
baseline models on all datasets in the 5-way 5-shot setting.
Overall, these results not only underscore the potential
of meta-learning in developing practical ETC solutions, but
also emphasize the superiority of M ETA ROCK ETC within the
context of few-shot ETC tasks, indicating that it is a promising
and practical solution for tackling the challenges posed by
complex network environments.
E. Efficiency Evaluation
1) Adaptation Efficiency: Here we take ISCX-VPN dataset
(20%) as an example to further demonstrate the fast adaptation
performance of M ETA ROCK ETC. As illustrated in Fig. 5,

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

Fig. 5. F1 score and loss evaluations of M ETA ROCK ETC and other baseline
models on ISCX-VPN dataset (20%) during fine-tuning phase.
TABLE VII
T IME OVERHEAD E VALUATION ON 5GAD DATASET

M ETA ROCK ETC can rapidly achieve satisfactory F1 score
and loss with a fewer number of epochs compared with
other baseline models. This nature enables M ETA ROCK ETC
to be practical to handle different ETC tasks and evolving network environments. AF and PAC R EP integrating the
common knowledge of previous ETC task also exhibit fast
adaptation ability to ISCX-VPN dataset. Moreover, we can
see that when label rate is set to 20%, the other baseline
models more or less over-fit to the training set and exhibit
poor performances on the testing set. While M ETA ROCK ETC
still achieve the best generalization performance on the testing
set as shown in Table V.
The experimental results suggest that M ETA ROCK ETC
effectively incorporates the common knowledge of different
ETC tasks, exhibiting exceptional transferability to adapt to
new ETC tasks. The reason behind these may be due to
the discriminatory patterns extracted by random convolution
transformations or the task-adaptive loss function, which
will be comprehensively discussed in Section V-F. From a
practical perspective, M ETA ROCK ETC effectively bridges the
gap between laboratory experimentation and the real-world
environments, providing an practical solution for adapting to
diverse ETC tasks.
2) Time Overhead: Considering the practical deployment
within real-world scenarios, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the time overhead associated with M ETA ROCK ETC
and two practical ETC solutions (i.e., AF and PAC R EP) in
different phases including feature extraction, model fine-tuning
and model execution. Specifically, we take 5GAD dataset for
evaluations, where 50% for model fine-tuning, and 50% for
model execution. The time overheads for all three methods are
presented in Table VII.
In a nutshell, M ETA ROCK ETC is significantly faster than
both AF and PAC R EP across all phases. Notably that AF
is originally designed for well-processed website fingerprinting datasets, we use the same preprocessing code as
M ETA ROCK ETC to process 5GAD dataset. Therefore the

2473

feature extraction times for AF and M ETA ROCK ETC are the
same.
Though M ETA ROCK ETC conducts plenty of convolution
transformations on the packet length sequences, all the transformations are executed in a parallel and independent manner.
Furthermore, the convolution kernels are deterministically
generated without training. Additionally, M ETA ROCK ETC
leverages 4-layer MLP as the base model for feature
encoding, which simple structure does not require much
computation overhead. These three factors collectively render
M ETA ROCK ETC highly efficient and applicable.
Comparatively, AF similarly relies on simple features and
a model structure similar to M ETA ROCK ETC. It utilizes
convolutional neural network as the feature extractor, which
require training. As for PAC R EP, it extracts both encrypted
and unencrypted data as text and hexadecimal bytes utilizing
the scapy library, which is time-consuming compared to
M ETA ROCK ETC and AF. It has been demonstrated that
packet lengths are effective and generic across different ETC
tasks by M ETA ROCK ETC and G RAPH DAPP.
It is worth noting that PAC R EP are implemented based
on its own open-source code. The efficiencies of the components (e.g., feature extractor) in PAC R EP can be further
optimized with PcapPlusPlus. However, even taking this factor
into account, M ETA ROCK ETC still demonstrates superior
efficiency in comparison with the two baselines.

F. Ablation Study
To further substantiate the efficacy of the innovative components, we conduct a careful ablation analysis on the key
components of M ETA ROCK ETC. Specifically, we compare the
full M ETA ROCK ETC with its three variants:
• w/o MV: w/o MV solely utilizes the original bidirectional packet length sequences as univariate time series
for subsequent analysis. Consequently, the random channel sampling and summation operation in multivariate
version of M ULTI ROCK ETC are inapplicable.
• w/o TL: w/o TL removes the two meta-learners that
serve as the task-adaptive loss function in inner-loop
optimization, instead employing a general cross-entropy
loss function in accordance with the vanilla MAML
framework.
• w/o FRZ: w/o FRZ does not incorporate the transfer
learning technique of freezing. Instead, it updates all
parameters during fine-tuning process on specific tasks.
To ensure fair comparisons, M ETA ROCK ETC and its variants are fine-tuned for an equal number of epochs. We present
the experimental results of M ETA ROCK ETC and its variants
on three datasets with 20% label rate in Table VIII. As
observed, M ETA ROCK ETC achieves the best classification
performance with remarkable stability across all tasks. The
respective average decreases of 1.74%, 5.01% and 13.29%
in macro-average F1 score for w/o MV, w/o TL and
w/o FRZ on three datasets indicate that all our proposed
improvements are both practical and effective for various ETC
tasks. Among these w/o MV exhibits the least performance

2474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE VIII
A BLATION S TUDY OF M ETA ROCK ETC ON THE F IVE E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS (20%)

decrease, suggesting that transforming bidirectional packet
length sequences from univariate and multivariate time series
results in a slight improvement. Introducing diversity can
enrich encrypted traffic representations and enhance classification performance to some extent. Furthermore, by comparing
M ETA ROCK ETC with w/o TL, we demonstrate that a simple
fixed loss function cannot generalize well across diverse
and distinct ETC tasks. Employing neural networks to fit
a task-adaptive loss function can significantly improve the
generalization and transferability. Lastly, we assess the efficacy
of the freezing technique when adapting the base model to
different ETC tasks. The performance of w/o FRZ declines
considerably. One possible explanation is that, when adapting
the base model to new tasks, the initial layers have learned
common knowledge from known ETC tasks. Without adopting
the freezing technique, the adaptation process becomes retraining, and the weights are compromised during subsequent
training iterations. In this case, fitting new ETC tasks require
a significantly larger number of training epochs, rendering
this approach impractical for real-world scenarios. Overall,
M ETA ROCK ETC surpasses all variants by integrating multivariate time series, task-adaptive loss function, and freezing
mechanism to rapidly adapt to diverse ETC tasks and evolving
network environments.
VI. D ISCUSSION
M ETA ROCK ETC exhibits strong generalization and transferability to quickly adapt to different encrypted traffic
classification tasks, yet there is still room for improvement. In this section, we discuss how to further optimize
M ETA ROCK ETC in the following four aspects.
A. Diversity
To add diversity in M ETA ROCK ETC, we perform a series of
transformations to generate multivariate time series and utilize
multiple pooling operators to summarize the convolution

outputs. Experimental results demonstrate that diversity is the
key to improve the discriminatory power of the extracted
features. In future work, we can further increase the diversity
by considering other per-packet features (e.g., inter-arrival
time and protocols) and design more pooling operators to
capture more comprehensive traffic patterns for classification.
By leveraging meta-learning, significant reductions in resource
consumption for parameter updates can be achieved, thus
eliminating concerns regarding feature dimension explosion.
B. Efficiency
We have implemented a highly efficient packet analyzer
in C++ and the remaining three modules in Python for
M ETA ROCK ETC. Although our meta-learning framework significantly reduces the need for frequent retraining, recent
advancements in Intelligent Data Plane (IDP) offer the potential to further promote the efficiency of M ETA ROCK ETC.
IDP leverages programmable switches to provides essential
hardware support, enabling the deployment of learning-based
models directly onto the network data plane. Integrating
M ETA ROCK ETC with an intelligent network data plane could
facilitate real-time intelligent traffic analysis and improve the
efficiency.
C. Scalability
Our aim is to develop a generic encrypted traffic classification framework which can acquire across-task knowledge and
rapidly adapt to unseen tasks and evolving network environments. To achieve this, M ETA ROCK ETC employs simple yet
effective features and follows a meta-learning framework, significantly reducing the burden of frequent retraining. However,
one notable inadequacy is its reliance on supervised learning,
which may not accurately reflect real-world scenarios, where
the exact number of classes is often unknown. To better
align with the realistic scenario, we can incorporate unsupervised meta-learning to further decrease data dependency and

ZHAO et al.: M ETA R OCK ETC: ADAPTIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

enhance M ETA ROCK ETC’s adaptability to complex and timeevolving environments and diverse downstream tasks.
D. Practicality
M ETA ROCK ETC provides a practical solution adaptable to
various ETC tasks. Especially, we highlight its strength in
network security analysis against dynamic threat landscapes.
The meta-learning ability of M ETA ROCK ETC facilitates
timely identification of emerging threats over limited traffic
data, allowing for rapid response. For example, IoT devices
without integrated security, are susceptible to cyber attacks.
M ETA ROCK ETC can efficiently monitor the network activities of IoT devices via encrypted traffic analysis, enabling
prompt detection and isolation of suspicious/compromised
devices and effectively prevents threat activities from the
outset. For future work, we can integrate continual learning
to develop M ETA ROCK ETC adaptively. We also see potential
in further refining its functionalities across different ETC
tasks (e.g., real-time alert for threat detection) to enhance its
practical applications.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present M ETA ROCK ETC, an innovative encrypted traffic classification framework that leverages
protocol-agnostic time series features and task-adaptive metalearning techniques to achieve better generalization across
various ETC tasks and rapidly adapt to unknown tasks and
evolving environments. By modeling packet length sequences
as multivariate time series and performing random convolution
kernel transformations, M ETA ROCK ETC effectively captures
the discriminatory behavioral patterns of encrypted traffic for
subsequent classification. We integrate the backbone network
with two meta-learners to learn task-adaptive loss functions in the MAML manner, enabling task-adaptive learning
in dynamic network environments. Extensive experimental
results have demonstrated the superiority of M ETA ROCK ETC
in both across-task and few-shot scenarios. M ETA ROCK ETC
offers a more practical and robust solution for encrypted traffic
classification in real-world network environments.
For future research, we suggest incorporating more
advanced time series analysis techniques and exploring
alternative meta-learning approaches to further enhance the
generalization performance of this framework. Additionally,
investigating the robustness of the proposed method against
adversarial attacks and integrating it with real-time network
monitoring systems could provide valuable research avenues.
R EFERENCES
[1] Google. “Google transparency report.” Accessed: May 31, 2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/
overview
[2] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong,
“MAppGraph: Mobile-App classification on encrypted network traffic
using deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proc. 37th Annu.
Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2021, pp. 1025–1038.
[3] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Def.,
2022, pp. 495–509.

2475

[4] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments
using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019.
[5] C. Wang, J. Dani, X. Li, X. Jia, and B. Wang, “Adaptive fingerprinting:
Website fingerprinting over few encrypted traffic,” in Proc. 11th ACM
Conf. Data Appl. Secur. Privacy, 2021, pp. 149–160.
[6] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Packet
representation learning for traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM
SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2022, pp. 3546–3554.
[7] K. Kostas, M. Just, and M. A. Lones, “IoTDevID: A behavior-based
device identification method for the IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
no. 23, pp. 23741–23749, Dec. 2022.
[8] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of
TLS (without decryption),” 2016, arXiv:1607.01639.
[9] J. Zhao, Q. Li, S. Liu, Y. Yang, and Y. Hong, “Towards traffic
supervision in 6G: A graph neural network-based encrypted malicious
traffic detection method,” SCIENTIA SINICA Inf., vol. 52, no. 2,
pp. 270–286, 2022. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciengine.com/
publisher/ScienceChinaPress/journal/SCIENTIASINICAInformationis/
52/2/10.1360/SSI-2021-0280
[10] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
[11] A. Dempster, F. Petitjean, and G. I. Webb, “ROCKET: Exceptionally
fast and accurate time series classification using random convolutional
kernels,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1454–1495, 2020.
[12] A. Dempster, D. F. Schmidt, and G. I. Webb, “Minirocket: A very
fast (almost) deterministic transform for time series classification,” in
Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2021,
pp. 248–257.
[13] C. W. Tan, A. Dempster, C. Bergmeir, and G. I. Webb, “MultiRocket:
Multiple pooling operators and transformations for fast and effective
time series classification,” 2022, arXiv:2102.00457.
[14] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for
fast adaptation of deep networks,” 2017, arXiv:1703.03400.
[15] A. Antoniou, H. Edwards, and A. Storkey, “How to train your
MAML,” 2019, arXiv:1810.09502.
[16] S. Baik, M. Choi, J. Choi, H. Kim, and K. M. Lee, “Learning
to learn task-adaptive hyperparameters for few-shot learning,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., early access, Mar. 24, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3261387.
[17] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), 2016,
pp. 439–454.
[18] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow
sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Commun. INFOCOM, 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[19] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[20] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Identifying encrypted malware traffic
with contextual flow data,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
2016, pp. 35–46. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
2996758.2996768
[21] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” in
Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min.,
2017, pp. 1723–1732. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
1145/3097983.3098163
[22] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.14707
[23] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
[24] C. Duan, H. Gao, G. Song, J. Yang, and Z. Wang, “ByteIoT: A practical
IoT device identification system based on packet length distribution,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1717–1728,
Jun. 2022.
[25] J. Zhao, Q. Li, J. Sun, M. Dong, K. Ota, and M. Shen, “Efficient
IoT device identification via network behavior analysis based on time
series dictionary,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Aug. 16, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3305585.

2476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

[26] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. Van Goethem, and W. Joosen,
“Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc. 25nd
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2018, pp. 1–15.
[27] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep
learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018,
pp. 1928–1943.
[28] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021.
[29] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet
fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with
n-shot learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
2019, pp. 1131–1148.
[30] I. Guarino, C. Wang, A. Finamore, A. Pescape, and D. Rossi, “Many
or few samples? comparing transfer, contrastive and meta-learning in
encrypted traffic classification,” 2023, arXiv:2305.12432.
[31] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023.
[32] A. Bagnall, A. Bostrom, J. Large, and J. Lines, “The great time series
classification bake off: An experimental evaluation of recently proposed
algorithms. extended version,” 2016, arXiv:1602.01711.
[33] M. Müller, “Dynamic time warping,” in Information Retrieval for Music
and Motion. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2007, pp. 69–84.
[34] Y.-S. Jeong, M. K. Jeong, and O. A. Omitaomu, “Weighted dynamic
time warping for time series classification,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 44,
no. 9, pp. 2231–2240, Sep. 2011. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S003132031000484X
[35] P.-F. Marteau, “Time warp edit distance with stiffness adjustment for
time series matching,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 31,
no. 2, pp. 306–318, Feb. 2009.
[36] J. Lin, R. Khade, and Y. Li, “Rotation-invariant similarity in
time series using bag-of-patterns representation,” J. Intell. Inf.
Syst., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 287–315, Oct. 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10844-012-0196-5
[37] M. G. Baydogan, G. Runger, and E. Tuv, “A bag-of-features framework
to classify time series,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 35,
no. 11, pp. 2796–2802, Nov. 2013.
[38] L. Ye and E. Keogh, “Time series shapelets: A novel technique that
allows accurate, interpretable and fast classification,” Data Min. Knowl.
Discov., vol. 22, pp. 149–182, Jan. 2011.
[39] T. Rakthanmanon and E. Keogh, “Fast shapelets: A scalable algorithm
for discovering time series shapelets,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data
Min., 2013, pp. 668–676.
[40] A. Bostrom and A. Bagnall, “Binary shapelet transform for multiclass
time series classification,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf., Big Data Anal.
Knowl. Discov., 2015, pp. 257–269.
[41] M. Middlehurst, J. Large, M. Flynn, J. Lines, A. Bostrom, and
A. Bagnall, “HIVE-COTE 2.0: A new meta ensemble for time series
classification,” 2021, arXiv:2104.07551.
[42] S. Baik, M. Choi, J. Choi, H. Kim, and K. M. Lee, “Meta-learning with
adaptive hyperparameters,” 2020, arXiv:2011.00209.
[43] S. Baik, J. Choi, H. Kim, D. Cho, J. Min, and K. M. Lee, “Metalearning with task-adaptive loss function for few-shot learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 9465–9474. [Online].
Available: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2021/html/Baik_
Meta-Learning_With_Task-Adaptive_Loss_Function_for_Few-Shot_
Learning_ICCV_2021_paper.html
[44] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy,
2016, pp. 407–414. [Online]. Available: http://www.scitepress.org/
DigitalLibrary/Link.aspx?doi=10.5220/0005740704070414
[45] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc.
ICISSp, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[46] 2015, “Stratosphere laboratory Datasets,” Stratosphere, Accessed:
Mar. 13, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.stratosphereips.org/
datasets-overview
[47] C. Coldwell et al., “Machine learning 5G attack detection in programmable logic,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
2022, pp. 1365–1370.
[48] C. Wang et al., “Fingerprinting encrypted voice traffic on smart speakers
with deep learning,” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Secur. Privacy Wireless
Mobile Netw., 2020, pp. 254–265. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.
org/doi/10.1145/3395351.3399357

[49] J. F. I. C. W. Shbair and T. Cholez, 2016, “HTTPS Websites
Dataset,” betternet. [Online]. Available: http://betternet.lhs.loria.fr/
datasets/https/
[50] A. Paszke et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. 33rd Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
pp. 1–12.
[51] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
[52] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt. “The source code of FlowPic.” 2021,
Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/talshapira/
FlowPic
[53] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li. “The source code of FSnet.” 2019, Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
WSPTTH/FS-Net
[54] C. Wang, J. Dani, X. Li, X. Jia, and B. Wang. “The source code of
AF.” 2021, Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
SmartHomePrivacyProject/AdaptiveFingerprinting
[55] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang. “The source
code of PacRep.” 2022, Accessed: Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//github.com/ict-net/PacRep
Jianjin Zhao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Eng. degree from the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, China,
in 2019, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in cyberspace security. His current research
interests include encrypted traffic analysis and audit
log analysis.

Qi Li received the Ph.D. degree in computer science
and technology from the Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2010,
where she is currently a Professor with the National
Engineering Laboratory for Mobile Network
Technologies, School of Cyberspace Security. Her
current research focuses on information system
security.

Yueping Hong received the B.Eng. degree
from the Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China, in 2021, where he is
currently pursuing the master’s degree in cyberspace
security. His current research interests include
encrypted traffic analysis and graph neural networks.

Meng Shen (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree in computer science from Shandong
University, Jinan, China, in 2009, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China in 2014. He is a
Professor with the Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing. He has authored over 50 papers in toplevel journals and conferences, such as ACM
SIGCOMM, IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS
IN C OMMUNICATIONS , and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY . His
research interests include data privacy and security, blockchain applications,
and encrypted traffic classification. He received the Best Paper RunnerUp Award at IEEE IPCCC 2014 and IEEE/ACM IWQoS 2020. He was
selected by the Beijing Nova Program 2020 and was the winner of the
ACM SIGCOMM China Rising Star Award in 2019. He has guest edited
special issues on emerging technologies for data security and privacy in IEEE
N ETWORK and IEEE I NTERNET- OF -T HINGS J OURNAL.