4518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

MLaD2: A Semi-Supervised Money Laundering
Detection Framework Based on
Decoupling Training
Xuejiao Luo , Xiaohui Han , Member, IEEE, Wenbo Zuo, Xiaoming Wu,
and Wenyin Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Money laundering (ML) poses a severe threat to
financial stability and social security. Various money laundering detection methods have emerged in the past two decades.
Among these methods, some semi-supervised ones based on graph
neural networks (GNNs) have achieved impressive performance.
However, the homogeneity hypothesis of GNN-based methods
does not fit the ML detection scenario, affecting the detection
performance. This paper presents a semi-supervised money
laundering detection framework based on decoupling training
(MLaD2 ). MLaD2 constructs a transaction relationship network
based on node similarity (TRNNS) to model account interactions.
Performing on TRNNS, MLaD2 learns the representation of
accounts using a GNN. The weighting mechanism of TRNNS
can overcome the drawback of the homogeneity hypothesis.
Based on the learned account representations, MLaD2 adopts
a decoupling training mechanism to build an ML accounts
detection model, reducing its dependence on annotated data.
The pre-training phase of the decoupling training employs a
contrastive self-supervised learning model to learn the intrinsic
characteristics of accounts. The fine-tuning phase extracts discriminative features between ML accounts and benign accounts
with labeled data. Comprehensive evaluations and comparisons
on a real-world ML dataset demonstrate that MLaD2 yields
results that surpass existing methods, especially when training
with a small scale of labeled samples.

Manuscript received 14 August 2023; revised 20 December 2023;
accepted 13 March 2024. Date of publication 25 March 2024; date of
current version 6 May 2024. This work was supported in part by Shandong
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant ZR2022MF295
and Grant ZR2022MF257; in part by the Key Project of Quancheng Provincial
Laboratory under Grant QCLZD202303; in part by the Fundamental Research
Promotion Plan of Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy
of Sciences) under Grant 2021JC02020; in part by the Pilot Project for
Integrated Innovation of Science, Education and Industry of Qilu University
of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) under Grant 2022JBZ01-01;
and in part by the Joint Open Project of Shandong Computer Society and
Provincial Key Laboratory under Grant SKLCN2021-03. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication
was Dr. Angelo Spognardi. (Corresponding author: Xiaohui Han.)
Xuejiao Luo, Xiaohui Han, Wenbo Zuo, and Xiaoming Wu are with the Key
Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry
of Education, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer
Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
Sciences), Jinan 250014, China, and also with Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Computer Networks, Shandong Fundamental Research Center
for Computer Science, Jinan 250353, China (e-mail: luoxj0116@gmail.com;
xiaohhan@gmail.com; zuowbo@sdas.org; wuxm@sdas.org).
Wenyin Liu is with Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100086, China
(e-mail: liuwy@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3380262

Index Terms— Money laundering detection, contrastive selfsupervised learning, graph neural network.

I. I NTRODUCTION

M

ONEY laundering (ML) refers to activities aimed at
turning dirty money (i.e., funds obtained by illegal
activities such as fraud, drug trafficking, and gambling) into
lawful money [1]. It can feed back into these illegal activities,
negatively affecting financial stability and social security.
According to an International Monetary Fund survey, the
amount of money laundered is 2% to 5% of global GDP [2].
Thus, ML detection techniques have attracted great attention
from both industry and academia.
Early ML detection solutions employ a set of heuristic rules
generated by human experts to identify suspicious transactions or accounts [3], [4]. The disadvantages of rule-based
solutions are the high false-positive rate, the need for human
resources, and the inability to recognize new ML patterns.
More recent ML techniques have leveraged machine learning
or deep learning models to improve detection accuracy and
generalization while reducing reliance on expert knowledge.
These techniques mainly fall into three categories: supervised,
semi-supervised, and unsupervised methods.
Supervised methods [5], [6], [7], [8] need a large quantity of
labeled data to train a classifier for money laundering identification. However, obtaining ground-truth labels for transactions
is still labor-intensive. In contrast, unsupervised methods adopt
strategies that do not require any ground-truth information,
such as reconstruction error computation [9], graph density
estimation [10], and outlier detection [11], [12]. However,
these methods show unsatisfactory detection performance on
real-world data due to inappropriate measurements of anomalies and the lack of supervision. Semi-supervised methods,
which fall between supervised and unsupervised methods, use
both a small amount of labeled data and a large amount of
unlabeled data during training. A branch of semi-supervised
methods, grounded in the principle of active learning [13],
iteratively uses unsupervised learning to select a small-scale of
data for expert annotation and then trains a supervised detection model with the annotated data [14]. Another branch of
semi-supervised methods focuses on designing sophisticated

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

Fig. 1. Examples of the aggregation process on a transaction relationship
network. (a) The aggregation process between a BA V1 and its neighbors. All
the neighbors of V1 are also BAs. The representation vector of V1 is updated
by receiving the information from its neighbors. (b) The aggregation process
between an MLA V2 and its neighbors. The neighbors of V2 contain both
BAs and MLAs. The representation vector of V2 after the aggregation looks
similar to that of V1 due to receiving information from its BA neighbors.

algorithms to accurately predict the categories of unlabeled
samples using a small labeled dataset. Some recent methods
in this branch based on graph neural networks (GNNs) have
shown impressive detection performance.
GNN-based semi-supervised methods typically model the
transaction relationships between bank accounts as a graph.
They learn the representation of an account (i.e., a node in the
graph) by aggregating information from its neighbors, including labeled and unlabeled samples. The learned representation
determines whether the account is an ML participant [15],
[16]. The underlying hypothesis is that a node in the graph
shares similar characteristics and labels with its neighbors
(i.e., the homogeneity hypothesis). For example, individuals
in social networks may share similar interests with their
friends; in citation networks, neighboring nodes (i.e., papers)
usually share similar topics. Hence, information obtained from
neighbors can enhance the representation of a node.
However, the homogeneity hypothesis does not fit the ML
detection scenario. Through the analysis of our experimental
dataset (see Section IV-A), we observed that ML participants
often carry out transactions with both their accomplices and
benign accounts (BAs) to hide the trace of ML. Some other
studies have also observed this phenomenon [10], [17]. Therefore, in the transaction relation graph, the neighbors of an
ML account (MLA) are composed of both MLAs and BAs.
Under this condition, the aggregation mechanism of GNNs
also brings the information of BA nodes into the representation
of MLA, which is equivalent to introducing a type of noise.
Moreover, the noise can dominate the aggregated information
if BAs are more than MLAs. For example, in Figure 1,
V1 is a BA, whose neighbors are all BAs, while V2 is an
MLA, whose neighbors contain both BAs and MLAs. Before
aggregation, the original representations of V1 and V2 are
different. However, after aggregation, the representation of V2
is influenced by its BA neighbors and becomes similar to those
of V1 .
To tackle the above issue, we propose a Semisupervised Money Laundering Detection Framework Based on
Decoupling Training (MLaD2 ) in this study. MLaD2 constructs
a Transaction Relationship Network based on Node Similarity
(TRNNS) to model the interactions between accounts. TRNNS

4519

is a weighted undirected graph, where nodes and edges represent accounts and money transfer relationships, respectively.
An edge connecting two nodes means that money transfers
have occurred between the corresponding two accounts. The
weight of the edge is calculated based on the similarity
between the two accounts. Performing on TRNNS, MLaD2
learns the representations of accounts using a GNN. During
the information aggregation process of GNN, the contribution
of each neighbor to a node’s representation is controlled
according to the weight of the edge connecting them. This
strategy can reduce the noise information from dissimilar
neighbors. Based on the representations of accounts, MLaD2
adopts a decoupling training mechanism [18] to build an
MLA detection model. The decoupling training consists of a
pre-training phase and a fine-tuning phase. In the pre-training
phase, MLaD2 learns the intrinsic features of accounts with
a contrastive self-supervised learning model, which gains discriminative knowledge from the contrast of elaborate instance
pairs instead of labels. Then, MLaD2 further learns category
features between MLAs and BAs with labeled data in the finetuning phase.
In summary, we make the following contributions to ML
detection research.
• We propose a novel semi-supervised ML detection framework, MLaD2 . The novelty of MLaD2 is that we
introduce the principle of decoupling training in its
learning process. Existing GNN-based semi-supervised
methods learn node representations through a single
training process. The training process takes ground-truth
labels as supervision and performs information aggregation to update node representations iteratively. Unlike
these methods, we decoupled the learning process of
MLaD2 into two phases. A pre-training phase learns
node representations by iteratively performing information aggregation and contrastive self-supervised learning
without the supervision of ground-truth labels. A finetuning phase further updates the node representations
under the supervision of ground-truth labels. Benefiting
from a decoupling training design, MLaD2 can effectively
leverage the discriminative knowledge in the intrinsic
properties of accounts and the limited labeled data to mitigate the impacts of insufficient and imbalanced labeled
samples.
• We reform GNN’s information aggregation process by
introducing a transaction relationship network TRNNS.
In TRNNS, an edge connecting two nodes is weighted
using their similarity. In the pre-training phase of
MLaD2 , GNN information aggregations are performed on
TRNNS. The contribution of each neighbor to a node’s
representation is differentiated based on the weight of the
edge connecting them. As a result, MLaD2 can selectively
bring more information to a node from neighbors similar
to it, reducing the noise aggregated from dissimilar neighbors. The reformed information aggregation process can
overcome the drawback of the homogeneity hypothesis
of GNN in the ML detection scenario.
• We introduce a novel type of contrastive instance pair,
called “structure view versus behavior view” (SvB), for

4520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

contrastive self-supervised learning in the pre-training
phase of MLaD2 . Conventional contrastive learning methods for graph data commonly use “node versus subgraph”
or “graph versus graph” as instance pairs; each sample
has a single information view. Since MLaD2 considers
an account’s behavior and structure features, SvB uses
two different views to describe these two aspects of
information. The two views of the same account are
considered a positive instance pair, while two views of
different accounts are considered a negative instance pair.
By performing contrastive self-supervised learning with
SvB pairs, MLaD2 can learn fine-grained discriminative
information between MLAs and BAs, reducing its dependency on labeled training data.
Comprehensive evaluations and comparisons on a
real-world ML dataset demonstrate that MLaD2 yields
results that surpass existing methods, especially when using
a small scale of labeled samples.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
briefly reviews the related work. Section III presents the details
of MLaD2 . Section IV presents and analyzes our experimental
results. Section V discusses the limitations of MLaD2 . Finally,
Section VI concludes this paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Money Laundering Detection
ML detection technology has made significant progress in
the past two decades. Early ML detection techniques are
generally rule-based, which screen suspicious entities using
rules (e.g., a threshold on the amount of money transferred)
predefined by domain experts [6]. Rule-based techniques can
accurately identify known ML patterns. However, they have
disadvantages like high investigation costs and false positives.
Moreover, money launderers can easily bypass the detection
using new ML patterns.
Recent ML research has increasingly employed machine
learning and deep learning models. Several works consider ML
detection a supervised learning problem and build classifiers
to identify ML transactions or accounts. Alkhalili et al. [19]
took statistics of money transfer behavior (e.g., the number
and amount of money transferred) as features and trained
support vector machine (SVM), decision tree (DT), and naive
bayesian (NB) as ML recognizers. Gu et al. [20] used a long
short-term memory (LSTM) network to build an anomalous
transaction detection model on the time sequences of behavior
statistics. Similarly, Jensen and Iosifidis [21] built an ML
detection model using a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (biGRU) instead of LSTM. Some studies combine account profile
attributes (e.g., gender, location, age, and the number of used
services) with behavior statistics as features to build classifiers [17], [22], [23], [24]. Besides, the structural importance
metrics (e.g., degree, betweenness, closeness, and transitivity)
of an account in a money transfer relationship network are also
commonly employed as features [5], [25], [26]. For example,
Jullum et al. [26] used an XGBoost to alarm ML entities based
on behavior statistics, structural metrics, and account profiles.

Supervised ML detection approaches need a large number of
labeled training samples to achieve satisfactory performance.
However, acquiring such a quantity of labeled data is typically
impossible due to the high labor cost. To tackle this issue,
some researchers built ML detection models based on unsupervised learning. Chen et al. [9] designed an automatic encoder
(AE) and used the reconstruction error of transaction statistics
to identify ML transactions. Li et al. [10] detected MLAs by
searching dense money transfer flows. Sun et al. [11] used the
statistical deviation of account balances to recognize MLAs.
Lee et al. [12] detected the “smurfing” pattern of ML by minimizing the minimum adjacency matrix description length [27]
of the adjacency matrix of a time-evolving accounting graph.
Although unsupervised ML detection approaches do not need
labeled data, their detection performance on real-world data
is unsatisfactory due to the lack of supervision. In addition,
finding an appropriate measurement of anomalies to identify
ML transactions or accounts is typically tricky.
To leverage the strengths of supervised and unsupervised
approaches and mitigate their weaknesses, many studies
designed ML detection models based on semi-supervised
learning paradigms, which utilize labeled and unlabeled data
for training. A branch of these studies adopts active learning
to select a small-scale of the most informative samples for
labeling iteratively [13]. For example, Labanca et al. [14]
proposed an active learning framework for ML detection that
leverages an unsupervised model to select the most suspicious
transactions for expert investigation and trains a supervised
ML detection model on experts’ feedback (i.e., the labeled
dataset). One drawback of active learning-based methods
is that their entire training process requires expert involvement. Another branch of semi-supervised methods explores
ingenious algorithms to accurately predict the categories of
unlabeled samples with a small scale of labeled data. Several
methods based on GNNs in this branch have shown impressive
detection performance. Weber et al. [15] proposed an MLA
detection approach based on the evolved graph convolutional
neural network (EvolveGCN). Assumpção et al. [28] leveraged GraphSAGE [29] and a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to
generate embeddings of nodes and edges in a money transfer network to detect MLAs. Most existing semi-supervised
attempts employ GNNs or graph embedding-based models as
their base model, aggregating neighborhood information to
learn node embeddings. However, these approaches ignore the
inconsistency problem between a node and its neighbors in
ML scenarios (see Figure 1), which hinders their ability to
capture anomalous information of MLAs effectively. In contrast, MLaD2 uses a novel TRNNS to address the above issue.
It can assign greater weight to the information of neighbors
exhibiting high similarity with the target node.
Another characteristic of MLaD2 is that it decouples the
training process. Existing semi-supervised methods jointly
learn node representations and an ML detector in a unified
process. MLaD2 decouples the learning of node intrinsic features and the learning of the MLA detector into
two separate phases, which can reduce the dependency
on labeled training data and mitigate sensitivity to class
imbalance [30].

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

4521

Fig. 2. Illustration of MLaD2 . MLaD2 consists of four modules, i.e., the data processing module, the feature encoder module, the contrastive learning
module, and the money laundering detection module. The MLaD2 workflow has two phases, i.e., the pre-training phase and the fine-tuning phase.

B. Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a type of unsupervised
learning, and contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL) is
an essential branch of SSL. CSSL learns data representations
by discriminating positive and negative instance pairs [18].
It has dramatically progressed in visual processing methods,
such as MoCo [31] and SimCLR [32]. Some recent works
have extended CSSL to GNNs. Velivckovic et al. [33] took
a node’s representation and a graph’s representation as a
contrastive instance pair (i.e., node versus subgraph) and generated negative instances by graph corruption. Wang et al. [34]
suggested an anomaly detection framework DCI. DCI treats
the feature representation of a node as the positive sample
and its row-wise shuffled version as the negative sample.
Besides, Lo et al. [35] and Zhou et al. [36] also performed
graph-level CSSL and then used a linear layer or an RF to
detect suspicious entities.
The above methods use “node versus subgraph” or “graph
versus graph” as instance pairs. They generate an embedding
of a graph for contrastive learning by averaging the values of
all node representations in the graph. However, the averaging
operation may result in a loss of fine-grained characteristics
of nodes in the graph, making it challenging to learn discriminative features. Unlike these methods, MLaD2 uses a novel
type of instance pair (i.e., SvB) for CSSL. It focuses more on
the fine-grained discriminative characteristics between nodes.
As a result, MLaD2 exhibits a more excellent capability in
detecting inconspicuous suspicious features within accounts.
III. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
Figure 2 shows the framework of MLaD2 , which includes
four components: a data processing module, a feature encoder
module, a contrastive learning module, and a money laundering detection module. The data processing module processes
the raw transaction records to calculate transaction behavior

TABLE I
N OTATIONS

statistics and build TRNNS. The feature encoder module
generates behavior and structure views for each account based
on the statistics and TRNNS. The contrastive learning module
leverages the behavior and structure view information to
construct instance pairs and learns discriminative features by
contrasting their corresponding embeddings. A pre-training
process based on NT-Xent loss guides the representations
of the two views of the same account to fall into nearby
locations in the embedding space. After the pre-training, the
money laundering detection module combines the behavior
view embedding with the structure view embedding and then
predicts the category of the corresponding node. In the following sections, we describe the details of each module. Table I
lists the notations used in this paper.
A. Data Processing Module
The data processing module constructs behavior statistics
and TRNNS based on the input transaction records.

4522

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE II
D EFINITION OF S TATISTICAL VARIABLES

1) Transaction Behavior Statistics Calculation: Let R =
[u sr c , u dst , time, amount] denote a transaction record, where
u sr c , u dst , time, and amount represent the sender, receiver,
timestamp, and transaction amount, respectively. We divide
the timeline of R into T slices with a 24-hour granularity
and design 32 statistical variables (i.e., {s1 , s2 , · · · , s32 }) to
track the transfer behavior characteristics of accounts. Table II
lists the statistical variables, the efficacy of which has been
demonstrated in our previous work [37]. For account u i , let
N
{Mi }i=1
∈ Rd×T denote the transaction statistics during T
slices, where N is the number of accounts, and d is the number
of statistical variables.
2) TRNNS Building: The basis of the aggregation mechanism of GNN is the homogeneity hypothesis, which considers
connected nodes in a graph to have similar characteristics.
Since the neighbors of an MLA typically contain both MLAs
and BAs, we should reduce the information from dissimilar neighbors during the aggregation process. One possible
solution is to use the graph attention network (GAT) [38]
to compute weights for each node, but this method has two
issues: (1) GAT is sensitive to parameter initialization, and (2)
the effect of GAT is negligible or even harmful on large and
noisy graphs [39]. To address this issue, we build a TRNNS to
weigh the relationship between nodes. Let G = {V, E} denote
the TRNNS, where V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , v N } is the set of nodes
representing accounts, and E = {< i, j >| i, j ∈ V} is the set
of edges representing transfer interactions between accounts.
Each edge in E is weighted by the similarity scores between

Fig. 3. Diagram of the TRNNS construction process. Building a TRNNS
involves three steps: (1) category probability calculation, (2) similarity calculation, and (3) graph weighting. Sim(·) and w denote the similarity function
and the weight of edges, respectively.

the two connected nodes. The construction of TRNNS consists
of three steps, as shown in Figure 3.
Step (1): Category Probability Calculation: Let u i be an
unlabeled node in the TRNNS (e.g., the “node a” in Figure 3).
We denote its 1-order neighbors as N(u i ) = {vi1 , vi2 , . . . , vin },
where n is the number of u i ’s 1-order neighbors. The probability of u i belonging to class ck is:
P(ck | u i ) ∝ P(ck | vi1 )P(ck | vi2 ) · · · P(ck | vin ).

(1)

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

4523

j

According to conditional probability, P(ck | vi ) can be further
decomposed as:
j

j

P(ck | vi ) =

P(vi | ck )P(ck )
j

P(vi )

, j ∈ [1, n].

(2)

Thus, P(ck | u i ) can be converted into the following formula:
P(vi1 | ck )P(vi2 | ck ) · · · P(vin | ck )P(ck )n

P(ck | u i ) ∝

P(vi1 )P(vi2 ) · · · P(vin )
n
Y

∝

j

P(vi | ck )P(ck )n .

,
(3)

j=1

Fig. 4. Comparison between traditional Transformer and convolutional-based
Transformer. (a) shows the architecture of traditional Transformer, where “W”
denotes the weight parameter matrix. (b) is the architecture of convolutional-based Transformer, where “Conv,1” and “Conv,k” represent convolution of
kernel size 1×1 and k ×1 with stride 1, respectively. “MHA Layer” represents
the multi-head self-attention layer.

j

P(ck ) and P(vi | ck ) can be obtained as follows:
PNL

I (yi = ck )
P(ck ) = i=1
, k ∈ {0, 1},
NL
PNL
j
j
i=1 I (N(u i ) = vi , yi = ck )
j
,
P(vi | ck ) =
PNL
i=1 I (yi = ck )

(4)
(5)

where N L is the number of labeled nodes, I (·) is an indicator
j
function, and N(u i ) represents the j-th neighbor of u i . Finally,
the probability of u i belonging to class ck can be calculated
as:
P(ck )n

n
Q
j=1

P(ck | u i ) =
P

j

P(vi | ck )

n
k={1,2} P(ck )

n
Q
j=1

j

.

(6)

P(vi | ck )

The class probability distribution of all nodes forms a matrix
P ∈ R N ×2 , in which the i-th row vector pi is the class probability distribution of u i . The labeled node’s class probability
distribution is according to its label information. For example,
if a node is an MLA, its probability of being anomalous will
be 1, while the probability of it being benign will be 0.
Step (2): Similarity Calculation: Dot-product is a simple and
effective operator to measure the distance between two vectors,
and has been demonstrated to be effective in link prediction
tasks. Thus, we perform a dot-product on P to measure the
degree of similarity between two arbitrary accounts:
W p = P · P⊤ ,

(7)

where W p ∈ R N ×N is the similarity score of N accounts.
Step (3): Graph Weighting: We weigh edges between nodes
based on the similarity scores calculated in Step (2) and finally
obtain the well-built TRNNS G.

B. Feature Encoder Module
As shown in the upper middle of Figure 2, we use a
behavior feature encoder f (·), a structure feature encoder
g(·), and a feature projector to obtain the behavior and
structure views of each account.

1) Behavior Feature Encoder: The target of the behavior
feature encoder is to capture both the long and short-term
dependencies of transaction behavior. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), such as LSTM [40] and GRU [41], have
been widely employed to capture the long-term characteristics of time series in many scenarios. However, they suffer
from the problems of vanishing and exploding gradients and
cannot handle long sequences very well. Some studies have
demonstrated that Transformer [42] performs much better than
LSTM in capturing fairly long-term dependencies [43]. Thus,
we adopt a Transformer-based approach to capture long-term
patterns.
Specifically, it contains two multi-head self-attention (MHA
for abbreviation) layers. The MHA layers generate N H distinct
query, key, and value matrices from Mi , where N H denotes
the number of attention heads. However, as shown in Figure 4
(a), the traditional Transformer model calculates the similarity
between queries and keys based on their pointwise values,
resulting in the losing of short-term features. To address
this issue, we apply convolution on input values before the
attention layers to capture short-term features, as shown in
Figure 4 (b). More specifically, we use a 3 × 1 convolution
kernel with a stride of 1 on Mi to obtain the query matrix and
the key matrix, respectively:
Nh

Q
H Q i = (tanh(Mi ⊗ Wconv
+ b Q ))W Q ,

(8)

Nh
K
H K i = (tanh(Mi ⊗ Wconv
+ b K ))W K ,

(9)

Nh

Nh

T × dc

where H Q i , H K i ∈ R N H , dc is the output dimension of
convolution, ⊗ denotes the convolutional operation, and Nh i
is the h i -th attention head. The value matrix is calculated by
performing a convolution of kernel size 1 × 1 with stride 1 on
Mi :
Nh

V
HV i = (tanh(Mi ⊗ Wconv
+ bV ))WV ,
Nh

(10)

T × dc

where HV i ∈ R N H . After these convolutional projections,
the scaled dot-product attention computes the final outputs:
Nh

Nh

Ha i = so f tmax(

Nh

HQ i HK i
Nh
)HV i .
√
dc

(11)

4524

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

In practice, we use two attention headers, i.e., N H = 2.
Nh
Nh
Then, we concatenate Ha 1 and Ha 2 and perform a linear
projection:
Nh

Nh

H f = [Ha 1 ∥Ha 2 ]Wl + b f .

(12)

By computing the similarity of queries and keys from their
local information rather than pointwise values, the behavior
feature encoder obtains the transaction behavior embeddings
H f ∈ RT ×dc with both long and short-term patterns.
2) Structure Feature Encoder: This component aims to
aggregate neighbor information to enhance the representation
of a node. We input the TRNNS G into a GNN with L
stacking layers to reduce the noise information from dissimilar
neighbors. The l-th layer can be computed as follows:
Hlg = G N N (A, Hl−1
g ),

(13)

where Hlg ∈ R N ×dg is the nodes’ embedding of G learned
by the l-th layer, dg is the embedding size of this layer, and
A ∈ R N ×N is the adjacency matrix of G. Similarly, Hl−1
∈
g
R N ×dg is the embedding of nodes learned by the (l − 1)-th
layer. We initialize Hlg with X when l = 1, where X ∈ R N ×d is
the average values of d variables of T time slices. Since GCN
is efficient and effective for the node classification task [44],
we adopt a two-layer GCN as the GNN base model in practice.
Thus, Eq.(13) can be specifically formulated as
Hg = ÂReLU (ÂXWg1 )Wg2 ,

positive instance pairs to neighboring locations within the
embedding space, while mapping negative instance pairs to
dissimilar positions.
1) Instance Pairs: Given an account, we construct a positive
instance pair with its behavior view ei and structure view e j .
The remaining 2(N − 1) behavior and structure views of the
other N − 1 samples are treated as negative. We save the
positive and negative pairs into their corresponding instance
pair pools.
2) Objective Function: The objective of the contrastive
learning module is to minimize the distance between two
views of an account. Following [32], we adopt NT-Xent (the
normalized temperature-scaled cross-entropy loss) as the loss
function for a positive instance pair (ei , e j ). Let sim(ei , e j )
denote the cosine similarity between ei and e j . The NT-Xent
for (ei , e j ) is defined as:
l(i, j) = −log P2N

ex p(sim(ei , e j )/τ )

q=1 I (q ̸ = i)ex p(sim(ei , eq )/τ )

,

(17)

where I (q ̸ = i) is an indicator function, whose value is
1 if q ̸ = i and 0 otherwise. τ is hyperparameter called a
temperature parameter. We discuss the impact of τ ’s value
on the performance of MLaD2 in Section IV-E. The overall
loss of the contrastive learning module is computed across all
positive pairs, including both (ei , e j ) and (e j , ei ), as follows:
N

(14)

e− 21 ee− 12

A is the adjacency matrix with selfwhere Â = D AD . e
connections, i.e., e
A = A + I N . I N ∈ R N ×N represents an
identity matrix. e
D ∈ R N ×N is the degree matrix with e
Dii =
P
e
A
.
W
and
W
are
the
learnable
weight
matrices
of
g1
g2
j ij
the 1-st and 2-nd graph convolutional layers, respectively. The
output Hg ∈ R N ×dg is the embedding of nodes obtained by
the structure feature encoder.
3) Feature Projector: We use a multilayer perceptron with
one hidden layer to obtain the behavior and structure views,
respectively, and map them into the same embedding space:
E f = W p2 (ReLU (H f W p1 + b p1 )) + b p2 ,

(15)

Eg = W p2 (ReLU (Hg W p1 + b p1 )) + b p2 ,

(16)

where E f and Eg are the behavior view and structure view,
respectively. The weight matrix W p∗ and the bias b p∗ are
shared by the structure view projector and behavior view
projector.
We define the contrastive learning task on each account’s
behavior and structure views, considering each view as an
individual sample, resulting in a total of 2N samples.

1 X
L SS L =
[l(2q − 1, 2q) + l(2q, 2q − 1)].
2N

(18)

q=1

D. Money Laundering Detection Module
We employ an MLP with one hidden layer as the classifier
for detecting MLAs. As the feature projector in the feature
encoder module could remove some helpful information for
classification, we feed the unmapped representations (i.e., H f
and Hg ) into the MLP. The class of accounts can be estimated
as follows:
Ŷ = σ ((ReLU ([H f ∥Hg ]Ws1 + bs1 ))Ws2 + bs2 ),

(19)

where σ (·) is the softmax function, ∥ denotes the concatenation operation, and Ŷ is the predicted class. The
training objective of the MLP is to minimize the following
cross-entropy loss L S L :
N

L
1 X
LS L = −
((1 − yi )log(1 − ŷi ) + yi log(ŷi )),
NL

(20)

i=1

where ŷi is the i-th value of Ŷ, and yi is the i-th account’s
ground truth.

C. Contrastive Learning Module
We use contrastive learning module to pre-train MLaD2 .
It helps the model learn discriminative representations by
adjusting instance pairs’ distances in the latent space and
reduces its dependence on the labeled training data. Specifically, we first construct contrastive instance pairs consisting
of behavior and structure views. Then, we employ a contrastive
loss as the objective function to guide the model in mapping

E. Training Procedure of MLaD2
Algorithm 1 illustrates the training procedure of MLaD2 .
Specifically, MLaD2 first builds TRNNS G by calculating
account similarity and assigning edge weights (lines 3-5).
In the pre-training phase, it acquires the behavior embedding
of nodes using the behavior feature encoder (line 8). Additionally, it obtains the graph structure embedding of nodes based

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of MLaD2
Input:
Transaction records, Node attribute: X, Transaction charN , Number of pre-training and fineacteristics: {Mi }i=1
tuning epochs: e p , e f .
Output:
The well-trained MLaD2 .
1: Randomly initialize the parameters of MLaD2 .
2: # Build the TRNNS G.
3: Construct G = (V, E) based on transaction records.
4: Calculate P(ck | u i ) via Eq.(2)-Eq.(6).
5: Weight the E to obtain the well-built TRNNS.
6: # Pre-training phase.
7: for i = 1, 2, . . . , e p do
N , ϕ).
8:
Embed transaction behavior: H f = f ({Mi }i=1
9:
Embed graph structure: Hg = g(G, θ ).
10:
Map behavior embedding: E f = Pr ojector (H f , ζ ).
11:
Map structure embedding: Eg = Pr ojector (Hg , ζ ).
12:
Calculate L SS L via Eq.(18).
13:
θ, ϕ, ζ ← Adam(L SS L ).
14: end for
15: # Fine-tuning phase.
16: for i = 1, 2, . . . , e f do
17:
Predict class for accounts: Ŷ = cl f ([H f ∥Hg ], ξ ).
18:
Calculate L S L via Eq.(20).
19:
θ, ϕ, ξ ← Adam(L S L ).
20: end for

4525

TABLE III
C HARACTERISTICS OF BASELINE M ETHODS

during the investigation of an illegal online gambling case in
which the operators of an illegal gambling platform attempted
to make their illegal profits “clean” through ML. The dataset
includes several common simple ML topologies, such as “FanIn”, “Stacked Bipartite”, “Gather-Scatter”, and “Random” (see
Figure 5(a)-5(d)). There are also more sophisticated ML patterns composed of the above simple topologies (see Figure 5(e)
for an example). Figure 6 shows the density distribution
diagrams of some selected statistical variables. We can see
noticeable differences between MLAs and BAs regarding these
variables.
We randomly selected 70%, 10%, and 20% of accounts
in our dataset and used all their transaction records as the
training, validation, and test data, respectively.
B. Experimental Settings

Fig. 5. Examples of ML topologies within the evaluation dataset, where nodes
represent accounts and directed edges represent transaction relationships.

on G using the structure feature encoder (line 9). After that,
MLaD2 applies the feature projector to transform the above
two views of embeddings to the same feature space (lines
10-11). Then, it performs the Adam algorithm to minimize
L SS L to optimize the feature encoder module (lines 12-13).
The fine-tuning phase uses a classifier to predict the account
class (line 17). Then, MLaD2 computes L S L (line 18) and
fine-tunes the parameters (θ, ϕ, and ξ ) through a backpropagation process (line 19). After e p pre-training iterations and e f
fine-tuning iterations, we can obtain the well-trained MLaD2 .
IV. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS
A. Dataset
We evaluate MLaD2 with a real-world dataset from a
Chinese law enforcement agency. The dataset was collected

1) Baselines: Since we focus on the scenario where transaction records are the only data for analysis, we compared
the MLaD2 performance with baselines that can take transaction records as input. Among them, EvolveGCN, ADMLA,
FlowScope, XGBoost, and MonLAD are recent methods for
ML detection, while GAT is a representative method of GNNs
for node classification tasks. Given that ML detection is
a specific instance of anomaly detection, we also included
two exceptional contrastive-learning-based anomaly detection
methods as baselines, i.e., DCI and DGI. Table III shows the
characteristics of the baselines.
• DCI1 [34]: This method first builds an unweighted transaction network and obtains the node embeddings by
analyzing their degrees in the network. Then, it splits
the unweighted transaction network into k subgraphs and
learns their embeddings. Finally, it applies contrastive
learning on node and subgraph embeddings to detect
anomalous nodes.
• DGI2 [33]: This method takes the whole unweighted
transaction network and a single node as instance pair
for contrastive learning. The learned node embeddings
are input into an MLP to detect anomalous nodes.
1 http://github.com/wyl7/DCI-pytorch
2 http://github.com/PetarV-/DGI

4526

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 6. The data distribution plot of selected statistical variables. The x-axis represents the variable’s value, and the y-axis represents the density. Due to the
significant differences in the magnitude of variables, we applied a logarithmic transformation to their original values for better visualization. We replaced the
minimum value 0 with 1e-10.

EvolveGCN [15]: This method is a semi-supervised GNN
model for ML detection tasks. It aggregates neighboring
information using GCN to obtain node embeddings and
captures the graph sequence’s dynamism using an RNN.
In our implementation, we used transaction behavior
statistics as the initial attributes of nodes and generated
graph sequences at the granularity of days.
• GAT3 [38]: This method is also semi-supervised. It adds
node-level attention compared to GCN. The node initialization method is the same as EvolveGCN.
• XGBoost [26]: This method efficiently implements the
gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT). Jullum et al. [26]
have designed a supervised ML detection approach based
on XGBoost. However, they use user profile features
as representations of accounts. Due to our focus on
scenarios where only transaction records are available,
we replace the input of their approach with the account
representations generated by MLaD2 .
• ADMLA [17]: This supervised method detects suspicious
accounts based on transaction relationships and user
profile information. As user profiles are unavailable in
•

our scenario, we still use the account representations
generated by MLaD2 as its input.
• FlowScope4 [10]: This unsupervised method identifies
MLAs by searching dense flows in a transaction network.
• MonLAD5 [11]: This unsupervised method takes transaction streams as input and exploits a statistical deviation
of the transaction amount to detect MLAs.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We employ the macro average of
precision, recall, F1 -score, accuracy, and False Positive Rate
(FPR) as the evaluation metrics. Previous works have widely
used these metrics to assess the performance of ML detection [9], [11], [15].
3) Implementation Details: We trained the supervised methods using 100% labeled accounts and their transaction records
in the training data (denoted as 100-LTD). We randomly
selected 10%-80% accounts from the training data and
assigned labels to them (denoted as 10-LTD, 20-LTD, 40-LTD,
60-LTD, and 80-LTD, respectively), utilizing their transaction
records to train the semi-supervised methods. All experiments
were executed on a server with Xeon 6138 CPU and an
NVIDIA GeForce RTX3090 GPU. To ensure that the results
4 http://github.com/csqjxiao/FlowScope

3 http://github.com/Diego999/pyGAT

5 http://github.com/BGT-M/MonLAD

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

4527

TABLE IV
PARAMETER S ETTINGS OF MLAD2 AND BASELINE M ETHODS

Fig. 7. Training and inference time cost comparisons with baseline methods.

were not derived by chance, we repeated each experiment
ten times, and the final performance of each method was the
average of the ten trials. Table IV lists the parameter settings
of MLaD2 and baseline methods.
C. Performance Comparisons With Existing Methods
Table V presents the performance comparison of MLaD2
with supervised and semi-supervised baselines. Table VI
reports the comparison results of MLaD2 trained on the
10-LTD with unsupervised baselines. Based on the results,
we have the following observations.
• Among contrastive learning-based baselines, MLaD2
achieved a 3%-11% improvement in F1 -score compared
to DCI and a 1.64%-8.92% improvement compared to
DGI. DCI and DGI used “node versus subgraph” and
“graph versus graph” as instance pairs, respectively. They
both calculated the average value of node embeddings
to obtain the graph embedding for contrastive learning.
However, the averaging operation may cause the loss
of fine-grained node information, hindering the model’s
ability to learn discriminative features between nodes.
In contrast, MLaD2 adopts “SvB” as instance pairs, which
focus on the nodes’ fine-grained features and contribute to
extracting inconspicuous suspicious account information.
• Among
semi-supervised learning-based baselines,
MLaD2 outperforms EvolveGCN and GAT in terms
of F1 -score, with improvements of 1.64%-4.69%
and 3.93%-4.51%, respectively. The reason is that
EvolveGCN and GAT aggregate information from
both MLA and BA neighbors, introducing noise to
the representation of the target node and impeding
the model’s classification capability. It proves the
inconsistency problem is severe and considerable when
applying GNNs to ML detection. On the contrary,

MLaD2 considers the similarity between neighbors and
the target node during the aggregation process, reducing
the noise in the transferred neighbor information.
• MLaD2 exhibits superior MLA discriminative ability
than supervised learning-based baselines. Compared to
XGBoost and ADMLA, the F1 - improvements are 2.71%
and 3.26%, respectively. The possible reason is that,
by employing CSSL on massive unlabeled data, MLaD2
can learn intrinsic discriminative features between MLAs
and BAs and better comprehend the data distribution.
• MLaD2 achieves significant performance gains with a
small quantity of labeled data compared to unsupervised
learning-based baselines. When training with 10-LTD, the
F1 -score and accuracy improvements of MLaD2 over the
best one among FlowScope and MonLAD are 24.80%
and 6.93%, respectively. These gains can be attributed
to the robust ability of MLaD2 to extract discriminative
knowledge from the “SvB” instance pair. In contrast,
FlowScope and MonLAD judge the abnormalities of
accounts based on the statistical density of transaction
flows and balance changes, respectively. Their strategies
may miss the potential correlations and patterns among
MLAs when dealing with complex transactional data.
• Figure 7 shows the training and inference time consumption of MLaD2 and baseline methods. We can see that the
training time of MLaD2 is longer than all the baselines.
However, its inference time is shorter than most of the
baseline models. Compared with the best supervised
learning-based baseline XGBoost and the best semisupervised learning-based baseline DGI, MLaD2 obtains
2.71% and 1.46%-8.92% improvements in F1 -score at the
cost of only 234.65s and 136.67s additional training time,
respectively. Moreover, the training of MLaD2 on 51,326
transactions was finished within 4 minutes, demonstrating
its feasibility for practical applications.
• MLaD2 keeps a zero FPR in all the comparisons in
Table V and Table VI, which further demonstrate its
practicality in real-world ML detection scenarios. Some
other methods, such as GAT, EvolveGCN, and MonLAD,
also achieve zero FPR in all comparisons. The FPRs of
DCI and DGI, while not being zero, are at a low level.

4528

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS W ITH S UPERVISED AND S EMI -S UPERVISED BASELINE M ETHODS

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS W ITH U NSUPERVISED
BASELINE M ETHODS

In summary, MLaD2 achieves the best overall detection
performance compared with baseline methods. Table VII
presents the p-values of paired t-test of the performance
comparisons in terms of F1 -score. The results demonstrate that
the improvements of MLaD2 over the baselines are statistically
significant at α = 0.05.

D. Ablation Study

FlowScope exhibits the highest FPR. The possible reason
is that the dense flows of money transfers identified by
FlowScope may involve BAs, as MLAs often carry out
transactions with BAs to disguise their activities.

To verify the effectiveness of the TRNNS in MLaD2 ,
we built a transaction network with equal edge weights and
executed MLaD2 on it. We refer to this variant of MLaD2
as MLaD2 /w. We first observed the loss variations of MLaD2
and MLaD2 /w during the pre-training and fine-tuning phases.
Figure 8 shows the observation results. We can see that MLaD2
exhibits a more stable optimization process and converges
faster when using TRNNS. It reveals the effectiveness of

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

4529

TABLE VII
PAIRED t -T EST R ESULTS ON THE I MPROVEMENTS OF ML A D2 C OMPARED TO BASELINES IN T ERMS OF F1 -S CORE

Fig. 8. The loss variation of MLaD2 and MLaD2 /w during pre-training and fine-tuning phase. (a) The loss variation of MLaD2 and MLaD2 /w during
the pre-training phase. (b) The loss variation of MLaD2 and MLaD2 /w during the fine-tuning phase on the 80-LTD. (c) The loss variation of MLaD2 and
MLaD2 /w during the fine-tuning phase on the validation set.

TRNNS in accelerating model training by reducing the aggregation of noise information from dissimilar neighbors.
Further, we compared the performance of MLaD2 /w with
those of MLaD2 . The second last row in Table V reports
the performance of MLaD2 /w. We can see that MLaD2
has an average F1 -score gain of approximately 0.25%
across various label fractions of training data compared with
MLaD2 /w, indicating that assigning higher weights to information from similar neighbors improves detection performance.
The improvement is minor but significant because the number
of accounts can be tens of thousands.
To validate the effectiveness of fine-tuning in MLaD2 ,
we remove the fine-tuning phase from MLaD2 and test its
performance. We refer to this variant as MLaD2 /ft. The last
row in Table V presents the performance results. Evidently, the
fine-tuning phase can improve the model’s overall performance
on the training data with different proportions of labeled
samples, especially when the number of labeled samples is
small. For example, MLaD2 improves by 4.58% in F1 -score
on 10-LTD compared with MLaD2 /ft.
Furthermore, as shown in Table V, MLaD2 /ft achieves
competitive performance compared to MLaD2 and outperforms almost all baselines. The results indicate that during the
pre-training phase, the feature encoders learn discriminative
knowledge from instance pairs rather than relying on labels,
reducing MLaD2 ’s dependency on labeled data.
E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
Finally, we investigate the impacts of three hyperparameters
on the performance of MLaD2 , i.e., the training batch size, the
temperature τ in L SS L , and the number of GNN layers l.

1) Effect of the Batch Size: We discontinuously varied the
training batch size from 128 to 2131 (i.e., the total number of
samples in the training set). Figure 9 (a) shows the F1 -score
performance changes of MLaD2 using different batch sizes.
As we can see, when the number of labeled training data is
small (e.g., 10%), larger batch sizes have a significant advantage over smaller ones. A larger batch size can provide more
negative samples to facilitate the feature encoder’s learning
of helpful representation. When there is more labeled data,
the performance improvement obtained with increasing batch
size is no longer apparent. However, using a larger batch size
can still get a better performance. Therefore, we finally chose
2,131 as the batch size.
2) Effect of the Temperature: We further analyze the significance of τ in L SS L of MLaD2 . Figure 9 (b) shows the F1 -score
performance changes with different values of τ . We can see
that MLaD2 can obtain a relatively good detection result when
τ = 0.1. It can attribute to the role of τ in controlling
the penalty strength on hard negative samples. Specifically,
MLaD2 with a small τ value tends to penalize hard negative
samples more. Conversely, the model with a larger τ value is
less sensitive to hard negative samples [32]. We finally set τ
as 0.1.
3) Effect of the Number of GNN Layers: We vary l from 1 to
4 to explore the sensitivity of MLaD2 to it. Figure 9 (c) shows
the impact of l when MLaD2 trains on various proportions
of labeled training data. As we can see, the F1 -score is
relatively worse when l is small (l = 1) due to insufficient
neighboring information. As l increases, we can observe that
the F1 -score first increases and then declines. A larger value
of l indicates that a node can aggregate information from

4530

Fig. 9.
of l.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Impact of hyper-parameters on the performance of MLaD2 in terms of F1 -score. (a) Impact of the training batch size. (b) Impact of τ . (c) Impact

higher-order neighbors. The results suggest that neighbors
farther than two orders may introduce more noise to the node
representations learned by MLaD2 . We finally set l as 2.

reveal the robustness of MLaD2 against adversarial samples
(i.e., ML strategies to evade detection). Its robustness may
be attributed to the fine-grained discriminative information
learned from the “SvB” instance pair.

F. Model Robustness
To explore MLaD2 ’s robustness against evolving ML strategies that malicious actors may employ to evade detection,
we evaluated its performance in a realistic attack scenario.
The attack scenario assumes that: (1) an attacker can infer
that MLaD2 utilizes a GNN-based approach, but they cannot
obtain the specific design and parameters of the model; (2)
the attacker has control over a set of accounts and can evade
detection by manipulating transactions between the accounts.
Based on the above assumptions, we employed a basic GCN
architecture [45] as the surrogate model Satt that attackers may
build to generate adversarial samples. Then, we leveraged the
Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [46] to generate adversarial samples for Satt . FGSM is a simple and effective technique
for generating adversarial samples to attack deep learning
models. The basic idea behind FGSM is to add a perturbation
in the direction of the gradient of the loss with respect to
the input, causing the model to make incorrect predictions.
The resulting new sample is very similar to the original but is
crafted to cause the model to make a misclassification.
We selected 81 MLAs in our test dataset whose transaction
relationship can form a connected component in TRNNS.
These MLAs are assumed to be under the attacker’s control,
and their data are input into FGSM. The generated adversarial
samples are considered novel ML strategies. We replaced the
original data of the 81 MLAs with the adversarial samples
and used the tampered test data for to evaluate the robustness
of MLaD2 . Several studies have demonstrated that adversarial
samples generated for one deep learning model may also be
misclassified by another model [47].
Let Dot and Dtt denote the original and tampered test data,
respectively. Table VIII reports the performance comparison of
MLaD2 and XGBoost (i.e., the best baseline trained with 100LTD in terms of F1 ) on Dot and Dtt . We can see that MLaD2 ’s
performance shows a slight decrease on Dtt compared with
its performance on Dot . The F1 score of MLaD2 trained with
different proportions of labeled data drops 0.027-0.0687 on
Dtt . In contrast, XGBoost exhibits a significant decrease of
0.5972 in F1 on Dtt compared to its F1 on Dot . The results

G. Case Study on Model Interpretability
The interpretability of MLaD2 decisions is crucial for
its trust and transparency in financial applications. To gain
deeper insight into the decision-making mechanism of MLaD2 ,
we attempted to explain the prediction results of MLaD2 using
PGM-Explainer. PGM-Explainer [48] is an interpretability
method using probabilistic graphic models to elucidate the
decisions made by GNN. By inputting the prediction results
of MLaD2 into PGM-Explainer, we can identify those samples that are most crucial for determining the category of a
particular node based on the output explanation.
We select two test samples that MLaD2 has correctly classified for a case study. One sample is a BA (referred to as v1 ),
and the other is an MLA (referred to as v2 ). Figure 10 shows
the two samples and their 1-order neighbors. The red dashed
circles point out the neighbors most crucial for determining
the categories of v1 and v2 . We can see that although the
neighbors of v1 and v2 include samples of different categories,
those determining their categories are all of the same category
as them due to TRNNS’s effect. We also computed the cosine
similarity between the vector representations of v1 (v2 ) and
all its neighbors. Figure 10 lists the respective five neighbors
most similar to v1 and v2 . It can be seen that those neighbors
determining the categories of v1 and v2 are the most similar
to them. MLaD2 can find these samples by computing the
similarities between the target node and their neighbors.
The above analysis provides an approximate explanation of
the decision-making process of MLaD2 .
V. L IMITATIONS
One obvious limitation of this work is that MLaD2 was evaluated on a single dataset, and the evaluation dataset is small in
scale and a bit dated. Therefore, the performance of MLaD2 is
not guaranteed to generalize to other datasets. Moreover, the
scalability of MLaD2 on large datasets or real-time detection
scenarios remains to be determined. Another limitation is that
the interpretability of MLaD2 needs to be improved. Although

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

4531

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS ON O RIGINAL AND TAMPERED T EST DATA

Fig. 10. Prediction result explanations of (a) a BA and (b) an MLA. The blue nodes represent BAs, and the red nodes represent MLAs. The dashed red
circles highlight those samples that are most crucial for determining the category of the central node. The tables to the right of each subgraph enumerate the
five neighbors most similar to the central node and their respective cosine similarities with the central node.

we have explored its interpretability using PGM-Explainer,
MLaD2 has weak inherent interpretability. In our future work,
we will collect more extensive and real-time labeled data to
train and evaluate MLaD2 . We also will design an inherent
interpretable mechanism for it.
Users of MLaD2 can utilize a small set of labeled historical
data to train the framework to detect MLAs. However, there
are two limitations of MLaD2 in daily use. First, as MLaD2 is
a semi-supervised-based framework, users need to perform its
training process periodically to detect MLAs in new coming
data. Second, if an MLA only conducts transactions with
very few accomplices and almost all of their counter-parties
are BAs, MLaD2 may not pick out the MLA from BAs.
However, most MLAs are unlikely to engage in transactions
with numerous benign accounts due to the labor and resources
costs. Therefore, our method can work for most real-world
scenarios.

VI. C ONCLUSION
This study proposes MLaD2 , a semi-supervised framework
based on decoupling training, for MLA detection. It overcomes the drawback of the homogeneity hypothesis of GNN
in ML detection scenarios via the weighting mechanism of
the proposed TRNNS. Additionally, the model successfully
captures the discriminative features of accounts using CSSL
based on the newly designed “SvB” instance pair, which
mitigates the model’s reliance on labeled information and the
adverse effects of class imbalance. Extensive experiments on
a real-world dataset demonstrate that MLaD2 achieves superior detection performance with a small quantity of labeled
training data. Besides, the ablation study verifies the effectiveness of TRNNS and the importance of the fine-tuning
process in enhancing model performance. Experimental results
also proved that MLaD2 has robustness against adversarial
samples.

4532

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

R EFERENCES
[1] A. Salehi, M. Ghazanfari, and M. Fathian, “Data mining techniques
for anti money laundering,” Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res., vol. 12, no. 20,
pp. 10084–10094, 2017.
[2] S. N. F. S. M. Nazri, S. Zolkaflil, and N. Omar, “Mitigating financial
leakages through effective money laundering investigation,” Managerial
Auditing J., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 189–207, Feb. 2019.
[3] A. Verhage, “Between the hammer and the anvil? The anti-money
laundering-complex and its interactions with the compliance industry,”
Crime, Law Social Change, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 9–32, Jul. 2009.
[4] S. Gao, D. Xu, H. Wang, and P. Green, “Knowledge-based anti-money
laundering: A software agent bank application,” J. Knowl. Manage.,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 63–75, Apr. 2009.
[5] D. Savage, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Chou, and X. Yu, “Detection of
money laundering groups: Supervised learning on small networks,” in
Proc. Workshops 31st AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 43–49.
[6] Z. Chen, L. D. Van Khoa, E. N. Teoh, A. Nazir, E. K. Karuppiah,
and K. S. Lam, “Machine learning techniques for anti-money laundering
(AML) solutions in suspicious transaction detection: A review,” Knowl.
Inf. Syst., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 245–285, Nov. 2018.
[7] L. Keyan and Y. Tingting, “An improved support-vector network model
for anti-money laundering,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Manage. E-Commerce
E-Government, Nov. 2011, pp. 193–196.
[8] L.-T. Lv, N. Ji, and J.-L. Zhang, “A RBF neural network model for antimoney laundering,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wavelet Anal. Pattern Recognit.,
Aug. 2008, pp. 209–215.
[9] Z. Chen, W. M. Soliman, A. Nazir, and M. Shorfuzzaman, “Variational autoencoders and wasserstein generative adversarial networks for
improving the anti-money laundering process,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 83762–83785, 2021.
[10] X. Li et al., “FlowScope: Spotting money laundering based on graphs,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 4731–4738.
[11] X. Sun et al., “MonLAD: Money laundering agents detection in transaction streams,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining,
Feb. 2022, pp. 976–986.
[12] M.-C. Lee et al., “AutoAudit: Mining accounting and time-evolving
graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2020,
pp. 950–956.
[13] K. Veeramachaneni, I. Arnaldo, V. Korrapati, C. Bassias, and K. Li,
“AI2 : Training a big data machine to defend,” in Proc. IEEE IEEE
2nd Int. Conf. Big Data Secur. Cloud (BigDataSecurity) Int. Conf. High
Perform. Smart Comput. (HPSC), IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Data Secur.
(IDS), Apr. 2016, pp. 49–54.
[14] D. Labanca, L. Primerano, M. Markland-Montgomery, M. Polino,
M. Carminati, and S. Zanero, “Amaretto: An active learning framework for money laundering detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 41720–41739, 2022.
[15] M. Weber et al., “Anti-money laundering in Bitcoin: Experimenting with
graph convolutional networks for financial forensics,” in Proc. KDD
Workshop Anomaly Detection Finance, 2019, p. 8.
[16] A. Pareja et al., “EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks
for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Apr. 2020,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 5363–5370.
[17] Y. Zhou et al., “Analyzing and detecting money-laundering accounts
in online social networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 115–121,
May 2018.
[18] Y. Xie, Z. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised learning
of graph neural networks: A unified review,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2412–2429, Feb. 2023.
[19] M. Alkhalili, M. H. Qutqut, and F. Almasalha, “Investigation of applying
machine learning for watch-list filtering in anti-money laundering,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 18481–18496, 2021.
[20] Z. Gu, D. Lin, and J. Wu, “On-chain analysis-based detection of
abnormal transaction amount on cryptocurrency exchanges,” Phys. A,
Stat. Mech. Appl., vol. 604, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 127799.
[21] R. I. T. Jensen and A. Iosifidis, “Qualifying and raising anti-money
laundering alarms with deep learning,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 214,
Mar. 2023, Art. no. 119037.
[22] U. G. Ketenci, T. Kurt, S. Önal, C. Erbil, S. Aktürkoglu, and
H. S. Ilhan, “A time-frequency based suspicious activity detection for
anti-money laundering,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 59957–59967, 2021,
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3072114.
[23] C. R. Alexandre and J. Balsa, “Incorporating machine learning and
a risk-based strategy in an anti-money laundering multiagent system,”
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 217, May 2023, Art. no. 119500.

[24] J.-D.-J.
Rocha-Salazar,
M.-J.
Segovia-Vargas,
and
M.-D.-M. Camacho-Miñano, “Money laundering and terrorism
financing detection using neural networks and an abnormality
indicator,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 169, May 2021, Art. no. 114470.
[25] B. Dumitrescu, A. Baltoiu, and S. Budulan, “Anomaly detection in
graphs of bank transactions for anti money laundering applications,”
IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 47699–47714, 2022.
[26] M. Jullum, A. Løland, R. B. Huseby, G. Ånonsen, and J. Lorentzen,
“Detecting money laundering transactions with machine learning,”
J. Money Laundering Control, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 173–186, Jan. 2020.
[27] J. Rissanen, “Modeling by shortest data description,” Automatica,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 465–471, 1978.
[28] H. S. Assumpção, F. Souza, L. L. Campos, V. T. de Castro Pires,
P. M. L. de Almeida, and F. Murai, “DELATOR: Money laundering
detection via multi-task learning on large transaction graphs,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2022, pp. 709–714.
[29] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
[30] B. Kang et al., “Decoupling representation and classifier for long-tailed
recognition,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2020,
pp. 1–16.
[31] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[32] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[33] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2019, pp. 1–17.
[34] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Guo, H. Yin, C. Li, and H. Chen, “Decoupling
representation learning and classification for GNN-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 44th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr.,
Jul. 2021, pp. 1239–1248.
[35] W. Weng Lo, G. K. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and
M. Portmann, “Inspection-L: Self-supervised GNN node embeddings for
money laundering detection in Bitcoin,” 2022, arXiv:2203.10465.
[36] J. Zhou, C. Hu, J. Chi, J. Wu, M. Shen, and Q. Xuan, “Behavior-aware
account de-anonymization on Ethereum interaction graph,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3433–3448, 2022.
[37] X. Luo, X. Han, W. Zuo, Z. Xu, Z. Wang, and X. Wu, “A dynamic
transaction pattern aggregation neural network for money laundering
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput.
Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2022, pp. 818–826.
[38] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2018, pp. 1–12.
[39] B. Knyazev, G. W. Taylor, and M. Amer, “Understanding attention
and generalization in graph neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 4202–4212.
[40] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[41] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, D. Bahdanau, and Y. Bengio, “On the
properties of neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder approaches,”
2014, arXiv:1409.1259.
[42] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[43] S. Li, “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck
of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 5243–5253.
[44] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
[45] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017,
pp. 1–14.
[46] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples,” in Proc. ICLR, 2015, pp. 1–11.
[47] Y. Liu, X. Chen, C. Liu, and D. Song, “Delving into
transferable adversarial examples and black-box attacks,” 2016,
arXiv:1611.02770.
[48] M. Vu and M. T. Thai, “PGM-explainer: Probabilistic graphical model
explanations for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 12225–12235.

LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING

Xuejiao Luo is currently pursuing the master’s degree in computer science and technology
with Shandong Computer Science Center (National
Supercomputer Center, Jinan), Qilu University of
Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences),
China. Her current research interests are in computer
forensics and data mining.

Xiaohui Han (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
and Ph.D. degrees in computer science and technology from Shandong University, China, in 2006 and
2012, respectively. From 2011 to 2012, he was
a Visiting Scholar with the Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory, MIS Department, The University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. He is currently a
Professor with Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Qilu
University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
Sciences), China. He has coauthored more than
30 peer-reviewed articles. His research interests include cybersecurity, digital
forensics, data mining, and machine learning. He serves as a PC member for
several international conferences.

Wenbo Zuo received the master’s and Ph.D. degrees
in astrophysics from the University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences. He is currently an Assistant Researcher with Shandong Computer Science
Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan),
Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy
of Sciences), China. His current research interests
include cyber security, data mining, and machine
learning.

4533

Xiaoming Wu received the master’s degree in
computer science and technology from Shandong
University and the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from Shandong University of
Science and Technology. He is currently a Professor with Shandong Computer Science Center
(National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Qilu
University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
Sciences), China. His current research interests
include industrial internet, big data analysis, and
information security. He was selected as a young and
middle-aged expert with outstanding contributions in Shandong Province.

Wenyin Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng. and M.Eng. degrees in computer science
from Tsinghua University, Beijing, and the D.Sc.
degree from the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa. He was a Professor with the School of
Computer Science and Technology and the Director
of the Web Identity Security Laboratory, Guangdong
University of Technology, the Deputy Director of the
Multimedia Software Engineering Research Centre,
City University of Hong Kong, from 2013 to 2016,
an Assistant Professor with the Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, from 2002 to 2012, and a
full-time Researcher at Microsoft Research China/Asia from 1999 to 2001.
He is currently a full-time Researcher with Zhongguancun Laboratory. His
research interests include anti-phishing and web identity authentication and
management. He is a fellow of IAPR. In 2003, he was awarded the International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition Outstanding Young
Researcher Award from the International Association for Pattern Recognition
(IAPR). He was the TC10 Chair of IAPR from 2006 to 2010.