IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

7091

MPAF: Encrypted Traffic Classification With
Multi-Phase Attribute Fingerprint
Yige Chen

and Yipeng Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— The widespread use of cryptographic protocols
such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) has necessitated the
development of effective methods for encrypted traffic classification. The existing methods relying on a single feature
source face challenges in achieving high accuracy and efficiency
simultaneously. Additionally, there is a decrease in accuracy in
complex scenarios, posing significant challenges for networks and
security services based on application-level traffic classification.
In this paper, we propose Multi-Phase Attribute Fingerprint
(MPAF), an encrypted traffic classification system that overcomes
these limitations. MPAF leverages three phases to separately
leverage attributes that emerge at different time periods of
encrypted traffic communication. Additionally, we transform
discrete attributes into computable vectors through embedding
and design a classifier for the multi-phase mechanism based on a
leaf node masking tree. The experimental results show that MPAF
achieves a classification accuracy ranging from 96.33% to 99.42%
and an average waiting time (AWT) ranging from 0.18s to 0.45s.
MPAF outperforms other approaches in scenarios with high
robustness requirements, including small-scale training datasets,
cross-dataset classification, and unknown application recognition.
Index Terms— Encrypted traffic classification, multi-phase,
TLS messages, network management.

a large proportion of mobile network traffic is now encrypted
using TLS.
Accurate encrypted traffic classification is essential for
a range of networking and security services, including
policy-based network traffic management, application Qualityof-Service (QoS), and application-level firewalls [5]. For
instance, an enterprise network administrator may prioritize
certain specific applications for the quality of critical services and assign a lower network communication priority
to applications that do not adhere to the network policy. Existing approaches for encrypted traffic classification
involve mobile application identification [6], [7], IoT behavior
identification [8], [9], [10], protocol identification [11], etc.
However, existing approaches for encrypted traffic classification overlook the average waiting time required to capture a
sufficient number of packets for classification. Furthermore,
these approaches lack the robustness to classify traffic in
complex scenarios accurately. In this paper, we propose a novel
fingerprinting approach to address the shortcomings of existing
approaches.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Motivation and Problem Statement

B. Our Insights and Proposed Approach

T

1) Key Observation to Encrypted TLS Traffic: In this paper,
we propose MPAF, Multi-Phase Attribute Fingerprint for
encrypted TLS traffic classification. MPAF aims to enhance the
classification efficiency of encrypted TLS traffic by performing
multi-phase traffic classification, while still ensuring high
classification accuracy. The general encrypted communication
process between a client and a server consists of three phases.
In the first phase, the client application initiates a domain name
query against the destination application server, thus obtaining
the IP address of that server. Then, in the second phase, based
on the obtained IP address, the client application conducts a
handshake process with the destination server regarding the
exchange of some metadata (including the negotiated encryption suite, server-side certificate information, etc.). Finally, the
third phase involves the exchange of encrypted application
content between the client and the server. It’s worth noting
that in some situations, due to caching mechanisms, the first
and second phases of this process may not be necessary.
2) Key Insights Into Our System: In this paper, MPAF
builds on our key insight that the three phases of encrypted
traffic communication between a client and a server occur at
distinct time periods: the first phase precedes the second, and
the second precedes the third. If we can classify a majority of

HIS paper presents a novel approach to address the
challenge of encrypted traffic classification for mobile
applications. As the number of mobile applications in the
application market continues to grow, identifying the application to which network traffic belongs becomes increasingly
important for network management. To ensure secure mobile
application communications, major application markets such
as App Store [1] and Google Play [2] have adopted Transport
Layer Security (TLS) [3], [4] encryption standards. As a result,
Manuscript received 2 January 2024; revised 3 June 2024; accepted 30 June
2024. Date of publication 15 July 2024; date of current version 25 July 2024.
This work was supported in part by the Fundamental Scientific Research
Project of Wenzhou City under Grant G2023005 and in part by the General
Scientific Research Project of the Education Department of Zhejiang Province
under Grant Y202248893. The associate editor coordinating the review of
this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Husrev Taha Sencar.
(Corresponding author: Yipeng Wang.)
Yige Chen is with the College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou University, Wenzhou 325000, China, and also with Wenzhou
Key Laboratory for Intelligent Networking, Wenzhou 325000, China (e-mail:
ygchen@wzu.edu.cn).
Yipeng Wang is with the College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China, and also with the Engineering
Research Center of Intelligent Perception and Autonomous Control, Ministry
of Education, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: yipeng.wang1@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3428839

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

7092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

the encrypted flows accurately during the first two phases, the
overall classification efficiency can be significantly enhanced.
Specifically, during encrypted traffic communication, more
than half of encrypted flows can be accurately classified solely
based on their associated domain names. A large portion
of other encrypted flows can be accurately classified solely
through the metadata in the handshake process. The remainder
can be accurately classified using the message sequence of
each TLS flow.
3) Brief Introduction to Our Approach: MPAF aims to
reduce the observation waiting time for encrypted flows
to be classified while ensuring high classification accuracy.
As shown in Figure 1, MPAF consists of three classification
phases, namely, domain name phase, handshake metadata
phase, and message sequence phase.

including small-scale training datasets, cross-dataset classification, and unknown application recognition.
The remaining sections of this paper are structured as
follows. In Section II, we present an overview of prior works.
In Section III, we present the design of MPAF, offering
insights into the system’s architecture and providing detailed
information on each phase. In Section IV, we elaborate on the
details of our dataset collection and provide an overview of the
datasets used in this study. Section V presents the experimental
settings and provides an in-depth analysis of the evaluation
results. Section VI outlines a comparison of our proposed
approach with state-of-the-art methods. Finally, in Section VII,
we conclude our study and discuss potential avenues for future
research.

1) Phase 1: Domain Name Phase. This is the first phase
of our proposed scheme. In this phase, MPAF attempts
to classify a significant portion of the encrypted flows
at an early phase, relying solely on their associated
domain names. Any flows not classified in this phase are
forwarded to the subsequent phases for further analysis.
2) Phase 2: Handshake Metadata Phase. MPAF classifies
encrypted flows that cannot be classified during the
domain name phase. The classification in this phase
relies solely on the raw bytes in the TLS handshake
messages. Encrypted flows that remain unclassified are
then forwarded to the message sequence phase.
3) Phase 3: Message Sequence Phase. MPAF processes
the encrypted flows that remained unclassified after the
first two phases. The objective here is to classify all
these flows accurately based on the message sequence
of each flow.

II. R ELATED W ORK

Through these three phases, MPAF can classify encrypted
flows accurately and more efficiently.

C. Key Contributions
We briefly summarize our main contributions as follows:
We propose an encrypted traffic classification system
called Multi-Phase Attribute Fingerprint (MPAF). MPAF
employs three phases to utilize distinct attributes that
emerge at different time periods within encrypted traffic
communication, thereby enhancing classification efficiency while maintaining high classification accuracy.
• We utilize an embedding mechanism to transform discrete
attributes into calculable vectors and use the message
length sequence as a supplementary fallback attribute.
Additionally, we design a leaf-node masking tree-based
classifier to facilitate the multi-phase mechanism.
• We compare the effectiveness and robustness of MPAF
with state-of-the-art approaches on two real-world collected datasets and two public datasets. Experimental
results demonstrate that MPAF achieves a remarkable
classification accuracy ranging from 96.33% to 99.42%.
Besides, it exhibits a low Average Waiting Time (AWT)
ranging from 0.18s to 0.45s. Notably, MPAF outperforms
other approaches in scenarios demanding robustness,
•

In this section, we introduce the relevant and recent
encrypted traffic classification methods. The literature on
traffic classification techniques can be categorized into
three groups: (1) machine learning-based methods, (2) deep
learning-based methods, and (3) dataset and benchmarking.
In Table I, we give a summary for each related work.
A. Machine Learning-Based Methods
In 2014, Korczyński and Duda [12] proposed the concept
of Markov chain fingerprinting using first-order homogeneous
Markov chains to model the probability of message type
sequences. In 2017, Shen et al. [13] extended this concept
by incorporating second-order message type Markov chains
with the lengths of the Certificate and first Application
Data in the session. They proposed second-order Markov
chain fingerprints with application attribute bigrams (SOB)
to capture distinctive characteristics of applications. In 2020,
Montieri et al. [14] proposed a novel traffic classification
method for network traffic generated by anonymity tools
through a general hierarchical classification framework. The
proposed method uses per-flow statistical features for classification. Additionally, to promote analysis of anonymity
tools’ traffic at different levels of granularity, Montieri et al.
conducted experiments at three levels: (1) anonymous network
level, (2) traffic type level, and (3) application level. Also in
2020, Van Ede et al. [15] proposed a semi-supervised approach
for the mobile application fingerprint named FlowPrint. FlowPrint uses destination-related features to deal with unseen apps
without requiring prior knowledge. In 2021, Aceto et al. [16]
proposed machine learning-based methods for modeling the
network traffic of mobile applications. The proposed method
introduced a novel heuristic to reconstruct application-layer
messages in the common case of encrypted traffic. They
designed and evaluated per-app modeling and prediction using
Hidden Markov Models and high-order Markov Chains at
both the packet level and message level. Also in 2021,
Ma et al. [17] proposed a context-aware website fingerprinting
system for encrypted traffic. The system uses built-in spatialtemporal flow correlation for packet sizes to understand flow
sequential patterns. In 2022, Xu et al. [18] proposed a creative
path signature-based method named ETC-PS. ETC-PS adopts

CHEN AND WANG: MPAF: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH MULTI-PHASE ATTRIBUTE FINGERPRINT

7093

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF R ELATED W ORK

session packet length sequences as the path signature and
performs path transformations to exhibit its structure and
obtain different information. In 2023, Piet et al. [19] proposed
GGFAST, a unified, automated framework designed to build
powerful classifiers for specific network traffic analysis tasks.
GGFAST aims to automatically identify sets of patterns in
packet length sequences, which are critical characteristics of
each category of traffic.
B. Deep Learning-Based Methods
In 2019, Aceto et al. [20] proposed, for the first time,
the design of mobile traffic classifiers capable of operating
with encrypted traffic through the adoption of deep learning technology. Additionally, they systematically provided
valuable guidelines and directions to address the challenges
of applying deep learning algorithms to mobile traffic classification. In the same year, Aceto et al. [21] introduced
MIMETIC, which allows network traffic to be inspected from
complementary views, thus providing a more effective solution
for network traffic classification. MIMETIC uses the initial
bytes of the Layer 4 payload and the fields of the initial
packets as inputs. It is also the first attempt to introduce
the idea of multimodal deep learning into the field of traffic
classification. Also in 2019, Liu et al. [22] proposed the Flow
Sequence Network (FS-Net), which uses a multi-layer RNNbased encoder-decoder structure to generate features from
packet length sequences and directly predicts the original
application of the flow. In 2020, Aceto et al. [23] envisioned
the deep learning paradigm as a stepping stone toward the
design of practical mobile traffic classifiers based on automatically extracted features that can operate with encrypted
traffic and reflect complex traffic patterns. They proposed
a deep learning-based traffic classification framework that
capitalizes on heterogeneous input data from mobile traffic
to solve multiple traffic classification tasks simultaneously.
They also proposed and validated a general framework for
deep learning-based encrypted traffic classification. In the

same year, Lotfollahi et al. [24] proposed a convolution neural
network-based approach named Deep Packet. Deep Packet
takes the IP header and the first 1480 bytes of packets as
input and classifies them through the convolution and max
pooling operations of the neural network. Also in 2020,
Zhang et al. [25] proposed an autonomous model update
scheme to achieve data filtering and dataset construction
for unseen applications, and then update traffic classifiers
via transfer learning. In 2021, Aceto et al. [26], [27] proposed DISTILLER, a novel multimodal deep learning-based
approach for multitask network traffic classification. It aims to
learn both intra- and inter-modality dependencies, thus overcoming the limitations of single-task deep learning in network
traffic classification. The lack of interpretability of classification models built by deep learning techniques prevents
their applicability to critical scenarios. To address this issue,
in 2021, Nascita et al. [28] designed MIMETIC-ENHANCED,
a novel architecture for traffic classification operating at the biflow level. Their proposal leverages the multimodal paradigm
and consists of two branches. They investigate the rationale
behind the working behavior of MIMETIC-ENHANCED by
applying state-of-the-art XAI tools to understand input importance in both branches and within each individual branch.
Also in 2021, Montieri et al. [29] predicted the network traffic
generated by mobile applications at the finest granularity,
the packet level, using multitask deep learning architectures.
To deal with time series data, they proposed a windowing
approach based on a sliding memory window. They also investigated the potential advantages of using exogenous inputs
taken from the traffic data. In 2022, Xiao et al. [30] introduced
an Extended Byte Segment Neural Network (EBSNN) for
network traffic classification. This method introduces an aggregate strategy that relies on only the first k packets in the flow to
identify the flow. For each packet, EBSNN divides the payload
into segments and feeds them into encoders with the attention
mechanism for classification. In 2022, Lin et al. [31] proposed
ET-BERT that pre-trains deep contextualized datagram-level
representation from large-scale unlabeled data. The pre-trained

7094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

model can be fine-tuned on a small number of task-specific
labeled data for accurate encrypted traffic classification. Also
in 2022, Jiang et al. [32] proposed FG-Net to utilize graph
neural networks to capture flow-level relationships. FGNet converts the problem of learning app fingerprints from
encrypted mobile traffic into the task of graph embedding
to identify mobile applications. In 2023, Nascita et al. [33]
aimed to use XAI-based techniques to understand and improve
the behavior of state-of-the-art multimodal and multitask
deep learning traffic classifiers. To this end, they explored
and exploited XAI techniques to characterize these traffic classifiers, providing global interpretations, and proposed
a novel classifier, DISTILLER-EVOLVED, optimized along
three objectives: performance, reliability, and feasibility. Also
in 2023, Qu et al. [34] proposed an input-agnostic hierarchical
deep learning framework tailored for traffic fingerprinting. The
framework allows the effective handling of diverse traffic patterns without reliance on specific input characteristics. In 2024,
Cerasuolo et al. [35] proposed a novel fine-tuning approach
aimed at solving the class incremental learning task in network
traffic classification. To this end, they designed three main
building blocks for the proposed fine-tuning approach in class
incremental learning: memory management, training procedure, and model rectification. Additionally, four per-packet
properties are considered: transport-layer payload size, interarrival time between consecutive packets, TCP window size,
and direction.
C. Dataset and Benchmarking
In 2019, Aceto et al. [36] proposed and described
MIRAGE, a novel reproducible architecture for the capture
and ground-truth creation of the network traffic of mobile
applications. The significant outcome of this architecture is
a human-generated dataset, MIRAGE-2019, which aims to
advance the state-of-the-art in mobile application traffic analysis. In 2020, Van Ede et al. [15] released a new cross-platform
dataset, which includes applications from iOS and Android
operating systems. In 2024, Bovenzi et al. [37] experimentally
evaluated the performance of a large set of state-of-the-art
class incremental learning approaches for classifying network
traffic generated by mobile apps in an incremental scenario.
They made several new and interesting observations regarding
the differences between big-increment and small-increment
scenarios.

TABLE II
ACRONYMS AND T HEIR M EANINGS

gateway. The attacker aims to identify applications associated
with encrypted traffic using a training dataset. By utilizing the
attributes extracted from the traffic, the attacker can determine
if a flow belongs to a particular application. We demonstrate
this attack through experiments described in § V and § VI.
The assumption made in this paper is that the attacker can
track all 802.3 frames to various devices based on extracted
source/destination IP addresses. This enables the reassembly
of frames into TCP flows using the IP 5-tuple. However,
the attacker is unable to obtain the secrets shared between
communication parties, nor can they access plaintext payload
from TLS Application Data messages.
B. Traffic Preprocessing

In this section, we first present the threat model and the
traffic preprocessing method. Then, we outline the systematic design of the Multi-Phase Attribute Fingerprint (MPAF).
MPAF comprises three key phases to hierarchically utilize
traffic attributes, namely Domain Name Phase, Handshake
Metadata Phase, and Message Sequence Phase. For the convenience of readers, we collect all the acronyms used throughout
the manuscript into Table II.

This subsection details the preprocessing of raw traffic
for encrypted traffic classification. The traffic preprocessing
consists of TLS message reassembly and DNS extraction.
As the focus is on the sniffed traffic, network packets are
first extracted from the raw bidirectional traffic and reassembled into bidirectional flows, which form the smallest unit for
classification. A bidirectional flow encapsulates all packets
belonging to a network session, so we can utilize the TLS
protocol specification to parse the packets and recover the TLS
message sequence, which contains handshake messages and
Application Data messages.
DNS packets are also considered in the fingerprint, as they
provide information on queried domains and address records
from authoritative name servers. For the DNS record parsed
from DNS packet d, we extract the domain name DN d , request
time Td , and authoritative addresses record Ad , and build a
DNS record dict, D = {(DN d , Td ) → Ad |d ∈ DNS Packets},
to facilitate the reverse retrieval of domain names from address
records.

A. Threat Model

C. Phase 1: Domain Name Phase

This paper considers an attacker who intercepts encrypted
traffic at a specific point in the network, such as a firewall or

The domain name phase is the first phase of our proposed classification scheme. As shown in Figure 1, this

III. M ULTI -P HASE ATTRIBUTE F INGERPRINT

CHEN AND WANG: MPAF: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH MULTI-PHASE ATTRIBUTE FINGERPRINT

Fig. 1.

7095

Architecture of Multi-Phase Attribute Fingerprint (MPAF).

phase consists of three components: a domain name extractor,
a domain name vectorizer, and a domain name classifier. First,
the domain name extractor retrieves the associated domain
name in reverse by matching each flow’s IP address and timestamp with the acquired DNS records. Then, the domain name
vectorizer generates domain name vectors through attribute
embedding. Finally, the domain name classifier aims to accurately classify a significant portion of encrypted flows at this
early phase based solely on their associated domain names.
1) Domain Name Extractor: In the realm of networking,
domain names provide long-term, stable entry points that allow
applications to access their respective remote servers. Application vendors can utilize Server Name Indication (SNI) to
facilitate multi-domain hosting on a single server to optimize
the efficiency of computing resource utilization. This will
cause “one-to-many” relationships between an IP addresses
and domain names. By extracting the domain name associated
with a flow, we can infer the application to which the flow
belongs. A straightforward way to extract the domain name
associated with a flow is to conduct a reverse lookup from its
IP address.
Specifically, for a given encrypted flow f with IP address
A f and its first packet timestamp T f , the associated DNS
record satisfies the following three conditions: (1) the authoritative addresses record Ad of the DNS record (DNd , Td ) →
Ad ∈ D should contain the IP address of the flow A f , i.e.
A f ∈ Ad ; (2) The request time of the DNS record Td should be
earlier than the first packet timestamp of the flow T f ; (3) When
multiple DNS records meet the first two conditions, we address
the “one-to-many” relationship between IP addresses and
domain names by choosing the DNS record that has the closest
timestamp to the flow. Figure 2 presents a case study of the
reverse retrieval for domain names. For flow 1, we can find
three DNS records that satisfy the address record inclusion
criteria. The timestamp of the third record is later than the

Fig. 2.

The retrieval of domain name.

flow, causing a time logic error. To address the “one-to-many”
issue caused by the first two records, we select the query name
from the second record as the associated domain name because
the timestamp of the second record is closest to the timestamp
of the flow.
Due to the DNS caching mechanism, some DNS queries
do not generate DNS traffic but instead utilize the DNS
caches. However, this does not affect the effectiveness of the
aforementioned reverse DNS lookup for flows’ IP addresses.
We can set the time-to-live (TTL) declared in the DNS
response for captured DNS records, thereby conducting a
validity test of the TTL during the reverse retrieval of domain
names, simulating the process of DNS caching.
2) Domain Name Vectorizer: To represent discrete domain
name values as vectors, we use an embedding matrix for
attribute representation. Specifically, we assign each domain
name an embedding vector based on its occurrence frequency
in the training traffic for each application. For the training
domain name set DN , we construct the domain name embedding matrix E DN = [e1DN , e2DN , . . . , e|DN
DN | ], which comprises
DN
|DN | unique vectors. Each vector ei
= [q1i , q2i , . . . , q Ni ]

7096

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

corresponds to the embedding for the i-th domain name in
DN . Here, ‘N ’ represents the total number of applications, and
the element q ij indicates the frequency of the i-th domain name
appears in the j-th application’s traffic. During the classification phase, we map the domain name DN f to the embedding
DN f
DN
DN
vector eDN
, q2 f , . . . , q N f ] using the embedding
DN f = [q1
matrix. If a domain name is absent from the embedding matrix,
we map it to a zero vector.
3) Domain Name Classifier: The domain name classifier
aims to classify new incoming encrypted flows using the
domain name vectors previously described. Most encrypted
flows can be classified with a high degree of confidence using
only domain name vectors, while others require additional
information for accurate classification. Those flows that remain
unclassified after this initial phase are further processed during
the handshake metadata phase, where additional attributes are
utilized for traffic classification. The classification algorithm
employed by the classifier will be detailed in Section III-F.
D. Phase 2: Handshake Metadata Phase
The handshake metadata phase is the second phase of our
proposed classification scheme. As shown in Figure 1, this
phase consists of a metadata extractor, a metadata vectorizer,
and a metadata classifier. In this phase, we aim to classify
the remaining encrypted flows from the first phase, known as
the domain name phase. Here, we rely solely on raw bytes
in the TLS handshake messages. The encrypted flows that are
not classified in this phase will enter the subsequent message
sequence phase for processing.
1) Metadata Extractor: TLS handshake messages contain
various fields that can serve as indicators for encrypted traffic
classification. Although TLS is an encrypted protocol, its
handshake messages are plaintext. In this part, we design a
deep learning-based model to automatically extract discriminative representation from the raw byte sequences of the TLS
handshake messages. The input to the metadata extractor is the
first L packets of a flow, where each packet belongs to a TLS
handshake message. The output from the metadata extractor
is a deep learning-based model for extracting classification
features from handshake messages.
For a flow f , the metadata extractor first constructs a token
sequence from the first L packets, which serves as the input to
the subsequent step. Specifically, for each packet, the metadata
extractor extracts the initial B bytes to create a token sequence
representation. We use truncation or padding to ensure each
packet maintains its first B bytes. After obtaining L B-length
byte sequences, the metadata extractor arranges these byte
sequences in packet sequential order. We then use a bi-gram
encoding scheme, where each token consists of two adjacent
bytes, to form the token sequence T oK f , denoted by T oK f =
{tok1 , · · · , toki , · · · , tok L∗B/2 }, where each token unit ranges
from 0 to 65535.
Next, we adopt a transformer-based neural network to
learn a stable and discriminative representation for labeled
encrypted flows. There are three key components in our
transformer-based neural network 9: (1) input and positional
embedding, (2) 12 stacked self-attention encoders, and (3) two

fully-connected layers. First, T oK f is fed into an embedding
layer to construct the d-dimensional high-level abstraction, and
positional information is added to the embedding tensor using
a sinusoidal embedding manner. Then, the positional embedding tensor is fed into the first self-attention encoder, which
consists of h parallel self-attention layers and a feed forward
layer. Here, we adopt the default parameter settings from the
ET-BERT structure [31]. Finally, the output tensor from the
stacked self-attention encoders is fed into two fully-connected
layers, with input dimensions of 768 and the number of traffic
classes, respectively. The above neural network model 9 uses
the application labels of the flow samples to guide model
training and convergence.
2) Metadata Vectorizer: After the transformer-based neural
network 9 is well-trained, the metadata vectorize uses it to
extract classification features for each flow. Specifically, for
a flow f , we use the output from the first fully-connected
layer as its feature tensor with dimensions of 768. This feature
tensor is also processed through a tanh activation function. For
the extracted feature tensor, we employ the same embedding
method for vectorization as used in the domain name phase
discussed in Section III-C. Next, we convert the feature values
into embedding vectors, which serve as the input for the
subsequent metadata classifier.
3) Metadata Classifier: Similar to the domain name classifier, the metadata classifier assigns categories to a portion of
the remaining encrypted flows based on the metadata vectors.
The majority of these flows are classified in this phase. Those
encrypted flows lacking domain names and metadata, as well
as some unclear flows, are fed into the final phase. The
algorithm for this classifier is the same as that for the domain
name classifier, but with different inputs, outputs, and different
model parameters. We will describe the algorithm used by the
classifier in Section III-F.
E. Phase 3: Message Sequence Phase
The message sequence phase is the final phase of our
proposed classification scheme. As illustrated in Figure 1, this
phase consists of a message length extractor and a sequence
classifier. The input for this phase consists of encrypted
flows that remained unclassified in the first two phases (the
domain name phase and the handshake metadata phase). Its
objective is to accurately classify all remaining flows. In this
phase, we perform encrypted traffic classification based on the
message sequence of each flow.
1) Message Length Extractor: The encrypted nature of
the message payload in TLS traffic presents a significant
challenge for deep packet inspection-based traffic classification. According to the TLS protocol specification, the byte
stream of a transmitted datagram should be encrypted as a
TLS message before transmission. The length of each TLS
message is determined by the length of the original datagram.
Therefore, the length sequence of TLS messages can reveal the
traffic pattern of applications that generate them. In this phase,
we extract the message length information from TLS flows and
use the message length sequences as our classification input.
We define the message length sequence ML f of a flow f as

CHEN AND WANG: MPAF: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH MULTI-PHASE ATTRIBUTE FINGERPRINT

Fig. 3.

7097

Leaf-node masking tree-based classifier.
Fig. 4.

Schemes for collecting datasets from mobile applications.

follows:
f

f

f

f

ML f = [l1 , l2 , · · · , li , · · · , lh |H | ].

(1)

f

where li denotes the captured message length in the i-th
position, |H | denotes the number of messages used for each
flow.
2) Sequence Classifier: In the sequence classifier,
we directly use the message length sequence as a length
vector, without any embedding operation. To accommodate
the input of our sequence classifier, we truncate overly
long sequences to a preset fixed length and zero-pad short
sequences to ensure dimensional consistency. This module
assigns the final classification results to all input flows
without any confidence limitation. The algorithm used in this
classifier mirrors that of the domain name classifier, with
variations only in its inputs, outputs, and model parameters.
F. Leaf-Node Masking Tree-Based Classifier
In this subsection, we first introduce the design of our
tree-based classification algorithm, which is utilized across
the three phases of our proposed method. Then, we elaborate
on the details of using the bootstrap mechanism to mitigate
overfitting in the classifiers.
As shown in Figure 3, we propose a leaf-node masking treebased classifier for the multi-phase classification of encrypted
traffic. C4.5, a decision tree model, employs normalized
information gain as the splitting criterion to establish paths
from the root to the leaf nodes. A node becomes a leaf node
and ceases further splitting once the training samples meet
the preset parameter thresholds. In the initial two phases, our
strategy is to utilize early-generated attributes, such as the
domain name and the metadata from handshake messages,
to achieve high accuracy and efficiency in traffic classification.
For this purpose, we mask leaf nodes with a node purity value
greater than 0 – that is, those containing training samples from
multiple categories. Flow samples classified into masked nodes
will be advanced to the subsequent phase for further analysis,
while other samples are immediately classified. In contrast
to the earlier phases, the final phase of our method retains

impure leaf nodes, thus preserving the capability to classify
all incoming flows.
One C4.5 decision tree is prone to over-fitting when the
training data contains noise or irrelevant patterns. To address
this issue, we implement the bootstrap mechanism within
the random forest algorithm, which performs sampling
at both the sample level and the feature level. For the
|S|
training dataset S = {(x j , y j )} j=1 that contains |S|
samples, the random forest algorithm constructs a subset
S ′ = {Sub1 , . . . , Subi , . . . , Sub K } through sampling with
replacement, where K is the number of subsets. Using these
subsets, the random forest algorithm then constructs K
leaf-node masking trees in each phase. For each flow sample
fed into the random forest, we can obtain K application labels
from the K trees. If more than K ∗ P identical labels are
present in the results, where P ∈ (0, 1] is a preset threshold
parameter, we confirm the classification and assign the flow to
the most confidently predicted label; otherwise, we advance
it into the next phase.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS
In this section, we introduce four encrypted traffic classification datasets used to evaluate our proposed approach
and other state-of-the-art methods. The first two datasets are
collected by ourselves: one is a manually collected dataset, and
the other is an automatically collected dataset. The third and
fourth datasets are public datasets: one is the cross-platform
(Android) dataset, and the other is the cross-platform (iOS)
dataset.

A. Collection Scheme
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of MPAF, the collection of mobile network datasets with ground-truth application
labels is essential. Two fundamental schemes are commonly
used to collect such datasets, namely (1) active dataset collection, and (2) passive dataset collection.

7098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

1) Active Dataset Collection: Figure 4 (a) illustrates the
active scheme used for collecting mobile application datasets,
which is similar to the MIRAGE architecture [36]. The
scheme involves running mobile applications on a manipulated Android phone and dumping the corresponding mobile
network traces with the application label on the workstation.
The mobile application activities can be generated using either
Monkeyrunner [38] or volunteers. The manual trace collection
generates authentic application traces but requires significant
human effort. Monkeyrunner offers the advantage of full
automation to generate traces by random UI operations [6],
[39]. Compared to the human collection, Monkeyrunner has
the fundamental limitation that the collected traces may not
reflect the complex, structured interactions of actual human
users. The workstation monitors the traffic forwarded by its
NIC when the Android phone is connected to the workstation’s
access point, to selectively capture the traces generated by an
application and attach the specified application label to them.
2) Passive Dataset Collection: The passive scheme,
as shown in Figure 4 (b), collects unlabeled mobile application
traces through a port-mirroring [40] supporting switch or
another network trace collection device deployed between the
mobile device network and the Internet. To label the passively
collected traces, some works [12], [13] select certain labelable
encrypted flows from the collected traces by matching their
IP addresses to the address records [41] of application-related
domain names. However, the accuracy of application labels
in this scheme may be compromised when the domain name
is mapped to more than one application, such as several
applications that share the same domain names.
B. Datasets Collected by Ourselves
To ensure accurate experimental evaluations, we employ
two different dataset collection schemes, namely the manual
and automated methods, to gather network traces for popular
mobile applications.1 During the trace collection process,
only the necessary system applications and the application
being traced are installed on the Android phone. To minimize
extraneous network connection requests, we use a root-level
firewall to block noisy requests by Android system applications. We refer to the application list in [13] to conduct a
robust comparison evaluation against state-of-the-art methods.
We add three applications, ‘Taobao’, ‘Amap’, and ‘Baidu
Map’, to examine the classification performance of applications from the same vendor. The manual dataset collection
was conducted for two months, compared to two weeks for
the automated collection.
Table III presents a statistical summary of the two datasets,
including the number of flows (Flows), packets (Packets), percent of flows starting from a domain name query (Domain),
percent of flows containing an X.509 certificate (Cert), and
percent of flows starting from a domain name query or containing an X.509 certificate (Both). The imbalance in the number
of flows in the automatically collected dataset is attributed
to the varying complexity of the application UI logic and
Monkeyrunner’s adaptability to them. Our statistical analysis
1 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ygchen1/mpaf-dataset-pcap

demonstrates that roughly 25%-30% of the encrypted flows
in the datasets lack domain name association. In the passive
dataset collection scheme, these flows may be discarded due
to difficulty in labeling. Additionally, approximately 5%-10%
of the flows neither originate from a domain query nor possess
a certificate, posing a challenge for the classifier.
Table IV presents the ranking of attribute overlap between
applications. The utilization of public or vendor libraries in
applications will result in the presence of identical domain
names and SNI attributes across application datasets. We take
the average proportion of flows with the same attributes
between two applications in their datasets as the proportion
of attribute overlap. The attribute overlap between Alipay/Taobao, Taobao/Amap, and Taobao/Ele reaches an average
of 34.84% 23.94%, and 14.78%, respectively, presenting a
significant challenge for the classifier.
C. Public Datasets
To further evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
proposed approach, we also use public datasets released by
Van Ede et al. in 2020 [15]. The datasets include two encrypted
traffic classification tasks: (1) the Cross-Platform (Android)
task, and (2) the Cross-Platform (iOS) task. The statistical
information for this dataset is shown in Table V. The first
task contains 215 applications, while the second contains
196 applications. The Android apps and the iOS apps were
collected from the top 100 apps in the US, China, and India.
The datasets exhibit a long-tail data distribution across all
classes, meaning that some applications have a very small
number of flows. We retain the classes with more than 30 flows
in the dataset to ensure each class has a sufficient number of
flows for reliable experimental evaluations.
V. E VALUATION OF MPAF
In the present section, we undertake a comprehensive evaluation of the MPAF through rigorous experiments. Initially,
we introduce the evaluation preliminary in § V-A, after which
we report the evaluation results in § V-B.
A. Preliminary
1) Evaluation Schemes: To comprehensively evaluate the
performance of MPAF, we devise two comparison experiments
on the manually collected dataset and two cross-platform
datasets, aiming at exploring the performance of MPAF’s
phases.
First, we conduct a parameter selection experiment for the
leaf-masking-based tree classifier, including the number of
subsets K and the threshold parameter P. We vary the range of
parameter K ∈ {10, 20, 30}, and P ∈ {0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0}.
For each parameter combination, we evaluate the classification
accuracy of the three phases separately and calculate the
overall classification accuracy. After selecting the optimal
parameters, we further measure the average waiting time, the
execution time, and the proportion of classified samples in the
three phases.
Besides, we perform an experiment to study the effectiveness of a single MPAF phase in classification. Meanwhile,

CHEN AND WANG: MPAF: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH MULTI-PHASE ATTRIBUTE FINGERPRINT

7099

TABLE III
S TATISTICAL S UMMARY OF DATASETS O URSELVES

TABLE IV
R ANKING OF ATTRIBUTE OVERLAP B ETWEEN A PPLICATIONS

TABLE V
S TATISTICAL I NFORMATION OF THE P UBLIC C ROSS -P LATFORM DATASET

we can infer the performance lower bound of MPAF from the
results of this experiment.
We conduct the experiments on a general computing server
with 2*Intel® Xeon® Gold 6330 CPU @ 2.00GHz and DDR4
2933MHz 256GB memory.
2) Cross-Validation: We employ repeated random
sub-sampling to mitigate the potential impact of accidental
errors introduced by the dataset partitioning. We partition
each experimental dataset into a training dataset and a
validation dataset in a randomized manner using a 70-30 split
and repeat this split ten times and compute the average of the
resulting experimental results.
3) Evaluation Criteria: In our evaluation, we employ Precision (Prec.), Recall (Rec.), Accuracy (Acc.), F1_Macro (F1),
and Average Waiting Time (AWT) as metrics to provide a
comprehensive evaluation of the overall performance.

Precision: We define the precision of application Appi as
the ratio of correctly classified encrypted flows belonging
to Appi to the total number of encrypted flows classified
as Appi . The Precision is the macro average of all
application precisions.
• Recall: We define the recall of Application Appi as the
ratio of correctly classified encrypted flows belonging to
Appi to the total number of encrypted flows that actually
belong to Appi . The Recall is the macro average of all
application recalls.
• Accuracy: We define accuracy as the overall ratio of
correctly classified encrypted flows to the total number
of encrypted flows.
• F1_Macro: We calculate the F-score of each application
Appi as the harmonic mean of its Precision and Recall.
The F1_Macro is the macro average of all F-scores.
• AWT: We define the waiting time W T f of a flow
f as the time required from the initialization of the
flow until sufficient packets are collected or the flow is
prematurely terminated to implement classification. The
average waiting time (AWT) is the arithmetic mean of the
waiting times. A smaller AWT value implies a quicker
implementation of traffic classification.
•

B. Experimental Results of MPAF
1) The Parameters Selection for Leaf-Node Masking TreeBased Classifier: Table VI shows the experimental results of
the classifier parameter selection. We make a grid search for
both the number of trees K and the classification threshold P.
For each parameter combination, we evaluate the classification
accuracy in each phase and perform summary calculations.
Based on the Table VI, all parameter combinations show
remarkably high classification accuracy for the summary of all
phases. In some parameter combinations, the first two phases
completely classify all flows, leaving none for the third phase.
We use ’-’ in the table to indicate this. The parameter combinations {K = 20, P = 0.8}, {K = 30, P = 0.5}, and {K =

7100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE VI
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF C LASSIFIER PARAMETER S ELECTION

TABLE VII
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE IN E ACH P HASE

TABLE VIII
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE W ITH A S INGLE P HASE

20, P = 0.6} achieve the best overall accuracy of 99.50%,
96.51%, and 99.11% for the three experimental datasets,
respectively. From the perspective of attribute sources, the
message sequence is less discriminative than the attributes in
the first two phases and is therefore more susceptible to the
classifier parameters. Considering the classification accuracy
across three datasets, we select {K = 30, P = 0.6} as the
final parameter combination.
Table VII presents the classification performance in each
phase under the optimal parameter combination, including
classification accuracy, AWT, and the proportion of classified
flows. The first two phases both demonstrate high classification
accuracy and low AWT, and together handle approximately
99% of the flows. The flows classified in the message sequence
phase are residual flows from the first two phases, introducing
challenges to the classification process. The accuracy of the
message sequence phase ranges from 34.67% to 76.52%,
which is significantly lower than the first two phases. This
phase tries to use message sequence features to classify them
as accurately as possible, thereby improving the overall system
accuracy. The AWT of the domain name phase is 0.00s

because the associated DNS records are always generated
and captured before the flow starts. The domain name phase
of MPAF handles approximately 70% of the flows, which
significantly reduces the waiting time for most flows. The
AWT of the handshake metadata phase ranges from 0.62s to
1.32s, while the AWT of the message sequence phase ranges
from 1.00s to 4.19s. The overall AWT of the three phases
are 0.45, 0.18, and 0.19 seconds(s) for the three experimental
datasets, respectively.
2) The Effectiveness of a Single MPAF Phase: Table VIII
shows the classification performance of each single phase.
We implement this experiment by skipping the prior phases
and enforcing classification at a given phase. Based on the
combined results of each phase across the three datasets,
the domain name phase shows high precision but relatively
lower recall. The handshake metadata phase achieves both
high accuracy and recall. The performance of the message
sequence phase fluctuates significantly, making it suitable as
a supplementary fallback. In the manually collected dataset
and the cross-platform(Android) dataset, the combined use
of all three phases further enhances overall performance.

CHEN AND WANG: MPAF: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH MULTI-PHASE ATTRIBUTE FINGERPRINT

7101

TABLE IX
C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY

Fig. 5.

Classification accuracy with different training dataset proportions.

TABLE X
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF C ROSS -DATASET C LASSIFICATION

In the cross-platform(iOS) dataset, the overall performance is
minimally affected by the accuracy of the domain name phase
and the message sequence phase, but still remains relatively
high.
VI. C OMPARISONS W ITH E XISTING A PPROACHES
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of
MPAF by comparing it with five contemporary approaches
in terms of classification accuracy, AWT, scalability of the
dataset, and resilience to cross-dataset classification. Furthermore, we compare MPAF against one advanced approach that
addresses the challenge of unknown application recognition.
A. Preliminary
1) Existing Approaches: In this section, we conduct a comparison analysis of MPAF with six state-of-the-art approaches
for encrypted traffic classification. These approaches are
selected for their superior declared classification performance,
with a focus on incorporating a variety of technical routes.

FS-Net [22] utilizes an encoder-decoder structure to generate features and directly classify the feature vectors.
We use the parameters mentioned in their paper to rebuild
the neural network using Pytorch.
• EBSNN [30] is a method that aggregates the payload
segments of the first few packets of each flow as input
and classifies them using an encoder with an attention
mechanism. We utilize open-source code to implement
the approach on our datasets.
• ET-BERT [31] is a pre-trained model on large-scale
unlabeled traffic data. We refine the model on our datasets
through fine-tuning using the open-source code.
• ETC-PS [18] builds traffic path signatures for the first
N data packets of each flow and uses machine learning algorithms to implement the classifier. We use six
sequence features declared in the paper to rebuild the
system.
• Input-Agnostic [34] is a neural network method that
is built upon a hierarchical attention mechanism that
integrates information from packet level, flow level, and
•

7102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE XI
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS IN THE P RESENCE OF U NKNOWN A PPLICATIONS

trace level. We implement the approach on our datasets
using open-source code.
• AMUS [25] is a novel approach that identifies unknown
applications by setting a threshold on the discriminator.
We use the parameters mentioned in the paper to rebuild
the unknown application identification system.
2) Setting of MPAF: According to the experimental results
presented in § V, we select {K = 30, P = 0.6} as the
parameter combination, and use a maximum of 5 payload
packets per flow in the second phase and a maximum of
12 messages per flow in the third phase.
3) Experimental Setting: In this study, we evaluate MPAF
against state-of-the-art approaches on six key aspects, namely
classification accuracy, F1_Macro, AWT, scalability of the
dataset, resilience to cross-dataset classification, and recognition of unknown applications. To compare classification
accuracy, F1_Macro, and AWT, we conduct experiments on
the manually collected dataset and two cross-platform datasets.
We also investigate the scalability of the dataset in relation
to classification accuracy, covering a range from 20% to
80% of the manually collected dataset and two cross-platform
datasets.
Moreover, we explore the robustness of cross-dataset classification by training on the automatically collected dataset
and validating on the manually collected dataset. Finally,
to evaluate the performance of MPAF in the recognition of

unknown applications, we compare it with a state-of-the-art
approach on the manually collected dataset.
B. Classification Performance and AWT
Table IX presents the comparison experimental results of
both the classification effectiveness metric and the classification efficiency metric. In terms of classification effectiveness
metric, Table IX shows that MPAF achieves high classification accuracies of 99.42%, 99.09%, and 96.33% on the
three datasets, accompanied by consistently high F1_Macro
scores. On the manually collected dataset, MPAF surpasses all
the state-of-the-art approaches on the classification accuracy.
In addition, MPAF and EBSNN lead the other methods on
the AWT metric. On the cross-platform(Android) dataset, the
classification accuracy of MPAF and ET-BERT is comparable
and leads other methods, while the AWT of MPAF leads all the
other approaches. On the cross-platform(iOS) dataset, MPAF
is slightly inferior to ET-BERT in classification accuracy but
performs 3.74 × faster than ET-BERT on the AWT metric.
The slightly inferior performance of MPAF is caused by the
domain name phase. Table VII shows that the performance of
the domain name phase falls short compared to the handshake
metadata phase. To further improve performance, it is feasible
to incorporate the first packet information into the domain
name phase to enhance its classification capability. The good
performance of ET-BERT on the cross-platform dataset can be

CHEN AND WANG: MPAF: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH MULTI-PHASE ATTRIBUTE FINGERPRINT

attributed to its reliance on a pre-trained transformer model,
which exhibits better generalization capabilities on datasets
with fewer samples.
Discussion: The Average Waiting Time (AWT) is the arithmetic mean of the waiting time when sufficient packets have
been captured or the flow is prematurely terminated. Thus,
the AWT is primarily determined by the number of packets
required by each method. Based on the results in Table IX,
MPAF achieves the AWTs of 0.45s, 0.18s, and 0.19s on
the three datasets without packet limitations, respectively,
improves the AWT by up to 77.53 times compared to the stateof-the-art approach. MPAF requires a maximum of 5 payload
packets in the second phase and a maximum of 12 messages
in the third phase, resulting in lower AWTs compared to stateof-the-art approaches. EBSNN and ET-BERT require a small,
fixed number of payload packets, resulting in relatively low
AWT ranges of 0.41s to 0.69s and 0.71s to 1.00s, respectively.
FS-Net, ETC-PS, and Input-Agnostic achieve classification
with 32-40 raw packets, resulting in much higher AWTs.
C. Robustness to Scale of the Dataset
The classification accuracy of MPAF and five state-of-theart approaches, under different proportions of the training
dataset, is presented in Figure 5. For the manually collected
dataset and cross-platform(Android) dataset, as the proportion
of the training dataset increases, the improvement of FSNet, ETC-PS, and Input-Agnostic is notably significant, which
highlights the substantial dependence of these approaches
on the scale of the training dataset. The accuracy of other
approaches, MPAF, ET-BERT, and EBSNN, do not increase
significantly as the proportion of the training dataset increases.
For the manually collected dataset and cross-platform(android)
dataset, the accuracy of ET-BERT, FS-Net, and ETC-PS is
fairly high at 20% training dataset proportion, which indicates
the robustness of these approaches to the training dataset’s
scale. MPAF shows consistently high accuracy from 20%
to 80% of the training dataset proportion with very small
differences. This demonstrates the strong tolerance of MPAF
to the inadequacy of the training dataset, and we can significantly reduce the amount of training dataset while maintaining
high accuracy. For the cross-platform(iOS) dataset, some
approaches show a significant decrease in classification performance under all training dataset proportions, while MPAF and
ET-BERT maintain a high classification accuracy with only
20% of the training dataset.
D. Resilience to Cross-Dataset Classification
Table X reports the results of a comparison study
of approaches when applied to cross-dataset classification.
Specifically, the classifiers are trained on the automatically
collected dataset and tested on the manually collected dataset.
We create two MPAF variants for comparison in cross-dataset
classification and the recognition of unknown applications in
the subsequent subsection.
• MPAF-D is a Dual-phase attribute fingerprint where the
first phase exploits domain name and handshake metadata
and the second phase uses all attributes.

7103

MPAF-M is a three-phase attribute fingerprint that
incorporates Multiple attributes in its last two phases.
Specifically, the first phase exploits domain names, the
second phase uses domain name and handshake metadata,
and the third phase uses all attributes.
The state-of-the-art approaches exhibit accuracy and
F1_Macro ranging from 17.24% to 47.75%. This represents a
decline of 47.86% to 71.19% when compared to the baseline
classification results presented in Table IX. The dissimilarities
between the two datasets stem from differences in the UI
operation logic of the application when generating traffic,
resulting in differences in dataset distribution. The independent
nature of MPAF’s utilized attributes, such as Domain Name
and Metadata, from the traffic content enables it to perform
accurate classification for most applications. This results in an
accuracy of 79.09%, signifying a decrease of 20.33%, and an
F1_Macro of 77.44%, reflecting a drop of 21.88%.
•

E. Recognition of Unknown Applications
In addition to providing traffic classification for known
applications in the training dataset, we can make some modifications to MPAF to enable it to identify unknown applications
in real-world scenarios. We alter the classification output
mode from labels to classification probability vectors v =
[ p1 , p2 , . . . , p N ], where pi is the classification probability to
i-th application. In the last phase of MPAF and its variants,
we set a probability threshold τ to label the flows whose
maximum probability is lower than the threshold, that is,
max(v) < τ , to the unknown applications.
To evaluate the robustness of MPAF, MPAF-D, MPAF-M,
and AMUS against unknown applications, we randomly select
three applications as unknown and remove the corresponding
traffic from the training dataset, but keep them in the validation
dataset. We conduct the experiments on four scenarios with
different randomly selected unknown applications to improve
the confidence of the experimental results. In the experimental
result analysis, we treat the unknown applications as a distinct
class.
Table XI reports the experimental results of classifying
encrypted traffic in the presence of unknown applications.
Experimental results reveal that MPAF attains the highest
classification accuracy, ranging from 93.50% to 97.09%,
F1_Macro from 93.89% to 97.72%, an unknown application precision rate ranging from 92.16% to 95.68%, and
an unknown application recall rate of 100.00% across four
scenarios. The overall performance of MPAF-M is higher
than MPAF-D, but weaker than MPAF. Compared to MPAFM, MPAF-D removes a phase designed for domain attributes
and maintains comparable overall performance to MPAF-M.
This indicates that independently utilizing domain attributes
in the initial phase does not result in an overall performance
decrease; instead, it can reduce the AWT of the classification.
AMUS demonstrates a classification accuracy ranging from
74.07% to 81.18%, F1_Macro from 70.62% to 77.80%,
an unknown application precision rate varying between
71.34% to 92.45%, and an unknown application recall rate
spanning 9.73% to 23.22% across four scenarios. In comparison to the precision rate for unknown applications, the recall

7104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

rate for unknown applications is notably lower. This could
be attributed to the ambiguous classification boundaries of
known applications. In comparison to AMUS, MPAF exhibits
superior performance with a 14.93% to 21.36% advantage in
classification accuracy, an improvement of 18.19% to 25.87%
in F1_Macro, a 1.71% to 24.34% increase in precision for
unknown application precision rate, and a 76.78% to 90.27%
boost in unknown application recall rate.
VII. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
This study introduces an efficient encrypted traffic classification system named Multi-Phase Attribute Fingerprint
(MPAF), which leverages three phases to exploit attributes
emerging at different time periods. The experimental results
clearly demonstrate the superiority of MPAF over stateof-the-art approaches in terms of classification efficiency
and robustness. The two datasets used in our study were
captured, respectively, by volunteers and through machine
automation. There still exists a performance gap between
the cross-dataset classification and single-dataset classification. In future research, we will delve into the diminishing
effectiveness of attributes across different datasets to achieve
comparable classification accuracy. These findings will significantly broaden the applicability of automatically collected
datasets for replacing manually collected datasets.
R EFERENCES
[1] App
Store.
Accessed:
Jan.
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.apple.com/ios/app-store/
[2] Google Play. Accessed: Jan. 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://play.google.com/store
[3] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol
version 1.2,” Internet Eng. Task Force, USA, Tech. Rep. rfc5246, 2008.
[4] E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol version 1.3,”
Internet Eng. Task Force, USA, Tech. Rep. rfc8446, 2018.
[5] Y. Wang, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, and T. Zang, “Rethinking
robust and accurate application protocol identification,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 129, pp. 64–78, Dec. 2017.
[6] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[7] M. Conti, Q. Q. Li, A. Maragno, and R. Spolaor, “The dark side(channel) of mobile devices: A survey on network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2658–2713, 4th Quart., 2018.
[8] A. Acar et al., “Peek-a-boo: I see your smart home activities, even
encrypted!” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Secur. Privacy Wireless Mobile
Netw., Jul. 2020, pp. 207–218.
[9] B. Charyyev and M. H. Gunes, “IoT event classification based on
network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops,
Jul. 2020, pp. 854–859.
[10] S. Dong, Z. Li, D. Tang, J. Chen, M. Sun, and K. Zhang, “Your
smart home can’t keep a secret: Towards automated fingerprinting of
IoT traffic,” in Proc. 15th ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
Oct. 2020, pp. 47–59.
[11] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Investigating two different
approaches for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. 6th Annu. Conf.
Privacy, Secur. Trust, Oct. 2008, pp. 156–166.
[12] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
[13] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute
bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
[14] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Bovenzi, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
“A dive into the dark web: Hierarchical traffic classification of anonymity
tools,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1043–1054,
Jul. 2020.

[15] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
vol. 27, 2020, pp. 1–18.
[16] G. Aceto, G. Bovenzi, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapé, “Characterization and prediction of mobile-App traffic using
Markov modeling,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 907–925, Mar. 2021.
[17] X. Ma et al., “Context-aware website fingerprinting over encrypted
proxies,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2021,
pp. 1–10.
[18] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing
traffic paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181,
Jun. 2022.
[19] J. Piet, D. Nwoji, and V. Paxson, “GGFAST: Automating generation
of flexible network traffic classifiers,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf.,
New York, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 850–866.
[20] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “Mobile encrypted
traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation,
lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
[21] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile
encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944.
[22] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[23] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Toward effective
mobile encrypted traffic classification through deep learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 409, pp. 306–315, Oct. 2020.
[24] M. Lotfollahi, R. S. H. Zade, M. J. Siavoshani, and M. Saberian, “Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020.
[25] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405.
[26] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, and A. Pescapè,
“Encrypted multitask traffic classification via multimodal deep learning,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Aug. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[27] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985.
[28] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
[29] A. Montieri, G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico,
and A. Pescapè, “Packet-level prediction of mobile-app traffic using
multitask deep learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, Dec. 2021,
Art. no. 108529.
[30] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN:
Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538,
Sep. 2022.
[31] X. Lin, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram
representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642.
[32] M. Jiang et al., “Accurate mobile-app fingerprinting using flow-level
relationship with graph neural networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 217,
Nov. 2022, Art. no. 109309.
[33] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapé, “Improving performance, reliability, and feasibility in multimodal multitask traffic classification with XAI,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289, Jun. 2023.
[34] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework
for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023,
pp. 589–606.
[35] F. Cerasuolo et al., “MEMENTO: A novel approach for class incremental
learning of encrypted traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, May 2024,
Art. no. 110374.
[36] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
“MIRAGE: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” in
Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Comput., Commun. Secur. (ICCCS), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1–8.

CHEN AND WANG: MPAF: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH MULTI-PHASE ATTRIBUTE FINGERPRINT

[37] G. Bovenzi et al., “Benchmarking class incremental learning in deep
learning traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 51–69, Feb. 2024.
[38] (2019). Monkeyrunner—Android Developers. [Online]. Available:
https://developer.android.com/studio/test/monkeyrunner/
[39] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
pp. 439–454.
[40] J. Zhang and A. Moore, “Traffic trace artifacts due to monitoring via
port mirroring,” in Proc. Workshop End-End Monitor. Techn. Services,
May 2007, pp. 1–8.
[41] P. V. Mockapetris, “Domain names: Concepts and facilities,” Internet
Eng. Task Force, USA, Tech. Rep. rfc1034, 1987.

Yige Chen received the Ph.D. degree in computer
software and theory from the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
China, in 2022. He is currently a Lecturer with the
College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou University, China. His research
interests include encrypted traffic fingerprints, network security, and machine learning.

7105

Yipeng Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Institute
of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS), China, in 2014. He is currently an
Associate Professor with the College of Computer
Science, Beijing University of Technology, China.
He has published more than 50 research papers
in refereed international journals and conferences,
such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION
F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE/ACM T RANS ACTIONS ON N ETWORKING , IEEE International
Conference on Network Protocols, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK
AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT . His research interests include networking,
network security, and machine learning. He serves as a Program Committee Member for IJCAI 2021, IJCAI 2022, IJCAI 2023, and IJCAI
2024. He was a recipient of the Best Paper Award at IEEE International
Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP) on his protocol format inference
technology. He serves as a regular reviewer for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS
ON N ETWORKING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C OGNITIVE C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKING,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING, and
IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.