IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

5520313

MSNet: Self-Supervised Multiscale Network With
Enhanced Separation Training for Hyperspectral
Anomaly Detection
Haijun Liu , Member, IEEE, Xi Su, Xiangfei Shen , and Xichuan Zhou , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) has
attracted increasing attention due to its economical and efficient
applications. The main challenge lies in the data-starved problem
of hyperspectral images (HSIs) and the costliness of manual
annotation, making it heavily reliant on the model’s adaptability
and robustness to unseen scenes under limited samples. Selfsupervised learning offers a solution to this urgency via mining
meaningful representations from the data itself. One promising
paradigm is leveraging untrained neural networks to reconstruct
the background component for revealing anomalous information. Its capability stems from the network architecture and
the training process rather than learning from expensive and
strongly domain-dependent data, which is naturally applicable to
HAD. In this article, to handle the urgent requirement for selfsupervised learning in HAD, we propose a multiscale network
(termed MSNet) that detects anomalies with enhanced separation
training. The network architecture consists of several multiscale
convolutional encoder–decoder (CED) layers, considering the
spatial characteristics of the anomalies. To suppress the anomalies
during background reconstruction, we adopt a new separation
training strategy by introducing a soft separator for better practicality on larger datasets. Extensive experiments conducted on five
commonly used datasets and the HAD100 dataset, demonstrate
the superiority of our method over its counterparts. Our code is
available at https://github.com/enter-i-username/MSNet.
Index Terms— Enhanced separation training, hyperspectral
anomaly detection (HAD), multiscale network, self-supervised
learning.

X
X̂
M

M̄
ϵ
S(·)

N OMENCLATURE
Network input hyperspectral image.
Network output background image.
Binary mask. Ones indicate the locations of
anomalous pixels, while zeros represent the
background pixels.
Boolean not operation on M.
Small constant that prevents division by
zero.
Summation of all elements in the input
matrix.

Manuscript received 17 May 2024; accepted 4 June 2024. Date of publication 7 June 2024; date of current version 20 June 2024. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant U2133211, Grant 62001063, and Grant 61971072; and in part by
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
2023CDJXY-037. (Corresponding author: Xichuan Zhou.)
The authors are with the School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China (e-mail:
zxc@cqu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3411009

⊙
∥ · ∥F

Element-wise multiplication over spatial
dimensions.
Frobenius norm.
I. I NTRODUCTION

H

YPERSPECTRAL imagery (HSI) has been receiving
great attention in the field of remote sensing over the
past decades and has been widely utilized in various tasks [1],
[2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. Among these studies, hyperspectral
anomaly detection (HAD) stands out as a crucial technique
for localizing targets of interest in HSIs without the need
for human supervision [7]. This is particularly relevant due
to the data-starved problem of HSIs [8], [9] and the costliness of obtaining human labels. Therefore, HAD can be
applied economically and efficiently for various civilian and
military purposes [10], [11], [12]. Hyperspectral anomalies are
defined as an extremely small number of pixels with spectral
signatures that differ significantly from the surrounding or
global background [13]. Generally, the imbalance between
the samples of background and anomalies makes the direct
binary classification of abnormal pixels against background
pixels quite challenging [14]. More importantly, due to the
diversity of spectral sensors and anomalous targets, achieving
consistent performance across different scenarios with a unified learning model is difficult, placing high demands on the
model’s adaptability and robustness. To date, various studies
have proposed solutions to address this difficult yet crucial
problem from different perspectives. These solutions can be
broadly categorized into four types: unsupervised background
modeling, semi-supervised background reconstruction, weakly
supervised discriminative learning, and self-supervised background reconstruction.1
Unsupervised methods model the background from the
observed HSI in a model-driven manner, leveraging prior
knowledge and assumptions from the background component.
They measure the abnormality of each pixel by calculating the
difference between the original image and the background.
In 1990s, Reed and Xiaoli proposed the RXD [15], which
1 The methods of four types all possess an unsupervised nature since they do
not require human-annotated labels. In this article, we categorize them based
on their respective methodologies. For example, the self-supervised methods
take the image itself as the supervision information, and the semi-supervised
methods only screen background pixels as training samples.

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5520313

assumes that the background pixels follow a multivariate
Gaussian distribution and utilizes the Mahalanobis distance
as a measure of the deviation of outliers from the background. Building upon this foundation, various enhancements
have been developed, such as the local information-based
RXD [16], the kernel trick-driven RXD [17], and other
representatives [18], [19], [20]. In addition to these probability distribution-based methods, some others model the
background using man-made image priors, also referred to as
representation-based methods [13]. They hold a fundamental
assumption that background pixels can be represented by background pixels locally or globally, whereas anomalous pixels
cannot [21]. For example, the collaborative representationbased detector (CRD) [22] considers each background pixel
as a linear combination of its neighboring pixels, which are
included in a local dual window. To exploit more characteristics of the HSI from a global view, two image priors, i.e.,
the low-rank property and the sparsity, are discussed in many
studies [23], [24], [25], [26]. While these unsupervised modeldriven methods maintain ideal and simplistic assumptions
for background modeling, they may fail to accurately detect
anomalies concealed within more complex scenes [27].
The remaining three types of methods conduct detection
within a data-driven paradigm based on parameterized neural
networks [28], [29], [30] rather than strongly relying on
handcrafted priors, which are more practical and adaptive
for handling different complex backgrounds. They train networks to learn low-level and abstract representations of the
image and detect anomalies through reconstruction errors.
The semi-supervised methods [31], [32] search for pure
background samples in the image before training using clustering [33], [34] or distance measurement [35]. Different from
semi-supervised ones, the weakly supervised group [27] automatically generates supervision information for both anomaly
and background, holding a belief that the prior search is not
accurate. It employs the generative adversarial network (GAN)
[36] for discriminative learning between the coarsely annotated
background and anomalous pixels. To conclude, the goal of
the above-mentioned two types is to “overfit” their networks
to a highly compact background boundary, exposing outliers
far when testing [37]. Unfortunately, the boundary is not
robustly guaranteed, especially in cases where the initial coarse
searching mistakenly includes anomalies in the background set
or vice versa.
Self-supervised methods treat the entire image as supervision information and aim to reconstruct the image itself using
an untrained network beforehand, a similar way as in those
image restoration tasks [9], [38], [39]. It operates under the
assumption that learning the background is a more straightforward shortcut for the networks rather than outliers. Typically,
the training samples are all pixels (spectral vectors) in the test
HSI for autoencoders (AEs) [28], [40], [41] and patches for
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [42], [43]. Recently, the
AETNet [44] introduced an image-level paradigm that takes
normal HSIs as external training samples, and trained a unified
network with anomaly data augmentation. This method has an
incredibly high detection speed because it only needs inference
when testing. However, due to limited diversity of the training

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 1. Feature maps of three downsampling scales on the Gulfport and
Pavia datasets. The Gulfport and Pavia datasets shown in the left column,
respectively, contain airplanes and vehicles as anomalies of interest (boxed in
red) in the imaging scenes. Due to the differences in their spatial resolutions
(for different images) and object sizes (for the same or different images), these
anomalies exhibit multiscale characteristics, posing a challenge to a unified
single-scale learning model for background reconstruction. The downsampling
operation is used to eliminate the anomalies in the background. A single finer
downsampling can eliminate most vehicles in the Pavia dataset shown in the
middle column, but it cannot handle the largest airplane in the Gulfport dataset.
A single coarser downsampling can eliminate most anomalies as shown in
the right column, but it also removes the background details. To reconstruct a
better background for anomaly detection, the most robust way is to efficiently
integrate all downsampled multiscale features to overcome these flaws.

set, this detector may be trapped within the distribution [45].
To make models more adaptive and robust to unseen scenes
when data are limited, a remedy is to use an untrained network
in a self-supervised manner [45]. Specifically, its capability
stems from the network architecture and the training process
(or objectives), but not from the network parameters that are
randomly initialized before each test image instead of learning
from external domain-dependent data. Both of the factors are
prior to unseen data and determine how to mine meaningful
representations from the data itself. Therefore, careful designs
for the network architecture and the training process are of
vital importance.
For the network architecture, the key is to find an optimal structure that “resonates” with the inherent structure of
data [38], while also maintaining low computational complexity. Currently, most AE-based methods [28], [41] mainly
concentrate on the spectral features of the scene, which do
not make full use of the spatial information. To handle the
spatial structure of anomalous targets, Auto-AD [42] assumes
the anomalies are extremely small in size and thus can be eliminated through the downscaling encoding during background
reconstruction. However, anomalies of interest like airplanes
or vehicles, as shown in Fig. 1, often exhibit multiscale characteristics. This problem arises due to two primary factors: first,
anomalies may exhibit diverse shapes; second, imaging sensors
may possess varying physical resolutions, resulting in inconsistencies in the scale of anomalies across different images.
These factors pose a significant challenge to the model’s ability
to perform effectively across multiple scales. This inspired
us to consider a multiscale downsampling architecture, which

LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING

exploits the topological structures of different anomalies via
multiple scale branches.
For the training process, one main concern is that background reconstruction is a unguided process due to the
ambiguity in determining when to stop the training [41]. However, the detection performance via background reconstruction
is sensitive to the timing of termination, rendering it unsuitable
for automated detection on test images. In this context, directly
taking the original image as the reconstructive target leads
to an identical mapping problem (IMP) [46], because the
network has a risk of learning a trivial identity mapping
when converged. The potential solution documented in [46]
is that the network first estimates the threshold from the background and anomaly components and subsequently performs
separation training until the network converges to a dynamic
equilibrium around the threshold. While the separation training
strategy can effectively suppress anomalies and avoid the IMP,
its effectiveness relies heavily on the availability of a precise
threshold value, which is hard to estimate and requires finetuning for each specific image, and thus restricts its automated
detection.
In this article, we present MSNet, a multiscale network featuring enhanced separation training for self-supervised HAD,
to address the problem of multiscale anomalous targets and
the IMP without threshold fine-tuning. MSNet is composed of
several stacked convolutional encoder–decoder (CED) layers,
each of which serves as a different spatial downscaling feature
learner and eliminates the anomalies at its respective scale. The
encoded and decoded features are fused with skip connections.
Distinct from the classic multiscale network U-Net [47],
we do not fuse the multiscale features using channel-wise
concatenation, but use a summation for the fusion purpose.
In addition, we keep the channel number of these features
equal to the input, and apply a fast and efficient band selection
algorithm OPBS [48] to the input HSI to further reduce total
convolution kernels while preserving the informativeness and
distinctiveness of the HSI. To further preserve the multiscale
characteristics in both shallow and deep layers, similar to certain deblurring approaches [49], [50], we utilize a multiscale
reconstruction loss as the content loss rather than the mean
squared error (mse) loss.
Relying solely on the multiscale network cannot well
address the widespread IMP in self-supervised HAD [28],
[41], [42] because of the contamination of anomalous targets
during background reconstruction. Therefore, we introduce the
separation training to address this problem and further enhance
it for flexible and robust results. The enhanced separation
training includes two components: the enhanced separation
training loss and the latent mask updating. The enhanced separation training loss relies on a latent mask to partition the HSI
into background and anomaly parts, suppressing the anomaly
while reconstructing the background to obtain an estimate
of pure background. The latent mask is periodically updated
during training by soft thresholding to adaptively correct the
separation results and prevent contamination by anomalous
targets. The softened updates remove the dependence on
threshold parameters, resulting in more robust performance
on larger datasets.

5520313

Our contributions can be summarized as the following.
1) We propose a multiscale network architecture, designated as MSNet, for the purpose of addressing the
intricate issue of multiscale anomaly shapes. The MSNet
framework incorporates multiple CED layers, each featuring distinct spatial downscaling factors, aimed at
minimizing the influence of varying anomaly sizes.
To facilitate efficient feature integration, we employ
skip connections, which contributes significantly to the
generation of accurate background images. Furthermore,
to preserve the multiscale features throughout all layers,
we incorporate a multiscale reconstruction loss as the
content loss, ensuring that information from various
scales is effectively utilized and propagated within the
network.
2) We develop an enhanced separation training algorithm
that aims to address the IMP within the self-supervised
learning framework. This algorithm offers greater flexibility and eliminates the need for threshold fine-tuning.
To mitigate the potential anomalies during background
reconstruction, we incorporate an enhanced separation
training loss. Additionally, to minimize the influence of
the threshold parameter on the training process, we construct the update rule of the latent mask by introducing
the soft mask paradigm, enabling a more gradual and
adaptive adjustment of the mask.
We organize the rest of this article as follows: Section II
reviews the IMP and a potential solution, separation training,
both highly relevant to our method. Section III presents our
method in detail, including the MSNet structure and the
enhanced separation training. Extensively conducted experiments are described in Section IV. We conclude this article in
Section V.
II. P RELIMINARIES
Self-supervised methods regardless of their network structures, all suffer from unguided training due to their reconstruction nature, which may cause a severe performance decline
in detection. We first review this problem and introduce a
potential solution to it.
A. Identical Mapping Problem
Self-supervised detectors [28], [41], [42], [46] take the
entire HSI as the supervision information, considering the
background as valuable and easily learnable information for
the network. By leveraging this understanding, these detectors efficiently filter out abnormality, focusing on learning
and identifying the underlying patterns in the background.
However, such detectors often assimilate both background
and anomalies into the estimated background as the training
progresses, behaving like identity mapping functions. This
phenomenon is referred to as the IMP [46], resulting in
a significant decline in detection performance. It is mainly
caused by the unguided training process that the complex
background is hardly reconstructed because of anomaly component included in the process.

5520313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fortunately, this issue can be addressed by using different reconstruction objectives. For example, the sparse AE
method [28] constrained the sparsity of hidden codes, mitigating the IMP by limiting the model’s capacity. RGAE [41]
assumed the sparsity in anomalous targets, resulting in a
slower convergence speed under the reconstruction with
the l2,1 -norm compared to the background. Similarly, AutoAD [42] introduced an adaptive-weighted loss to regulate the
convergence speed of pixels with larger reconstruction errors.
Differently, BiGSeT [46] shifted the objective to reconstructing the background and completing potential anomalies with
a process termed separation training. Rather than approximating the input HSI, the separation training considers the
convergence as a dynamic equilibrium around a preestimated
threshold between the background and anomalies. However,
this training strategy can efficiently prevent reconstructing the
anomalies only when a precise threshold is obtained, thereby
limiting its flexibility.
B. Separation Training
Different from the unguided training process, the separation
training algorithm introduces a latent binary mask explicitly
dividing the pixels in the reconstructed image into two mutually exclusive parts, i.e., the potential anomaly part and the
background part. By separately suppressing (i.e., removing and
completing) the anomaly part while reconstructing the background part during training, the networks avoid anomalous
component in the reconstructed image, and thus maintain high
performance throughout the training.
Concretely, we train the network using the separation training loss LSeT given below
1
∥(X̂ − X) ⊙ M̄∥2F
S(M̄)
1
LAS =
∥LoG(X̂) ⊙ M∥2F
S(M) + ϵ
LSeT = LBR + λ · LAS
LBR =

(1)
(2)
(3)

where LBR and LAS , respectively, indicate the background
reconstruction loss and anomaly suppression loss, and λ is a
tradeoff parameter in (3); LoG(X̂) in (2) represents the secondorder Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) operator applied to the
estimated image X̂, which is computed as follows:


−2 −4 −4 −4 −2
−4
0
8
0
−4



8
24
8
−4
L = −4
(4)

−4
0
8
0
−4
−2 −4 −4 −4 −2
LoG(X̂) = L ∗ X̂

(5)

where L is a 5 × 5 LoG template, and ∗ computes 2-D
convolutions over each band. The remaining notations in (1)
and (2) are comprehensively elucidated in Nomenclature.
It can be known from LBR and LAS that we reconstruct
the background pixels selected by M̄, and we suppress the
anomalous pixels selected by M by constraining the secondorder spatial variation.

Algorithm 1 Separation Training Algorithm
Input: HSI data X, tradeoff hyperparameter λ > 0, proportion
threshold τ for binarization, number of training iterations
K ≥ 1, number of epochs in one iteration E ≥ 1.
Initialize: M(0) = 0.
1: for m = 1 : K do
2:
for n = 1 : E do
3:
Feed the network with X ⊙ M̄(m−1) as input and yield
X̂(m) ;
4:
Calculate L SeT using (3);
5:
Do backward propagation;
6:
end for
(m)
2
7:
Calculate Ri,(m)
j = ∥X̂i, j,: − Xi, j,: ∥2 ;
(m)
8:
Sort the elements in R in ascending order to create
r̃ (m) , and obtain the τ quantile r̃ (m)
(τ ) from it;
9:
Calculate M(m) using (6);
10: end for
Output: Detection map R(K ) .

The latent variable M is predicted and periodically updated
in our training process. Specifically, we divide the whole
training into K iterations. In the mth iteration, we first train
the network for a small number of epochs E using LSeT with
M(m−1) derived from the previous iteration. Then, the mask is
updated to M(m) by the following binarization:
(
1, if Ri, j > r̃ (τ )
Mi, j =
(6)
0, otherwise
where R denotes the reconstruction error matrix in this iteration, obtained by Ri, j = ∥X̂i, j,: − Xi, j,: ∥22 ; vector r̃ contains
values sorted in ascending order from the matrix R and
r̃ (τ ) represents the τ quantile with a predefined proportion
threshold τ ∈ (0, 1]. The threshold parameter τ here means
the proportion of anomalies over the total number of pixels
and represents ones in M. We set M(0) = 0 as an initial step,
and the training algorithm is given in Algorithm 1.
In conclusion, pixels below τ are well reconstructed and
those above τ will stay continuously suppressed, and thereby
exists an equilibrium around τ . Although the termination
condition is thus relaxed by fixing a proper K , the threshold
has an unignorable impact on the performance and often needs
fine-tuning.
III. P ROPOSED MSN ET
A. Overview
Our proposed method works under a self-supervised
paradigm, whose detection performance is highly relevant to
the network structure and the training process. Considering
the multiscale characteristics of the anomalies across different
images, we build our network with multiple downscaling
branches to adapt to various possible scenes. In addition,
we enhance the separation training strategy as stated in
Section II to improve its robustness to larger datasets,
by expanding the Boolean values of the latent mask to real
values and removing the threshold parameter. Fig. 2 illustrates
the overall structure of our proposed method.

LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING

5520313

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed MSNet method. Our detection consists of three steps. 1) Band selection, 2) multiscale network training, and 3) network
inference to obtain the detection result. We use OPBS before training to remove band redundancy from the input HSI while preserving its discriminability.
The MSNet architecture consists of L stacked multiscale layers, each of which serves as a downscaling feature learner at a different scale. Skip connections
in summation trunks are employed to fuse both encoding and decoding features. We train the network using two losses including the multiscale reconstruction
loss LMSR and the enhanced separation training loss LSeT+ . The output decoded features Dout are regarded as different scale levels of Xbs constrained by
LMSR as the content to retain both deep and shallow multiscale characteristics in the network. The topmost feature Dout
1 is designated as the reconstructed
background and undergoes separation training with Xbs . In enhanced separation training, we use an adaptively updated soft latent mask to separately represent
background and anomaly regions, reconstructing the background part while suppressing the anomaly part without the need for threshold fine-tuning. The final
detection result is obtained by computing the error between the input image and the background computed from network inference.

Our network consists of several stacked CED layers, each
serving as a background learner at a different scale. Under this
setting, anomalies of different sizes can be eliminated during
background reconstruction, rather than a single-scale architecture that might not be robust to various cases. Different from
the U-Net, we fuse multiscale features extracted by CED layers
through skip connections simply using summation, instead
of channel-wise concatenation that might lead to catastrophic
complexity. To further reduce the computational cost, we apply
a fast and efficient band selection algorithm OPBS [48] as a
pretraining step. This algorithm quickly selects an informative
and distinctive subset of the original bands. Therefore, the
complexity of the network can be reduced while the detection
performance is maintained.
To train our network, two loss functions are used. The
first multiscale reconstruction loss is to retain multiscale
features within the deep layers as our content loss. The
second enhanced separation training loss is to mitigate the
IMP, preserving the background and suppressing the anomalies, completely independent of any preestimated threshold
parameter.
Our detecting procedure consists of the following three
steps: 1) band selection; 2) network training; and 3) network inference. Formally, let the observed HSI be denoted
as X ∈ R H ×W ×B , where H , W , and B represent height,
width, and spectral bands, respectively. After selecting a
subset of Nbs bands out of B, we denote the subimage as
Xbs ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs . This subimage is subsequently fed into

Fig. 3. lth CED layer. The input feature Elin of layer l first undergoes a
bottleneck module and residual skip processing, followed by a down block
to obtain Zl . Subsequently, Zl splits into two branches: the first one passes
through the up block in the encoder part, producing Elout for lower layers; the
second one goes through the up block in the decoder part, and after fusing
with the decoder features Dlin from lower layers, it yields the output feature
Dlout for layer l.

our network for training. In the training phase, we use the
multiscale reconstruction loss and the enhanced separation
training loss, following the separation training strategy. Finally,
the well-trained network is used to estimate a pure background
X̂bs by inference, and the detection map is computed via
reconstruction errors between X̂bs and Xbs .
B. Network Architecture
The network architecture is depicted in Fig. 2. It consists of
L CED layers that serve as multiscale feature extractors, with
each embedding a different spatial downsampling rate.
1) CED Layer: One CED layer comprises an encoder and a
decoder, as described in Fig. 3. Taking layer l as an example,
the input Elin ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs is fed through the cascaded

5520313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

ED structure, being spatially downsampled and restored in
sequence, to output Dlout ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs of this layer.
For the encoder, a spectral bottleneck consisting of two
convolution blocks, followed by a residual skip, is first used to
compress and restore input channels and pays more attention to
distinctive spectral information. Next, there is a downsampling
block that reduces the features to Zl ∈ R(κl ·H )×(κl ·W )×Nbs
through average pooling, shrinking the spatial dimensions by
a factor of κl .
For the decoder, an upsampling block using bilinear interpolation and a convolution block is used to restore the spatial
size. Then, a convolution block is finally appended that
outputs Dlout .
For flexible interlayer connections that will be explained
later, we add an extra upsampling block in the encoder that
takes Zl as input and outputs Elout ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs . Additionally,
Dlin ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs from other layers is added in the decoder
before the convolution block.
2) Stacking Multiscale Layers With Skip Connections:
We fuse multiscale features extracted from the input image
by integrating several layers with different κ values, which
are respectively set to {1, 1/2, 1/4, . . . , 1/2 L−1 } for L layers.
A simple and natural approach is to stack the layers up and
in
connect adjacent layers l and l + 1 by passing Elout to El+1
in
out
and Dl+1 to Dl . Then, the input and output of the multiscale
network are defined as the topmost layer Ein
1 ≡ Xbs and
X̂bs ≡ Dout
1 , respectively. Based on this simple consideration,
we introduce interlayer skip connections that make multiscale
features flow more flexibly within the network, and contribute
to better background reconstruction. Concretely, for each layer
l, we have

l=1

 Xbs ,
f
in
X
(7)
El =

l − 1Eout
 Xbs +
k , l = 2, 3, . . . , L
k=1


l=L

 0,
L
in
X
Dl =

Dout

k , l = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1.

(8)

k=l+1

Clearly, (7) indicates that we input layer l not with the
out
encoder output El−1
of the upper
layer, but with Xbs
P adjacent
out
and the sum of the outputs
E
of
all
previous layers.
k k
Similarly, (8) shows
that
the
decoder
input
receives
the sum
P
of the outputs k Dout
of
all
lower
layers.
k
C. Loss Function
1) Multiscale Reconstruction Loss: To retain the multiscale
information from deeper layers, we utilize a multiscale reconstruction loss as the content loss, which is given by
L

1
1X

LMSR =
L l=1 S (Xbs )↓κl

2

Dlout ↓κl − (Xbs )↓κl

(9)

F

where S(·) obtains the pixel number, and (·)↓κl downsamples
the image at rate κl over spatial dimensions. We treat all
decoder outputs as downsampled images of Xbs , so that those
deeper outputs will retain their multiscale nature. Note that
when L = 1, LMSR degenerates to the mse loss.

2) Enhanced Separation Training Loss: The separation
training strategy can effectively suppress anomalies through
the utilization of a binary mask mechanism, but it, however,
relies heavily on the availability of a precise threshold value.
On the one hand, the proportion of anomalous pixels in
one image is extremely imbalanced, which causes accurate
prediction to be difficult. On the other hand, the distribution of
background and anomalies varies significantly across different
datasets, suggesting that we can hardly develop a unified
threshold prediction method that generalizes well to unseen
datasets. For this reason, here we propose an enhanced version
of the separation training algorithm in order to completely
remove the impact of any threshold-related parameter.
Our strategy is to “soften” the hard thresholding while
preserving the characteristics of separating anomalies from
background during training. First, we calculate M by min–max
scaling to replace (6)
Mi, j =

Ri, j − Min(R)
Max(R) − Min(R)

(10)

where Min(·) and Max(·) obtain the minimum and maximum
values of the matrix, respectively. Equation (10) indicates that
we allow M to be a soft separator, where the separation
between background and anomaly is less strict compared
to the previous hard one, but no longer needs binarization.
Accordingly, the complementary term M̄ of M is extended as
M̄ = 1 − M instead of Boolean operations. We denote the
softened separation training loss as LSeT+ , which is calculated
as follows:
LSeT+ = LBR + λ · LAS

(11)

where LBR and λ · LAS are the background reconstruction
term and anomaly suppression term introduced in (1) and (2),
respectively. λ is a tradeoff parameter. The calculation of
LSeT+ here is similar as LSeT in (3). The difference is that
M and M̄ calculated by (10) here are real matrices, rather
than Boolean matrices.
3) Total Loss: The total loss function consists of the above
two parts, given as the following:
Ltotal =

1
(LMSR + LSeT+ ).
Nbs

(12)

D. Training and Detection
The enhanced separation training algorithm is summarized
in Algorithm 2. We set K and E to 5 and 150, respectively.
ADAM is chosen as the optimizer, and the learning rate is set
to 0.001. After training, we can directly obtain X̂bs = Dout
1 by
network inference. The detection result R is computed by the
following:
Ri, j = ∥(X̂bs )i, j,: − (Xbs )i, j,: ∥22

(13)

where (·)i, j,: is the spectral vector at position (i, j).
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first give a brief introduction to the
basic experimental settings we followed in Section IV-A.

LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING

Algorithm 2 Enhanced Separation Training Algorithm
Input: HSI data Xbs after band selection, tradeoff hyperparameter λ > 0, number of training iterations K ≥ 1,
number of epochs in one iteration E ≥ 1.
Initialize: M(0) = 0.
1: for m = 1 : K do
2:
for n = 1 : E do
3:
Feed the network with Xbs and yield X̂(m)
bs ;
4:
Calculate the total loss using (12);
5:
Do backward propagation;
6:
end for
(m)
(m)
2
7:
Calculate Ri,(m)
j = ∥(X̂bs )i, j,: − (Xbs )i, j,: ∥2 ;
(m)
8:
Calculate M using (10);
9: end for
Output: Detection map R(K ) .

5520313

Fig. 5. (Upper row) Pseudocolor images of the HAD100 dataset and (lower
row) their corresponding ground truth maps. We only display scenes 10, 20,
30, 40, and 50 from the HAD100 dataset for visualization here.

Then, comprehensive comparisons with competitors are presented in Section IV-B. To verify the individual effectiveness
of the network structure and training process in our proposed self-supervised method, we discuss them separately in
Sections IV-C and IV-D. Finally, the analysis of important
hyperparameters is given in Section IV-E.

5) Hydice was collected by the Hyperspectral Digital
Imagery Collection Experiment (HYDICE) sensor. It has
a spatial size of 100 × 80 and 162 spectral bands.
6) HAD100 [44] was collected by the AVIRIS sensor.
It contains 100 scenes of size 64 × 64 × 276 after
removing bad bands from the original 425.
3) Metrics: We used the receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves of parameter pairs (Pd , P f ) and (P f , τ ), along
with the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) values,
to evaluate a detection algorithm. The former (Pd , P f ) curve
contains detection probabilities Pd on all false alarm rates
P f tested from 0 to 1. A model with stronger anomalybackground separability exhibits a curve that approaches the
upper left corner, consequently yielding a higher AUC(Pd , P f )
close to 1. Besides, an AUC(P f , τ ) closer to 0 suggests
low false alarm rates over a range of threshold values τ ,
signifying fewer background pixels incorrectly classified as
anomalous samples and thus reflecting a higher background
reconstruction capability. In addition, we recorded the run
times as another quantitative metric. For a more intuitive
presentation, we visualized the detection maps of an included
method.

A. Experimental Settings

B. Performance Comparisons

1) Implementation: Our method was implemented using
PyTorch code, and run on a PC equipped with an Intel Core
i7-11800H CPU at 2.30 GHz with 16 GB RAM, and an
NVIDIA 3070 GPU with 8 GB of memory.
2) Datasets: We used six datasets including five classic
datasets Gulfport, Pavia, Coast, San Diego, and Hydice,
as well as the larger one HAD100 for evaluation. The pseudocolor images and ground truth maps of the classic datasets
are shown in Fig. 4 and part of the HAD100 dataset is shown
in Fig. 5. More detailed information is listed as follows.
1) Gulfport was captured by the Airborne Visible/Infrared
Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) sensor. It has a size of
100 × 100 × 191.
2) Pavia was collected using the Reflective Optics System
Imaging Spectrometer (ROSIS-03) sensor. It has a size
of 150 × 150 × 102.
3) Coast was also acquired from the AVIRIS sensor. It contains 100 × 100 pixels and 204 spectral bands.
4) San Diego is a subset of size 100 × 100 × 189 selected
from an entire image obtained by the AVIRIS sensor.

1) Comparative Methods: We chose seven methods, including RXD [15], CRD [22], LRASR [23], LREN [40],
RGAE [41], Auto-AD [42], and BiGSeT [46] as benchmarks for comparison. RXD, CRD, and LRASR are the most
representative model-driven methods, while the remaining
ones are data-driven detectors. The RXD is a probability
distribution-based method; the CRD and LRASR are both
representation-based methods; LREN detects the anomalies
using encoded hidden features; and RGAE, Auto-AD, and
BiGSeT reconstruct the background in a self-supervised manner. For our method, we set the regularization parameter λ to
10−4 , 10−3 , 10−3 , 1 and 10−4 , respectively, for the Gulfport,
Pavia, Coast, San Diego, and Hydice datasets, and fixed it to
10−3 for all images in the HAD100. The band number Nbs
and layer number L were fixed at 64 and 3 for all datasets.
2) Quantitative Comparisons: Three quantitative metrics
for different methods on the classic datasets are listed in
Table I. The best and second best results are marked in bold
and underlined, respectively. It can be seen that our method
achieved the highest scores of AUC(Pd , P f ) on these datasets,

Fig. 4. (Upper row) Pseudocolor images of the classic datasets and (lower
row) their corresponding ground truth maps.

5520313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE I
AUC OF ( Pd , P f ), AUC OF ( P f , τ ), AND RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON C LASSIC DATASETS

TABLE II
AUC OF ( Pd , P f ), AUC OF ( P f , τ ), AND RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON HAD100 DATASET

which indicates superior probabilities of detection. The scores
of AUC(P f , τ ) for our method on Gulfport, Pavia, Coast,
and Hydice datasets are very close to 0, suggesting minimal
false alarm rates across a broad range of threshold values.
Additionally, the run times of our method are relatively low
and acceptable, compared to other representation-based and
deep learning-based methods.
We conducted a similar experiment on the HAD100 dataset.
Before testing on each image, we applied the OPBS to reduce
the original channel number to 64 because it is too timeconsuming for most methods. In this setting, each input image
has a size of 64 × 64 × 64. We computed the mean (±std)
values of AUC(Pd , P f ) and AUC(P f , τ ) of 100 images. The
results are listed in Table II. It can be observed that our method
obtained the best values of AUC(Pd , P f ) and AUC(P f , τ )
among others statistically. The average run time for ours is
lower than the convolutional structure Auto-AD under the
same settings.
To conclude, the performance comparisons on six datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our method over its counterparts
in terms of detection performance under different scenes with
different anomalies, and architecture complexity.

3) Visual Comparisons: We display the detection maps for
different methods on the classic datasets in Fig. 6. It can
be observed that our method highlighted the desired objects
in different scenes clearly and accurately, while effectively
suppressing the background. However, other methods failed
to do so. For example, the RXD, CRD, and RGAE failed to
detect all airplanes on Gulfport dataset, while the LRASR,
LREN, and Auto-AD wrongly focused on most background
components. The ROC curves of (Pd , P f ) and (P f , τ ) for
different methods on Pavia, Coast, and Hydice datasets are,
respectively, shown in Figs. 7 and 8. The curves of (Pd , P f )
for our method (in black) cover all other methods, suggesting
higher AUC(Pd , P f ) scores. Meanwhile, our false alarm rates
are quite close to 0 across a wide range of threshold values
as shown in Fig. 8, indicating very low AUC(P f , τ ) scores.
We present the separation performance between background
and anomalous targets in Fig. 9. The normalized separability
maps obtained by all methods on San Diego and Hydice
datasets are illustrated. A separability map reflects the distribution of the background and anomalies in a detection map.
The vertical dashed line spans the maximum and minimum
ranges of the numerical distribution. The box contains a data

LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING

Fig. 6.

(First column) Ground truth maps of five datasets and (remaining columns) corresponding detection maps for different methods.

Fig. 7.

ROC curves of (Pd , P f ) for different methods on (a) Pavia, (b) Coast, and (c) Hydice datasets.

range from 10% to 90%. The horizontal black line in the box
represents the median of the data. The red and green colors
denote the anomaly and background, respectively. Obviously,
a method has a superior separation performance when its
anomaly box leaves a large gap from the background box at
the bottom. From Fig. 9, we can observe that the anomalies
are separated from at least 90% of the background on the
San Diego and Hydice datasets, while other methods cannot.
Note that our maximum background value on the Hydice
dataset is the smallest among all methods, indicating the best
background anomaly separability.
C. Validation of Network Structure
We first validate the effectiveness of our proposed network
structure MSNet on the classic datasets, by comparing it
with two convolutional HAD frameworks Auto-AD [42] and
MSBRNet [43]. The former is an encoder–decoder structured

5520313

network, and the latter is composed of a low-rank module and
a multiscale module. We set L = 3 and that means MSNet
comprises three CED layers in this experiment. For a fair
comparison, we maintained all other variables constant, except
for the network structure. For example, we did not include
band selection in our method prior to training. And these three
networks were all trained using LSeT+ with λ = 10−2 . The
AUC scores and run times are recorded in Table III. We can
conclude from the table that our network can obtain the highest
AUC scores in most cases while requiring the lowest run times
at the same time.
Furthermore, we conducted a comparative experiment on
the HAD100 dataset. The well-known multiscale network
architecture U-Net2 [47] was used in our discussion here.
2 A public PyTorch implementation is available at https://github.com/
milesial/Pytorch-UNet.

5520313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 8.

ROC curves of (P f , τ ) for different methods on (a) Pavia, (b) Coast, and (c) Hydice datasets.

Fig. 9.

Background-anomaly separability results for different methods on (a) San Diego and (b) Hydice datasets.

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF N ETWORKS MSN ET, AUTO -AD, AND MSBRN ET ON
C LASSIC DATASETS U SING AUC OF ( Pd , P f ) AND RUN
T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) AS M ETRICS

We compared the performance of MSNet and U-Net with the
LSeT+ under the same settings introduced in Section IV-B to
validate the effectiveness of our network. Comparing MSNet
with U-Net, as shown in Table IV, we observe that our
MSNet achieved a better AUC(Pd , P f ) value, indicating that
MSNet architecture is statistically more effective for HAD
tasks than U-Net. On the other hand, the computational
complexity of MSNet is smaller than U-Net. This is because
MSNet retains the input channels throughout all downsampling
branches. In contrast, U-Net increases channel numbers to

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF N ETWORKS MSN ET AND U-N ET ON HAD100 DATASET

preserve more channel-related information, resulting in a large
number of parameters that are unnecessary for HAD tasks.
In conclusion, our multiscale network can perform better
than other architectures across six datasets that contain different spectral sensors and anomalous targets, confirming its
adaptability and robustness while maintaining low computational complexity.
D. Validation of Enhanced Separation Training
To focus on discussing the proposed enhanced version of
separation training, we set a vanilla AE structure as the
detection network for both training Algorithms 1 (denoted as
LSeT for simplicity) and 2 (denoted as LSeT+ ), and compared
their detection performance. The AE comprises a linear layer

LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING

5520313

Fig. 10. Analysis of hyperparameters using AUC of (Pd , P f ) as metric on the classic datasets. (a) Regularization parameter λ. (b) Band number Nbs .
(c) Layer number L. Datasets Gulfport, Pavia, Coast, San Diego, and Hydice are, respectively, shown as blue, orange, green, red, and purple curves.

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF A LGORITHMS LSeT AND LSeT+ W HEN A PPLIED TO THE
VANILLA AE ON C LASSIC DATASETS U SING
AUC OF ( Pd , P f ) AS M ETRIC

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN W ITH AND W ITHOUT THE E NHANCED S EPARA TION T RAINING W HEN A PPLIED TO MSN ET AND U-N ET ON HAD100
DATASET U SING AUC OF ( Pd , P f ) AS M ETRIC

with 100 hidden units, a ReLU activation function, and a linear
layer that restores the input channels. The detection results
tested on five datasets including Gulfport, Pavia, Coast, San
Diego, and Hydice are listed in Table V. It can be seen that
the LSeT+ performs better than LSeT on average, indicating
that the enhanced version LSeT+ can efficiently suppress the
anomalies while training.
Additionally, we conducted experiments on the HAD100
dataset, comparing the results with and without the enhanced
separation training strategy when the detection networks are
set as MSNet and U-Net. The results are listed in Table VI.
We can find that enabling LSeT+ leads to significant performance improvements for both networks, providing clear
evidence for the effectiveness of the enhanced separation
training. Moreover, the training algorithm is convenient to
use because we do not need to finely adjust the threshold
hyperparameter for 100 images, which however is critical for
the BiGSeT.
In conclusion, our enhanced separation training algorithm
exhibits its effectiveness and advantage over the original version on six datasets, in terms of adaptability and automation.

E. Hyperparameter Analysis
In this section, we first analyze how hyperparameters including λ, Nbs , and L impact the detection performance of our
model. The scores of AUC(Pd , P f ) regarding these three
factors are shown in Fig. 10(a)–(c). We then conduct an
ablation study for other main components.
1) Regularization Parameter λ: λ controls the effect of
anomaly suppression. We set Nbs = 64 and L = 3 and
chose λ values from {10−4 , 10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 , 1}. As shown
in Fig. 10(a), the performance of five datasets starts to
decrease after reaching the maximum, except for the San
Diego dataset (in red) which keeps on increasing. The optimal
values for the five datasets are 10−4 , 10−3 , 10−3 , 1, and 10−4 ,
respectively.
2) Band Number Nbs : Nbs is the number of band subset
selected by the OPBS [48], which also indicates the input
channels of the network. We set λ to the optimal and fix L = 3,
and compared Nbs values chosen from {16n}6n=1 , as well as
the original band number without band selection (denoted as
Orig., see Section IV-A). The AUC results are displayed in
Fig. 10(b). It is evident that, across the five tested datasets,
a subset of the original bands (bands 64–96) can be adequate
to achieve high performance.
Moreover, it can be seen from Table VII that the run times
increase as Nbs gets larger from 16 to 96. However, it is
noteworthy that the run times for all these cases are still lower
than Orig. This is because OPBS can save time for the deep
network by reducing the number of input channels, and the
process of performing OPBS itself does not require much time.
In conclusion, band selection can help maintain (or improve)
the AUC performance while reducing the time cost for the
network.
We suggest a proper value of 64 for Nbs considering the
AUC performance and time cost.
3) Layer Number L: L is the number of multiscale CED
layers that we stack. We set λ to the optimal and fix Nbs = 64,
and studied the effects of L chosen from 1 to 5. The trends of
AUC are shown in Fig. 10(c) and the run times are tabulated
in Table VIII. It can be observed that the AUC scores tend
to increase as L gets larger. This is because more multiscale
features lead to better background estimation and thus improve
detection performance.

5520313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE VII
RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) OF BAND S ELECTION /T OTAL C OST FOR
D IFFERENT BAND N UMBERS ON THE C LASSIC DATASETS

TABLE VIII
RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT L AYER N UMBERS ON THE
C LASSIC DATASETS

TABLE IX
A BLATION S TUDY FOR OTHER M AIN C OMPONENTS U SING AUC OF
( Pd , P f ) AS M ETRIC

However, adding layers results in increases in computational
cost, as shown in Table VIII, but does not lead to an unlimited
improvement in detection performance. Notably, we do not
need more layers than three, because the AUC performance
starts to get saturated when L ≥ 3.
Therefore, we suggest an appropriate value of 3 for L as a
good tradeoff between the AUC performance and time cost.
4) Other Main Components: The considered components
are two loss functions LSeT+ and LMSR , as well as the skip
connections (denoted as SC). We studied their effects by
incorporating them into the model sequentially. The results are
listed in Table IX. We can conclude that each one contributed
to an improved performance, thus validating their respective
effectiveness.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we propose a multiscale network architecture
MSNet with enhanced separation training for self-supervised
HAD. Considering the anomalies may exhibit different scales,
the network is built with several multiscale CED layers
and stacked up using skip connections to adapt to different

situations. The network is trained by the multiscale reconstruction loss that retains the multiscale features, and the
enhanced separation training loss that suppresses potentially
included anomalies in the estimated background in a more
automated manner. We detect anomalies by performing a network inference and computing the reconstruction errors after
training. Moreover, before training and detection, a fast and
efficient band selection algorithm OPBS is adopted to reduce
redundant bands and decrease the computational complexity.
Extensive experiments conducted on six datasets show that
our method surpasses some comparative methods in terms of
overall detection performance and computational complexity.
Hyperparameter analysis validates the effectiveness of the
main components and provides a better understanding of them.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Chen, X. Zheng, and X. Lu, “Hyperspectral image super-resolution
with self-supervised spectral–spatial residual network,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 13, no. 7, p. 1260, Mar. 2021.
[2] L. Mou, P. Ghamisi, and X. X. Zhu, “Deep recurrent neural networks for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3639–3655, Jul. 2017.
[3] X. Zheng, H. Sun, X. Lu, and W. Xie, “Rotation-invariant attention
network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 31, pp. 4251–4265, 2022.
[4] H. Sun, X. Zheng, and X. Lu, “A supervised segmentation network for
hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30,
pp. 2810–2825, 2021.
[5] X. Shen, H. Liu, J. Qin, F. Ge, and X. Zhou, “Toward weak signal
analysis in hyperspectral data: An efficient unmixing perspective,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5534314.
[6] X. Shen, H. Liu, J. Nie, and X. Zhou, “Matrix factorization with framelet
and saliency priors for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504413.
[7] S. Matteoli, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A tutorial overview of anomaly
detection in hyperspectral images,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag.,
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 5–28, Jul. 2010.
[8] Z. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Zhong, M. Shu, and C. Sun, “SiamHYPER:
Learning a hyperspectral object tracker from an RGB-based tracker,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 7116–7129, 2022.
[9] Y.-C. Miao, X.-L. Zhao, X. Fu, J.-L. Wang, and Y.-B. Zheng,
“Hyperspectral denoising using unsupervised disentangled spatiospectral deep priors,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5513916.
[10] N. K. Patel, C. Patnaik, S. Dutta, A. M. Shekh, and A. J. Dave, “Study
of crop growth parameters using airborne imaging spectrometer data,”
Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2401–2411, Aug. 2001.
[11] G. Shaw and D. Manolakis, “Signal processing for hyperspectral image
exploitation,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 12–16,
Jan. 2002.
[12] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
[13] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection:
A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90,
Mar. 2022.
[14] X. Hu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using deep learning:
A review,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 9, p. 1973, Apr. 2022.
[15] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
[16] J. M. Molero, E. M. Garzón, I. García, and A. Plaza, “Analysis and
optimizations of global and local versions of the RX algorithm for
anomaly detection in hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 801–814, Apr. 2013.
[17] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
[18] W.-M. Liu and C.-I. Chang, “Multiple-window anomaly detection for
hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 644–658, Apr. 2013.

LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING

[19] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “WeightedRXD and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics
estimation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366,
Jun. 2014.
[20] J. Zhou, C. Kwan, B. Ayhan, and M. T. Eismann, “A novel cluster
kernel RX algorithm for anomaly and change detection using hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 11,
pp. 6497–6504, Nov. 2016.
[21] J. Li, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Ma, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
by the use of background joint sparse representation,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2523–2533,
Jun. 2015.
[22] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
[23] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in
hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000,
Apr. 2016.
[24] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix
decomposition-based Mahalanobis distance method for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2016.
[25] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via
a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017.
[26] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, and L. Jiao, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection via background and potential anomaly dictionaries construction,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2263–2276,
Apr. 2019.
[27] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022.
[28] E. Bati, A. Calíškan, A. Koz, and A. A. Alatan, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection method based on auto-encoder,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9643,
pp. 220–226, Oct. 2015.
[29] B. Hosseiny and R. Shah-Hosseini, “A hyperspectral anomaly detection
framework based on segmentation and convolutional neural network
algorithms,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 41, no. 18, pp. 6946–6975,
Sep. 2020.
[30] S. Xiao, T. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. Qu, S. Hou, and W. Dong, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral images based on transformer with spatial–spectral
dual-window mask,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
Sens., vol. 16, pp. 1414–1426, 2023.
[31] K. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, G. He, and Q. Du, “Semisupervised
spectral learning with generative adversarial network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7,
pp. 5224–5236, Jul. 2020.
[32] Y. Li, T. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Sparse coding-inspired GAN
for hyperspectral anomaly detection in weakly supervised learning,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512811.
[33] W. Xie, B. Liu, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Autoencoder and adversariallearning-based semisupervised background estimation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 8,
pp. 5416–5427, Aug. 2020.

5520313

[34] K. Li et al., “Spectral difference guided graph attention autoencoder for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–17, 2023.
[35] X. Wang, L. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Local spatial–spectral informationintegrated semisupervised two-stream network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
2022, Art. no. 5535515.
[36] Y. Hong, U. Hwang, J. Yoo, and S. Yoon, “How generative adversarial
networks and their variants work: An overview,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 1–43, Feb. 2019.
[37] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
[38] V. Lempitsky, A. Vedaldi, and D. Ulyanov, “Deep image prior,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 9446–9454.
[39] O. Sidorov and J. Y. Hardeberg, “Deep hyperspectral prior: Single-image
denoising, inpainting, super-resolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 3844–3851.
[40] K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, T. Jiang, and Y. Li, “LREN: Low-rank
embedded network for sample-free hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4139–4146.
[41] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314.
[42] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5503314.
[43] W. Cao, H. Zhang, W. He, H. Chen, and E. H. Tat, “MSBRNet: Multiscale background reconstruction network with low-rank embedding for
anomaly detection in hyperspectral images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci.
Remote Sens. Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 3720–3723.
[44] Z. Li, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, Q. Ling, Z. Lin, and W. An, “You only
train once: Learning a general anomaly enhancement network with random masks for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5506718.
[45] Y. Miao, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and D. Tao, “DDS2M: Self-supervised
denoising diffusion spatio-spectral model for hyperspectral image
restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023,
pp. 12086–12096.
[46] H. Liu, X. Su, X. Shen, L. Chen, and X. Zhou, “BiGSeT: Binary
mask-guided separation training for DNN-based hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” 2023, arXiv:2307.07428.
[47] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[48] W. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Dou, and L. Zhao, “A geometry-based band selection
approach for hyperspectral image analysis,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4318–4333, Aug. 2018.
[49] S. Nah, T. H. Kim, and K. M. Lee, “Deep multi-scale convolutional neural network for dynamic scene deblurring,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 3883–3891.
[50] S.-J. Cho, S.-W. Ji, J.-P. Hong, S.-W. Jung, and S.-J. Ko, “Rethinking
coarse-to-fine approach in single image deblurring,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4641–4650.