IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

4013

No More Data Silos: Unified Microservice Failure
Diagnosis With Temporal Knowledge Graph
Shenglin Zhang , Member, IEEE, Yongxin Zhao , Sibo Xia , Shirui Wei , Yongqian Sun , Member, IEEE,
Chenyu Zhao, Shiyu Ma , Junhua Kuang, Bolin Zhu , Lemeng Pan , Yicheng Guo ,
and Dan Pei , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Microservices improve the scalability and flexibility of monolithic architectures to accommodate the evolution of
software systems, but the complexity and dynamics of microservices challenge system reliability. Ensuring microservice quality
requires efficient failure diagnosis, including detection and triage.
Failure detection involves identifying anomalous behavior within
the system, while triage entails classifying the failure type and
directing it to the engineering team for resolution. Unfortunately,
current approaches reliant on single-modal monitoring data, such
as metrics, logs, or traces, cannot capture all failures and neglect
interconnections among multimodal data, leading to erroneous diagnoses. Recent multimodal data fusion studies struggle to achieve
deep integration, limiting diagnostic accuracy due to insufficiently
captured interdependencies. Therefore, we propose UniDiag, which
leverages temporal knowledge graphs to fuse multimodal data for
effective failure diagnosis. UniDiag applies a simple yet effective
stream-based anomaly detection method to reduce computational
cost and a novel microservice-oriented graph embedding method
to represent the state of systems comprehensively. To assess the
performance of UniDiag, we conduct extensive evaluation experiments using datasets from two benchmark microservice systems,
demonstrating its superiority over existing methods and affirming
the efficacy of multimodal data fusion. Additionally, we have publicly made the code and data available to facilitate further research.
Index Terms—Microservice, failure diagnosis, multimodal data,
knowledge graph.
Received 18 June 2024; revised 19 September 2024; accepted 16 October
2024. Date of publication 31 October 2024; date of current version 30 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the Advanced Research
Project of China under Grant 31511010501, and in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272249, Grant 62302244, and Grant
62072264. (Corresponding author: Yongqian Sun.)
Shenglin Zhang is with the College of Software, Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology Application Innovation (HL-IT), Nankai University, Tianjin
300192, China (e-mail: zhangsl@nankai.edu.cn).
Yongxin Zhao, Sibo Xia, Shiyu Ma, and Junhua Kuang are with the Nankai
University, Tianjin 300192, China (e-mail: zyx_nkcs@mail.nankai.edu.cn;
xiath@mail.nankai.edu.cn; mashiyu@mail.nankai.edu.cn; 2013157@mail.
nankai.edu.cn).
Shirui Wei is with the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
101408, China (e-mail: weishirui23@mails.ucas.ac.cn).
Yongqian Sun is with the College of Software, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Software Experience and Human Computer Interaction (TKL-SEHCI), Nankai
University, Tianjin 300192, China (e-mail: sunyongqian@nankai.edu.cn).
Chenyu Zhao is with the Alibaba Group, Beijing 100020, China (e-mail:
zhaochenyu@mail.nankai.edu.cn).
Bolin Zhu is with the Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China (e-mail:
bolinzhu@smail.nju.edu.cn).
Lemeng Pan and Yicheng Guo are with the Huawei Technologies
Co., Ltd., Shenzhen 518129, China (e-mail: panlemeng@huawei.com;
guoyicheng3@huawei.com).
Dan Pei is with the Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: peidan@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2024.3489444

I. INTRODUCTION
ICROSERVICES have gained significant attention in
the last few years in both industry and academia [1].
However, the complexity and dynamism of microservice systems pose unique challenges for maintenance [2]. When a
microservice system fails, the failure will propagate along the
interaction network between microservices, posing significant
challenges and pressures for operators. Failures will negatively
impact user experience and cause enormous losses for service
providers if they are not quickly diagnosed and mitigated [3],
[4]. To ensure high availability and minimize service downtime,
prompt diagnosis, encompassing both detection and triage, is
crucial [5], [6]. This allows operators to respond efficiently to
failures, mitigating their impact and restoring service functionality as quickly as possible. Proactive failure detection can alert
operators timely, and accurate failure triage can not only provide
operators with suggestions for mitigation measures (Table I)
but also minimize the cost associated with reassignment, which
refers to the process of re-allocating the initially assigned mitigation measures to the potentially more appropriate measures [5].
Therefore, rapid and accurate failure diagnosis is indispensable
for effectively maintaining microservice systems.
A microservice system is an architecture composed of multiple microservices, with each microservice having multiple
instances. To monitor the status of microservice systems in realtime and achieve rapid failure diagnosis, operators often continuously collect three modalities of monitoring data (i.e., metrics,
logs, traces) for each microservice instance [7]. Fig. 1 shows
the three modalities of data in a microservice system. Metrics
include system-level metrics (e.g., CPU utilization, memory
utilization, and network throughput) and user-perceived metrics
(e.g., average response time, error rate, and page view count),
presented as time series. Logs are semi-structured text that
records various events and system runtime status. Traces are
in the tree structure recording information about user requests
like instances and service calls, and each call forms a span.
For example, as shown in Fig. 1, after a failure occurs, the
“system.cpu.pct_utilization” metric sharply rises, and simultaneously microservice instances S1 and S2 generate anomalous
log messages, with a significant increase in response time in
related traces.
Over the years, many single-modal data-based failure diagnosis approaches for microservice systems have been proposed

M

1939-1374 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

TABLE I
ANOMALOUS MANIFESTATIONS OF MULTIMODAL DATA ARE DERIVED FROM AN EXTENSIVE EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF FAILURE CASES, AND MITIGATION
MEASURES FOR EACH FAILURE TYPE ARE BASED ON THEIR UNDERLYING ROOT CAUSES [21]

Fig. 1. An example of the multimodal data of a microservice system during a failure. Fig. 1(a) shows two metrics: the blue line in the figure represents the original
value of the metric, and the red line represents an anomalous fragment. Fig. 1(b) shows eight logs; the red ones are anomalous. Fig. 1(c) shows a trace where a node
represents a microservice instance, an edge from a caller to a callee denotes a span, and the red span is anomalous because of its excessively high response time.

(e.g., metrics [8], [9], [10], logs [11], [12], [13], or traces [14]).
However, these approaches usually lead to a large number of
misdiagnoses due to the inherent limitations of the characteristics of the data used:
Limitations of Metrics: Metrics can react rapidly to changes
in system performance [15], reflecting various failure modes
via higher or lower values. However, the over-sensitivity of the
metrics may produce false alarms [15], [16]. For example, in
scenarios where memory is effectively released, notwithstanding
a potentially decreased memory utilization may be lower than
normal level, it does not indicate a system failure.
Limitations of Logs: Since logs are semi-structured text generated by logging statements in software source code [17], they
rely significantly on developers’ domain knowledge. Consequently, certain nuanced performance issues, such as anomalous
memory utilization, may not be adequately reflected in the logs,
rendering it impossible to diagnose “Resource underprovisioning” failures (Table I).
Limitations of Traces: The information reflecting calls between microservice instances does not provide information
about what is happening inside the instance [18]. This lack of
information makes it unfeasible to diagnose “System component
damage” failures through tracing alone (Table I).
Due to the above limitations, recent studies have explored
multimodal data fusion for enhanced failure diagnosis [19], [20].
However, these approaches often fall short of achieving sufficiently deep integration of heterogeneous data sources. This limitation in effectively capturing the complex interdependencies
between different modalities consequently hinders diagnostic
accuracy. Furthermore, the predominant reliance on supervised

learning frameworks in these existing methods introduces a
significant dependency on labeled data, restricting their flexibility and generalization capabilities, particularly when confronted
with novel failure patterns or evolving system architectures.
Much research has demonstrated that knowledge graph (KG)
is a potent technique for combining multimodal information [22], [23]. It can capture entity characteristics for subsequent
failure detection and triage. Therefore, we try to apply KG to
fuse multimodal data for failure diagnosis (i.e., failure detection
and triage). However, applying KG to achieve failure diagnosis
through multimodal data faces the following challenges:
1) The immense volume of monitoring data generated by microservices systems [2], makes it challenging to integrate
all the data into the KG in the form of entities and relations.
Furthermore, as aforementioned, the multimodal data is
heterogeneous. The fusion of these heterogeneous data in
a KG poses significant challenges.
2) The relations between entities in the KG manifest as a
heterogeneous composition, capturing not only the states
of distinct events within a given microservice instance but
also the intricate interactions and resource-sharing across
different instances. Moreover, the temporal variations in
instance states and the dynamic fluctuations in the number of instances [24], [25] present notable obstacles in
effectively acquiring temporal and heterogeneous structural information from a KG. Furthermore, deriving graph
representations from dynamic node embeddings adds to
the complexity of the challenge.
In this paper, we propose UniDiag, a novel approach for
integrating the multimodal data in microservice systems and

ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

conducting failure diagnosis. It first fuses multimodal data using
a temporal knowledge graph (TKG), which is constructed by
temporally stacking KG snapshots to capture system dynamics [26]. This method enables the effective fusion of multimodal data. Subsequently, a novel microservice-oriented graph
embedding (MOGE) method is employed to generate graph
representations of the TKG, encoding its rich structural and
temporal information. The main contributions of this paper are
as follows:
1) UniDiag considers the heterogeneity and correlation of
three modalities of data (i.e., metrics, logs, and traces)
and combines these data with TKG. To the best of our
knowledge, we are among the first to apply the KG-based
method to fuse the three modalities of data for failure
diagnosis.
2) To decrease the number of entities present in KG and fuse
the heterogeneous data, we propose a simple yet effective
stream-based anomaly detection method, addressing the
first challenge.
3) To obtain the comprehensive state representation of a
microservice system, we propose a novel MOGE method,
integrating the Relation-aware Graph Convolutional Network (R-GCN) [27], Gate Recurrent Unit (GRU) [28] and
second-order pooling (SOPOOL) [29], which addresses
the second challenge. R-GCN and GRU effectively capture the heterogeneous structural and temporal information of entities and relations in the TKG, respectively.
Furthermore, we utilize SOPOOL to learn a comprehensive graph representation of dynamically changing KGs
by leveraging the node embeddings.
4) We assess the efficacy and efficiency of UniDiag by
conducting experiments on two benchmark microservicegenerated datasets. Our findings reveal that UniDiag
achieves online diagnosis within 0.6 seconds and exhibits
robust generalization across diverse microservice systems.
Furthermore, we observe that UniDiag outperforms the
baseline methods, as evidenced by an average F1 -score
of 0.869 and 0.723 for failure diagnosis on the respective
datasets, representing a significant improvement of 0.117
and 0.04 compared to the best-performing baseline methods, respectively. Beyond achieving superior performance
on known failure types, UniDiag demonstrates promising capabilities for diagnosing previously unseen failure
types, highlighting its potential for real-world deployment
scenarios. To ensure better reproducibility, we have made
our code and data publicly available [30].
II. RELATED WORK
Various methodologies exist for diagnosing failures through
metric analysis. For instance, iSQUAD [8] labels root causes and
features for different failure clusters, while PatternMatcher [9]
employs coarse-grained anomaly detection and a pattern classifier to identify anomalous patterns. DéjàVu [10] trains a model
using historical failures and system dependencies.
Log analysis is also pivotal for diagnosing microservice system failures. LogCluster [11] clusters log sequences to determine

4015

failure types. Yuan et al. [12] use supervised methods to extract
features from anomalous logs and correlate them with failure
behaviors, requiring extensive manual labeling.
MEPFL [14] predicts errors and failure types for trace instances based on system trace data. However, methods like those
in [31], [32], [33] using traces for anomaly detection or root
cause localization do not specify failure types.
Several studies integrate multimodal data for anomaly detection or root cause localization [18], [19], [20], [34], [35],
[36], [37]. CloudRCA [20] combines metrics and logs with a
Knowledge-informed Hierarchical Bayesian Network for root
cause analysis. MicroCBR [34] embeds anomaly event sequences into a failure knowledge graph for case retrieval and
failure triage. DiagFusion [19] uses embedding techniques and
a Graph Neural Network to determine failure types. Eadro [18]
models intra-service dynamics and inter-service dependencies
using traces, logs, and KPIs for anomaly detection and root
cause localization. TAD [35] employs a Transformer encoder
model to identify failures and utilizes tracing chains to pinpoint
faulty services. HeMiRCA [36] utilizes Spearman correlation
to localize hierarchical root causes. MULAN [37] localizes root
causes by co-learning a causal graph from metrics and logs.
However, none of these approaches, including Eadro, TAD,
HeMiRCA, and MULAN offer comprehensive triage of failure
types in microservice systems.
III. MOTIVATION AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
A. Motivation
Our goal is to recommend to the operators the occurrence
and type of failure based on the latest multimodal data to help
operators quickly take the correct mitigation measures. We refer
to this as failure diagnosis, which includes failure detection
and triage, which facilitates a more comprehensive identification and comprehension of diverse failure types [5], [6], [38].
Table I lists typical failures encountered in microservice systems, showcasing the corresponding manifestations of these
failures on multimodal data and the corresponding mitigation
measures. The failure types are designated based on their underlying root causes [21]. Nevertheless, the primary objective
of our research in this study centers on failure diagnosis rather
than the subsequent remediation of failures.
Our examination of 164 microservice system failure cases collected from benchmark microservice systems (see Section VI-A
for more details) determined that the fusion of multimodal data
holds crucial significance in detecting and triaging failures.
During failures, anomalies can be observed in metrics [8],
[9], [10], logs [11], [12], and traces [31]. Moreover, different
types of failures exhibit distinct anomalous patterns across these
multimodal data [18].
1) The Role of Metric in Failure Diagnosis: As shown in
Fig. 1(a), the metric data is defined as x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT },
where T is the observation window length and xt ∈ R represents
the observation at time t. Metrics are crucial for gauging proper
system functioning. When a microservice instance experiences
failures, the associated metrics (e.g., memory utilization, disk
I/O, CPU utilization, and network throughput) frequently exhibit

4016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

abnormal patterns. Therefore, operators must remain vigilant in
continuously monitoring the metrics.
2) The Role of Log in Failure Diagnosis: As shown in
Fig. 1(b), a log message often contains multiple fields, including
timestamp, node ID, and detailed information, etc. The detailed
information field is unstructured and usually contains constants
and variables. The constants are fixed texts the developers set
to describe system event entities and relations. In contrast, the
variables carry dynamic runtime information (e.g., IP address,
file name, status code, etc.) [17]. Various log parsing algorithms, such as Drain [39] and FT-tree [40], can automatically
distinguish the constants and the variables, and generate log
templates (constants) and parameters (variables). System states
and significant events at various critical points are the main
function of logs [41]. Diagnosing microservice system failures
can be effectively facilitated by analyzing the diverse anomalous
behaviors manifested in logs.
3) The Role of Trace in Failure Diagnosis: The microservice systems encompass a significant volume of asynchronous
interactions between instances of microservices, which involve
intricate invocation chains [2]. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the mutual
invocations between instances can be represented as trace trees,
where one invocation request corresponds to one trace. Each
span corresponds to one service invocation, having a span ID
and a parent ID to reconstruct the calling relations between
individual spans [42]. The trace data, which contains response
time, status codes, and request frequency, etc., can be crucial
indicators for failures [14].
4) Multimodal Data Fusion: For instance, consider a “Network device breakdown” failure may result in increased network
packet errors for affected services. While metrics alone might
indicate anomalies, identifying the failure type remains challenging without additional contextual information. By integrating metrics with traces, which expose disrupted communication
paths between services, operators can more precisely diagnose
the underlying network device failure.
In light of the above observations, a novel approach for the fusion of multimodal data to enable effective failure diagnosis has
been conceptualized. This has culminated in the development of
UniDiag.
It is worth noting that in our study, data collection is conducted with distinct granularity levels to capture comprehensive
insights. Metrics and logs are collected at the microservice instance level, gaining a detailed understanding of the performance
and the events within individual microservice instances, respectively. Meanwhile, traces are collected at the microservices
system level, revealing intricate interactions and dependencies
among the microservices and facilitating a holistic understanding of the whole system. This multi-faceted analysis, encompassing various levels of data granularity, enables UniDiag to
deliver a comprehensive assessment of the microservices system
and empowers accurate failure diagnosis.
B. Problem Statement
The fine-grained decomposition of microservices makes the
system susceptible to performance issues due to highly complex

orchestration and dynamic interactions. Failure diagnosis is
the core of microservice system maintenance, which enables
operators to resolve failures effectively.
Our goal is to recommend to the operators the occurrence
and type of failure based on the latest multimodal system
monitoring data to help operators quickly take the correct recovery measures. We refer to this as failure diagnosis, which
includes failure detection and triage. The detection and triage
of failures facilitate a more comprehensive identification and
comprehension of diverse failure types, thereby enabling the
implementation of suitable remedial actions [5], [6], [38]. For
example, metrics, logs, and traces are the most direct signals
that characterize underlying failures [43]. Table I lists typical
failures encountered in microservice systems, showcasing the
corresponding manifestations of these failures on multimodal
data and the corresponding remedial measures. The failure types
are designated based on their underlying root causes [21]. Nevertheless, the primary objective of our research in this study centers
on failure diagnosis rather than the subsequent remediation of
failures.
IV. PRELIMINARIES
A. Temporal Knowledge Graph
A TKG incorporates temporal information into a static KG by
extending the triple (h, r, t) into a quadruple (h, r, t, τ ), where h
represents the head entity, t represents the tail entity, r represents
the relation, τ provides additional temporal information about
the fact of the triple, indicating that the fact is valid at time
τ . KG can effectively combine multimodal data, and since
metrics, logs, and traces change dynamically over time, using
TKG allows for the accurate representation of the microservice
system’s state.
B. R-GCN
To capture the multiple relations in the graph, R-GCN [27]
models different relations for the central node separately while
adding self-looping features for feature fusion and continuously
updating the representation of the central node. In KGs, different
edge types convey distinct information, and the direction of
edges plays a crucial role in determining the underlying facts.
Therefore, in our work, we employ R-GCN to capture not only
the states of individual events within a specific microservice
instance but also the intricate relations among diverse instances.
C. GRU
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [44] is a powerful model
for processing sequential data [45]. However, it cannot solve
problems such as long-term memory and gradients in backpropagation. Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) [46] and GRU [28]
have been proposed to address this issue. GRU and LSTM
are similar in functional performance in many cases [47], but
compared to LSTM, GRU has fewer parameters and is more
computationally efficient. Therefore, we choose GRU in UniDiag.

ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

Fig. 2.

4017

The framework of UniDiag.

V. APPROACH
A. Overview
As shown in Fig. 2, UniDiag has two parts: offline training and
online diagnosis. In the offline training stage, UniDiag consists
of three main steps:
1) Multimodal Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction
(Section V-B): To address the first challenge of KG, we
introduce a stream-based anomaly detection module. It
first serializes the multimodal data into streams based on
their characteristics, and then conducts anomaly detection
for each stream. To deal with the dynamically changing
data, UniDiag builds a TKG based on the topological
relations of microservice systems.
2) MOGE (Section V-C): To address the second challenge,
UniDiag combines R-GCN, GRU, and SOPOOL. R-GCN
leverages its ability to handle multi-relational graphs to
learn the structural information within the TKG. GRU, on
the other hand, captures long sequence dependencies to
learn the temporal information within the TKG. Lastly,
SOPOOL pools the TKG to capture high-level features
within the graph.
3) Failure Diagnosis (Section V-D): A hierarchical clustering approach is used to perform failure diagnosis on the
learned graph embeddings to obtain a number of clusters.
Then, UniDiag presents these clusters to operators who
investigate and assign corresponding normal or failure
types to each cluster.
In the online diagnosis (Section V-E) stage, UniDiag converts
the data into a graph representation vector and diagnoses the
failure type based on the trained model (Section V-D).
B. Multimodal Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction
KG representations, characterized by their structured nodes
and edges, elucidate the relationships among diverse data
sources within microservice systems. This structured approach
enhances the comprehension of complex dependencies and
facilitates the analysis of failure patterns. Temporal Knowledge Graphs (TKGs) offer significant flexibility and scalability,

adeptly capturing the dynamic nature of microservices. Their
ability to accommodate updates ensures real-time accuracy,
which is essential for effective monitoring in rapidly evolving
environments. UniDiag applies TKGs to enhance the fusion of
heterogeneous multimodal data. The TKGs can be viewed as a
series of sub-KGs, i.e., G = (Gτ −k+1 , . . . , Gτ −1 , Gτ ), where
Gτ is the KG at time τ . We try to utilize all instances, metrics,
and log templates in the microservice system as nodes in Gτ .
Serializing Multimodal Data: As shown on the left side of
Fig. 3, we need to serialize multimodal data of each microservice
instance to obtain multimodal information at each time point.
1) Metric Serialization: Metrics appear in the form of time series with a serialized structure. Therefore, UniDiag adopts
standard preprocessing steps such as normalization.
2) Log Serialization: Logs, as semi-structured text, encapsulate crucial information regarding system events [17].
UniDiag employs the Drain algorithm [39] to extract fixed
text segments, referred to as log templates, which preserve
the core semantic content essential for effective analysis [48]. Utilizing the sliding window technique, UniDiag
segments the logs and quantifies the occurrence frequency
of each log template per minute. These frequencies are
subsequently transformed into time series data, aligning
with metrics for comprehensive analysis.
3) Trace Serialization: UniDiag concentrates on three pivotal
metrics for traces: response time (RT), error count (EC),
and query count (QC) [32]. These metrics are essential for
identifying anomalies related to performance, reliability,
and traffic [32]. Specifically, to ensure a comprehensive
evaluation, we divide the data into one-minute time windows and obtain the values of the three critical metrics
within each window. Accordingly, we generate three time
series for each tuple <caller, callee>, each reflecting
the average response time, query count, and error count,
respectively.
Capturing Microservice Dependencies: Understanding the
intricate dependencies between microservices is crucial for effective failure diagnosing [19]. These dependencies primarily
consist of function calling and resource contention [49]. To
accurately model these interdependencies, we integrate traces

4018

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

Multimodal data serialization, stream-based anomaly detection, and construction of TKGs (u_low: unexpected low, e_high: excessively high).

and deployment data. Specifically, we aggregate trace data to
represent the invocation relations between microservices, adding
a directed edge in the KG from each caller to its corresponding
callee. Additionally, when two instances are co-deployed according to the deployment data, we introduce a directed edge in
the KG from the instance to the physical host associated with
the deployment data.
Transforming Time Series Data into Events: The intuitive idea
is to regard the invocation and deployment relations between
instances, the value of metrics data, the number of log templates, and the value of three vital trace-related metrics data
as edges. However, this will bring excessively high calculation
and storage costs for subsequent tasks, making real-time failure
diagnosis impractical. Therefore, UniDiag applies a streambased anomaly detection approach to transform these time series
into events and capture the underlying characteristics of the
multimodal data. As shown in the middle part of Fig. 3, we
adopt the 3-sigma rule to classify the time series data as normal,
excessively high, and unexpectedly low every minute, then the
type of the edge is set accordingly. Specifically, the edge settings
in Gτ are as follows:
The edge of an instance-type object represents whether it is
a normal or anomalous call, and this classification depends on
whether the current values of the three key trace-related metrics
are normal, excessively high, or unexpectedly low. Moreover,
the edge of a metric-type (log-template-type) object represents
whether the current metric (log) data is normal, excessively high,
or unexpectedly low. UniDiag stores this information on the
edges of the KG.
Constructing the TKG: At time τ , UniDiag utilizes the output
obtained from stream-based anomaly detection to derive the
quadruples required for constructing a TKG. For example, the
representation of a quadruple between microservice instance S1
and metric m1 is indicated as (S1 , has a normal value of, m1 , τ ),
whereas the representation of a quadruple between microservice
instance S1 and log template l1 is denoted as (S1 , has an excessively high number of, l1 , τ ). Concerning trace data, we utilize
“anomalously calls” and “normally calls” to identify whether

the trace-related metrics are anomalous or not. For instance,
the quadruple representation for calls between two microservice
instances S1 and S2 is expressed as (S1 , anomalously calls, S2 ,
τ ). Moreover, the relation between microservice instance S1 and
host H1 is presented as (S1 , deploys at, H1 , τ ). Finally, UniDiag
builds a comprehensive KG (τ ) based on the serialized data
and the topological relation between microservice instances.
UniDiag stacks the KGs of each moment together to form a
graph stream (i.e., a TKG).
C. Microservice-Oriented Graph Embedding
To learn the nodes and edges information in TKG, UniDiag
uses entity and relation embedding. We apply R-GCN and GRU
to take into account the structural and temporal information of
entities and relations, respectively.
Capture Structural Dependency: Each graph in the TKG
contains rich facts, and the interconnection between entities
demonstrates a structural dependency. Exploiting the structural
dependency enables the central entity to aggregate information
from its surrounding neighbors and enhance the learning of entity representations. UniDiag uses L-layer relation-aware GCN
as an evolutionary unit to model the concurrent facts of structural
dependency information. Each entity et,τ obtains information
from itself, its connected neighboring entities eh,τ , and the
relation r at time τ , and passes down to the next layer
⎞
⎛



1
⎝
ek+1
γ1k ekh,τ + rτ + γ2kekt,τ ⎠ ,
t,τ = f
δt
(h,r),∃(h,r,t)∈ϑτ

(1)
where ϑτ is the set of facts at timestamp τ , k ∈ [0, L − 1], ekh,τ ,
rτ , ekt,τ denote the k th layer embeddings of entities h, relation r,
and entities t at time τ , respectively. γ1k and γ2k are the parameters
for aggregating features and self-loop in the k th layer. ekh,τ + rt
represents the relational translation between the head entity and
the tail entity under relation r. δt is a normalization constant,
equal to the in-degree of entity t. f (·) is the RReLU activation
function.

ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

Capture Temporal Information: A TKG contains information
about the dynamic evolution of KGs over time. UniDiag utilizes two temporal gating components to model the sequential
information of entities and relations, respectively.
The embedding of all entities at time τ is determined by the
final layer output of the relation-aware GCN at time τ and the
entity embedding representation at time τ − 1. Formally,
Eτ = Uτ ◦ EτL + (1 − Uτ ) ◦ Eτ −1 ,

(2)

where E ∈ R|E|∗d denotes the entity embedding matrix, E is
the set of entities, and d is the dimension of the embeddings. ◦
denotes the Hadamard product. The temporal gate Uτ ∈ R|E|×d
conducts nonlinear transformation.
The embedding of a relation at time τ is influenced by Eτ −1
and er,τ , which can be formulated as


rτ = [pooling (Eτ −1 , er,τ ) ; r ] ,

(3)

where r is the embedding of relation r, er,τ is the set of r-related
entities, pooling denotes the mean pooling operation, and [; ]
denotes the vector concatenation operation.
UniDiag uses the GRU component to obtain the embedding
of all relations
Rτ = GRU (Rτ −1 , Rτ ) ,

(5)

where μ ∈ R is a trainable vector.
These graph embeddings, encapsulating the rich informational content of three distinct monitoring data (metrics, logs,
and traces) gathered during microservice system operation, effectively capture the nuanced patterns embedded within each
modality. This comprehensive representation, derived from the
fusion of heterogeneous data sources, enables a more discriminating differentiation between various failure types, thereby
facilitating increased accuracy in downstream failure diagnosis
tasks.
d

We train the MOGE model with the KG inference task of
the TKG. Specifically, the inference is performed on the KG of
the next moment based on the KG of the current moment, and
a cross-entropy loss is computed according to the result of the
inferred and the actual KG of the next moment.
D. Failure Diagnosis
UniDiag trains failure diagnosis models using various failure
features. Initially, the number of clusters n is set based on
operators’ prior knowledge. UniDiag then clusters the embedded
representations of multimodal TKGs according to n. The farthest
distance between cluster centers defines the distance threshold
d.
We employ hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) for
the following reasons: (1) it uses a “bottom-up” approach to
identify hierarchical relations; (2) it is easy to define and flexible
with distance similarities and rules; (3) it handles clusters of
different sizes; and (4) it is widely used in failure diagnosis [13],
[50], [51]. Operators label each cluster with a specific failure
type using a typical case, thus reducing annotation effort by
labeling only the typical case closest to each cluster center.

(4)

where R ∈ R|R|∗d denotes the relation embedding matrix, and
R is the set of relations.
Our goal is to diagnose failures in the entire microservice
system, so we need to learn the graph embeddings of the KG at
each moment to perform downstream diagnostic tasks. Because
microservice instances are dynamically created and deleted in
the microservice system, the deployment and invocation relation
also change dynamically [24], [25]. That is, the KGs in the
constructed TKG can be different, which brings challenges for
subsequent failure detection and triage. Moreover, there is no
inherent ordering relation among the nodes in the graph, and we
get the same output by using any order of node representation
as input.
SOPOOL [29] collects second-order statistics from the information of all nodes. It captures the correlations among features
and topology information in graph representation learning [29].
In this way, it can help UniDiag address the above challenge.
Therefore, UniDiag uses SOPOOL to obtain a graph representation based on node representation. UniDiag transforms the
entity embedding matrix E using a linear mapping to obtain the
embedding of the graph
SOP OOL(E) = E T Eμ,

4019

E. Online Diagnosis and Update
For a new window’s multimodal data, UniDiag calculates the
distance between the failure’s embedding and the existing cluster
centers, mapping the failure to the nearest cluster. If the distance
is less than d, the failure is classified according to the nearest
cluster center. Otherwise, a new cluster is created and labeled by
operators, who then update UniDiag accordingly. Discrepancies
between UniDiag’s diagnosis and operators’ verification result
in cluster set updates, enhancing performance.
UniDiag is initially deployed in a limited number of scenarios
and gradually expanded as it stabilizes. Failures identified in
one scenario can inform diagnoses in other scenarios, allowing
operators to build a comprehensive knowledge base of failure
types. This enables quick labeling of new failures, thereby
improving diagnosis efficiency and mitigation.
F. Computational Complexity Analysis
To evaluate the computational efficiency of UniDiag, we
conduct a complexity analysis of two critical components:
Multimodal Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction and
Microservice-Oriented Graph Embedding. In the Multimodal
Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction phase, the time complexity for serializing multimodal data is determined by the
number of data entries at each timestamp. Constructing the
knowledge graph entails the insertion of nodes and edges.
Assuming the number of nodes is |Eall | and the number of
edges is |Rall |, the complexity is O(|Eall | + |Rall |). In the
Microservice-Oriented Graph Embedding phase, the time complexity for capturing structural dependencies is O(|F|L), where
|F| denotes the maximum number of concurrent facts within
the knowledge graph. Additionally, the time complexity for
capturing temporal information is O(|Esub ||R|), where |Esub | is

4020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

TABLE II
DATASET INFORMATION

the maximum number of entities involved in the relationships,
and |R| is the size of the relation set.
VI. EVALUATION
We aim to answer the following research questions (RQs):
RQ1: How effective does UniDiag perform in failure diagnosis?
RQ2: Does each component contribute to UniDiag?
RQ3: Does each data modality contribute to UniDiag?
RQ4: Is UniDiag computationally efficient?
RQ5: What is the impact of different hyperparameter settings?
A. Experimental Setup
Dataset: To evaluate UniDiag, we conduct extensive experiments using two datasets, D1 and D2, sourced from distinct
microservice systems with varying business contexts and architectures. Table II details the datasets. Both datasets are split
into training (the initial 70% of failure cases) and testing (the
remaining 30%) sets based on their start time.
Dataset 1 (D1), derived from CloudWise’s Generic AIOps
Atlas (GAIA)1 , serves as a benchmark for microservice failure
diagnosis [19], [52], [53], [54]. GAIA data, primarily from
CloudWise’s MicroSS simulation system, encompasses comprehensive monitoring data and simulated failures. We test four
types of failures: “Memory resource underprovisioning”, “System component damage”, “Filesystem misconfigurations”, and
“Access control errors”.
Dataset 2 (D2) originates from a simulated e-commerce application utilizing microservices. It includes a variety of real failure injections to replicate e-commerce operational challenges.
This dataset encompasses dynamic service topologies, real-time
traces, metrics, and logs. We test five types of failures: “CPU resource underprovisioning”, “Memory resource underprovisioning”, “Disk resource underprovisioning”, “System component
damage”, and “Container resource quota violations”.
Implementation: UniDiag is implemented in PyTorch, and all
of the experiments are conducted on a Linux Server with 64
16C32T Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5218 CPU @ 2.30GHz, two
NVIDIA(R) Tesla(R) V100S, and 187.5 GB RAM. As for the
hyperparameters, the number of layers and the hidden size in
R-GCN are 2 and 50, respectively. The dimension of graph
embedding is 100.
1 https://github.com/CloudWise-OpenSource/GAIA-DataSet

Baselines: We compare UniDiag with the following baseline methods: iSQUAD [8], DéjàVu [10], LogCluster [11],
Cloud19 [12], MEPFL [14], CloudRCA [20], MicroCBR [34],
and DiagFusion [19], which are based on either single-modal or
multimodal data. We implement these methods referring to the
codes provided by the original papers. For the papers without
open-source codes, we set the hyperparameters according to the
descriptions provided in the respective papers.
Evaluation Metrics: In the task of failure diagnosis, distinct
labels are assigned to each type of failure. Hence, to assess
multi-label tasks, we utilize the extensively employed evaluation
metrics known as Weighted Average Precision, Weighted Average Recall, and Weighted Average F1 -score [55]. For each label,
we perform calculations to determine the respective precision =
T P/(T P + F P ), recall = T P/(T P + F N ), and F1 -score =
2 × precision × recall/(precision + recall), with True Positives (T P ), False Positives (F P ), and False Negatives (F N ).
Subsequently, these metrics are averaged by applying weighting
based on the support, representing the number of true cases
associated with each label.
Furthermore, in the ablation experiments, we employ two
widely acknowledged metrics, namely Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) [56] and Clustering Accuracy (ACC) [57],
to evaluate the performance of UniDiag. NMI is a commonly
used evaluation metric for clustering results, which measures the
consistency between clustering results and ground-truth class
labels. Formally,
NMI = −

2×
i

i

j

|Ti ∩ Qj | × log

|Ti |×log

|Ti |
C

+

j

C×|Ti ∩Qj |
|Ti |×|Qj |

|Qj |×log

|Qj |
C

,

(6)
where C is the total number of cases, Ti and Qj denote the ith
class of the ground truth and the jth cluster generated by the
clustering algorithm, respectively.
ACC elucidates the correspondence between clustering results and ground-truth class labels by quantifying the degree
to which each cluster encompasses data points belonging to the
respective ground-truth class. ACC can be calculated as follows:
1 
δ (xc = x̂c ) ,
C c=1
C

ACC(x, x̂) =

(7)

where x and x̂ denote the actual class labels of the results and the
labels that match the ground truth best, respectively. δ denotes
the Kronecker delta.
B. Overall Performance (RQ1)
Table III presents the number of labeled samples (failures
needing labeling) and the overall performance comparison on
the two datasets. The quantity of labeled data for each baseline
is tailored to its specific requirements. We empirically determine
the optimal number of labeled samples for methods without
explicit labeling needs by conducting multiple experiments with
varying labeled sample numbers, selecting the best configuration. Notably, the labeled samples are only a subset of the training
data, while larger datasets are used for training and testing to

ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

4021

TABLE III
EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY OF FAILURE DIAGNOSIS

ensure comprehensive learning and robust evaluation. A key
distinction is that MEPFL [14] labels anomalous traces, unlike
other methods that label failure cases. Table III details the number of traces needing labeling for MEPFL. UniDiag outperforms
all baselines on both datasets, achieving an impressive Weighted
Average F1 -score of 0.869 and 0.723, respectively.
iSQUAD [8] diagnoses failures using ground truths from
similar failures but lacks historical failure integration, risking
errors from noise and fluctuations. DéjàVu [10] trains a model
with historical failures and Failure Dependency Graphs (FDGs),
requiring many labeled cases. Both methods rely on metric data,
lacking comprehensive features, resulting in poor performance.
LogCluster [11] struggles to parse log entries into meaningful
events, missing semantic information. Cloud19 [12] fails to
address polysemy and uses a limited context window, missing
broader contextual information and leading to suboptimal performance.
MEPFL [14] uses a supervised learning model through traces,
relying on labeling all anomalous trace patterns.
CloudRCA [20] combines logs and metrics but ignores the
microservice system’s topology, missing crucial features. It also
requires many labeled historical failure cases, and insufficient
training samples harm its performance. In contrast, UniDiag
excels in failure diagnosis, achieving a significantly higher
Weighted Average F1 -score than existing methods.
UniDiag demonstrates superior performance in failure diagnosis compared to MicroCBR [34] and DiagFusion [19] by
integrating both normal and failure data, thereby capturing a
holistic view of the system state and mitigating information loss.
Unlike MicroCBR, which is constrained by its reliance on failure
data alone, and DiagFusion, which depends heavily on labeled
historical cases, UniDiag employs TKG and MOGE to provide
a comprehensive temporal representation of the microservice
system’s state, effectively modeling complex dependencies and
interactions.
RT and invocation paths reflect anomalous patterns in trace
data, while EC and QC are key for detecting reliability and traffic
failures. MicroCBR uses only RT for anomaly detection, and
DiagFusion uses RT and EC, potentially leading to inaccurate
diagnoses. In contrast, UniDiag uses invocation paths, RT, EC,
and QC to construct a knowledge graph, incorporating rich
information for more accurate failure diagnosis.
Frequent failure scenarios in historical data can be swiftly and
accurately identified through observation and practice. However,

as the microservice architecture evolves and develops, new types
of failures, that is, undiscovered types of failures that have never
occurred or occurred less frequently in the past, often manifest
within the microservice systems.
To evaluate UniDiag’s robustness in diagnosing new failure
types, we select distinct failure types from diverse datasets
and excluded associated samples from the training set. Given
that supervised methods cannot diagnose new failure types and
MicroCBR can only match new cases with existing types, we
used iSQUAD and LogCluster as baselines. As listed in Table IV,
by averaging the results of each new failure type diagnosis on the
same dataset, we calculate the precision, recall, and F1 -score.
UniDiag significantly outperforms the other methods. iSQUAD
and LogCluster, limited to single-modal data, fail to detect some
failures, resulting in numerous false positives and negatives. In
contrast, UniDiag’s fusion of three modalities of monitoring data
captures unique features from each modality, leading to comprehensive representation learning for each failure type. This
demonstrates that multimodal data fusion enhances UniDiag’s
performance.
C. Contribution of Key Components (RQ2)
To show the effectiveness of UniDiag’s key techniques (i.e., ,
entity embedding, graph embedding, and clustering), we creat
five variants (C1-C5) by substituting these techniques with common or state-of-the-art alternatives: (1) C1 uses RE-NET [58]
instead of MOGE for learning entity embedding. (2) C2 uses
TANGO [59] instead of MOGE for learning entity embedding.
(3) C3 uses mean pooling instead of MOGE for learning graph
embedding. (4) C4 uses DBSCAN instead of HAC. (5) C5 uses
K-means instead of HAC.
Table V demonstrates that UniDiag outperforms all variants
on two datasets, underscoring the significance of each component. Substituting MOGE with RE-NET (C1) or TANGO (C2)
results in decreased performance. RE-NET’s use of subgraph
aggregators and GRUs neglects the structural dependencies and
static attributes in TKGs, leading to the potential loss or mixing of historical facts. TANGO’s Neural Ordinary Differential
Equations (NODE) [60] are better suited for continuous time
domains and fail to capture patterns in the discrete snapshots of
TKGs amidst frequent microservice changes.
Replacing MOGE with mean pooling (C3) degrades performance as traditional pooling methods (e.g., mean pooling)

4022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

TABLE IV
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE MODELS DEALING WITH NEW TYPES OF FAILURES

TABLE V
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF ABLATION STUDY

differently. Traces contribute the least in D1 and D2, as indicated
by the minor performance drop in UniDiag w/o T , due to limited
trace records and fluctuating RT and QC. Conversely, UniDiag
w/o M shows significant performance degradation, aligning
with observations in Table I.
In conclusion, integrating all three data modalities significantly enhances UniDiag’s effectiveness, highlighting the crucial role of diverse data in improving failure diagnosis.
E. Computational Efficiency (RQ4)

TABLE VI
CONTRIBUTIONS OF DIVERSE DATA SOURCES

cannot effectively characterize features. SOPOOL, by modeling
general graph information correlations, captures long-distance
feature information more effectively.
Substituting HAC with DBSCAN or K-means (C4 & C5) also
reduces performance. HAC is robust to random initial values
and can identify outliers in KGs. DBSCAN, a density-based
method, is insensitive to noise and outliers, making it unsuitable
for failure detection. K-means struggles with non-spherical and
varied-sized clusters, and the choice of initial cluster centers
significantly affects the results.
D. Contribution of Each Modality (RQ3)
We conduct ablation experiments to examine the contributions
of different data sources by creating the following variants:
(1) UniDiagw/o M drops metrics while inputs logs and traces.
(2) UniDiagw/o L drops logs while inputs metrics and traces.
(3) UniDiagw/o T drops traces while inputs metrics and logs.
Table VI indicates that UniDiag’s effectiveness depends on
the integration of all data modalities, with each contributing

Table III compares the running times of UniDiag with other
baseline methods, covering both offline training and online diagnosis durations. Notably, UniDiag achieves an average online
diagnosis time of 0.6s, meeting real-time diagnostic demands,
given that data collection intervals for D1 and D2 are at least
30s. However, UniDiag has longer offline training times due to
the entity embedding process, which is influenced by the size
and complexity of the KG and the GCN. Despite this, UniDiag
minimizes the need for frequent retraining.
To test UniDiag’s efficiency on larger datasets, we constructed
a KG with 2,553 entities and 3,807,420 edges by replicating
nodes and attributes from D1. UniDiag achieved an average
offline training time of 5.12h and an average online diagnosis
time of 4.73s, demonstrating suitability for real-world deployment. These results confirm UniDiag’s robust performance on
large-scale datasets.
F. Effect of Hyperparameters (RQ5)
We discuss the impact of UniDiag’s three hyperparameters
and different training set sizes. Fig. 4 shows how NMI, ACC,
and Weighted Average F1 -score vary with these parameters.
The Number of Layers in Entity Embedding: UniDiag’s performance declines as the number of GCN layers increases from 1
to 5, with optimal results achieved at 2 or 3 layers. An excessive
number of layers causes node representations to converge and
lose distinction.
Graph Embedding Dimension: Optimal performance is observed at a graph embedding dimension of 100. Larger dimensions risk sparsity, over-fitting, and increased computational
complexity, but they may be suitable for complex microservice
systems.
The Number of Clusters: Increasing the number of clusters
enhances the utilization of training data; however, too many
clusters raise the labeling effort. We select 15 and 20 clusters
for D1 and D2, respectively.

ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

Fig. 4.

4023

Hyperparameters sensitivity on UniDiag.

The Size of the Training Set: We evaluated UniDiag with
training set sizes of 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, and 70%, using the
remaining 30% for testing. Fig. 4 demonstrates that UniDiag
achieves a high Weighted Average F1 -score even with a limited
number of failure cases, proving its effectiveness in real-world
scenarios with constrained historical data.
VII. DISCUSSION
A. Lessons Learned
1) Data Collection Granularity: Currently, most IT enterprises collect data at minute-level granularity, typically every
1 or 5 minutes [61], [62]. This granularity generally does not
significantly impact the model’s effectiveness. In our approach,
once the metric granularity is set, logs and traces must be aligned
with the metrics.
2) Effectiveness: UniDiag demonstrates superior effectiveness in failure diagnosis by integrating comprehensive multimodal data and leveraging TKGs to capture the full system
state over time. Unlike other methods that rely on limited data
sources, insufficient labeled data, or simplistic models, UniDiag
incorporates a broader range of features, which ensures accurate
diagnosis in microservice systems.
3) Flexibility: UniDiag’s flexibility is driven by its dynamic
TKG updates and incremental learning. The system continuously adapts to new data, integrating evolving failure patterns
and architectural changes without requiring full retraining, ensuring it remains effective in diagnosing emerging failures as
the environment evolves.
4) Scalability: UniDiag exhibits a high degree of adaptability to the dynamic nature of microservice architectures. As microservice instances are created or destroyed, UniDiag requires
only the addition or removal of the corresponding entities and
relations within the TKG. The workflow of UniDiag is inherently
general and does not rely on any specific data modality, thereby
maintaining its effectiveness even in production environments
where not all three modalities of data are concurrently monitored.
B. Threats to Validity
Regarding internal validity threats, the primary concern is the
implementation process. To address this, we conducted repeated

experimental tests and iteratively optimized the approach. The
results presented are averages of multiple trials.
Externally, there are two primary threats. First, the limited scale of our datasets compared to real-world microservice
systems in production environments restricts generalizability.
These datasets might not fully represent all microservice systems. Nevertheless, we believe our approach is sufficiently
general. We plan to collaborate with a top-tier Internet service
provider to deploy UniDiag and validate its effectiveness in
real-world scenarios. Second, our datasets may not capture
all failure types compared to industry-collected data. Future
work will involve evaluating our approach on a broader range
of microservice systems, incorporating larger-scale real-world
cases with diverse failure types to address this limitation.
C. Limitations
Based on the conducted experiments, we draw attention to
two primary limitations of UniDiag, as follows:
1) While UniDiag is designed to leverage metrics, logs, and
traces for comprehensive failure diagnosis, it remains robust even when data from some modalities are unavailable.
This is crucial since acquiring synchronized multimodal
data can be challenging in certain microservice deployments. Although UniDiag can function with missing data
sources due to its loosely-coupled nature, providing all
data types maximizes its effectiveness. Open-source toolkits such as cAdvisor [63] for metrics, Elasticsearch [64]
for logs, and Jaeger [65] for tracing facilitate monitoring
data collection in microservice systems. These tools simplify equipping microservices with comprehensive data
collection capabilities [18].
2) UniDiag relies on a data-driven approach. If specific failures do not manifest anomalies in the collected data, accurate diagnosis becomes challenging. This issue is common
and also recognized in MEPFL [14] and SCWarn [16].
VIII. CONCLUSION
Recognizing the limitations of relying solely on single-modal
data, which may fail to capture a substantial amount of crucial
information, we present UniDiag as a novel approach for failure
diagnosis. UniDiag fuses multimodal data, including metrics,
logs, and traces, using TKG. It includes a three-step process:

4024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

(1) effective fusion of metrics, logs, and traces through TKGs,
(2) utilization of MOGE for entity embedding and graph embedding, and (3) training of the failure diagnosis model to detect
failures and identify failure types accurately. We have conducted
extensive evaluation experiments on two datasets to validate the
efficacy, efficiency, and generalization of UniDiag. The empirical findings affirm the robustness and effectiveness of UniDiag
in achieving accurate and efficient failure diagnosis. Moreover,
to overcome the limitations of the data-driven approach, a
contextual analysis module could effectively analyze external
factors, such as deployment changes and system updates, which
might provide additional clues about potential failures for more
accurate failure diagnosis.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Colanzi et al., “Are we speaking the industry language? The practice and
literature of modernizing legacy systems with microservices,” in Proc. 15th
Braz. Symp. Softw. Compon. Architectures Reuse, New York, NY, 2021,
pp. 61–70.
[2] X. Zhou et al., “Fault analysis and debugging of microservice systems:
Industrial survey, benchmark system, and empirical study,” IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 243–260, Feb. 2021.
[3] A. Mahimkar, C. E. de Andrade, R. Sinha, and G. Rana, “A composition
framework for change management,” in Proc. 2021 ACM SIGCOMM
Conf., New York, NY, 2021, pp. 788–806.
[4] J. Y. Chung, C. Joe-Wong, S. Ha, J. W.-K. Hong, and M. Chiang, “CYRUS:
Towards client-defined cloud storage,” in Proc. 10th Eur. Conf. Comput.
Syst., New York, NY, 2015, pp. 1–16.
[5] J. Chen et al., “An empirical investigation of incident triage for online
service systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.: Softw.
Eng. Pract., Los Alamitos, CA, 2019, pp. 111–120.
[6] J. Chen et al., “Continuous incident triage for large-scale online service
systems,” in Proc. 34th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng., Los
Alamitos, CA, 2019, pp. 364–375.
[7] Y. Meng et al., “Localizing failure root causes in a microservice through
causality inference,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 28th Int. Symp. Qual. Serv., Los
Alamitos, CA, 2020, pp. 1–10.
[8] M. Ma et al., “Diagnosing root causes of intermittent slow queries in
cloud databases,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1176–1189,
2020.
[9] C. Wu et al., “Identifying root-cause metrics for incident diagnosis in
online service systems,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng.,
Los Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 91–102.
[10] Z. Li et al., “Actionable and interpretable fault localization for recurring failures in online service systems,” in Proc. 30th ACM Joint Eur.
Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2022,
pp. 996–1008.
[11] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc.
IEEE/ACM 38th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion, Los Alamitos, CA,
2016, pp. 102–111.
[12] Y. Yuan, W. Shi, B. Liang, and B. Qin, “An approach to cloud execution
failure diagnosis based on exception logs in OpenStack,” in Proc. IEEE
12th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., Los Alamitos, CA, 2019, pp. 124–131.
[13] X. Zhang et al., “Onion: Identifying incident-indicating logs for cloud
systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2021, pp. 1253–1263.
[14] X. Zhou et al., “Latent error prediction and fault localization for microservice applications by learning from system trace logs,” in Proc. 27th ACM
Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York,
NY, 2019, pp. 683–694.
[15] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Yang, and M. R. Lyu, “Heterogeneous
anomaly detection for software systems via semi-supervised cross-modal
attention,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Los Alamitos,
CA, 2023, pp. 1724–1736.
[16] N. Zhao et al., “Identifying bad software changes via multimodal anomaly
detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting
Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2021,
pp. 527–539.

[17] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2021.
[18] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Eadro: An end-to-end
troubleshooting framework for microservices on multi-source data,” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Los Alamitos, CA, 2023,
pp. 1750–1762.
[19] S. Zhang et al., “Robust failure diagnosis of microservice system through
multimodal data,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3851–
3864, Nov./Dec. 2023.
[20] Y. Zhang et al., “CloudRCA: A root cause analysis framework for cloud
computing platforms,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage.,
New York, NY, 2021, pp. 4373–4382.
[21] P. Dogga, K. Narasimhan, A. Sivaraman, S. Saini, G. Varghese, and R. Netravali, “Revelio: ML-generated debugging queries for finding root causes
in distributed systems,” Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst., vol. 4, pp. 601–622,
2022.
[22] C. Deng et al., “GAKG: A multimodal geoscience academic knowledge
graph,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., New York, NY,
2021, pp. 4445–4454.
[23] A. V. Kannan et al., “Multimodal knowledge graph for deep learning papers
and code,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., New York,
NY, 2020, pp. 3417–3420.
[24] X. Li, Y. Chen, and Z. Lin, “Towards automated inter-service authorization
for microservice applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM 2019 Conf.
Posters Demos, New York, NY, 2019, pp. 3–5.
[25] S. Chakraborty, S. Garg, S. Agarwal, A. Chauhan, and S. K. Saini,
“CausIL: Causal graph for instance level microservice data,” in Proc. ACM
Web Conf., New York, NY, 2023, pp. 2905–2915.
[26] R. Trivedi, H. Dai, Y. Wang, and L. Song, “Know-evolve: Deep temporal
reasoning for dynamic knowledge graphs,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., New York, NY:PMLR, 2017, pp. 3462–3471.
[27] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. v. d. Berg, I. Titov, and
M. Welling, “Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Eur. Semantic Web Conf., Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2018,
pp. 593–607.
[28] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoderdecoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods
Natural Lang. Process., Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2014, pp. 1724–1734.
[29] Z. Wang and S. Ji, “Second-order pooling for graph neural networks,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 6870–6880,
Jun. 2023.
[30] UniDiag, “Open source repository of unidiag,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/AIOps-Lab-NKU/UniDiag.git
[31] P. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anomalies through service-level deep Bayesian networks,” in Proc. IEEE
31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., Los Alamitos, CA, 2020,
pp. 48–58.
[32] D. Liu et al., “MicroHECL: High-efficient root cause localization in largescale microservice systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw.
Eng.: Softw. Eng. Pract., Los Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 338–347.
[33] Z. Li et al., “Practical root cause localization for microservice systems
via trace analysis,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Qual. Serv., Los
Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[34] F. Liu et al., “MicroCBR: Case-based reasoning on spatio-temporal fault
knowledge graph for microservices troubleshooting,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Case-Based Reasoning, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2022, pp. 224–239.
[35] J. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Qi, Y. Lu, and B. Wu, “Multilayered fault detection
and localization with transformer for microservice systems,” IEEE Trans.
Rel., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 1502–1515, Sep. 2024.
[36] Z. Zhu, C. Lee, X. Tang, and P. He, “HeMiRCA: Fine-grained root cause
analysis for microservices with heterogeneous data sources,” ACM Trans.
Softw. Eng. Methodol., Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1145/3674726.
[37] L. Zheng, Z. Chen, J. He, and H. Chen, “MULAN: Multi-modal causal
structure learning and root cause analysis for microservice systems,” in
Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2024, pp. 4107–4116.
[38] A. Workshop, “2022 CCF AiOps challenge,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://workshop.aiops.org
[39] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv.,
Los Alamitos, CA, 2017, pp. 33–40.
[40] S. Zhang et al., “Syslog processing for switch failure diagnosis and
prediction in datacenter networks,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 25th Int. Symp.
Qual. Serv., Los Alamitos, CA, 2017, pp. 1–10.

ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH

[41] J. Kulkarni, S. Joshi, S. Bapat, and K. Jambhali, “Analysis of system logs
for pattern detection and anomaly prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput.
Sci. Appl., Berlin:Springer-Verlag, 2020, pp. 427–436.
[42] B. H. Sigelman et al., “Dapper, A large-scale distributed systems tracing
infrastructure,” Google, Inc., Tech. Rep., 2010.
[43] Z. Chen et al., “Adaptive performance anomaly detection for online service
systems via pattern sketching,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., New
York, NY, 2022, pp. 61–72.
[44] S. Kim, S. An, P. Chikontwe, and S. H. Park, “Bidirectional
RNN-based few shot learning for 3D medical image segmentation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Palo Alto, CA:AAAI, 2021,
pp. 1808–1816.
[45] M. S. Murshed, C. Murphy, D. Hou, N. Khan, G. Ananthanarayanan, and F.
Hussain, “Machine learning at the network edge: A survey,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–37, 2021.
[46] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[47] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” in Proc. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. Workshop Deep Learn., 2014.
[48] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly
detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting
Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2021,
pp. 1404–1415.
[49] Y. Wang et al., “Fast outage analysis of large-scale production clouds with
service correlation mining,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw.
Eng., Los Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 885–896.
[50] Y. Sun et al., “Efficient and robust KPI outlier detection for large-scale
datacenters,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 2858–2871,
Oct. 2023.
[51] Y. Fu, M. Yan, Z. Xu, X. Xia, X. Zhang, and D. Yang, “An empirical study
of the impact of log parsers on the performance of log-based anomaly
detection,” Empir. Softw. Eng., vol. 28, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 6.
[52] Y. Sui et al., “LogKG: Log failure diagnosis through knowledge
graph,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3493–3507,
Sep./Oct. 2023.
[53] S. Zhang et al., “Efficient and robust trace anomaly detection for large-scale
microservice systems,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., Los
Alamitos, CA, 2023, pp. 69–79.
[54] C. Zhao et al., “Robust multimodal failure detection for microservice
systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
New York, NY, 2023, pp. 5639–5649.
[55] B. M. Sundheim, “Overview of the fourth message understanding evaluation and conference,” Naval Command Control and Ocean Surveillance
Center RDT and E DIV, San Diego CA, USA, Tech. Rep., 1992.
[56] L. Danon, A. Diaz-Guilera, J. Duch, and A. Arenas, “Comparing community structure identification,” J. Stat. Mechanics: Theory Exp., vol. 2005,
no. 09, 2005, Art. no. P09008.
[57] N. Zhao, L. Zhang, B. Du, Q. Zhang, J. You, and D. Tao, “Robust dual
clustering with adaptive manifold regularization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 2498–2509, Nov. 2017.
[58] W. Jin, M. Qu, X. Jin, and X. Ren, “Recurrent event network: Autoregressive structure inferenceover temporal knowledge graphs,” in Proc.
2020 Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., Stroudsburg, PA:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 6669–6683.
[59] Z. Han, Z. Ding, Y. Ma, Y. Gu, and V. Tresp, “Learning neural ordinary
equations for forecasting future links on temporal knowledge graphs,” in
Proc. 2021 Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., Stroudsburg,
PA:Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 8352–8364.
[60] R. Das et al., “Go for a walk and arrive at the answer: Reasoning over
paths in knowledge bases using reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2018, pp. 1–18.
[61] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, and D. Pei, “Robust and rapid clustering of KPIs
for large-scale anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp.
Qual. Serv., Los Alamitos, CA, 2018, pp. 1–10.
[62] Z. Li, W. Chen, and D. Pei, “Robust and unsupervised KPI anomaly
detection based on conditional variational autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE
37th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf., Los Alamitos, CA, 2018,
pp. 1–9.
[63] Google, “Container advisor,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.
com/google/cadvisor
[64] Elastic, “Elasticsearch,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/
[65] C. N. C. Foundation, “Jaeger,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.
jaegertracing.io/

4025

Shenglin Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the BS
degree in network engineering from the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2012, and the PhD degree in
computer science from the Department of Computer
Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2017. He is currently an associate
professor with the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. His current research interests
include failure detection, diagnosis, and prediction
for service management.

Yongxin Zhao received the BS and MS degrees in
software engineering from the College of Software,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2021 and 2024,
respectively. She is currently working toward the PhD
degree with the College of Software, Nankai University. Her research interests include failure detection
and failure diagnosis.

Sibo Xia received the BS degree in software engineering from the College of Software, Nankai University,
Tianjin, China, in 2022. He is currently working
toward the PhD degree with the College of Software, Nankai University. His research interests include anomaly detection and failure diagnosis.

Shirui Wei received the BS degree in software engineering from the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2023. She is currently working
toward the master’s degree with the National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Her research interests include
astroinformatics and virtual observatories.

Yongqian Sun (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree in statistical specialty from Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2012, and the
PhD degree in computer science from the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently
an associate professor with the College of Software,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China. His research interests include anomaly detection and root cause localization in service management.

Chenyu Zhao received the BS and MS degrees in
software engineering from the College of Software,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2020 and 2023,
respectively. Her research interests are focused on
anomaly detection and root cause analysis.

4026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

Shiyu Ma received the BS degree in software engineering from the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2022. She is currently working toward the master’s degree with the College of
Software, Nankai University. Her research interests
include failure diagnosis and root-cause localization.

Junhua Kuang received the BS degree in software
engineering from the College of Software, Nankai
University, Tianjin, China, in 2024. He is currently
working toward the master’s degree with the College
of Software, Nankai University. His research interests
include anomaly detection and anomaly localization.

Bolin Zhu received the BS degree in software engineering from the College of Software, Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2023. He is currently working
toward the master’s degree with the Computer Science and Technology Department, Nanjing University. His research interests include the reasoning of
large language models.

Lemeng Pan received the PhD degree in statistics
from the University of Maryland College Park, Maryland. He is currently a research scientist with Huawei
Technologies Company, Ltd.

Yicheng Guo received the BS degree in particle and
nuclear physics from the University of Science and
Technology of China, in 2014, and the PhD degree in
particle and nuclear physics from the Department of
Modern Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2019. He is currently a
senior engineer with Huawei Technologies Company,
Ltd.

Dan Pei (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BE
and MS degrees in computer science from the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1997 and 2000,
respectively, and the PhD degree in computer science from the Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 2005.
He is currently an associate professor with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. His research interests include network and service management in general. He is an
ACM senior member.