IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

4639

Normal Image Guided Segmentation Framework for
Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Peng Xing , Yanpeng Sun , Dan Zeng , Senior Member, IEEE, and Zechao Li , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Unsupervised anomaly detection is required to
detect/segment anomalous samples/regions that deviate from
the normal pattern while learning only through the normal
sample category. Towards this end, this paper proposes a
novel framework for anomaly detection by introducing normal
images as guidance called Normal Image Guided Segmentation
Framework (NIGSF). It consists of a Normal Guided Network
(NGN) and a Saliency Augmentation Module (SAM). NGN
constructs the contrast set, which is a candidate set for extracting
normal sample features. Then, a normal feature extractor is
developed to extract detailed and complete features containing
normal semantic information as guidance features. Meanwhile,
the guidance feature fusion module is introduced to realize
normal semantic guidance in the feature space, and then the
segmentation module discriminates the features that are different
from the normal guidance features as anomalies. SAM aims
to generate forged anomaly samples utilizing available normal
samples. It introduces saliency maps and random Perlin noise to
generate saliency Perlin noise maps and then to generate diverse
forged anomaly samples. Extensive experiments are conducted to
evaluate the performance of NIGSF on three anomaly detection
benchmark datasets. The results demonstrate the effectiveness
of each proposed module and the superiority of the proposed
method. Specifically, NIGSF outperforms the runner-up by 5.4%
in terms of anomaly segmentation AP metric.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, contrast set, normal guidance, saliency augmentation, feature guidance.

I. I NTRODUCTION

U

NSUPERVISED anomaly detection is a crucial task in
computer vision, which includes two parts: anomaly
classification and anomaly segmentation [1], [2], [3], [4], [5].
The former aims to identify samples as normal or anomalous, whereas the latter strives to locate anomalous pixels.
However, anomaly detection is different from general detection and segmentation tasks. Due to the wide distribution of
Manuscript received 29 June 2023; revised 23 September 2023; accepted 16
October 2023. Date of publication 25 October 2023; date of current version 6 June 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022ZD0118802
and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant U20B2064 and Grant U21B2043. This article was recommended by
Associate Editor A. Liu. (Corresponding author: Zechao Li.)
Peng Xing, Yanpeng Sun, and Zechao Li are with the School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science
and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China (e-mail: xingp_ng@njust.edu.cn;
yanpeng_sun@njust.edu.cn; zechao.li@njust.edu.cn).
Dan Zeng is with the School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China (e-mail:
dzeng@shu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3327448.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3327448

Fig. 1. Comparison of different unsupervised anomaly detection methods.
(a) “Recon.”( Reconstruction-based method [6], [19]). (b) DRAEM [20].
(c) The proposed framework (NIGSF). NIGSF takes full advantage of the
similarity of normal samples and directly utilizes normal image to guide the
segmentation of abnormal regions.

anomaly events and the difficulty of collecting all anomaly
categories [6], [7]. Therefore, unsupervised anomaly detection
that relies only on normal sample modelling becomes an
important task. This task holds great promise in industrial
contexts [1], [2], [8], [9], [10], [11], medical diagnosis [12],
[13], and video surveillance [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], for
example, by modeling normal industrial product images to
detect abnormal types of products and get rid of manual quality
control. Training only through normal samples poses a huge
challenge of unsupervised anomaly detection. To solve this
challenge, the relationship between normal images must be
fully explored.
Recent developments in anomaly detection have explored
a plethora of methods to address its inherent challenges
[21], [22], [23], [24]. As depicted in Figure 1 (a), popular reconstruction-based methods [6], [25], [26] utilize an
autoencoder for recovering normal samples with low error,
while recovering “unlearn” abnormal samples are expected
to yield higher reconstruction error. This reconstruction error,
representing the anomaly score of an image, alongside the
pixel-level error forming the anomaly segmentation map, are
the principal insights of these methods [3], [4]. However, these
models face limitations as they cannot filter all anomalies,
especially when actual anomalous samples for training are

1051-8215 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

insufficient or when these anomalies closely resemble normal
samples. Figure 1 (b) illustrates the DRAEM segmentation
method [20], which anticipates training a segmentation model
for direct anomaly segmentation. The insight of DRAEM
expects the segmentation model to learn the representation
of anomalies and then segmentation. However, anomalous
features are diverse, which results in unlearned anomaly
types that may still be misclassified as normal. Under the
traditional anomaly detection paradigm, a significant limitation
of existing methods is that they aim to learn as much as
possible about the representation of all anomaly types and
then filter or segment them accordingly. Therefore, there is
an urgent requirement to develop a novel anomaly detection paradigm to overcome this challenge. Moreover, some
methods [20], [27] have been proposed to overcome the
imbalance challenge between positive and negative samples
associated with the dearth of anomalous samples available for
training. CutPaste [27] generates forged anomalous samples
by randomly cropping thin rectangular areas from normal
samples and then uses a classifier to detect the anomalous
samples. Meanwhile, anomaly segmentation maps are inferred
by the classifier’s gradient. Nonetheless, the forged anomalous
regions only comprise part of the normal sample and are
rectangular in shape, which causes the forged anomalies to be
too simplistic. DRAEM [20] is developed based on random
noise [28] to create binary masks that generate forged anomalous regions. However, the use of global random noise results
in the generated anomalies appearing in image backgrounds.
These forged anomaly samples may prompt the model to focus
excessively on the background region, which results in the
model being ineffective in detecting real anomalies, especially
in industrial product scenes.
Towards this end, a novel Normal Image Guided Segmentation Framework (NIGSF) for anomaly detection is presented,
as illustrated in Figure 1 (c). The proposed NIGSF is more
perceptually consistent with human intuition for detecting
abnormal images, i.e., it utilizes normal samples as the reference to guide the segmentation model to identify “abnormal
features” that deviate from the normal reference. This is called
the normal image-guided anomaly detection paradigm. Our
framework hinges on two main components: the NormalGuided Network (NGN), and the Saliency Augmentation
Module (SAM). Firstly, Normal-Guided Network (NGN) is
proposed to extract valid normal features as reference features
and guide the segmentation model to segment out abnormal
regions. In NGN, we set up the contrast set, which is proposed as a candidate set for extracting guidance features for
the input image. In addition, a normal feature extractor is
developed to extract noiseless guidance features with detailed
normal semantic information from the contrast set. Meanwhile,
a simple yet effective multiscale guidance fusion is proposed
to fully utilize the guidance features to guide the segmentation
of anomalous features. The multiscale features account for the
discrimination of tiny anomaly regions. Secondly, to further
facilitate NIGSF learning to detect abnormal regions that deviate from normal patterns, a Saliency Augmentation Module
(SAM) is proposed, which aims to generate forged anomalous
samples that differ from the normal sample distribution to

participate in training. SAM introduces the saliency map and
Perlin noise to forge anomalies in saliency regions rather
than background regions while ensuring diversity and avoiding
generating noisy samples that may hinder model learning.
During training, NIGSF is expected to accurately segment
the forged anomalies under the guidance of the normal
image. Extensive experiments are conducted on three anomaly
detection datasets. The performance of NIGSF over the stateof-the-art approaches demonstrates its superiority.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as
follows:
• In this paper, the inadequacies of the current anomaly
detection paradigm are analyzed, and a novel paradigm,
anomaly detection guided by normal images, which aligns
more closely with human intuition, is proposed.
• Based on the proposed anomaly detection paradigm,
a novel Normal Image Guided Segmentation Framework
(NIGSF) is proposed. It directly introduces normal image
features as reference features and guides the segmentation
model to identify “abnormal” classes that differ from the
normal reference.
• A Saliency Augmentation Module (SAM) is proposed to
generate diverse and valid forged anomaly samples, which
facilitates the learning of NIGSF.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents a brief overview of related work, including differences between recent studies and the proposed
approach. Section III outlines the details of the proposed
method. Section IV provides a detailed description of the
experiments, containing the ablation experiments and the
experimental results of the three data sets. Section V provides
the conclusions.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Anomaly detection plays a pivotal role in visual tasks [20],
[27]. The issue lies in the diversity of anomalous samples
making it unfeasible to obtain representations of all anomalies,
necessitating unsupervised methods which only require normal
samples [29], [30], [31]. This challenge of detecting anomalies
without prior knowledge of anomalous scenes is demanding. Initially, anomaly detection aimed to identify unlearned
category samples, referred to as Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
detection [32] or One-Class Classification [23]. Yet, in industrial and medical scenarios, locating anomalous regions in
abnormal images becomes imperative [1], [20], [33], [34],
thereby bifurcating unsupervised anomaly detection into two
subtasks, namely, anomaly classification and anomaly segmentation. Various existing approaches include distribution-based,
knowledge distillation-based, reconstruction-based, and forged
anomalous sample-based methods.
Distribution-based methods [21], [22], [23] deduce normal sample distribution before identifying anomalies as
samples falling outside these distributions. For instance,
DeepSVDD [23] uses deep learning models to map the original
image space to high-dimensional latent space. Normal samples’ distribution is limited to certain regions in this space,
enabling the identification of anomalies outside these regions.

XING et al.: NIGSF FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

These methods excel when normal and anomaly classes have a
wide gap but falter with finer anomalies like leather scratches.
Padim [24] further refines this approach by modeling the distribution of each normal image patch using multiple Gaussian
mixture models [35], thus identifying outliers, yet precise
anomaly segmentation remains elusive.
The knowledge distillation-based approach [2], [36] trains
one or more student networks through a pre-trained teacher
network and detects anomalies by the output’s differences
between the teacher and student networks for the samples.
U-Std [2] utilizes multiple student networks and image patches
as input to the network. However, it is inefficient in practice
and can not achieve anomaly localization. MKDAD [36] uses
only one student network and multi-scale feature distillation
to encode normal samples closer together. It achieves anomaly
localization relying on the gradients to locate anomalous
regions. However, it is limited by the resolution of feature
maps and does not enable accurate anomaly segmentation.
The reconstruction-based approaches usually utilize autoencoder (AE) [37] to successfully reconstruct normal samples
and poorly anomalous samples [19], [26], [38], [39]. Abnormal
regions are detected and localized by comparing the difference
between the original and reconstructed images. These methods
are implemented directly through AE [19]. However, due to
the strong reconstruction ability of AE, they can reconstruct
anomalous samples well even if no anomalous samples are
available in training. Some methods [4], [6], [7], [25], [40],
[41], [42], [43] are proposed to reduce the reconstruction
ability of AE by introducing memory networks. For example,
MemAE [6] introduces a memory module after the encoder
of the traditional AE, and PMB introduces a more efficient
local memory module weakening anomaly recovery. However,
the simple memory module makes the performance poor
in the face of fine-grained anomalies. MNAD [7] further
improves the original memory module and introduces a new
loss function to improve the learning of the memory module.
Unfortunately, these methods can still reconstruct unlearned
objects well, and the anomaly segmentation performance of
anomaly detection remains poor.
The forged anomalous sample-based approach is proposed
to solve the problem of positive and negative sample imbalance in anomaly detection [20], [27]. After acquiring forged
anomaly samples, supervised models can be used to solve the
anomaly detection challenge. Cutpaste [27] generates forged
abnormal samples that are added to the training set by using
a part of the rectangular region of the original image to fill
the forged region. However, the forged anomalies are not only
rectangular in shape but also simple. Besides, using the gradient method to locate the anomalies, the pixel-level localization
performance is poor. Inspired by the excellent performance of
segmentation models in dense prediction tasks [44], [45], [46],
[47], several studies [20], [48] have introduced segmentation
networks in anomaly localization task. In [48], the forged
images are first generated by the GAN as well as the semantic
segmentation network, and then the distillation network is
used to detect anomaly images. However, it is only applicable
to anomaly classification and difficult to achieve anomaly
localization. DRAEM [20] directly introduces segmentation

4641

networks for segmenting forged anomalous samples. However,
this is not effective due to the distributional gap between the
generated and real anomalies. Towards this end, this paper
proposes a more reasonable method to generate forged anomalous samples. Then, a novel anomaly detection framework is
proposed, which utilizes normal features as guidance features
to detect anomaly regions. The purpose of NIGSF is to learn
and detect distributions that differ from the normal distribution,
guided by the normal pattern.
III. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
A. Overview
The overall architecture of the proposed Normal Image
Guided Segmentation Framework (NIGSF) is shown in
Figure 2, which contains a Normal Guided Network (NGN)
and a Saliency Augmentation Module (SAM). The intuition of NIGSF is to identify unknown abnormal samples
by comparing the differences with known normal samples
which is similar to the detection of abnormal classes in
humans. Towards this end, NGN (Sec. III-B) is proposed,
which contains a normal feature extractor, the guidance feature fusion and a segmentation module. The purpose of the
normal feature extractor is to extract the normal features
with detailed information from only the normal samples.
To facilitate feature-level guidance, this paper utilizes a simple
yet effective guidance feature fusion method. Specifically, the
features extracted from the input image (I or A) by the
encoder of the segmentation module are multi-scale fused
with the guidance features. The decoder of the segmentation
module learns from the fused features and segments the
“anomalies” that differ from the guidance features. To facilitate
the segmentation module segmenting anomalies efficiently,
SAM (Sec. III-C) is proposed. SAM aims to generate forged
anomaly samples by available normal samples. It can generate
reasonable forged anomaly samples in the saliency region
rather than the background region. In the training phase, the
generated forged anomalous samples serve as training samples
along with normal samples to train the segmentation model to
locate the forged regions. In the inference phase, the input
samples are input to the segmentation module without SAM.
In summary, NIGSF aims to enable the model to learn to
identify content that differs from the guidance features as
anomalies under normal sample guidance. Therefore, NIGSF
differs from the traditional anomaly detection paradigm in that
it is more in line with the anomaly detection principle, i.e.,
identifies deviations from normal as abnormal.
Formally, A represents the input image and y A =
 ij ij
N ,N
y |y ∈ {0} i=1, j=1 is pixel-level label, where N × N represents the size of A, y i j = 0 represents that the pixel is normal,
y i j = 1 represents that the pixel is abnormal. The contrast set

N ,N
is C = {C1 , C2 , . . . , Cn }, yC = yi j |y i j ∈ {0} i=1, j=1 , where
n denotes the number of samples in C. The sampled image is
Ci as the input of the normal feature extractor. The auxiliary

N ,N
image is represented as B, y B = yi j |y i j ∈ {1} i=1, j=1 . R
represents the output of the normal feature extractor with the
same size as Ci . The loss function of the normal feature
extractor is L N . The image A is forged by the SAM to obtain

4642

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

Fig. 2. Illustration of the proposed NIGSF. A represents the input image. The contrast set C is first generated from A and available normal samples, then
Ci is randomly sampled from C as the input of the normal feature extractor, which is responsible for extracting the noise-free and complete features as
the guidance features that guide the segmentation module to segment anomaly regions. During training, the image A is input to the Saliency Augmentation
Module (SAM) to generate the forged anomaly image I . The guidance features and features extracted by I are fed into the decoder of the segmentation
network by the guidance feature fusion module. Finally, the decoder of the segmentation module identifies the difference between the input features and the
guidance features segmenting the anomalous region to obtain the segmentation map O. The proposed NISGF utilizes L N and L S to train the model. SAM
is discarded during the inference phase, and A is fed directly into the segmentation module to achieve anomaly detection.


N ,N
the set of samples I , and y I = yi j |y i j ∈ {0, 1} i=1, j=1 . O
represents the output of the segmentation module as anomaly
localization images. M represents the forged mask. The loss
function of the segmentation network is L S .

serves as the features for measuring similarity. The output q
is then flattened into a vector p A ∈ R512 by the mean-pooling
layer. p A obtained from image A is used to calculate the cosine
similarity T with the training normal images pT rain .
j

B. Normal Guided Network
Since the high correlation among normal samples, it is
natural to consider normal sample comparisons for identifying
anomalies. In this regard, we first introduce the concept of a
contrast set whose images serve as reference samples for the
input samples. We then extract features from the reference
images using a normal feature extractor as guidance features.
Finally, the anomaly detection results are obtained by guidance
feature fusion and the segmentation module.
1) Contrast Set: Given the substantial intra-class variations
exhibited by samples, even normal ones, low-level attributes
such as texture and color tend to differ. Consequently, randomly selecting normal samples as reference images poses
a challenge in ensuring the extracted features suitable for
guiding the detection of anomalous samples. This paper introduces the contrast set. The contrast set is composed of normal
samples that closely resemble input image A, allowing for
the controlled similarity of low-level information and highlevel semantic information between the guidance features and
features extracted from A. As a result, the segmentation
module is better guided to locate tiny anomalies using the
guidance features obtained from the segmentation module.
Specifically, the proposed approach utilizes a feature extractor, where the output q ∈ R512×8×8 of the extractor’s last layer

T = {T 1 , T 2 , . . . , T j , . . . , T m |T j =

p A · pT rain
j

},

∥ p A ∥ × pT rain
(1)
where m is the number of available normal samples to construct the contrast set. Then, T is arranged as T ′ in descending
order of similarity. The top n in T ′ that correspond to the
original images are used to constitute the contrast set of A.
It is important to note that the contrast set of image A does
not comprise A itself since this can prevent the network from
excessively attending to low-level features (see Sec. IV-E).
During the training phase, images are randomly sampled from
the contrast set and used as input for the normal feature
extractor. On the other hand, in the reference phase, only
normal samples that are most similar to the input samples
A are included in the contrast set (Table VIII and ablation
experiments (5) give more explanation.).
2) Normal Feature Extractor: To guarantee that the
extracted features comprise comprehensive and detailed information, a normal feature extractor is employed, as shown
in Figure 3. In particular, Ci , sampled randomly from the
contrast set, is inputted into the extractor to ensure that the
extracted guidance features possess normal semantic information. Specifically, the normal feature extractor with a standard

XING et al.: NIGSF FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

4643

Fig. 3. Illustration of the guidance feature fusion module and segmentation module. Ci is randomly sampled from the contrast set C and used as the input
4 . The segmentation
of the normal feature extractor. The features of Ci are extracted by the normal feature extractor as the guidance features C D = {C iD }i=1
4
module extracts the features A E = {AiE }i=1
of the input image I or A (During the inference phase, A is input directly into the segmentation module
without SAM). The C D as guidance feature to provide feature-level guidance. The fused results are subjected to a standard 3 × 3 convolution layer to extract
discriminative features, which utilize skip connections to guide the decoder to obtain anomalous localization map O.

AE composition is trained by a reconstruction task. The
reconstruction task compresses and then recovers the image
features to ensure that the output of the decoder is normal
features. In addition, the multi-scale ensures the extraction of
high-dimensional semantic and low-dimensional information.
Therefore, the multi-scale features output from the normal
feature extractor decoder are used as guidance features.
3) Guidance Feature Fusion: To achieve normal features as
the guidance for input images, we adopt a simple yet effective
guidance feature fusion, as shown in Figure 3. We utilize
guidance features and the encoder of segmentation module to
achieve fusion. n each step, features with the same resolution
are fused through each layer of encoder to achieve feature
level fusion. Formally, the multi-scale features extracted by
4 . The
a normal feature extractor network are C E = {C Ei }i=1
i
4
output of the decoder is C D = {C D }i=1 , where C D is defined
as the guidance features. The output of the encoder of the
4
segmentation network is A E = {AiE }i=1
and the output of
i
4
the decoder is A D = {A D }i=1 . The proposed approach direct
multiscale fuses C D and A E , which ensures the segmentation
of tiny anomalous regions. It can be expressed as:
ACi = cat (C iD , AiE ),

i = 1, 2, 3, 4,

(2)

where cat (·) represents two features concatenated along the
channel dimension. Then, we further process ACi by 3 ×
3 convolutional layer to implement feature-level guidance.
di = σ (B Ni (Convi (ACi ))),
AC

(3)

where B Ni (·) denotes batch normalization layer, σ (·) denotes
di are fed to the next
the ReLU activation function. ACi and AC
encoder layer and to the decoder after the skip connection,
respectively.
4) Segmentation Module: The segmentation module consists of an autoencoder. The encoder is responsible for
extracting the multi-scale features of the input image. The
fused features are input to the decoder, then gradually obtains
the segmentation result by transposition convolution. Taking
layer i of the decoder as an example. First, its input is the

output Ai−1
D of layer i − 1.
d
AiD = T rConvi (Ai−1
D ),

(4)

where T rConvi (·) is 2× transposed convolution, d
AiD is output of the transposed convolution. Meanwhile, the guidance
features C iD are fused with AiE to obtain a new tensor
ACi ∈ Rh×w×2c . We utilize the fused features to generate
di and then obtain the decoder output Ai at layer
further AC
D
i
i. A D is represented as follows:
di , d
AiD = σ (B Ni2 (Convi2 (σ (B Ni1 (Convi1 (cat ( AC
AiD )))))).
(5)
where B Ni1 (·) and B Ni2 (·) denote two batch normalization
layers, Convi1 and Convi2 represent 3 × 3 with stride =
1. By performing the aforementioned operations iteratively,
a segmentation map O is obtained. Each pixel value of
the localization image O indicates the likelihood of each
pixel being discriminated as anomalous. Following [20], O
is processed through the mean-pooling layer to aggregate
local anomaly information. Furthermore, the proposed method
utilizes the maximum pixel value of O rather than the average
value as the anomaly score of the sample to eliminate any
adverse effects caused by noise.
C. Saliency Augmentation Module
SAM aims to generate reasonable forged anomalous samples that are close to the real anomaly distribution and suitable
for model learning, which includes a Saliency Perlin Noise
Generator (SPNG) and a Forged Sample Generator (FSG),
as shown in Figure 4. We follow DRAEM [20] to introduce random Perlin noise. However, the mask generated by
DRAEM using global noise may cause the model to focus
excessively on the background region, which is detrimental to
industrial anomaly detection. SAM further introduces saliency
information.SPNG generates saliency Perrin noise to make the
generated anomaly masks lie in the saliency region instead
of the background region. Meanwhile, to generate diverse

4644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

generate G S . Formally,
(
GS =

G R , sum(S) = 0,
G S , other wise,

(8)

D. Loss Function

Fig. 4. Illustration of the Saliency Augmentation Module (SAM). The
input of the SAM consists of three parts: the original input image A, the
auxiliary image B and the saliency map S. The Saliency Perlin Generator
generates the saliency Perlin noise G. The mask M is obtained from the
saliency Perlin noise G using an adaptive threshold segmentation strategy.
Finally, the original image A, auxiliary image B and mask (M and 1 − M)
are processed to generate the forged anomaly image I . G R represents the
random grid.

The proposed approach contains losses L N and L S . For the
normal feature extractor, the l2 loss is introduced. Besides,
the SS I M loss function [50] is also introduced to enhance the
reconstruction result so that the output guidance features are
completely noise-free normal features. Following [19], SS I M
loss is obtained from Equation (10). It is expressed as follows:
Ll2 = ∥R − C∥2 ,
(9)
N

L SS I M =

N

XX
1
k
1 − SS I M(i,
j) (R, C),
N×N

(10)

i=1 j=1

masks, an adaptive threshold scheme is proposed to binarize
the saliency Perlin noise. Then, FSG utilizes the auxiliary
samples, the mask generated by SPNG and the original image
to generate the forged anomalous samples.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 4, the input of SAM is
the original image A, the saliency map S extracted using
the saliency method [49], and the auxiliary image B. First,
a random grid G R is generated with the same size as the
original image A. Second, the saliency grid G S is obtained by
Hadamard product between saliency map S and the original
grid G R , which is used to generate the original noise G in
the saliency region. Third, by setting the threshold µ, the
foreground mask (M) and the background mask (1 − M)
are segmented. In this paper, an adaptive threshold scheme
is developed associated with the saliency map as follows:
µ=a+

sum(S)
× b,
N∗N

(6)

where [a, a + b] denotes the value domain of µ, sum(S)
denotes the sum of the values of S, and N represents the size of
image A. Finally, FSG fuses the image A, the auxiliary image
B, the background mask (1 − M) and the foreground mask
(M) to generate a forged anomalous sample I . The specific
methods are as follows:
I = A ⊙ (1 − M) + α × (B ⊙ M) + (1 − α) × (A ⊙ M),
(7)
where α denotes the proximity of the simulation to the normal
sample distribution, ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product. The
label of I is composed of the labels of A, B, and M, i.e.,
y I = M ⊙ y B + (1 − M) ⊙ y A . To ensure the diversity
of the generated forged anomaly samples, NIGSF randomly
samples auxiliary image B from a large-scale dataset and
applies data augmentation operations when generating each
forged anomaly sample.
However, existing saliency detection methods identify the
whole image as a background when targeting textured images.
Each pixel value on the saliency map is 0, which is obviously
not reasonable. Therefore, we used the following way to

where R and C are the reconstruction image and input
k (R, C) denotes
image of normal feature extractor. SS I M(i,
j)
the structural similarity index of a block of size k × k centred
at (i, j). For the segmentation module, the Focal loss [51]
is introduced to alleviate the imbalance between normal and
anomalous pixels. L S is expressed as follows:
(
ij
−(1 − p)τ log( p), y I = 1,
(11)
LS =
ij
− p τ log(1 − p),
y I = 0.
where p represents the probability of pixel (i, j) prediction.
Finally, the total loss of the proposed NIGSF is expressed as:
L = λ × L N + L S = λ × (Ll2 + L SS I M ) + L S ,
(12)
where λ is set to measure the importance of the two loss
functions.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we introduce the experimental datasets, the
experimental setup, and anomaly classification and localization performance. In addition, we conduct extensive ablation
experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of each proposed
module.
A. Datasets
1) MVTec: MVTec [1] is a challenging anomaly detection
dataset. It contains a series of industrial real abnormal and
normal images. The MVTec dataset includes 15 different
categories, containing both texture images (e.g., “leather”) and
non-textured images (e.g., “cable”). Anomaly classification
and anomaly localization can be evaluated. In the training
phase only normal samples for training and in the reference
phase different anomalies need to be detected. All images are
high-resolution images, and some anomalous regions are tiny,
such as “broken screw”.
2) KolektorSDD2: KolektorSDD2 [55] is a surface anomaly
detection dataset from real scenes. The dataset consists of
color images of defective production items captured by a
vision inspection system. The images in the dataset are captured in a controlled environment and are similar in size, about
230 × 630. The dataset is complex and accurately annotated.
In the original dataset, the training set contains a large number
of abnormal samples. In this work, we first process the original
dataset to contain only normal samples for training. Finally,

XING et al.: NIGSF FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

4645

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD AND U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS ON MVT EC DATASET W ITH AUROC (%). T HE B EST
R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD . B OTH DRAEM1 AND DRAEM2 A RE R EPRODUCED F ROM T HIS PAPER , W HERE DRAEM1 U TILIZES THE
U-N ET M ODEL W ITH THE L ARGER PARAMETERS F ROM [20] AND DRAEM2 U SES THE S AME UN ET M ODEL AS NIGSF

the number of training samples is 2085, and the test samples is
1004. The anomalies include scratches or large surface defects
with different shapes, sizes, and colors.
3) DAGM: DAGM [61] is a well-known dataset for surface
defect detection. It contains ten categories of computergenerated gray images of surfaces and various defects. Early,
only six categories of data were publicly evaluated, and subsequently, four categories were publicly available. The anomaly
label of this dataset is inaccurate. Therefore, only the anomaly
classification performance of the DAGM dataset is evaluated.
B. Baselines and Evaluation Metric
1) Baselines: NIGSF is compared with state-of-the-art deep
methods including fully supervised methods, i.e., CCNN [56]
and ENSDD [57], weakly supervised methods, i.e., CADNW18 [58], CADN-W18 (KD) [58], and MSDD [55], as well
as unsupervised methods, i.e., GANomaly [52], MKDAD [36],
U-Std [2], DAAD+ [25], RIAD [53], MAD [54], Cutpaste [27], Padim [24], RD [62], UniAD [3], and SPADE [63].
Fully supervised methods use all the normal samples with
pixel-level labels. The weakly supervised method uses imagelevel labelled abnormal samples with all normal samples or a
part of pixel-level labelled abnormal samples with all normal
samples. The unsupervised method only uses normal samples.
The MKDAD, U-Std, RD, UniAD, and Cutpaste use the
pre-trained model. The Cutpaste and DRAEM use forged
anomalous samples.
2) Evaluation Metric: Following previous work [1], [36],
[64], image-level and pixel-level Area Under the Receiver
Operating Characteristic Curve (AUROC) are introduced
to evaluate the performance of anomaly classification and
anomaly localization. The metric of AUROC does not reflect
the true performance in evaluating the localization performance. However, the percentage of anomalous pixels is small
in the test images, which makes the overall false positive rate
perform at a low-level [20]. Therefore, the pixel-level average
precision (AP) metric is introduced. It evaluates the accuracy
of the overall pixel discrimination and the localization performance together with the pixel-level AUROC. AU R OCdet ,

AU R OCloc and A Ploc represent AUROC for anomaly image
classification, AUROC for anomaly image localization, and AP
for anomaly image localization, respectively. Following [55],
on the DAGM dataset, the image level AUROC, AP, F1, TPR,
TNR, ACC, and mACC = (T P R + T N R)/2 are introduced
to evaluate the performance of anomaly classification.
C. Implementation Details
1) Sets: The number of contrast set n is set to 5. The auxiliary images in SAM are randomly sampled from the DTD [65].
We follow the image augmentation method in the DRAEM and
adjust the ratio of forged abnormal images to normal images
to 3:1 during the training phase.
2) Experimental Setting: The proposed model is trained on
a single RTX TiTAN GPU using PyTorch. It is trained with a
mini-batch size of 16 using the Adam optimizer. The learning
rate is set to 1 × 10−4 . The learning rate decays to 0.1 times
the current one at 800×[0.5, 0.7, 0.9] iterations, respectively.
The hyperparameter a is set to 0.4, b is set to 0.2 in Eq. (6),
and the input image size is set to 256 × 256. In Eq. (7) a ∈
[0.1, 1]. In Eq. (12) λ is set to 1 and in Eq. (11) τ is set to 2.
D. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
1) Anomaly Image Classification: For the anomaly classification task, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
method on MVTec, DAGM, and KolektorSDD2 datasets.
Table I presents a comparison between the anomaly classification performance of NIGSF and unsupervised anomaly
detection methods on MVtec dataset. The results indicate
that NIGSF is a competitive method, achieving a mean
AU R OCdet of 96.7%. Specifically, NIGSF outperforms the
remaining unsupervised methods in four categories, such as
“leather” and “Toothbrush” categories, achieving 100% in
terms of AU R OCdet . Additionally, it demonstrates the best
performance in eight categories of MVTec, which verifies
the effectiveness of introducing normal sample features as
reference features. In comparison with the recently advanced
UniAD method that incorporates Transformer and pretrained

4646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD AND U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS ON DAGM DATASET W ITH AUROC (%). N IN MSDD
I NDICATES T HAT MSDD U SES N P IXEL -L EVEL L ABELLED A NOMALY S AMPLES . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

models, NIGSF still remains more competitive. In addition,
we compare it with the current state-of-the-art DRAEM
method. We reproduce the results of DRAEM, denoted as
DRAEM1 . Furthermore, we find that DRAEM uses a larger
Unet model, so we replace this model with the same Unet
model as the proposed NIGSF method and perform anomaly
detection in MVTec-AD. The results are denoted as DRAEM2 .
It can be found that DRAEM relies on a specific UNet model.
NIGSF significantly outperforms DRAEM when the same
network structure is used. The above experimental results
show the effectiveness of NIGSF for anomaly classification
on MVTec dataset.
In Table II, we compare the anomaly classification
performance of NIGSF with unsupervised, weakly, and supervised anomaly detection methods on DAGM dataset. The
experimental results indicate that NIGSF outperforms the
unsupervised and weakly supervised methods in 10 and 6 categories, respectively, highlighting its superiority over these
methods. The proposed method achieves AUROC 99.9%,
indicating that NIGSF can solve the anomaly classification
challenge of grayscale images well. Specifically, the anomaly
classification performance of NIGSF without real anomaly
supervision information is the same as the supervised CCNN
and ENSDD. Importantly, there is a large distribution gap
between the forged anomalous samples and the grayscale
anomalies of DAGM, yet the anomalous samples in DAGM
can be detected. This is due to the fact that NIGSF by
introducing normal samples as guidance, the model learns to
detect different from guidance images as anomalies. NIGSF
generalizes well for grayscale image anomaly detection.
In Table III, we compare the anomaly classification performance of NIGSF and unsupervised and weakly supervised
anomaly detection methods on KolektorSDD2 dataset. The
experimental results show that NIGSF achieves the best performance for the weakly supervised methods and unsupervised
methods. NIGSF outperforms unsupervised methods U-std
21% and F-AnoGan 30% and outperforms weakly supervised

TABLE III
C OMPARISON OF NIGSF AND U NSUPERVISED A NOMALY D ETECTION
M ETHODS ON KOLEKTOR SDD2 DATASET W ITH APdet (%). T HE B EST
R ESULTS A RE M ARKED IN B OLD

method MSDD 3%, indicating the effectiveness of introducing
normal features to guide the segmentation module. Even
though real anomaly samples are lacking, the proposed normal
image guided anomaly detection paradigm can effectively
solve the anomaly detection challenges of multiple scenes.
2) Anomaly Localization: To evaluate the performance of
NIGSF in anomaly localization task, we conduct experiment
on the MVTec dataset. The experimental results of the proposed method and unsupervised anomaly detection methods
are shown in Table IV. The proposed NIGSF achieves mean
AU R OCloc 97.2% and mean A Ploc 73.8%. The proposed
method achieved similar results with PaDim and DRAEM
in AU R OCloc . However, NIGSF is 18% higher than PaDim
and 5% higher than DRAEM in A Ploc . For the “toothbrush”
category, the proposed NIGSF is the only one that achieves
78.9% in the A Ploc metric, exceeding the rest of the methods
by at least 24%, validating the efficiency of the segmentation
paradigm using normal image guidance. The remaining unsupervised anomaly localization methods have similar findings
while obtaining good localization performance for anomalous
regions is difficult. Since the segmentation module of NIGSF
has prior knowledge of normal patterns, it can detect all
patterns different from normal guidance as anomalies, which

XING et al.: NIGSF FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

4647

TABLE IV
A NOMALY L OCALIZATION P ERFORMANCE OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD AND OTHER A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS ON THE MVT EC DATASET

Fig. 5. Anomaly segmentation results of the proposed NIGSF with DRAEM [20], where (5) and (10) are normal samples and the rest are abnormal samples.
“IMAGE” denotes the test image. “NIGSF” denotes the results of the proposed method. “DRAEM” denotes the results of DRAEM. “GT” represents
groundtruth. The accuracy of the proposed NIGSF segmentation significantly exceeds the current state-of-the-art methods.

is not available in other methods. In summary, the proposed
NIGSF method achieves state-of-the-art localization results.
In Figure 5, we visualize the anomaly localization results
of the proposed method and the DRAEM. It can be seen
that NIGSF has the following advantages. First, NIGSF is
more accurate for detection of normal regions in the abnormal
samples, as shown in (1), (5), (6), and (10). The localization
map of DRAEM has many mislocalized anomalous regions.
NIGSF directly utilizes normal sample features as guidance
features, thus ensuring the validity of the guidance information. Therefore, the segmentation module can correctly
identify the normal features and segment the abnormal ones
that differ from the normal guidance features. Second, NIGSF
performs better for detail boundary localization, as shown in
(3) and (8). It demonstrates the advantage of using multiscale features for guidance in NIGSF. The low-level features

effectively provide guidance about the boundary information,
resulting in excellent localization performance of the segmentation module. Third, (9), (11), and (12) show that our
method has advantages in localizing tiny anomalous regions.
The detailed feature information acts as guidance features that
allow the model to effectively locate small anomalies. Fourth,
(2), (7), and (15) show that DRAEM is wrong in predicting
the background. NIGSF addresses this problem in the Saliency
Augmentation module. SAM introduces saliency map that
makes the model more focused on foreground content. However, Figure 7 (C) demonstrates that NIGSF can also precisely
localize to anomalies outside the saliency region. Finally,
NIGSF is more sensitive for locating anomalous regions.
As shown in (13), the anomalies are subtle textural differences.
NIGSF can still accurately locate detailed anomalies, which
are unavailable with DRAEM.

4648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

TABLE V
A BLATION S TUDIES ON NGN. “- / - / -” R EPRESENTS THE AVERAGE R ESULT OF 5 T EXTURE C LASSES , THE AVERAGE R ESULT OF 10 O BJECT C LASSES ,
AND THE OVERALL AVERAGE R ESULT, R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDIES ON SAM

Fig. 6. Illustration of the localization map and Ground Truth of some samples
in the “Transistor” category. The anomaly detection results of these images
need to predict not only the regions where anomalies appear, but also the
regions where components are missing.

a) Failure cases: Although NIGSF achieves good results
in most categories, it does not perform well in the “transistor”
category. Figure 6 shows the localization results of the samples in “transistor” category. Groundtruth of some abnormal
samples is marked not only with “component bending” but
also with semantically missing regions. The model is required
to further understand the fine-grained semantics of normal
samples: the position of the component is related to whether
the sample is abnormal or normal. However, NIGSF only
locates the anomalous component but fails to predict the
original component location.
E. Ablation Study
1) Normal Image Guided Anomaly Detection Paradigm: To
validate the effectiveness of the proposed paradigm, ablation
experiments were conducted without normal image guidance.
In other words, the segmentation module directly segments
forged anomalous and normal regions without guidance features. The results are shown in Table V. It can be clearly

Fig. 7. The forged anomalous samples generated by DRAEM (a) and SAM
(b) are illustrated. (c) shows that our method can locate the anomalous regions
beyond the saliency regions.

found that the anomaly detection performance decreases with
the lack of normal image guidance. With image guidance, both
image anomaly detection and localization are significantly
improved. Particularly, A Ploc decreases by 17% compared to
the method that introduces normal guidance. Even though the
SAM can generate forged anomalous samples close to the real
anomalies to participate in training, there is still a distribution
gap with the real anomalous samples. The normal feature thus
plays a key role in guiding the segmentation model by explicitly providing normal distribution information that contributes
to detecting abnormal distribution. The experimental results
validate the effectiveness of the normal image guided anomaly
detection paradigm.
2) Saliency Perlin Noise Generator: To validate the effectiveness of the proposed Saliency Perlin Noise Generator
(SPNG), experiments were conducted to explore the differences between it and traditional generation methods.
Figure 7 (A) shows the forged anomalous samples generated
by DRAEM, while Figure 7 (B) shows the forged anomalous
samples generated by the proposed Saliency Perlin Noise Generator (SPNG). Obviously, NIGSF focuses on saliency regions

XING et al.: NIGSF FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

4649

TABLE VII
T HE I MPACT OF M ODEL S IZE ON THE P ERFORMANCE OF THE M ETHODS . T HE DRAEM1 , DRAEM2 U SE THE O RIGINAL S TRUCTURE AND THE N ETWORK
S TRUCTURE OF T HIS PAPER , R ESPECTIVELY

to generate anomalies, while DRAEM tends to generate more
noisy samples in the background, especially in the category of
small foreground objects (e.g., “screw”). Table VI shows the
results of the ablation experiments in two settings. Comparing
(1) and (2), (3) and (4), the anomaly localization and anomaly
classification results of NIGSF using PNG are lower than
those using SPNG, which validates the effectiveness of SPNG.
SPNG reduces the noise sample generation and improves the
learning efficiency of effective samples. Specifically, although
NIGSF produces anomalies only in the saliency region, however, we can still obtain good localization results on regions
outside the saliency region, such as the zipper shown in
Figure 7 (C) (the saliency map contains only the “zipper” not
the “cloth”, but anomalies on the “cloth” can be detected).
3) Reconstruction Task and Denoising Task: To validate
the influence of self-supervised tasks in the normal feature
extractor, different self-supervised tasks are selected to validate the performance. Different self-supervised tasks have
advantages and disadvantages for NIGSF, and we examined
the reconstruction task and denoising task in our experiments.
Specifically, we choose the reconstruction task and denoising
task as the training method for the normal feature extractor
to verify their effects on anomaly detection, respectively. The
input and optimization objective of the reconstruction task are
as described in Section III-B. In the denoising task, we redesign the input part of the normal feature extractor. Its input
is the forged anomaly sample, and the objective is the original
samples without the contrast set. The two tasks share the same
backbone.
The experimental results are shown in Table V. The results
show that the anomaly classification performance decreases
by 2% introducing the denoising task compared to the reconstruction task, and the anomaly localization in AU R OCloc
and A Ploc decreases by 3% and 7%, respectively. Therefore,
the reconstruction task is more suitable for NIGSF. The
reason is that NIGSF relies on the guidance features as the
prior knowledge to guide the segmentation module to locate
anomalous regions. Therefore, it is important to ensure that the
guidance features are noise-free normal features. The input of
the reconstruction network is normal samples, while the input
of the denoising network is forged anomalous samples. The
features extracted from the reconstruction network are noisefree and more suitable for the guidance features. Although
the denoising network can denoise some anomalous regions
by training, it is difficult for a simple denoising network to
guarantee a good denoising effect for all anomalous regions.

Therefore, the guidance features extracted from the denoising
network may include noisy anomalous features, which cannot
be used as guidance. In conclusion, the choice of the reconstruction task has the potential to achieve excellent anomaly
detection performance.
4) Comparison of the Proposed Method With Advanced
Method Draem: To demonstrate the performance and parameter advantages of the proposed NIGSF, we conduct three
different settings compared with DRAEM.
• DRAEM1 : SOTA DRAEM with the large UNet network
structure, i.e., more decoders and encoders.
• DRAEM2 : SOTA DRAEM with the standard UNet network. The number of parameters is 1/3 less than that of
DRAEM1 .
• NIGSF: The proposed method with the standard UNet
network.
The experimental results are shown in Table VII. It shows
that our method has better localization results than DRAEM1 ,
and the parameters are reduced by 1/3, which shows that
NIGSF is more efficient and accurate. Second, after changing
the network of DRAEM to the network structure of this
paper, the anomaly classification and localization results are
reduced by 3.7%, 2.3% and 12.9%, respectively. By comparing
DRAEM2 with the proposed method, it is shown that our
method is more competitive. The smaller model brings more
competitive localization and classification results.
5) Contrast Set: To validate the effect of the number of
images n in the contrast set, ablation studies with different
values of n are explored. The results are shown in Table VIII.
“W/O.A.” indicates whether the contrast set contains the
original image A. From Table VIII (2) and (3), it can be
observed that the performance of anomaly detection containing
A is lower than the performance without A. Including the
original image in the contrast set makes the segmentation
module in NIGSF overly focused on the guidance of low-level
features, which produces a negative effect. It is impossible to
find normal samples in the contrast set that completely overlap
with the inference phase at low-level features, resulting in
serious degradation of NIGSF performance. From the results
of Table VIII (1), (2) and (4), the localization performance
with n = 4 exceeds the remaining settings. Therefore, n
in the contrast set is set to 4 without the original image.
A large n leads to the more significant difference between
the image in the contrast set and the input image, which
makes the extracted guidance feature may be noisy. Noisy
guidance features fail to provide an effective reference, which

4650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

TABLE VIII
T HE I MPACT OF THE N UMBER OF S AMPLES n IN C ONTRAST S ET ON NIGSF. “W/O. A” I NDICATES W HETHER THE C ONTRAST S ET C ONTAINS THE I NPUT
I MAGES . “- / - / -” R EPRESENTS THE AVERAGE R ESULT OF 5 T EXTURE C LASSES , THE AVERAGE R ESULT OF 10 O BJECT C LASSES , AND THE
OVERALL AVERAGE R ESULT, R ESPECTIVELY

Fig. 8.

Ablation study of weight parameter λ in loss functions.

results in the segmentation module’s localization effect being
weakened. When n is too small, the segmentation module
accepts less variation in the guidance features, which weakens
the generalization ability of the segmentation module.
6) Ablation Study of λ: To validate the effect of hyperparameters λ in the loss function on the model, four sets of
comparison experiments with hyperparameters λ were conducted. In the experiment, λ is set to 0.01, 0.1, 1, and 2,
respectively. The experimental results are shown in Figure 8.
When λ = 0.01, it indicates that the loss of the normal
feature extractor is smaller than the overall loss. From the
results in Figure 8, it is found that the performance of both
localization and classification decreases, which may be due
to the loss function causing the normal feature extractor not
fully to converge. Normal feature extractor plays a critical
role in this paper. If the reconstruction effect of the normal
feature extractor is not significant, then there may be noise
in the extracted guidance features, which affects the learning
effect of the segmentation module. Therefore, the value of λ
cannot be too small. When λ is large, the performance of the
model starts to degrade. Therefore, the optimal hyperparameter
λ = 1 is chosen in this paper.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel unsupervised anomaly detection
paradigm is proposed to introduce normal image as reference.

Specifically, based on the novel paradigm, a Normal Image
Guided Segmentation Framework (NIGSF) is proposed, which
consists of a Normal Guided Network (NGN) and a Saliency
Augmentation Module (SAM). In NGN, we introduce the contrast set, which is a normal guidance image candidate set for
input samples. From the guidance images, we extract normal
features with unambiguous semantics and free from noise.
Meanwhile, a straightforward and efficient feature fusion strategy is developed to fuse guidance features and features to be
detected, which allows the segmentation module to efficiently
detect “abnormal features” different from the guidance features. To facilitate the segmentation of “anomalies” by NIGSF,
we introduce the SAM that generates forged anomaly samples
utilizing saliency maps and random Perlin noise. Multiple
experiments confirmed the efficacy of NIGSF, specifically
its anomaly segmentation capability. In the future, we will
gradually address the challenge of low accuracy of existing
models in “transistor” category localization and propose more
reasonable alignment methods to make the guidance features
more useful.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[2] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191.
[3] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
[4] P. Xing and Z. Li, “Visual anomaly detection via partition memory bank
module and error estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3596–3607, Aug. 2023.
[5] T. Shenkar and L. Wolf, “Anomaly detection for tabular data with
internal contrastive learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022,
pp. 1–26.
[6] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[7] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381.
[8] D. Carrera, F. Manganini, G. Boracchi, and E. Lanzarone, “Defect
detection in SEM images of nanofibrous materials,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 551–561, Apr. 2017.
[9] Z. Li et al., “Superpixel masking and inpainting for self-supervised
anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–12.

XING et al.: NIGSF FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION

[10] G. Xie, J. Wang, J. Liu, F. Zheng, and Y. Jin, “Pushing the limits of
fewshot anomaly detection in industry vision: Graphcore,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[11] C. Piciarelli, C. Micheloni, and G. L. Foresti, “Trajectory-based anomalous event detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 18,
no. 11, pp. 1544–1554, Nov. 2008.
[12] Y. Du et al., “Individualized statistical modeling of lesions in fundus
images for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 42, no. 4,
pp. 1185–1196, Apr. 2023.
[13] Y. Zhao, Q. Ding, and X. Zhang, “AE-FLOW: Autoencoders with
normalizing flows for medical images anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–14.
[14] A. Acsintoae et al., “UBnormal: New benchmark for supervised openset video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 20143–20153.
[15] S. Zhang et al., “Influence-aware attention networks for anomaly detection in surveillance videos,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 5427–5437, Aug. 2022.
[16] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. H. Khan, M. Segu, F. Yu, and S.-I. Lee,
“Generative cooperative learning for unsupervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 14744–14754.
[17] Y. Cheng, W. Liu, P. Duan, J. Liu, and T. Mei, “PyAnomaly: A PyTorchbased toolkit for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Int. Conf.
Multimedia, C. W. Chen et al., Eds., 2020, pp. 4473–4476.
[18] J. Yang, W. Liu, J. Yuan, and T. Mei, “Hierarchical soft quantization
for skeleton-based human action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 23, pp. 883–898, 2021.
[19] P. Bergmann, S. Löwe, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Improving unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity
to autoencoders,” in Proc. 14th Int. Joint Conf. Comput. Vis., Imag.
Comput. Graph. Theory Appl., 2019, pp. 1–9.
[20] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 8310–8319.
[21] S. M. Erfani, S. Rajasegarar, S. Karunasekera, and C. Leckie, “Highdimensional and large-scale anomaly detection using a linear one-class
SVM with deep learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 58, pp. 121–134,
Oct. 2016.
[22] K.-L. Li, H.-K. Huang, S.-F. Tian, and W. Xu, “Improving one-class
SVM for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Cybern.,
Nov. 2003, pp. 3077–3081.
[23] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[24] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 475–489.
[25] J. Hou, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Pu, and H. Zhou, “Divideand-assemble: Learning block-wise memory for unsupervised anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 8771–8780.
[26] F. Ye, C. Huang, J. Cao, M. Li, Y. Zhang, and C. Lu, “Attribute
restoration framework for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 24, pp. 116–127, 2022.
[27] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9659–9669.
[28] K. Perlin, “An image synthesizer,” in Proc. 12th Annu. Conf. Comput.
Graph. Interact. Techn., 1985, pp. 287–296.
[29] A. Zimek, E. Schubert, and H. Kriegel, “A survey on unsupervised
outlier detection in high-dimensional numerical data,” Stat. Anal. Data
Mining, ASA Data Sci. J., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 363–387, Oct. 2012.
[30] I. Golan and R. El-Yaniv, “Deep anomaly detection using geometric
transformations,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 31, 2018,
pp. 9781–9791.
[31] K. Leung and C. Leckie, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in network
intrusion detection using clusters,” in Proc. 28th Australas. Conf. Comput. Sci., 2005, pp. 333–342.
[32] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep learning
for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 38:1–38:38, Mar. 2021.

4651

[33] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes,
“Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 141:1–141:37, 2022.
[34] W. Liu, Q. Bao, Y. Sun, and T. Mei, “Recent advances of monocular
2D and 3D human pose estimation: A deep learning perspective,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1–41, Apr. 2023.
[35] D. A. Reynolds, “Gaussian mixture models,” in Encyclopedia of Biometrics, S. Z. Li and A. K. Jain, Eds. USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 659–663,
doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-73003-5_196.
[36] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14897–14907.
[37] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2014, pp. 1–14.
[38] S. Venkataramanan, K.-C. Peng, R. V. Singh, and A. Mahalanobis,
“Attention guided anomaly localization in images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 485–503.
[39] Y. Tang, L. Zhao, S. Zhang, C. Gong, G. Li, and J. Yang, “Integrating
prediction and reconstruction for anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit.
Lett., vol. 129, pp. 123–130, Jan. 2020.
[40] T. Wang, X. Xu, F. Shen, and Y. Yang, “A cognitive memory-augmented
network for visual anomaly detection,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica,
vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1296–1307, Jul. 2021.
[41] K. Wu, L. Zhu, W. Shi, W. Wang, and J. Wu, “Self-attention memoryaugmented wavelet-CNN for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1374–1385, Mar. 2023.
[42] D. Liu, P. Zhou, Z. Xu, H. Wang, and R. Li, “Few-shot temporal sentence
grounding via memory-guided semantic learning,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2491–2505, May 2023.
[43] Z. Li, H. Tang, Z. Peng, G.-J. Qi, and J. Tang, “Knowledge-guided
semantic transfer network for few-shot image recognition,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Feb. 6, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3240195.
[44] G. Lin, A. Milan, C. Shen, and I. Reid, “RefineNet: Multi-path
refinement networks for high-resolution semantic segmentation,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
pp. 5168–5177.
[45] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
[46] Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Zhang, and J. Tang, “CTNet: Context-based tandem
network for semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 9904–9917, Dec. 2022.
[47] H. Tang, C. Yuan, Z. Li, and J. Tang, “Learning attention-guided pyramidal features for few-shot fine-grained recognition,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 130, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 108792.
[48] Y. Xia, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, W. Shen, and A. L. Yuille, “Synthesize then
compare: Detecting failures and anomalies for semantic segmentation,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 145–161.
[49] Z. Wu, L. Su, and Q. Huang, “Cascaded partial decoder for fast and
accurate salient object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 3902–3911.
[50] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, Apr. 2004.
[51] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2999–3007.
[52] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly:
Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc.
Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 622–637.
[53] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[54] O. Rippel, P. Mertens, and D. Merhof, “Modeling the distribution of
normal data in pre-trained deep features for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 6726–6733.
[55] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “Mixed supervision for surfacedefect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput.
Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459.
[56] D. Racki, D. Tomazevic, and D. Skocaj, “A compact convolutional neural
network for textured surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter
Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2018, pp. 1331–1339.

4652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

[57] Z. Lin, H. Ye, B. Zhan, and X. Huang, “An efficient network for surface
defect detection,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 17, p. 6085, Sep. 2020.
[58] J. Zhang, H. Su, W. Zou, X. Gong, Z. Zhang, and F. Shen, “CADN:
A weakly supervised learning-based category-aware object detection
network for surface defect detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 109,
Jan. 2021, Art. no. 107571.
[59] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and
U. Schmidt-Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection
with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54,
pp. 30–44, May 2019.
[60] B. Staar, M. Lütjen, and M. Freitag, “Anomaly detection with convolutional neural networks for industrial surface inspection,” Proc. CIRP,
vol. 79, pp. 484–489, Jan. 2019.
[61] S. Albelwi and A. Mahmood, “A framework for designing the architectures of deep convolutional neural networks,” Entropy, vol. 19, no. 6,
p. 242, May 2017.
[62] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
[63] N. Cohen and Y. Hoshen, “Sub-image anomaly detection with deep
pyramid correspondences,” 2020, arXiv:2005.02357.
[64] M. Sabokrou, M. Fayyaz, M. Fathy, Z. Moayed, and R. Klette,
“Deep-anomaly: Fully convolutional neural network for fast anomaly
detection in crowded scenes,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 172,
pp. 88–97, Jul. 2018.
[65] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi,
“Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613.

Peng Xing is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology.
His current research interests include anomaly detection and unsupervised deep learning.

Yanpeng Sun received the M.S. degree from the
Guilin University of Electronic Technology, China,
in 2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
China. His research interests include deep learning,
visual segmentation, and understanding.

Dan Zeng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in electronic science and technology
and the Ph.D. degree in circuits and systems from
the University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei. She is currently a Full Professor and the Dean
of the Department of Communication Engineering
and the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Laboratory, Shanghai University. Her main research
interests include computer vision, multimedia analysis, and machine learning. She is serving as a TC
Member for IEEE MSA and IEEE MMSP. She is
serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIME DIA and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO
T ECHNOLOGY.

Zechao Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. degree from the University of Science and
Technology of China in 2008 and the Ph.D. degree
from the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, in 2013. He is currently a Professor with
the Nanjing University of Science and Technology.
His research interests include big media analysis and
computer vision. He was a recipient of the Best
Paper Award from ACM Multimedia Asia 2020 and
the Best Student Paper Award from ICIMCS 2018.
He serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL
N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS.