IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

1601

One Model to Find Them All Deep Learning for
Multivariate Time-Series Anomaly Detection
in Mobile Network Data
Gastón García González, Sergio Martinez Tagliafico, Alicia Fernández , Member, IEEE, Gabriel Gómez Sena ,
José Acuña, and Pedro Casas , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Network monitoring data generally consists of hundreds of counters periodically collected in the form of time-series,
resulting in a complex-to-analyze multivariate time-series (MTS)
process. Traditional time-series anomaly detection methods target
univariate time-series analysis, which makes the MTS analysis
cumbersome and prohibitively complex. We present DC-VAE
(Dilated Convolutional - Variational Auto Encoder), a novel
approach to anomaly detection in MTS data, leveraging convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and variational autoencoders
(VAEs). DC-VAE detects anomalies in MTS data through a single
model, exploiting temporal information without sacrificing computational and memory resources. In particular, instead of using
recursive neural networks, large causal filters, or many layers,
DC-VAE relies on Dilated Convolutions (DC) to capture long
and short-term phenomena in the data. We evaluate DC-VAE on
the detection of anomalies in the TELCO TELeCOmmunicationnetworks dataset, a large-scale, multi-dimensional network
monitoring dataset collected at an operational mobile Internet
Service Provider (ISP), where anomalous events were manually
labeled by experts during seven months, at a five-minutes granularity. We benchmark DC-VAE against a broad set of traditional
time-series anomaly detectors from the signal processing and
machine learning domains. We also evaluate DC-VAE in open,
publicly available datasets, comparing its performance against
other multivariate anomaly detectors based on deep learning
generative models. Results confirm the advantages of DC-VAE,
both in terms of MTS data modeling, as well as for anomaly
detection. For the sake of reproducibility and as an additional
contribution, we make the TELCO dataset publicly available
to the community and openly release the code implementing
DC-VAE.
Manuscript received 10 March 2023; revised 22 August 2023; accepted
22 November 2023. Date of publication 6 December 2023; date of current
version 15 April 2024. This work has been partially supported by the ANIIFMV project with reference FMV-1-2019-1-155850 Anomaly Detection with
Continual and Streaming Machine Learning on Big Data Telecommunications
Networks, by the CSIC I+D project with reference 22520220100371UD
Anomaly Detection in Time Series: Generalization and Domain Change
Adaptation, by Telefónica, and by the Austrian FFG ICT-of-the-Future project
DynAISEC – Adaptive AI/ML for Dynamic Cybersecurity Systems – project
ID 887504. Gastón García González was supported by the ANII scholarship
POS-FMV-2020-1-1009239, as well as by CSIC, under program Movilidad
e Intercambios Académicos 2022. The associate editor coordinating the
review of this article and approving it for publication was N. Stakhanova.
(Corresponding author: Pedro Casas.)
Gastón García González, Sergio Martinez Tagliafico, Alicia Fernández,
and Gabriel Gómez Sena are with IIE–FING, Universidad de la República,
Montevideo 11300, Uruguay.
José Acuña is with Telefónica Uruguay, Montevideo 11200, Uruguay,
and also with IIE–FING, Universidad de la República, Montevideo 11300,
Uruguay.
Pedro Casas is with the AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, 1210 Vienna,
Austria (e-mail: pedro.casas@ait.ac.at).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3340146

Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, multivariate
time-series, variational auto encoder, dilated convolution, TELCO
Open Dataset.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ETWORK monitoring data often consists of hundreds
or thousands of variables periodically measured and
analyzed in the form of time-series, resulting in a complexto-analyze multivariate time-series (MTS) process. Real-time
anomaly detection in such MTS processes is a key ingredient
for network management, particularly to detect performance
degradation and service disruption events that might strongly
impact end customers or failures impacting the network’s
health. There is a vast literature on the problem of anomaly
detection in time-series using traditional statistical models [1],
[2], [3], [4], [5]; due to the non-stationary, non-linear, and
high-noise characteristics of network monitoring data, traditional models have difficulty predicting these time-series
with high precision. Hence, modern approaches to timeseries anomaly detection based on deep learning technology
have flourished in recent years [6]. Most approaches in
the literature address the problem by either focusing on
univariate time-series modeling and analysis – running an
independent detector for each time-series, or by considering
multi-dimensional input data with short-term memory analysis,
to avoid the scalability limitations introduced by very deep
architectures or the complexities and delays introduced by
recurrent topologies.
Despite the broad literature, detecting anomalies in timeseries data through machine-learning remains a highly arduous
task [1], [6], and it has re-gained strong attention in recent
years. Some of the ever-present challenges to deal with include
the lack of labels and the contamination of normal operation
data with anomalies, the high imbalance between normal
and anomalous data, and the occurrence of so-called concept
drifts [7], [8], [9], referring to changes in the underlying
statistical properties of the analyzed data and prediction
targets. By definition, anomalies are rare and sporadic-in-time
events; thus, there is generally little information on them for
deeper characterization and eventual future detection. This
lack of insights into anomalies makes it generally difficult to
employ supervised techniques fingerprinting different anomalous behaviors. On top of this, the characterization of an

N

c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1932-4537 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

anomaly is typically bound to a certain time-period, which
might not necessarily represent what could happen in the
future. These challenges have led to a rise in the application of unsupervised learning-based approaches to time-series
anomaly detection. Unsupervised learning certainly copes
with many flagged challenges, although purely unsupervised
approaches tend to realize significantly high false-alarm rates.
The availability of partially labeled anomalies can alleviate
this problem, enabling weakly-supervised anomaly detection
approaches [6], to the detriment of inaccurate or imprecise
ground-truth, which introduces a further challenge for model
generalization.
Another challenge we deem relevant is the benchmarking
of time-series anomaly detection approaches through open
datasets of questionable quality. Most of the recent papers in
the topic test on one or more of a handful of popular benchmark datasets, including Yahoo [10], Numenta [11], [12],
NASA [13], and more. Recent studies [14] have shown
that these datasets have flaws that make them unsuitable
for evaluating anomaly detection algorithms, making it even
harder to assess the goodness of recent contributions in the
domain.
In this paper, we conceive a novel approach for MTS
anomaly detection, tackling many of the aforementioned
challenges. We introduce DC-VAE, a deep-learning-based,
unsupervised, and multivariate approach to real-time anomaly
detection in MTS, based on popular Variational Auto-Encoders
(VAEs) [15]. VAEs are a generative version of classical
auto-encoders, with the advantage of producing as output
prediction not only an expected value but also the associated
standard deviation, corresponding to the distribution the model
understands (i.e., has learned) generated the corresponding
input. This automatically defines a normality region for each
independent time-series, which can then be easily exploited
for detecting deviations beyond this region. Using VAEs as an
underlying approach allows the user to visualize the region of
normal behavior in an interpretable way, enabling fine-grained,
per univariate time-series anomaly detection.
To exploit the temporal dependencies and characteristics
of time-series data in a fast and efficient manner, we take
a Dilated Convolutional (DC) Neural Network (NN) as the
VAE’s encoder and decoder architecture. DCNNs have shown
excellent performance for processing sequential data in a
causal manner [16], i.e., without relying on recursive architectures, which are generally less time-efficient and more
difficult to train (e.g., gradient exploding/vanishing problems). Compared to normal convolutions, dilated convolutions
improve time-series modeling by increasing the receptive field
of the neural network, reducing computational and memory
requirements, and enabling training – and detection – on
longer-in-the-past temporal sequences.
The main properties and contributions of DC-VAE can be
summarized as follows: (i) single model for MTS analysis:
DC-VAE learns the behavior of the complete MTS process
within a single model parametrization, avoiding per-timeseries learning and fitting, and further exploiting the richness
of the multidimensional process; (ii) real-time operation: the
model architecture is fully causal, and provides instantaneous

predictions for each independent time-series at each new
time-step, using a sliding window of past measurements;
(iii) efficient temporal-memory representation: the VAE
encoder/decoder architecture based on dilated convolutions
permits to efficiently process temporal sequences of longer
length, making detection more robust; (iv) self-supervised
baseline modeling: by conception, auto-encoders are selfsupervised models, because the model trains itself to learn
the main features of the input from the very same input
samples, and ground-truth labels are only needed for tighter
calibration of detection thresholds – nevertheless, in the
absence of ground-truth, DC-VAE still estimates a normal
operation region, indirectly providing a detection threshold;
(v) compact deep-learning architecture: the structure and
number of layers in DC-VAE’s architecture is defined by a
single parameter T, representing the length of the temporal
sliding-window of past measurements used as input; (vi)
independent, per time-series detection: VAEs provide an
estimation of the expected value and its associated standard
deviation for each independent time-series, which provides
further flexibility and detail to the monitoring process; (vii)
detection results are visually interpretable: predictions
provided by DC-VAE define a continual and dynamically
adapted normality region, independently for each time-series,
making it visually easy to interpret the occurrence of an
anomaly.
We apply DC-VAE to a MTS dataset arising from the monitoring of an operational mobile ISP, detecting anomalies of
very different structural properties. Referred to as the TELCO
dataset [17], this large-scale – about 750 thousand samples,
long time-span – seven months’ worth of measurements
collected at a five-minutes scale, multi-dimensional – twelve
different metrics (time-series), network monitoring dataset
includes ground-truth labels for anomalous events at each
individual time-series, manually labeled by the experts of the
network operation center (NOC) managing the mobile ISP. We
benchmark DC-VAE against a broad set of 18 different timeseries anomaly detectors coming from the signal processing
and machine learning domains, individually testing on each
time-series – to keep the scope of the comparative analysis,
15 of these traditional models are combined into a powerful
ensemble detector. In addition, we evaluate DC-VAE in an
open, publicly available dataset commonly used in the literature – the SWaT dataset [18], and compare its performance
against other MTS anomaly detectors based on deep learning
generative models, which have become very popular in recent
years. For the sake of reproducibility and as an additional
contribution, we make the TELCO dataset publicly available
to the community, and openly release the DC-VAE’s code
(https://github.com/GastonGarciaGonzalez/DC-VAE).
We note that this work is an extension of a recently
published study [19]; the novel contributions of current
paper with respect to [19] are as follows: (i) a comprehensive state of the art in the problem of machine learning
for time-series anomaly detection; (ii) a more elaborated
presentation of the theoretical foundation behind DC-VAE;
(iii) a more exhaustive performance benchmarking against
a much broader set of state-of-the-art detectors, as well as

GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS

against newer deep-learning-based MTS detectors leveraging
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [20], [21], [22]; (iv)
the evaluation of DC-VAE in the open SWaT dataset; (v) a
deeper analysis of DC-VAE’s operation through controlled
tests; (vi) the description and release of the TELCO mobile
ISP dataset.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II presents a comprehensive overview of the related
work. In Section III we describe the DC-VAE model in
detail. Section IV presents the TELCO mobile ISP dataset
collected for evaluation, and briefly describes the SWaT
dataset. Section V reports the results obtained with DCVAE on the detection of anomalies in TELCO, additionally
benchmarking its performance against other approaches in
both TELCO and SWaT. Through the testing on synthetic
anomalies, Section VI presents a deeper analysis of DC-VAE’s
response when confronted with different temporal and spatial
behaviors such as concept drifts, multidimensional anomalies,
and strong outliers. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
There are multiple surveys on general-domain anomaly
detection techniques [1], [2], [3] as well as on network
anomaly detection [4], [5]. The diversity of data characteristics
and types of anomalies results in a lack of universal anomaly
detection models. The temporal nature of a very large spectrum
of data problems has led to a strong development of the
particular field of time-series anomaly detection [1], [23]. It
is common to find open libraries implementing the most
traditional approaches in the literature – a notable example
we use in this study is the python ADTK open library
(https://github.com/arundo/adtk/). As noted in [1], most of the
methods for unsupervised anomaly detection in univariate and
multivariate time-series consist of predicting an expected value
based on past information and finding a decision threshold to
decide whether the prediction matches the observation. The
automatic and adaptive computation of detection thresholds
remains an open research problem.
Modern approaches to time-series anomaly detection based
on deep learning technology have flourished in recent
years [6], [24], [25]. Due to their data-driven nature and
achieved performance in multiple domains, generative models
such as VAEs [15], and GANs [26] have gained relevance in
the anomaly detection field [20], [21], [22], [27], [28], [29],
[30]. VAEs [15], [31], [32] represent a powerful and widelyused class of models to learn complex data distributions.
Unlike GANs, a potential limitation of VAEs is the prior
assumption that latent sample representations are independent
and identically distributed. While this is the most common assumption followed in the literature, there is ongoing
research on the benefits of accounting for covariances between
samples in time and between time-series to improve model
performance [33], [34], [35], [36]. For example, while the
original work [15] assumes that the prior over the parameters
and latent variables are centered isotropic Gaussian and the
true posteriors are approximately Gaussian with approximately
diagonal covariance, [35] proposes an approximation capturing

1603

temporal correlations, by considering a Gaussian process prior
in the latent space.
Modeling data sequences through a combination of variational inference and deep learning architectures has been
vastly researched in other domains in recent years, mostly
by extending VAEs to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
with architectures such as STORN [37], VRNN [38],
OmniAnomaly [39], and Bi-LSTM [40] among others.
Convolutional layers with dilation have also been incorporated into some of these approaches [41], [42], [43],
allowing to speed up the training process based on the
possibilities of parallelization offered by these architectures.
Transformers [44] is another popular architecture recently
showing great performance in sequential data processing;
previous work on anomaly detection using transformers and
VAEs [45] improves training speed as compared to the state of
the art, additionally outperforming standard baseline methods.
In particular, the paper improves over [39], considered a reference work in the area. Transformer-based anomaly detection
in MTS data is indeed a promising research direction.
Few papers on deep learning-based detectors have addressed
the problem of real-time detection. In [46], authors consider
the alert delay in detecting so-called range-anomalies – i.e.,
contiguous anomaly segments, and evaluate their models based
both on F 1 scores and on average alert delay. The idea of
range-anomaly detection is appealing in practice; in real-world
applications, the operator generally does not care about pointwise anomalies, and it is acceptable for an algorithm to trigger
an alert for any sample in a contiguous anomaly segment, as
far as the detection delay is bounded to a certain max-delay
threshold. The work in [47] generalizes the classic measures
of Recall, Precision, and F1-score for range-anomalies. We
consider these extended performance metrics when evaluating
DC-VAE in TELCO.
The last topic we overview relates to evaluating and
benchmarking model performance through in-the-wild data
time-series, using expert domain knowledge for data labeling. Most proposals in the literature have been analyzed
on public datasets, such as the well-known Yahoo [10],
Numenta [11], [12], NASA [13], or others, where operating
conditions are unrealistic, anomalies might be trivial, and
labels are poorly assigned in the labeling process [14]. Getting
access to datasets labeled by domain experts in an operational
environment is irreplaceable for the realistic evaluation of
algorithms.
This work has its origins in our previous paper on generative
models for network anomaly detection in MTS data [21],
where we conceived Net-GAN, an architecture based on
GANs and RNNs, where Long Short-Term Memory networks
(LSTMs) were employed as both generator and discriminator
models to capture temporal dependencies in the data.
III. A NOMALY D ETECTION W ITH DC-VAE
Sequential data such as time-series is generally processed
through sliding windows, condensing the information of the
most recent T measurements. Let us define x as a matrix
in RM ×T , where M is the number of variables in the MTS

1604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

distribution P(x), the objective is to model or approximate the
data’s true distribution P using a parametrized distribution pθ
with parameters θ. Let z be a random vector jointly-distributed
with x, representing the latent encoding of x. We can express
pθ (x ) as:

pθ (x ) =
pθ (x , z ) d z ,
(1)
z

Fig. 1.

Variational autoencoder and the re-parameterization trick.

where pθ (x , z ) represents the joint distribution under pθ of
the observable data x and its latent representation or encoding
z. According to the chain rule, the equation can be rewritten as:

pθ (x |z )pθ (z ) d z
(2)
pθ (x ) =
z

Fig. 2. Example of time-series analysis through DC-VAE, for the TELCO
dataset. The normal-operation region is defined by μx and σx .

process, i.e., defines the dimension of the problem. We also
define x (t) ∈ RM ×1 as an M-dimensional vector, representing
the MTS at a certain time t, and xm (t), with m ∈ {1, . . . , M },
as the value of the m-th time-series at time t.
As depicted in Figure 1, for a given input x, the trained
VAE model produces two different predictions, μx and σ x
– matrices in RM ×T , corresponding to the parametrization
of the probability distribution which better represents the
given input. If the VAE model was trained (mainly) with data
describing the normal behavior of the monitored system, then
the output for a non-anomalous input would not deviate from
the mean μx more than a specific integer α times the standard
deviation σ x . On the contrary, if the input presents an anomaly,
the output would not belong to the region determined by the
predicted mean and standard deviation. For reference, Figure 2
presents the main ideas behind the usage of VAEs for timeseries anomaly detection, in this case portraying the results
obtained in the analysis of the TELCO dataset, which is fully
described in Section IV. For each of the displayed time-series
TSi – the TELCO dataset corresponds to twelve time-series
TS1 to TS12 , its real value xi , along with the outputs of the
VAE μxi and σxi , are reported.
In the VAE model, observations x are assumed to depend
on a random variable z that comes from a lower-dimensional
latent space. The objective is to maximize P(x), the probability
of the observations through the model. Similar to x, z will
also be a sequence of length T, but with a smaller number
of dimensions J < M, z ∈ RJ ×T . In formal terms, given
an input sample x characterized by an unknown probability

In the vanilla VAE, pθ (x |z ) is considered a Gaussian
distribution, and therefore, pθ (x ) is a mixture of Gaussian
distributions. The computation of pθ (x ) is very expensive and,
in most cases, even intractable. To speed up training and make
it feasible, it is necessary to introduce a further function to
approximate the posterior distribution pθ (z |x ), in the form of
qφ (z |x ) ≈ pθ (z |x ). In this way, the overall problem can be
easily translated into the autoencoder domain, in which the
conditional likelihood distribution pθ (x |z ) is performed by the
probabilistic decoder. In contrast, the approximated posterior
distribution qφ (z |x ) is computed by the probabilistic encoder,
cf. Figure 1.
As in every deep-learning problem, it is necessary to define
a differentiable loss function to update the network weights
through backpropagation. In VAEs, the idea is to jointly
optimize the generative model parameters θ to reduce the
reconstruction error between the input and the output of the
network and the parameters φ of the approximated posterior
distribution to have qφ (z |x ) as close as possible to the real
posterior pθ (z |x ). The Evidence Lower Bound Loss (ELBO)
loss function is generally considered for this task. In the case
of VAEs, the ELBO loss function Lθ,φ can be written as
follows:


Lθ,φ = − log(pθ (x )) + DKL qφ (z |x )pθ (z |x )


= −Ez ∼qφ (z |x ) [log pθ (x |z )] + DKL qφ (z |x )pθ (z )
(3)
where DKL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence, which here
basically measures the information loss when using q to
approximate p. To train the autoencoder and make the
application of backpropagation feasible, a so-called reparameterization trick is generally introduced. The main assumption
on the latent space is that it can be considered as a set of multivariate Gaussian distributions, and therefore, z ∼ qφ (z |x ) =
N(μz , σz 2 ). Given a random matrix ε ∼ N(0, I ) and 
defined as the element-wise product, the reparameterization
trick permits to explicitly define z = g(μz , σz ) = μz +σz ε.
Thanks to this transformation, the variational autoencoder is
trainable. The probabilistic encoder has to learn how to map
a compressed representation of the input into the two latent
vectors μz and σz . At the same time, the stochasticity remains
excluded from the updating process and is injected in the latent
space as an external input through ε. Under the Gaussian

GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS

1605

Fig. 3. Using CNNs with causal filters requires large filters or many layers to
learn from long sequences. Dilated convolutions improve time-series modeling
by increasing the receptive field of the neural network, reducing computational
and memory requirements, enabling training on long sequences.

assumption, the ELBO loss function Lθ,φ can be explicitly
re-written as:
N

Lθ,φ =

T


1
2×T ×N
n=1 t=1

 M 
2

2

xm (t)(n) − μxm (t)(n)
×
+ log σxm (t)(n)

2
m=1

−

J


σxm (t)(n)



1 + log σzj (t)(n)

2



− μzj (t)(n)

Fig. 4. Encoder architecture using causal dilated convolutions, implemented
through a stack of 1D convolutional layers.

2

j =1



− σzj (t)(n)

2

(4)

At each iteration, the loss is calculated for a batch of size N;
recall that m indicates the variable (time-series) in the space
of x, and j the variable in the space of z, whereas t represents
the specific time instant.
To exploit the temporal dimension of the input time-series,
we proposed an encoder/decoder architecture based on popular
CNNs, using Dilated Convolutions (DCs) [16]. DC is a
technique that expands the input by inserting gaps between
its consecutive samples. In simpler terms, it is the same as
a normal convolution, but it involves skipping samples so
as to cover a larger area of the input. Figure 3 explains the
basic idea behind DCs. The convolutions must be causal,
so that detection can be implemented in real-time. Because
such architectures do not have recurrent connections, they
are often much faster to train than RNNs and do not suffer
from complex-to-tame gradient exploding/vanishing problems.
Using DCs instead of standard convolutions has several advantages for real-time analysis: (i) they increase the so-called
receptive field, meaning that longer-in-the-past information
can be fed into the detection; (ii) DCs are computationally
more efficient, as they provide larger coverage at the same
computation cost; (iii) by using DC, the pooling steps are
omitted, thus resulting in lesser memory consumption; (iv)
finally, for the same temporary receptive field, the resulting
network architecture is much more compact.
Figure 4 depicts the encoder architecture used in DC-VAE.
The network architecture must be such that the output values
depend on all previous input values. The length T of the sliding
window plays a key role here, as it must ensure that the output

at t depends on the input at that time and at {t − 1, t − 2,
. . . , t − T + 1}. The simplest way to achieve this is to use
filters of length F = 2 and DCs with dilatation factor d = F h ,
which grow exponentially with the layer depth h ∈ [0, H − 1],
where H is the number of layers of the network. Subsequently,
H is the minimum value that verifies: T ≤ 2 ∗ F H −1 . In
the example, the window length is T = 8, and the target
is achieved by taking H = 3 layers. This direct relationship
between T and the network architecture has a strong practical
impact, making it easy to construct the encoder/decoder based
on the desired temporal-depth of the analysis.
Note that the dilation process allows doubling T with each
added layer. Consequently, a large temporal receptive field of
past measurements can be achieved without further deepening
the network. The encoder and decoder are symmetric in
architecture, both in the number of filters and applied dilations.
In the encoder model, the idea is to reduce or maintain
layer output dimensions with network depth. The opposite
for the decoder is increasing or maintaining the dimension
until reaching the observations’ dimension. In both cases, the
sequence length T is always maintained.
Model training is conducted on top of normal-operation data
to capture the baseline for anomaly detection. Once trained, the
detection process runs continually, rolling the sliding window
of length T by a unitary-time step. At each time t, the DC-VAE
model takes as input the matrix x ∈ RM ×T , constructed out
of the last T samples observed in the MTS, and produces as
output matrices μx and σx – for notation brevity, we define
μ = μx and σ = σx . From these two output matrices,
the anomaly detection only considers their values at time t,
corresponding to two vectors μ(t) and σ(t). For each of the
univariate time-series m, an anomaly is detected at time t if its

1606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 5. Snapshots of the TELCO MTS. For each time-series, the region of normal operation is depicted, as estimated from DC-VAE predictions μx and σ x .

value xm (t) falls outside the normal-operation region, defined
by μm (t) and σm (t). More precisely, an anomaly in timeseries m is declared at time t if:
|xm (t) − μm (t)| > αm × σm (t),

(5)

where α = (α1 , . . . , αm , . . . , αM ) is a vector of M detection
sensitivity threshold, where each αm can be set independently
for each time-series, allowing for fine-grained, per time-series
calibration of the detection process.
Regarding the calibration of α, and despite being DCVAE an unsupervised system, we acknowledge that these
thresholds are set relying on annotated anomalies. Inevitably
in any anomaly detection problem, it is necessary to set an
operating point. This must be set by an expert operator in
the system, who knows the behavior of the data and the
cost of false detections, both positive and negative. In all
sets for anomaly detection, this knowledge is in the labels
provided by the experts. There are different techniques to
define thresholds automatically from the data [48], but all are
applicable for the detection of outliers (i.e., values far from
normal behavior). In the problem we are dealing with, the
interest is to detect anomalies which are often difficult to
differentiate from normal behavior, so the calibration stage
inevitably must be supervised.
IV. T HE TELCO M OBILE ISP DATASET
A. TELCO – A New Open Dataset Released to the
Community
A recent study [14] alerts on the limitations of evaluating
anomaly detection algorithms on popular time-series datasets
such as Yahoo, Numenta, or NASA, among others.
In particular, these datasets are noted to suffer from
known flaws such as trivial anomalies, unrealistic anomaly
density, mislabeled ground truth, and run-to-failure bias.
For this reason, we decided to evaluate DC-VAE in a
proprietary MTS dataset, corresponding to real measurements
collected at an operation mobile ISP – note that we
are publicly releasing this dataset to the community

(https://iie.fing.edu.uy/investigacion/grupos/anomalias/en/telcodataset-2/downloads/). The TELCO dataset [17] corresponds
to twelve different time-series, with a temporal granularity of
five minutes per sample, collected and manually labeled for a
period of seven months between January 1 and July 31, 2021.
This temporal length is seldom available in other publicly
available datasets of this nature and is highly relevant and
useful to allow for long-term seasonal behavior analysis.
Each time-series corresponds to aggregated data from different sources; to keep business confidentiality, we do not
specify the exact data type reflected by each time-series. The
twelve time-series are typical data monitored in a mobile ISP,
including the number and amount of prepaid data transfer fees,
number and cost of calls, the volume of data traffic, number
of SMS, and more.
Figure 5 depicts daily snapshots of the complete TELCO
MTS. For each time-series, the region of normal operation is
depicted, as estimated from DC-VAE predictions μx and σ x .
Different time-series expose different behaviors, e.g., some of
them are noisier (TS3 ), others have lower dynamic ranges
(TS11 ), and some others show a smoother evolution (TS2 ).
To appreciate the strong seasonality component of the timeseries, Figure 6 depicts the TELCO MTS for a period of four
days, covering weekdays and weekends.
Table I presents the main details of the dataset. Note in
particular, how strongly imbalanced the dataset is in terms
of normal-operation and anomalous samples, which is the
typical case for real network measurements in operational
deployments. By definition, anomalies are rare events. We
split the full dataset in three independent, time-ordered subsets, using measurements from January to March for model
training, April for model validation, and May to July for
testing purposes. For the sake of completeness, Table II reports
normal-operation and anomalous samples per individual timeseries, for the training, validation, and testing sub-sets. The
share of anomaly samples is low and significantly different
for some of the time-series, adding richness and complexity
to the dataset; for example, time series TS1 , TS4 , TS9 , and
TS10 have a total share of anomaly samples above 2% or 3%.

GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS

1607

Fig. 6. TELCO dataset time-series, for four days, along with the corresponding DC-VAE estimations. The temporary receptive field – i.e., length of the
rolling time-window, is T = 512 samples, spanning about two days of past measurements.
TABLE I
TELCO DATASET. S EVEN -M ONTHS W ORTH OF M EASUREMENTS ,
M ANUALLY L ABELED FOR T WELVE D IFFERENT M ETRICS

While the TELCO dataset used in this paper and released to
the community has a seven-month time span, we acknowledge
that the complete dataset we have collected has almost two
years of duration. We have decided to work only on these
seven months because it corresponds to the data for which
expert operator annotated labels are available. Although DCVAE trains in a self-supervised fashion, a fair comparison
with supervised methods as the one we do in the evaluations
requires that all methods share the same training, validation,
and test sets.
Nevertheless, and for the sake of completeness, we investigated the impact on DC-VAE’s baseline modeling performance
when training with longer time-spans, without labels. Figure 7
reports the average log-likelihood Ez ∼qφ (z |x ) [ log pθ (x |z )] in
the reconstruction of TELCO in the testing dataset, using
different temporal spans for self-supervised model training.
Interestingly, improvements are rather marginal when considering up to 18 months of training data, suggesting that
manually labeling a longer time-span for TELCO might not
actually provide a richer dataset. In any case, we are working
with the expert annotators to release a newer version of
TELCO in the near future, covering more than one year of
labeled time-series.
B. The SWaT Open Dataset for Cybersecurity Analysis
While the core of the evaluations and benchmarking is
conducted on the TELCO dataset, we also evaluate DC-VAE

Fig. 7. Average log-likelihood Ez ∼q (z |x ) [ log pθ (x |z )] in the reconstrucφ
tion of TELCO in the testing dataset, using different temporal spans (3 to
18 months) for self-supervised model training.

in the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) dataset [18], an open,
publicly available dataset commonly used in the literature for
cybersecurity analysis. The SWaT dataset consists of 51 timeseries of data collected over eleven days in 2015-2016, on a
water treatment operational test-bed, which represents a smallscale version of a large modern cyber-physical system. The
dataset contains two sub-sets temporally split; the first week is
anomaly free and is considered as the training dataset, whereas
the last four days of data contain 36 attacks of different
nature and duration (from a few minutes to an hour), and
is meant for testing purposes. The total number of anomaly
samples accounts for about 5.8% of the total measurements.
As an example of the kind of patterns observed in the
SWaT MTS, Figure 8 depicts four of the time-series under
normal operation. Different from TELCO, which represents a
real operational network and anomaly labels are provided by
manual inspection on individual time-series, anomaly labels
in SWaT correspond to temporal ranges in which the attacks
were executed under a controlled environment.
We acknowledge that the SWaT dataset is far from
representing a real cyber-physical system and is not perfect
as benchmark for anomaly detection, presenting significant

1608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE II
D ISTRIBUTION OF A NOMALY S AMPLES IN THE TELCO DATASET, P ER T IME -S ERIES AND P ER T RAINING , VALIDATION , AND T ESTING S UB -S ETS . T HE
S HARE OF A NOMALY S AMPLES I S L OW, AND S IGNIFICANTLY D IFFERENT FOR S OME OF THE T IME -S ERIES

Fig. 8.

SWaT – the four time-series represent normal operation. Anomaly labels in SWaT correspond to 36 temporal ranges when attacks were executed.

trivial anomalies and unrealistic anomaly density, as well as
some mislabeled ground truth and missed anomalies in the
data (https://mlad.kaspersky.com/swat-testbed/). Nevertheless,
there are two main reasons for testing DC-VAE in SWaT:
(i) firstly, despite its deficiencies, the SWaT dataset is widely
used in the state of the art as benchmark for multivariate
time-series anomaly detection, and this allows us showing that
DC-VAE provides similar, or even better performance, than
other similar systems in a well-known dataset; (ii) secondly,
using SWaT lets us testing the modeling capabilities of DCVAE in a dataset with a broader variety of variables – 51 time
series in this case.
V. DC-VAE E VALUATION AND B ENCHMARKING
A. DC-VAE Architecture Calibration
The first step before evaluation of DC-VAE is to calibrate
the model. As explained in Section III, the length T of the
sliding window plays a major role in the architecture of DCVAE. Given the usage of the dilated convolutions, T determines
the number of encoder and decoder layers (cf. Figure 4).
The dimension J of the latent space is the other relevant

parameter to set; while it must be smaller than the MTS
dimension M, it must also be big enough to capture the most
relevant information of the MTS process. We test different
values for the sequence length T to show how this affects the
performance of the model. In particular, we test T = 1, 8, 16,
32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024 samples, considering the average
of the mean absolute error (MAE) between xm and μxm , for
each time-series m. Sequence length T = 1 corresponds to a
standard VAE model with only snapshot-like inputs; to avoid
an excessively compressed model for this sequence length, we
consider here an architecture with three fully-connected layers.
Besides the reconstruction MAE, we also compute the socalled explained variance or variance score Varscore , which
compares the variance of the reconstruction error and the
variance of the input signal:
Varscore (x (t), μx (t)) = 1 −

Var(x (t) − μx (t))
Var(x (t))

(6)

The value of Varscore is between [0, 1], where 1 represents
the ideal case. Figure 9 reports the (a) MAE and (b) Varscore
for each sequence length T and corresponding model architecture, in both cases obtained as the average value across all

GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS

1609

TABLE IV
T EMPORAL C OMPLEXITY FOR A RCHITECTURE O PTIMIZATION AND
M ODEL T RAINING (H ARDWARE R EFERENCE : GPU N VIDIA GTX 1060)

Fig. 9. Calibration of DC-VAE in TELCO. T = 512 provides the smallest
reconstruction error and the highest variance score.
TABLE III
G RID OF H YPERPARAMETERS U SED IN THE M ODEL C ALIBRATION

in DC-VAE, as compared to traditional recurrent architectures,
we created another architecture by replacing all layers with
RNNs. To search for the hyperparameters, we define another
grid that includes the previous one, adding the number of
hidden layers: h = {2, 4}. It is worth remembering that for
DC-VAE, defining the length of the T sequences automatically
sets the number of layers, and thus, this value varies between
[3, 10]. Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) were the type of layer
used in the RNNs, as they showed the highest convergence
stability in terms of vanilla RNN and LSTM models.
Table IV reports the comparative times taken for hyperparameter search and model training for both architectures,
i.e., DC-VAE and the RNN-based one. Tests are performed
on standard GPU hardware, using a Nvidia GTX 1060 GPU.
The fully causal architecture proposed by DC-VAE is more
compact and can be optimized and trained much faster than
traditional, recursive architectures. In particular, hyperparameter search takes less than half the time, and model training
is at least 33% faster.
B. Anomaly Detection Results in TELCO

the time-series, for the TELCO validation set. Latent space
dimensions J = 4, and J = 8 are considered in the analysis.
The MAE varies considerably for the proposed range, with
T = 512 providing the smallest reconstruction error, almost
identical for both latent space dimensions. Similarly, for the
Varscore , T = 512 results in the highest score, for both latent
space dimensions.
Another relevant hyperparameter is the number of filters
f for each hidden convolutional layer, which together with
the number of layers and the input and output dimensions
define the size of the architecture in terms of the number
of trainable parameters. Also, hyperparameters typical of the
training stage, such as the learning rate γ and the mini-batch
size m, are key to find the optimal solution. To find the
best combination of these hyperparameters, we use the Treestructured Parzen Estimator (TPE) approach [49]. In total, 50
attempts were tested on the grid shown in Table III, where
the hyperparameters for which the model showed the smallest
validation loss are reported in the last column.
The hyperparameter search stage for a deep learning model
is one of the most important and most expensive steps, since
it involves training many models until the optimal values
are found. Therefore, lowering the times of this stage is
paramount. To evaluate the time gained by using a fully
parallelizable compact architecture such as the one proposed

We go back to Figure 6 to show DC-VAE in action, using
a sliding-window of length T = 512 samples. DC-VAE can
properly track different types of behavior in the time-series,
including the strong seasonal daily component, but also the
operation during weekdays and weekends, clearly visible in
TS2 and TS11 , among others. In this example, time-series
TS3 and TS9 are noisier than time-series TS5 and TS12 ,
which justifies the need for different sensitivity thresholds
αm to address the underlying nature of each monitored
metric. Note in addition how different periods of time-series
variability result in more or less tight normal-operation regions
estimated by DC-VAE, as defined by σ(t). Figure 10 extends
the predictions of DC-VAE to a longer time-span, considering
two weeks of measurements, for time-series TS2 and TS11 .
While both time-series have a strong seasonal component, with
marked differences in behavior on weekdays and weekends,
TS11 has a decreasing trend on the second week, which can
be properly tracked by DC-VAE.
To apply DC-VAE for anomaly detection, we have to
calibrate the sensitivity thresholds α, which is usually done
in a supervised manner, relying on the labeled anomalies
available in the training and validation datasets. This step is the
only one that requires a certain level of “supervision” (in the
sense of ground-truth availability), but could also be done in a
self-supervised manner, by labeling anomalies through outlier
detection techniques. In our specific problem, each sensitivity
threshold αm is calibrated on a per time-series basis, by
maximizing the F1 score over the training and validation

1610

Fig. 10.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

DC-VAE operation for time-series with stationary behavior. Weekly seasonality is identified, with variations between weekdays and weekends.

Fig. 11. Examples of real anomalies present in the analyzed dataset, and
their identification by DC-VAE.

datasets, doing a grid-search of integer values from 1 to 5. In
a nutshell, we decide how many standard deviations σm shall
be considered as tolerance for the normal-operation variability
of the data.
Figure 11 reports some examples of real (i.e., labeled)
anomalies present in the TELCO dataset, in particular for timeseries TS2 , TS4 TS6 and TS9 , along with their corresponding
identification by DC-VAE, where sensitivity thresholds α were
calibrated as mentioned before. DC-VAE can detect different
types of anomalies present in the data, of a more transient
and spiky nature in the case of TS6 and TS9 , or on a more
structural basis in the case of TS2 and TS4 . Note also how
some of the actual measurements fall significantly outside the
normal-operation region – e.g., in Figure 11(c), but still these

were not labeled as anomalous by the expert operator. Whether
this is a false-positive produced by DC-VAE, or a non-labeled
anomaly missed by the expert operator is difficult to know.
It is important to note that anomalies in real, operational
measurements, as labeled by the expert operator, do not always
translate into clear outliers in the data; the contrary is also true,
meaning that typical outliers in the data might not correspond
to actual anomalies in the eyes of the expert operator. Manual
data labeling by experts is prone to human error, many times
due to a lack of conclusive information for the operator to take
a proper decision. These observations are paramount when
evaluating anomaly detectors with real, in-the-wild data.
We run a quantitative performance analysis of DCVAE in the testing dataset (cf. Table I), benchmarking its
performance against a broad set of more traditional detectors.
As performance metrics, we consider an elaborated version of
the traditionally used, per-sample evaluation metrics, to consider a more natural and practical approach for real anomaly
detection applications, evaluating detection performance in
the form of anomaly temporal-ranges. Traditional metrics
can make sense for point anomalies where a true positive
corresponds to a correct detection at the precise point in
time. However, as shown for example in Figure 11(b), many
anomalies occur in the form of multiple, consecutive point
anomalies, defining an anomaly range. In such scenarios, it
could be already enough to have a partial overlap between
the real anomaly range and the predicted anomaly interval
to consider a correct detection. Previous papers have considered these observations [11], [46], [47], defining new metrics
which prioritize early or delayed detection, or focusing mainly
on range anomalies. Therefore, we take the extended definitions of recall and precision as defined in [47] to generalize
for ranges of anomalies, considering a correct detection if at
least one of the samples between the start and the end of the
actual anomaly is flagged by the model. We refer to these
extended, range-based metrics as Rr , Pr , and F 1r , for recall,
precision, and F1-score, respectively. More precisely, given a
set of λ Real Anomaly ranges RA = RA1 . . . RAλ and a set
of δ Predicted Anomaly ranges PA = PA1 . . . PAδ :
λ
j =1 Rr (RAi , PA)
Rr (RA, PA) =
(7)
λ
δ
j =1 Pr (RA, PAi )
Pr (RA, PA) =
(8)
δ
Rr × P r
F 1r = 2 ×
(9)
Rr + P r

GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS

TABLE V
S ET OF B ENCHMARK T IME -S ERIES A NOMALY D ETECTORS
U SED IN TELCO AGAINST DC-VAE

In a nutshell, an intersection between an anomaly interval
and the whole set of predictions is enough to set Rr (RAi , PA)
to one. Pr (RA, PAi ) is determined in its dual form. To
consider the manual labeling uncertainty in the real anomaly
location [50], we run a preprocessing on the real anomaly
regions, convolving the series with a rectangular window, to
obtain better-defined anomaly ranges.
Table V summarizes the different anomaly detection
approaches considered in the benchmark against DC-VAE.
Most of these approaches correspond to univariate detection methods (except S-VAE), largely studied in the signal
processing domain. A broad set of 15 univariate detectors
are integrated into a single ensemble detector, referred to as
ENS-15. The ensemble includes regression models, changepoint detectors, outliers detectors, dimensionality reduction,
clustering, and more. The aggregation corresponds to a majority voting strategy, where each detector is independently
calibrated in the training and validation datasets, and a voting
threshold maximizing F1 validation scores is computed. In
TELCO, ENS-15 detects an anomaly if at least four ensemble
models detect it. We also consider well-established time-series
detectors, such as Seasonal Exponential Smoothing (S-EXPS)
and the standard Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average
(ARIMA) model. These approaches base the detection on
the prediction of μx and σx for each time instant, making
them particularly interesting to compare against DC-VAE. To
show the advantages of DC-VAE as compared to the usage of
standard, vanilla VAEs for anomaly detection in time-series,
we define the Standard-VAE (S-VAE) as a snapshot-inputbased anomaly detection model, where the encoder/decoder
architecture is based on a standard 3-layers, fully connected
feed-forward neural network, and the input corresponds to the
MTS at the specific time of detection – i.e., T = 1 in S-VAE.
The comparison against S-VAE serves to demonstrate the
advantages of DC-VAE temporal-aware architecture, through
the dilated convolutions. Finally, evaluations are reported
independently for each to the twelve time-series TSm in the
TELCO dataset.

1611

Table VI reports the corresponding results in the testing
dataset, independently for each time-series, and as an average
value. The first observation is that achieved results are in
general rather poor, achieving F 1r scores around 60% for
eight out of the twelve time-series, and below for the rest.
This is highly in contrast with the high F1 scores usually
reported in the literature, when dealing with simulated or
flawed datasets [14]. Indeed, as we explained before, dealing
with in-the-wild measurements and human-labeled, highlyimbalanced datasets is more complex than what the results in
the literature usually report – real, in practice MTS anomaly
detection is highly complex. Performance is significantly
different for some of the time-series, which corresponds to
the different nature and underlying behavior (cf. Figure 6)
and the fraction of anomalies (cf. Table II). While DC-VAE’s
performance as compared to S-VAE is outstanding, results
show that no single approach is superior to the rest in all the
time-series. DC-VAE’s performance is similar, on average, to
S-EXPS and ARIMA. Still, among those already mentioned,
the main advantage of DC-VAE remains its multivariate operation and the overall MTS modeling within a single learning
step.
C. Benchmarking DC-VAE in the SWaT Open Dataset
For the sake of completeness and to provide a stronger
and more comprehensive benchmarking, we compare DC-VAE
against other deep-learning-based MTS anomaly detectors
in SWaT. As discussed in the related work, GAN-based
MTS detectors are very popular in the literature, given their
flexibility to model a complex MTS process without making
any assumptions on the underlying distributions. GANs are a
powerful approach to learning the underlying distributions of
data samples, in a purely data-driven, model-agnostic manner.
Such models can be used in the practice to construct better
normal-operation baselines, improving the identification of
instances that deviate from this baseline. We, therefore, compare DC-VAE against three GAN-based detectors proposed
in recent years, including EGAN [22], MAD-GAN [20], and
our previous work on GAN-based MTS anomaly detection,
referred to as NET-GAN [21].
To train DC-VAE in SWaT, we take an architecture using
J = 16 as the dimension of the latent space, and a sequence
length T = 128, both parameters calibrated in the same way
we did it in TELCO (cf. Figure 9). We train both DC-VAE and
NET-GAN in the SWaT training dataset, using a small share of
samples from the attacks for calibration. Regarding EGAN and
MAD-GAN, we decided to report here the results obtained by
the authors in [20], which would generally correspond to the
best performance which could be achieved by these methods.
Finally, we also include a standard Auto Encoder (AE) model
as the simplest approach comparable to DC-VAE.
Table VII reports the results obtained in the testing dataset
in terms of recall, precision, and F1 scores. We fall back to
the standard evaluation on point anomalies instead of range
anomalies, to be consistent with the results obtained in SWaT
as reported in the literature. We consider two variations of
NET-GAN detectors [21], one using the generator function

1612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE VI
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE B ENCHMARKING IN TELCO, C OMPARING DC-VAE AGAINST S-EXPS, ARIMA, S-VAE, AND AN E NSEMBLE
OF 15 T RADITIONAL D ETECTORS (ENS-15). F IRST AND S ECOND H IGHEST F 1 S CORES A RE M ARKED IN R ED AND B LUE , R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE VII
A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE B ENCHMARKING AGAINST
D EEP -L EARNING G ENERATIVE M ODELS IN SWAT

(NET-GAN-G), and the other one the discriminator function
(NET-GAN-D). We also consider three different variations
of MAD-GAN, optimized for best precision (MAD-GANP), recall (MAD-GAN-R), and F1 score (MAD-GAN-F1).
DC-VAE results are comparable to those obtained with NETGAN-G and MAD-GAN-F1, and significantly better than
EGAN or the AE model. In addition, absolute results are
also significantly better than those obtained in TELCO,
helping us demonstrate that anomaly detection in real data
as the one in TELCO, dealing with the error-prone process of human labeling, is much more complex than what
the literature usually reports on such benchmarks. To sumup, we can claim that DC-VAE realizes state-of-the-art
detection performance, while again, flagging its underlying
advantages.
VI. T EMPORAL AND S PATIAL R ESPONSE OF DC-VAE
The visual exploration of DC-VAE predictions and detections in TELCO revealed certain behaviors of the model
when confronted with different temporal and/or spatial patterns
which are worth studying. In particular, the impact of the
sequence length T on the reaction of the model to certain
phenomena is relevant. Next, we present different prototypical

Fig. 12. A strong outlier in TS11 results in poor prediction for TS4 , with
sequence length T = 32. This effect is mitigated with longer lengths T.

examples of simulated anomalies and their impact on DC-VAE
predictions, using S-VAE and the ARIMA models for comparison, when applicable.

GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS

1613

Fig. 13. S-VAE and DC-VAE response to univariate and multivariate anomalies. The simultaneous modeling of the full MTS process adds regularity and
stability to the detection.

Fig. 14. DC-VAE and ARIMA response to range and point anomalies. The lower image is always a close-up view of the upper one. Being univariate and
with a small temporal window makes ARIMA less robust for MTS anomaly detection, and missing anomalies.

1) Impact of Strong Outliers: the processing of the complete MTS simultaneously has evidenced, and in particular
for simpler versions of the model with shorter sequence
lengths T, that coarse outliers affecting a single time-series
can affect the predictions for other time-series, generating
false detections. Figure 12 shows how a major outlier in
TS11 strongly perturbates predictions for TS4 , especially for
sequence length below 32 in this example. This effect can be
partially mitigated by taking longer sequences at the input. As
a lesson learned, using longer sequences improves the filtering
of strong outliers from the data.
2) Multivariate Model Properties: besides being more
scalable in production, having a single model for the analysis
of the complete MTS also improves detection. Figure 13(a)
shows S-VAE model predictions for two highly correlated
time-series, TS1 and TS2 . An artificial univariate anomaly
in TS1 , emulating a period where the time-series is constant
(e.g., no incoming measurements), has a contained impact
on the rest of the time-series predictions, as reflected in the
predictions of μx and σ x for TS2 . As the S-VAE model has no
temporal information (i.e., T = 1), predictions are influenced
by the fact that the rest of the time-series remained unchanged.
Nevertheless, in this example, the anomaly introduced in TS1
would be clearly detected.
3) Temporal Model Properties: we now apply the previous
anomaly to all the time-series in the same period and
verify how the VAE-based models exploit temporal correlations among time-series. Figure 13(b) shows that this time,
the S-VAE model predictions perfectly follow the anomaly,

making it go completely undetected. The result is totally different for DC-VAE; as shown in Figure 13(c), the predictions
of a DC-VAE model with a sequence length of T = 512 tend to
follow the past behavior, and take longer to track the anomaly
pattern, effectively detecting it.
Similar to DC-VAE, the ARIMA detection model enables
the visualization of the normal-operation region. However,
as we show in Figure 14, being univariate and with a small
temporal window makes ARIMA less robust for MTS anomaly
detection. In the figure, model predictions are depicted in
green for ARIMA and in orange for DC-VAE, and red dots
indicate real (i.e., labeled) anomalies. Figures 14(a) and 14(b)
show that the value of σx for the ARIMA model is constant
over time, but dynamically adapts in DC-VAE, providing a
better, more accurate normal-operation region. This is a strong
advantage of DC-VAE, since it adapts to the noise variations
that these time-series generally present.
The same happens to the estimations of μx . While the
estimation of the signal through the ARIMA model closely follows the time-series, even in the occurrence of real anomalies
– and thus the model misses detection, the estimation provided
by DC-VAE maintains a normal behavior in the face of the
anomalies, allowing to properly detect them. The bigger spatial
(M) and temporal (T) ranges of DC-VAE add robustness to the
anomaly detection process.
4) Concept Drift Response: the ability to detect Concept
Drift (CD) in time-series data is a paramount property [8].
The CD can manifest itself as a shift in the mean, an increase
or decrease in the variance, or both changes simultaneously,

1614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 15. DC-VAE response to univariate concept-drift: a gradual linear fall of the values during the day without affecting night behavior. While the drift
does not affect the predictions on the other time-series, it becomes easily detectable at the corresponding time-series.

which may be imperceptible for many methods [9]. These
CD changes may be related to important trends in the data,
requiring proper detection. We simulate a univariate CD in
one of the time-series, and check the outputs of DC-VAE.
Figure 15 shows an example of CD, where a gradual change in
the interval indicated as the CD zone is simulated in TS5 . The
daily values of the time-series are reduced linearly, starting at
80% (beginning of the CD zone) up to 40% (end of the CD
zone). This change does not only affect the mean value of
the time-series, but also its variance. Interestingly, predictions
of the DC-VAE follow the past behavior learned as normal,
allowing the CD event to be detected.
VII. C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
DC-VAE is a novel approach to anomaly detection in
multivariate time-series, leveraging dilated convolutional neural networks and variational autoencoders. DC-VAE detects
anomalies in multivariate time-series, exploiting temporal
information without sacrificing computational and memory
resources. In particular, instead of using recursive neural
networks, large causal filters, or many layers, DC-VAE relies
on dilated convolutions to capture long and short-term phenomena in the data, avoiding complex and less-efficient deep
architectures, simplifying learning. Applying DC-VAE to real
measurements collected at a mobile ISP showed that its
underlying architecture is better than traditional, vanilla VAEs
regarding time-series anomaly detection. The parameterization
of DC-VAE’s architecture is defined by a single parameter,
namely the length of the sliding window used for temporal
analysis, and the normal operation region can be easily adapted
on a per time-series basis by adjusting a single integer value,
all of these important advantages in practice.
The performance analysis shows that DC-VAE has good
properties for its implementation in production: scalability,

easy adjustment of the normal-operation region, robustness
against anomalies in other time-series, as well as against
concept drift, which can also be detected. The application
of DC-VAE in the TELCO and SWaT datasets shows the
complementarity with other detection methods and the onpar performance with state-of-the-art MTS anomaly detectors
in the literature. The quantitative and qualitative advantages
of DC-VAE concerning S-VAE evidenced the contribution
of the convolutional layers in capturing a longer time
horizon.
The open release of the TELCO dataset offers a real,
more representative environment to assess and benchmark
anomaly detectors, providing a solid contribution to advance
the domain.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank anonymous reviewers as well as associate
editors for their constructive feedback and comments, which
helped improving our work.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.1145/3444690
[2] M. Gupta, J. Gao, C. Aggarwal, and J. Han, Outlier Detection for
Temporal Data (Synthesis Lectures Data Mining Knowledge Discovery),
vol. 5. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 1–129.
[3] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, Jul. 2009. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1541880.1541882
[4] M. Ahmed, A. N. Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network anomaly
detection techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 60, pp. 19–31,
Jan. 2016.
[5] W. Zhang, Q. Yang, and Y. Geng, “A survey of anomaly detection
methods in networks,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Comput. Netw. Multimedia
Technol., 2009, pp. 1–3.

GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS

[6] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning
for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
no. 2, pp. 1–38, Mar. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3439950
[7] T. Hoens, R. Polikar, and N. Chawla, “Learning from streaming data
with concept drift and imbalance: An overview,” Prog. Artif. Intell.,
2012, pp. 89–101.
[8] J. Gama, I. Žliobaitundefined, A. Bifet, M. Pechenizkiy, and
A. Bouchachia, “A survey on concept drift adaptation,” Assoc. Comput.
Machinery, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1–37, 2014.
[9] G. H. F. M. Oliveira, R. C. Cavalcante, G. G. Cabral, L. L. Minku, and
A. L. I. Oliveira, “Time series forecasting in the presence of concept
drift: A PSO-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Int. Conf. Tools Artif.
Intell. (ICTAI), 2017, pp. 239–246.
[10] N. Laptev, S. Amizadeh, and Y. Billawala, 2015, “S5—A labeled
anomaly detection dataset,” Dataset, yahoo. [Online]. Available:
https://webscope.sandbox.yahoo.com/catalog.php?datatypeWebscope |
Yahoo Labs
[11] A. Lavin and S. Ahmad, “Evaluating real-time anomaly detection
algorithms–The Numenta anomaly benchmark,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), 2015, pp. 38–44.
[12] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised realtime anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262,
pp. 134–147, Nov. 2017.
[13] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[14] R. Wu and E. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
[15] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational
Bayes,” 2013, arXiv:1312.6114.
[16] A. v. d. Oord et al., “Wavenet: A generative model for raw
audio,” 2016, arXiv:1609.03499.
[17] G. García González, S. Martínez Tagliafico, A. Fernández, G. Gómez,
J. Acuña, and P. Casas, 2023, “TELCO—A new multivariate timeseries dataset for anomaly detection in mobile networks,” Dataset, IEEE
DataPort. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/skpg-0539
[18] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop
Cyber-Physical Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), 2016, pp. 31–36.
[19] G. G. González, S. M. Tagliafico, A. F. Iie-Fing, G. Gómez, J. Acuña,
and P. Casas, “DC-VAE, fine-grained anomaly detection in multivariate time-series with dilated convolutions and variational auto
encoders,” in Proc. 7th Workshop Traffic Meas. Cybersecurity (WTMC),
2022, pp. 1–6.
[20] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019,
pp. 703–716.
[21] G. G. González, P. Casas, A. Fernández, and G. Gómez, “On
the usage of generative models for network anomaly detection in
multivariate time-series,” SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 48,
no. 4, pp. 49–52, May 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3466826.3466843
[22] H. Zenati, C. S. Foo, B. Lecouat, G. Manek, and
V. R. Chandrasekhar, “Efficient GAN-based anomaly detection,” 2018,
arXiv:1802.06222.
[23] M. Braei and S. Wagner, “Anomaly detection in univariate time-series:
A survey on the state-of-the-art,” 2020, arXiv: 2004.00433.
[24] D. Bäßler, T. Kortus, and G. Güehring, “Unsupervised anomaly detection
in multivariate time series with online evolving spiking neural networks,”
Mach. Learn., vol. 111, pp. 1377–1408, Mar. 2022.
[25] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
[26] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 1–9.
[27] S. Zavrak and M. Iskefiyeli, “Anomaly-based intrusion detection from
network flow features using variational autoencoder,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 108346–108358, 2020.
[28] R.-Q. Chen, G.-H. Shi, W.-H. Zhao, and C.-H. Liang, “A joint model for
IT operation series prediction and anomaly detection,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 448, pp. 130–139, Aug. 2021.
[29] J. Donahue, P. Krähenbühl, and T. Darrell, “Adversarial feature learning,” 2016, arXiv:1605.09782.

1615

[30] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and
K. Veeramachaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using
generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big
Data), 2020, pp. 33–43.
[31] C. Doersch, “Tutorial on variational autoencoders,” 2016,
arXiv:1606.05908.
[32] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “An introduction to variational autoencoders,” 2019, arXiv:1906.02691.
[33] F. P. Casale, A. V. Dalca, L. Saglietti, J. Listgarten, and
N. Fusi, “Gaussian process prior variational autoencoders,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 10390–10401.
[34] L. Girin, F. Roche, T. Hueber, and S. Leglaive, “Notes on the
use of variational autoencoders for speech and audio spectrogram
modeling,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Digit. Audio Effects (DAFx), 2019,
pp. 1–8.
[35] V. Fortuin, D. Baranchuk, G. Rätsch, and S. Mandt, “GP-VAE: Deep
probabilistic time series imputation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell.
Statist., 2020, pp. 1651–1661.
[36] S. Ramchandran, G. Tikhonov, K. Kujanpää, M. Koskinen, and
H. Lähdesmäki, “Longitudinal variational autoencoder,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2021, pp. 3898–3906.
[37] J. Bayer and C. Osendorfer, “Learning stochastic recurrent
networks,” 2014, arXiv:1411.7610.
[38] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. C. Courville,
and Y. Bengio, “A recurrent latent variable model for sequential
data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015, pp. 1-9.
[39] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[40] S. Shabanian, D. Arpit, A. Trischler, and Y. Bengio, “Variational biLSTMs,” 2017, arXiv:1711.05717.
[41] Z. Yang, Z. Hu, R. Salakhutdinov, and T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, “Improved
variational autoencoders for text modeling using dilated convolutions,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3881–3890.
[42] G. Lai, B. Li, G. Zheng, and Y. Yang, “Stochastic wavenet: A generative
latent variable model for sequential data,” 2018, arXiv:1806.06116.
[43] C. Meng, X. S. Jiang, X. M. Wei, and T. Wei, “A time convolutional
network based outlier detection for multidimensional time series in
Cyber-physical-social systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 74933–74942,
2020.
[44] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
[45] H. Zhang, Y. Xia, T. Yan, and G. Liu, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in multivariate time series through transformer-based variational
autoencoder,” in Proc. 33rd Chin. Control Decis. Conf. (CCDC), 2021,
pp. 281–286.
[46] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoencoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. 2018 World
Wide Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[47] N. Tatbul, T. J. Lee, S. Zdonik, M. Alam, and J. Gottschlich, “Precision
and recall for time series,” in Proc. 32nd Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NeurIPS), 2018, pp. 1–11.
[48] J. Beirlant, Y. Goegebeur, J. Segers, and J. Teugels, Statistics of
Extremes: Theory and Applications, vol. 558. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
2004.
[49] J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. Kégl, “Algorithms for hyperparameter optimization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2011,
pp. 2546–2554.
[50] A. Shahid, G. White, J. Diuwe, A. Agapitos, and O. O’Brien, “SLMAD:
Statistical learning-based metric anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Service-Oriented Comput., 2020, pp. 252–263.

Gastón García González received the B.Sc. and
M.Sc. degrees from the Universidad de la República,
Uruguay, in 2018 and 2020, respectively. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Signal
Processing Department, Electrical Engineering
Institute, Universidad de la República, where he
holds a position as a Teaching Assistant/Lecturer.
His main research areas include signal processing,
anomaly detection, and machine learning.

1616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Sergio Martinez Tagliafico received the degree
in electrical engineering and the Specialization
Diploma degree in telecommunications from the
Universidad de la República, Uruguay, in 2012
and 2013, respectively, where he is an Assistant
Professor with the Engineering Faculty, working on
signal processing and data science.

Alicia Fernández (Member, IEEE) is a Professor
of Signal Processing with the Electrical Engineering
Institute, Universidad de la República, Uruguay.
Since 1989, she has been working with IIE, in
telecommunication and signal processing areas. Her
main research interests are signal processing and
pattern recognition with focus in biomedical image
analysis, biometric identification, anomaly detection,
and big data analysis.

Gabriel Gómez Sena received the degree in industrial engineering (speciality electronics) in December
1987, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering
from the Universidad de la República, Uruguay, in
2011, with a thesis concerning statistical methods
for traffic classification, where he is an Associate
Professor with Engineering School. His current
research interests are related to networking protocols, software defined networking, and anomaly
detection in telecommunication networks.

José Acuña received the degree in electrical engineering in July 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in signal
theory and communications from the Universidad de
Vigo, Spain, in 2013, with a thesis concerning efficiency of OFDM systems on urban radio channels.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Engineering
Faculty, Universidad de la República, Uruguay. He
is also a Network and IT Operations Manager with
Telefonica Uruguay. His current research interests
are related to telecommunication networks and
anomaly detection.

Pedro Casas (Member, IEEE) received the degree
in electrical engineering from the Universidad de la
República, Uruguay, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree
in computer science from Télécom Bretagne in
2010. He is currently a Senior Scientist in AI/ML
for Networking with the AIT Austrian Institute
of Technology, Vienna. He was a Postdoctoral
Researcher with LAAS-CNRS, Toulouse, from
2010 to 2011 and a Senior Researcher with the
Telecommunications Research Center Vienna from
2011 to 2015. He has published more than 200
networking research papers in major international conferences and journals,
and received 17 awards for his work, including eight Best Paper Awards. His
work focuses on machine learning-based approaches for networking, big data
analytics and platforms, Internet network measurements, network security, and
anomaly detection, as well as Internet QoE monitoring. He is the General
Chair for different actions in network measurement and analysis, including
the IEEE ComSoc ITC Special Interest Group on Network Measurements and
Analytics.