5668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Online Self-Supervised Deep Learning for Intrusion
Detection Systems
Mert Nakıp , Member, IEEE, and Erol Gelenbe , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— This paper proposes a novel Self-Supervised
Intrusion Detection (SSID) framework, which enables a fully
online Deep Learning (DL) based Intrusion Detection System
(IDS) that requires no human intervention or prior off-line
learning. The proposed framework analyzes and labels incoming
traffic packets based only on the decisions of the IDS itself using
an Auto-Associative Deep Random Neural Network, and on an
online estimate of its statistically measured trustworthiness. The
SSID framework enables IDS to adapt rapidly to time-varying
characteristics of the network traffic, and eliminates the need
for offline data collection. This approach avoids human errors in
data labeling, and human labor and computational costs of model
training and data collection. The approach is experimentally
evaluated on public datasets and compared with well-known
machine learning and deep learning models, showing that this
SSID framework is very useful and advantageous as an accurate
and online learning DL-based IDS for IoT systems.
Index Terms— Self-supervised learning, intrusion detection,
deep learning, Internet of Things, random neural network (RNN),
auto-associative deep RNN, botnet attacks.

I. I NTRODUCTION
OTNET attacks can lead to thousands of infected
devices [1] compromising the devices of victims and
turning them into “bots” via malware [2], which in turn cause
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks. The malicious
bots, i.e. compromised devices, can generate fraud information, cause data leaks, and spread malware. It is reported that
27.7% of all global website traffic in 2021 was generated by
bots with malicious intent, and is growing with a 7.3% increase
reported between 2018 and 2021 [3].
Botnet attacks severely challenge resource-constrained
devices and Internet of Things (IoT) networks [4], as an
attack propagates over the victim network increasing network

B

Manuscript received 5 September 2023; revised 8 April 2024 and 6 May
2024; accepted 7 May 2024. Date of publication 16 May 2024; date of
current version 28 May 2024. This work was supported in part by European
Commission H2020 Program through the Security by Design IoT Development and Certificate Framework with Front-end Access Control (IoTAC)
Research and Innovation Action under Grant 952684 and in part by European Commission Horizon Europe—the Framework Program for Research
and Innovation (2021–2027) Secure-by-Design IoT Operation with Supply
Chain Control (DOSS) Project under Grant 101120270. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication
was Prof. George Loukas. (Corresponding author: Mert Nakıp.)
Mert Nakıp is with the Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN), 44-100 Gliwice, Poland (e-mail:
mnakip@iitis.pl).
Erol Gelenbe is with the Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics,
Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN), 44-100 Gliwice, Poland, also with the
Laboratory of I3S, Université Côte d’Azur, 06108 Nice, France, and also
with the Department of Computer Engineering, Yaşar University, 35100 İzmir,
Turkey (e-mail: seg@iitis.pl).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3402148

congestion, power consumption, and processor and memory
usage of IoT devices over time. Therefore, it is crucial to
detect malicious network traffic and identify compromised
IoT devices during an ongoing Botnet attack. While detecting
malicious traffic allows reactive actions to alleviate the effects
of the attack and stop it, identifying compromised IoT devices
paves the way for preventive actions against the spread of
malware and Botnet attack.
On the other hand, as the majority (approximately 52%)
of IoT connections are to low cost and low maintenance
devices deployed in massive IoT networks [5], developing
and implementing complex and advanced security methods is
challenging as well. To this end, early research [6] developed
various types of lightweight Machine Learning (ML)-based
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) –especially anomaly detecting IDS (anomaly-based IDS)– for IoT networks, showing
that anomaly-based IDS is very promising in detecting zeroday attacks based on unknown intrusions that often target
vulnerable devices and networks.
Since the decisions of anomaly-based IDS are highly
dependent on the characteristics of the normal traffic used
for parameter optimization (i.e. learning), accurate decisions
become more difficult when the normal behaviour of network
traffic changes over time due to both internal and external
influences. For example, new device(s) may be added to the
IoT network causing a considerable change in aggregated
normal network traffic and an increased false positive alarms.
Therefore, anomaly-based IDS could greatly benefit from
the ability to adapt in real time to time-varying characteristics
of network traffic, ideally through sequential online learning [7], [8]. However, the effectiveness of completely online
learning, even for lightweight ML-based IDS, is often limited
by two main factors: 1) A sufficient amount of collected
and labeled traffic data is not always accessible for every
system intended to be secured by the IDS. 2) Online parameter
updates are occasionally performed in parallel with intrusion
detection at fixed or variable time intervals. Frequent online
updates, i.e. short time intervals, result in high computational
resource consumption for only minor or no performance gain
per update. In contrast, infrequent updates, i.e. long time
intervals, may have difficulty adapting to changes in normal
traffic, resulting in poor IDS performance. Hence, each time
interval needs to be carefully selected, taking into account the
current state of the IDS and the actual behaviour of normal
network traffic.
In this paper, in order to enable completely online learning of IDS parameters, a novel fully online Self-Supervised

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

Intrusion Detection (SSID) framework is proposed. SSID
learns from arriving traffic packets, measures the trustworthiness of the IDS, including its generalization ability and
accuracy on traffic packets it uses for learning. It can then
decide when to update the neural weights via its learning
algorithm, keeping itself up-to-date with a high intrusion
detection accuracy.
The SSID framework can be used with any anomalybased IDS that requires parameter optimization, providing
fully online self-supervised learning of parameters in parallel
with real-time detection requiring no human intervention.
It also eliminates the need for labeled or unlabeled offline
data collection, and offline training or parameter optimization. Therefore, the proposed framework contrasts sharply
with much of existing work [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14],
[15], [16] that has implemented self-supervised learning for
intrusion detection, often utilizing offline (small-sized) labeled
or unlabeled training data and pseudo-labeling. Accordingly,
as its main advantages, the SSID framework
• Enables IDS to easily adapt time varying characteristics
of the network traffic,
• Eliminates the need for offline data collection,
• Prevents human errors in data labeling (online or offline),
and
• Avoids human labor and computational costs for model
training and data collection through prior experiments.
We also implement our SSID framework for a Deep
Random Neural Network (DRNN)-based IDS that analyzes
high-level network traffic metrics extracted from packet header
information and learns those metrics calculated for only
normal benign traffic. We evaluate the performance of the
SSID framework for two tasks, malicious traffic detection and
compromised device identification on Kitsune [17] and BotIoT [18] datasets. The results revealed that IDS trained under
the SSID framework achieve considerably high performance
compared to the same IDS with offline and quasi-online (incremental and sequential) learning. Meanwhile, the IDS trained
under SSID requires no offline dataset, external parameter
optimization or human intervention.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II reviews the related work on intrusion detection.
Section III presents the overview of the IDS used in this work
as well as the detection and learning processes. Section IV
proposes the novel SSID framework and present the methodology enabling the self-supervised learning for IDS. Section V
evaluates the SSID framework for malicious traffic detection
and compromised device identification on public datasets, and
compares its performance against the state-of-the art methods.
Finally, Section VI summarizes this paper and provides some
insights for the future work. Note that the definitions of abbreviations and the symbols appear in this paper are respectively
listed in Table III and Table IV in Appendix.
II. R ELATED W ORK
We now briefly review recent related work on intrusion
detection in three categories of the work that: 1) detect
malicious traffic during Botnet-based DDoS (in short Botnet)

5669

attacks, 2) identifies compromised network nodes, and
3) performs self-supervised learning for intrusion detection.
A. DDoS Botnet Attack Detection
In [19], Tuan et al. conducted a comparative study for
performance evaluation of ML methods aiming to classify
Botnet attack traffic. In this work, the authors evaluated the
performances of Support Vector Machine (SVM), Multilayer
Perceptron (MLP), Decision Tree (DT), Naive Bayes (NB),
and unsupervised ML methods (such as K-means clustering)
on two datasets (including KDD’99) revealing that unsupervised ML methods achieve the best performance with
98% accuracy. In [20], Shao et al. created an ensemble of
Hoeffding Tree and Random Forest (RF) models with online
learning using both normal and attack traffic. In [21], Shafiq
et al. developed a feature selection technique as a preprocessing algorithm for an ML-based botnet attack detector. This
algorithm ranks features according to their Pearson correlation
coefficients and greedily maximizes the detector’s performance
with respect to area under Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curve in the Bot-IoT dataset. In [22], Doshi et al.
developed an attack detection algorithm comprised of feature
extraction from the network traffic and ML classifier. In the
place of the ML classifier, the authors used each of K-Nearest
Neighbour (KNN), SVM, DT, and MLP methods; then, they
evaluated the performance of this algorithm on a dataset
collected within the same work. Letteri et al. [23] developed
an MLP based Mirai Botnet detector specialized for Software
Defined Networks. The authors fed 5 metrics, including the
used communication protocol, to MLP.
In [24], Banerjee and Samantaray performed experimental
work to deploy a network of honeypots that attracts botnet
attacks and to detect those attacks via ML methods, such
as DT, NB, Gradient Boosting, and RF. In reference [25],
McDermott et al. developed the Bidirectional LSTM-based
method which is developed for packet-level botnet attack
detection by performing text recognition on multiple features
including source and destination IP addresses of a packet.
In addition, Tzagkarakis et al. [26] developed a sparse representation framework with parameter tuning using only normal
traffic for botnet attack detection.
Meidan et al. [27] developed an ML-based attack detection
technique which is trained using only normal traffic and tested
for Mirai and Bashlite botnet attacks on an IoT network with
nine devices. The authors also published the data collected
in this study under the name N-BaIoT dataset. In order to
detect Botnet attack in N-BaIoT dataset, Htwe et al. [28] used
Classification and Regression Trees with feature selection,
and Sriram et al. [29] performed a comparative study using
7 different ML methods (including NB, KNN, and SVM).
In Reference [30], Soe et al. developed a Botnet attack
detection algorithm comprised of two sequential phases first to
train utilized ML method and perform feature selection, then
to perform attack detection. The authors used MLP and NB
within this architecture, and they evaluated the performance on
N-BaIoT dataset. In [31], Parra et al. developed a cloud based
attack detection method using Convolutional Neural Network

5670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

(CNN) for phishing and using Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) for Botnet attacks. The authors evaluated the performance of this method also on the N-BaIoT dataset achieving
94.8% accuracy. CNN was also used by Liu et al. [32] with
features that are processed by the triangle area maps based
multivariate correlation analysis algorithm. In recent work
[33], Bovenzi et al. employed DL models, specifically using
Auto Encoders (AEs) and KitNET, for unsupervised early
anomaly detection in IoT datasets, namely IoT-23 [34] and
Kitsune [17]. The results of [33] demonstrated the potential for
early anomaly detection in IoT network attacks by evaluating
the detection effectiveness of varying numbers of packets,
finding the first four packets to be the most effective.

B. Compromised Device Identification
Some recent work [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40] focused
on detecting compromised IoT devices during Botnet attacks,
while Kumar and Lim [35] detected Mirai-like bots scanning
the destination port numbers in packet headers using an
optimization-based technique for subsets of all IoT packets.
Chatterjee et al. [36] identified malicious devices in IoT
networks via evidence theory-based analysis. To this end, they
analyzed traffic flows and selected the rarest features from a
large number of communication features, including number of
connections, transport layer protocol, and source/destination
ports. In [41], in order to detect IoT botnet in an Industrial
IoT network, Nguyen et al. developed a dynamic analysis
technique utilizing various ML models, such as SVM, DT, and
KNN, based on the features generated from the executable
files. In Reference [42], Hristov and Trifonov developed a
compromised device identification algorithm using wavelet
transformation and Haar filter on the metrics indicating the
processor, memory and network interface card usage of an
IoT device. In [40], Prokofiev et al. used Logistic Regression to determine if the source device is a bot based on
10 metrics regarding the traffic packets. The performance of
logistic regression is tested for a botnet that spreads through
brute-force attacks. Nguyen et al. [37] detected compromised
devices by an anomaly detection technique combining federated learning with language analysis for individual device
types identified prior to detection. In order to evaluate the
performance of this technique, the authors collected a dataset
by installing 33 IoT devices, 5 of which were malicious, and
showed that detection performance is around 94% for positive
and 99% for negative samples.
More differently, in Reference [38], Abhishek et al. detected
not compromised devices but compromised gateways monitoring the downlink channels in an IoT network and performing
binary hypothesis test. In [43], Trajanovski and Zhang developed a framework consisting of honeypots to identify the
indicators of compromised devices and botnet attacks. Bahşi
et al. in [44] addressed the scalability issues for ML-based
Bot detection algorithms by minimizing the number of inputs
of ML model via feature selection. In [39], for mobile IoT
devices, Taneja proposed to detect compromised devices taking into account their location, such that if a location change

or current location of an IoT device is classified as unusual
behavior, the device is considered compromised.
C. Self-Supervised Learning for Intrusion Detection
Song and Kim [9] developed self-supervised learning
algorithm for anomaly-based IDS in in-vehicle networks.
In this algorithm, Reduced Inception-ResNet is used to make
binary classification and detect unknown (zero-day) attacks.
The training of this anomaly-based IDS offline uses both
normal traffic and noised pseudo data generated using LSTM.
Wang et al. [10] applied and adapted Bootstrap Your Own
Latent (BYOL) self-supervised learning approach, which has
been proposed in [45], for intrusion detection. The parameters
of the BYOL algorithm are learned, then updated via transfer
learning, using a dataset containing both normal and malicious
traffic samples. For anomaly detection, Zhang et al. [11]
developed deep adversarial training architecture by extending
the well-known bidirectional Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) model. This architecture jointly learns from normal
data and generated latent features. Kye et al. [12] introduced
a hierarchical network IDS based on the Auto Encoder (AE).
By leveraging self-supervised signals and specialized anomaly
scores within its AE architecture, this IDS learns offline only
from normal traffic data and does not need an additional
data generator. Caville et al. [13] developed a Graph Neural
Network (GNN) based network-level IDS. This IDS was
trained with a self-supervised learning approach using both
positive and negative samples for offline training with an
encoder graph created using an extended version of the wellknown GraphSAGE framework. Wang et al. [14] developed an
IDS with unsupervised learning combined with transformer
based self-supervised masked context reconstruction, which
improves the learning by magnifying the abnormal intrusion
behaviours. Abououf et al. [15] developed a lightweight IDS
architecture based on LSTM Auto Encoder (LSTM-AE) to
perform detection on IoT nodes. This model is trained offline
and unsupervised in an encoder-decoder architecture using a
pre-collected dataset in the cloud. Meyer et al. [16] developed
a federated self-supervised learning IDS. This IDS employ
auto-encoder based self-supervised model on local datasets
using federated approach. Note that the key features of the
related works on self-supervised learning, as well as the
proposed SSID framework, are summarized in Table I.
In this paper, we introduce a pioneering learning framework
termed SSID, tailored for Deep Learning (DL)-based intrusion
detection. Unlike conventional approaches prevalent in the
ML / DL literature, SSID distinguishes itself in several key
aspects:
• SSID eliminates dependency on additional generative
models. Unlike common practice in self-supervised learning, which often necessitates the incorporation of an extra
generative model (or contrastive method) for training
purposes [46], our SSID framework operates without this
requirement.
• SSID is independent of offline training data. While many
methods in the literature rely on the availability of precollected (unlabeled) offline training data [47], SSID is

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

5671

TABLE I
K EY F EATURES OF R ELATED W ORKS ON S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING FOR I NTRUSION D ETECTION

designed to function autonomously, even in scenarios
where such data is not readily accessible. However,
if available, SSID can leverage offline data to enhance
its performance.
• SSID facilitates fully online learning on independent network nodes. A distinctive feature of SSID is its ability to
facilitate continuous online learning and enable real-time
intrusion detection across independent network nodes.
III. I NTRUSION D ETECTION S YSTEM U SED IN SSID
The SSID framework does not consider a specific algorithm
for IDS or have strict requirements for it, except that it is based
on ML / DL or some other function with learnable parameters
and has a certain range of inputs and outputs. In addition,
the SSID framework can also be used with both anomaly
and signature based detection algorithms. On the other hand,
as real-time network traffic contains only normal “benign” traffic until an attack occurs, an IDS structure that can learn only
from normal traffic may provide higher performance under
self-supervised learning. Therefore, anomaly-based algorithms
are the main focus in this paper.
We first present the structure of anomaly-based IDS that we
used within the SSID framework. This particular IDS structure
is displayed in Figure 1, which is mainly comprised of an DL
model and a decision maker component.
In the IDS structure shown in Figure 1, the DL model
is used to create an Auto-Associative Memory (AAM) that
reconstructs benign traffic metrics –which are the expected
metrics according to the norm of the actual traffic learned by
the AAM– from observed metrics. The significant difference
between the reconstructed (expected) metrics and the actual
metrics, as measured by the decision maker component, may
be indicative of malicious traffic.
The input of this IDS is the vector of M network traffic
metrics, xi = [xim , . . . , xim , . . . , xiM ], and the output, yi is a
decision indicating the probability of intrusion corresponding
to current traffic. The vector of expected metrics, which is

Fig. 1. Particular structure of IDS used within the SSID framework during
performance evaluation.

the output of DL-based AAM, for packet i is denoted by
x̂i = [x̂i1 , . . . , x̂im , . . . , x̂iM ]. The DL-based AAM is a learned
function that maps the noisy or disordered metrics to the
normal metrics, i.e. f aam : xi 7 → f aam (xi ) for f aam (xi ) = x̂i ,
so that f aam : [0, 1] M → [0, 1] M .
A. Deep Random Neural Network as Auto-Associative
Memory
In the particular implementation of the IDS shown in
Figure 1, in place of the DL algorithm, we use the DRNN
model [48], [49]. DRNN is an extension of the RNN [50], [51]
with dense feedback loops between clustered neuronal somas,
and an overall feed-forward structure between layers of dense
clusters. After it is trained to create an AAM, we call it AutoAssociative DRNN (AADRNN). Earlier research has shown
that an AADRNN-based IDS has a lightweight architecture
and offers high accuracy when used with unsupervised autoassociative training with normal (benign) traffic [7], [8], [52],
[53], [54], [55]. The AADRNN-based IDS was also evaluated
with offline [54], incremental [7] and sequential [8] learning
to detect malicious traffic and compromised devices during
Botnet attacks. G-Networks [56], which generalize the RNN,

5672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

and the simple RNN itself were also used with offline learning
to detect zero-day [55] and SYN DoS [57] attacks. In contrast,
in this paper, we use the AADRNN-based IDS as a specific
IDS within the novel SSID framework proposed for the first
time in this paper. The parameters of the AADRNN-based IDS
are now learned online thanks to the SSID framework learning
approach that is completely online and does not require labeled
data. It should be noted that the main contribution of this paper
is the development of self-supervised approach and the novel
SSID framework. In addition, AADRNN-based IDS can be
replaced with another ML or DL based IDS, e.g. MLP will
also be evaluated within the SSID framework in Section V.
In the AADRNN-based IDS, we use a DRNN model
consists of H layers and a rectangular structure with equal
units at each layer. Accordingly, we set H = M, each hidden
layer h ∈ {1, . . . , H − 1} contains M neural clusters, and the
output layer is comprised of M linear neurons.
B. Intrusion Detection Process
Recall that this paper considers two main tasks: detecting
malicious traffic packets and identifying compromised network
nodes. As the results of earlier research [8], [54] showed,
each task requires a customized IDS to provide high accuracy.
Therefore, in the remainder of this subsection, we present the
traffic metrics and the decision maker component for each task
separately.
1) Traffic Metrics: We use the traffic metrics that are
defined in our earlier research specifically for Botnet attack
detection in [54] and compromised device identification in
[8]. These metrics are relatively few in number and are
calculated based solely on packet header information. Therefore, they remain anonymous regarding packet content and
communicating devices, do not need for any sensitive or
device-specific information, thus preventing IDS from making
biased decisions, and are suitable for real-time operation on
lightweight systems. Meanwhile, they have been shown to be
effective in capturing signatures of Botnet attacks.
For malicious traffic detection, in order to capture the
signatures of Botnet attacks (especially Mirai), as the inputs
of AAM, we use M = 3 normalized metrics that measure
the total size and average inter-transmission times of the last
500 packets and the number of packets in the last 100 seconds.
For compromised device identification, we use M =
6 normalized traffic metrics which are calculated over time
windows of length 10 seconds. These metrics measure the
average size and average number of packets received from
a single source, the maximum size and maximum number of
packets received from any single source, and the total size and
total number of packets transmitted during a time window.
2) Estimation of the Expected Benign Traffic Metrics: The
expected benign traffic metrics is estimated (i.e. reconstructed)
based on the traffic metrics given as the inputs of AADRNN.
The estimated traffic metrics (x̂i ) are then fed into the decision
maker component.
Let Wh denote the [(M + 1) × M] matrix of connection
weights (including biases) between the layer h − 1 and layer
h for h ∈ {1, . . . , H }; that is, Wh is the multiplier for the inputs

of layer h. In addition, ζ (·) denote the activation function of
a cluster in AADRNN.
Accordingly, in real-time operation, the forward pass of
AADRNN model for the given input vector xi is computed
as:
x̂(i,1) = ζ ([xi , 1] W1 )

(1)

x̂(i,h) = ζ ([x̂(i,h−1) , 1] Wh )

∀h ∈ {2, . . . , H − 1},

x̂i = [x̂(i,H −1) , 1] W H ,

(2)
(3)

where x̂(i,h) is the output of layer h for packet i, and the term
[xi , 1] or [x̂(i,h) , 1] indicates that 1 is added to the input of
each layer as a multiplier of the bias.
The activation function ζ (·) is defined as [48]:
ζ (3) =

p (r + λ+ ) + λ− + 3
2 [λ− + 3]
s
 p (r + λ+ ) + λ− + 3 2
λ+
−
−
, (4)
2 [λ− + 3]
λ− + 3

where 3 is the input of the given cluster, p is the probability
that any neuron received trigger transmits a trigger to some
other neuron, and λ+ and λ− are respectively the rates of
external Poisson flows of excitatory and inhibitory input spikes
to any neuron.
3) Decision Making: The last step in the attack detection
process is making the attack decision. Since the AADRNN
output provides the expected metrics for normal network
traffic, any deviation of the actual metrics from the AADRNN
output, i.e. the expected metrics, indicates malicious traffic.
Therefore, we use a lightweight decision making approach
based on comparison of actual and expected metric values.
In particular, we measure the deviation of the actual metrics
xi from the expected metrics x̂i . On the other hand, since
AADRNN-based IDS uses different set of metrics for malicious traffic detection and compromised device identification
tasks, the decision making approach is also slightly different
for each task. One should note that this lightweight decision
making approach requires no human intervention or parameter
settings based on offline data; therefore, it is suitable for online
learning IDS.
For malicious traffic detection, the decision maker calculates the output of IDS, yi , as the average absolute difference
between the actual and the expected metric values:
M

yi =

1 X m
|xi − x̂im |.
M

(5)

m=1

For compromised device identification, the decision
maker calculates the output of IDS as the maximum absolute
difference between the actual and the expected metric values:
yi =

max

m∈{1,...,M}

(|xim − x̂im |).

(6)

C. Learning Algorithm to Create AADRNN
In order to create an AADRNN, we train an DRNN model
based on a batch of packet samples, denoted by B l , collected
and provided by the proposed SSID framework at any learning
phase l. To this end, we use the learning algorithm, used

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

for DRNN in earlier research [7], [8], [54], which shall be
reviewed in this subsection.
1) Initial Learning: As we use sequential learning to create
an auto-associative memory from DRNN (namely, AADRNN),
each weight matrix Wh is learned and updated based on
only the batch of benign packets B l provided by the SSID
framework.
When the learning algorithm is called by SSID for B l at
initial learning phase l = 0, we solve the following problem using A Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm
(FISTA) [58]:

train
[ad j (ζ ( X̂ l,h−1
W R )), 1k×1 ] W
Wh = argmin

5673

Fig. 2. Detection and learning processes of IDS within the Fully Online
Self-Supervised Intrusion Detection (SSID) framework.

{W : W ≥ 0}

train
− X̂ l,h−1

2
L2

+ ||W || L 1



,

(7)

where W R is a random weight matrix whose elements are in
train is the matrix that collects the output vectors
(0, 1) and X̂ l,h
of layer h for all packets i ∈ B l if yi = 0:
train
X̂ l,h
= {x̂(i,h) , ∀i ∈ B l },
train
train
X̂ l,0
= {xi , ∀i ∈ B l }, and X̂ l,H
= {x̂i , ∀i ∈ B l }

(8)

After FISTA is performed for a predefined number of iterations
to solve (7), we normalize the resulting weight matrix Wh :
Wh ← 0.1

Wh
train
max X̂ i,h

 .

(9)

2) Online Incremental Learning: During the online incremental learning of IDS parameters (i.e. l ≥ 1), only the
connection weights of the output layer of AADRNN, W Hl ,
are updated via the second stage to learn the new patterns of
the benign traffic provided by SSID via B l . As the incremental
learning algorithm, we mainly integrate the sequential learning
algorithm developed in [59]. Let define the operation matrix
Ol , which is initialized for l = 0 as the inverse of the Gram
matrix:
h
i−1
train T train
O0 = ( X̂ l,H
) X̂ l,H
(10)
If there is at least one benign packet in B l , we first compute
the value of Ol for l ≥ 1:
train
T
Ol = Ol−1 − Ol−1 ( X̂ l,H
−1 )

h
i−1
train
train
T
train
× I + X̂ l,H
X̂ l,H
−1 Ol−1 ( X̂ l,H −1 )
−1 Ol−1
(11)
Then, the value of W H is updated:
train
T
train
train
W H ← W H + Ol ( X̂ l,H
−1 ) ( X̂ l,0 − X̂ l,H −1 W H )

(12)

3) Learning Error Provided to the SSID Framework:
Furthermore, since we use an anomaly-based algorithm that
learns only the benign traffic, we take the learning error as the
mean of estimated attack probabilities for packets in learning
batch B l :
1 X
E(l) = l
yi
(13)
|B |
l
i∈B

IV. T HE S ELF -S UPERVISED I NTRUSION D ETECTION
F RAMEWORK
As the main contribution of this paper, we propose the
novel SSID framework to enable fully online self-supervised
learning of the parameters of IDS with no need for human
intervention. In order to clearly present the SSID framework,
this section first explains the main functionalities of both the
initial and online learning phases through Figure 2. Then, the
comprehensive methodology, that includes the details regarding all the blocks in Figure 3, is presented.
As shown in Figure 2, within the SSID framework, there
are two main operations performed, intrusion detection (lower
line) and learning (upper line). Intrusion detection is the main
operation performed by IDS and is not modified by SSID. That
is, intrusion detection (as an operation) is defined only by a
particular IDS algorithm used in SSID. On the other hand,
we can say that our SSID framework ensures that IDS makes
accurate decisions by updating its parameters with online
self-supervised learning, and it performs intrusion detection
uninterruptedly and continuously. Regarding the communication (data transfer) between intrusion detection and online
self-supervised learning processes in SSID, it is important
to note that SSID uses the decisions of IDS to enable selfsupervised learning during either initial or online learning
phases.
A. Online Self-Supervised Learning
In parallel with attack detection, our SSID framework
provides online self-supervised learning of IDS parameters,
as shown on the upper process line in Figure 2. As seen in
that figure and Figure 3 which shows the learning process in
SSID, the online self-supervised learning process starts with
the initial learning phase (namely, l = 0) and continues with
successive online learning phases.
Since network traffic characteristics may vary with time
and substantially affect the IDS detection performance, it is
crucial to update the parameters of the IDS online concurrently
with its real-time operation. The parameter updates conducted
through online learning serve to enhance the reliability of the
IDS as a detector by enhancing its performance and ensuring
it remains aligned with the latest traffic characteristics. Online
learning also circumvents the need to collect and label extensive datasets for offline training, thereby conserving both time
and resources. In situations where labeled datasets are readily

5674

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 3.

Block diagram of the learning process in the SSID framework for online self-supervised learning of the parameters of IDS.

accessible, the IDS can be pre-trained, and its performance
can be validated using those datasets.
1) Initial Learning: The initial learning phase in SSID can
be considered a special case of the proposed methodology of
self-supervised learning, which allows IDS to be used from its
initial setup and updates the parameters of the IDS frequently
achieving the desired performance gradually and quickly.
In detail, as shown in the top block of Figure 3, during
the initial learning phase in SSID, the parameters of the IDS
are updated for each packet that is selected for learning via
our self-supervised packet selection methodology. Whether the
parameters of the IDS are updated or not, SSID checks the
trust based completion criterion of the initial learning phase
l = 0 aiming to complete this phase as soon as the IDS is
trained enough to make trustworthy decisions. To this end,
it first calculates the trustworthiness of the IDS, namely the
“trust coefficient” denoted by 0 ∈ [0, 1], which indicates
the confidence of SSID in any decision made by the IDS.
Since the IDS does not have any information about the network
traffic patterns yet, SSID cannot judge the decisions of the IDS
and starts the initial learning process with 0 = 0 meaning that
there is no trust in the decisions of the IDS.
Subsequently, SSID checks the trust criterion to complete
the initial learning phase l = 0 by measuring if SSID’s trust in
the IDS is greater than a threshold 2, is the minimum desired
trust level:
if 0 ≥ 2, complete initial learning and set l = 1

(14)

Thus, as given in (14), if 0 ≥ 2, the initial learning phase
has been completed, and the next packet will be considered
for the first phase l = 1 of continuous online learning.
2) Online Learning: After the initial learning is completed,
the parameters of IDS are updated via an online learning phase
l ≥ 1 when the trust of SSID in the IDS is unacceptably low.
As the lower block in Figure 3 shows, the parameters of the
IDS are updated for a collected batch of packets when the
trustworthiness of the IDS is not acceptable anymore. When

SSID is in the online learning phase l ≥ 1, each packet
i selected by our self-supervised packet selection method is
collected into the batch of training packets, B l .
Then, SSID checks the trust-based criterion to update the
parameters of the IDS. Inversely with the initial learning phase,
SSID now updates the parameters of the IDS if 0 < 2, at least
K packets are collected for learning (i.e. |B l | ≥ K ), and there
is no attack detected by the IDS:
if 0 < 2 and |B l | ≥ K and

1
I

i
X

yj ≤ γ,

j=i−I +1

update parameters and set l = l + 1

(15)

where I is the number of packets to calculate the average of
the intrusion decisions, γ is the intrusion threshold, and K
is provided by the user considering properties of the network
and learning algorithm. Limit of minimum K packets is added
only to provide practical efficiency for training.
That is, by (15), SSID waits for a considerable decrease
in the trustworthiness of the decisions of IDS to update the
parameters since 0 is known to be already greater than 2 at
the end of the initial learning phase l = 0. In this way, the
learning is performed when it is essential.
On the other hand, if an intrusion is detected where the
average output of the IDS is greater than γ , SSID clears the
batch of collected packet samples, B l :
if

i
1 X
y j > γ , empty B l
I

(16)

j=i−I

With this cleanup, SSID aims to prevent the IDS from learning
any false negative instances since false negative outputs are
very likely to occur just before an attack is detected.
B. Self-Supervised Packet Selection
In the remainder of this section, we present our proposed
methodology to train the utilized IDS in a self-supervised

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

fashion enabling the fully online property of SSID. In other
words, we explain the details of the learning process in SSID,
which are shown as subblocks in Figure 3.
As the first operation of the learning process in SSID, each
packet i is decided to be used in learning for the next update
of IDS parameters. The packet selection is executed in a selfsupervised manner that only considers the output of the IDS
together with SSID’s trust in it.
Let pi− and pi+ respectively be the probability of selecting
packet i to be used as a benign or malicious packet sample
in the training of IDS, and qi be the probability of rejecting
i to be used in training. That is, we select the packet i as the
sample of a benign packet with probability pi− or that of an
attack packet with probability pi+ to use it in training, or the
packet i is not included in the training set with probability qi .
Also, recall that yi ∈ [0, 1] is the output of IDS for packet i.
Since we assume that there are no packet labeling mechanisms or labor to prepare packet data for learning, we select
each packet i based on the output of IDS (which is the
estimation of the probability of packet i being malicious)
considering how trustworthy IDS is. Therefore, we shall also
define a trust coefficient 0 to measure the trustworthiness of
IDS at any time based on the representativeness of the packet
samples that IDS learned until the end of the last learning
phase and the generalization ability of IDS from these samples.
Accordingly, we start by defining pi+ as
pi+ ≡ (trust in IDS) (est. prob. of packet i being malicious)
pi+ = 0 yi
(17)
We further define pi− similarly to pi+ :
pi− ≡ (trust in IDS) (est. prob. of packet i being normal)
pi− = 0 (1 − yi )

(18)

Subsequently, since
pi+ + pi− + qi = 1,

(19)

the probability qi of not selecting the packet i for training is:
qi = 1 − ( pi+ + pi− )
=1−0

(20)

Recall that SSID starts with 0 = 0 since the IDS does not
have yet any information about the network traffic patterns at
the initial learning phase. That is, the output of the IDS is
calculated using the initial parameter values (if available) and
will not be able to achieve accurate detection for the particular
traffic. In addition, for selecting the first packet, the parameters
of the IDS are updated for the first time using pi− = 1, pi+ =
0, and qi = 0. Thus, SSID selects the first packet to learn as
a benign sample.
C. Trustworthiness of IDS
Now, we determine the trust coefficient 0 for the IDS in the
SSID framework. Through this coefficient, we aim to include
both the effects of changes in the normal behavior of network
traffic over time and the generalization ability of the IDS into
the packet selection model for learning.

5675

To this end, we first define the factor of “representativeness”, denoted by Cr ep , for the traffic packets that are learned
by the IDS. The representativeness factor Cr ep takes a value in
the range of [0, 1] and measures how much the packets used
for learning (during all of the past learning phases) represent
the total observed traffic.
In addition, we define the factor of “generalization ability”,
denoted by C gen , of the IDS. The generalization factor C gen
takes a value in the range of [0, 1] and is calculated only at the
end of each parameter update since it is the only time when
the parameters of the IDS are updated. These two factors shall
respectively be given in Section IV-D and Section IV-E.
Accordingly, in (21), we determine the trust coefficient 0
as the multiplication of Cr ep and C gen :
0 = Cr ep C gen

(21)

In this way, 0 simultaneously measures how much the IDS
is able to learn and generalize from provided traffic packets
and how much these packets reflect actual traffic patterns.
That is, through this trust coefficient, we evaluate how much
information the IDS can generalize from the traffic packets
provided to make decisions for the upcoming traffic.
D. Representativeness of the Traffic That Is Learned (Cr ep )
In order to calculate the representativeness of the packet
traffic used during the earlier learning phases, we compare the
learned traffic with the total observed traffic through KullbackLeibler (KL)-Divergence [60]. Therefore, there are two sets of
traffic packets for comparison, the packets used in the previous
learning phases up to and including l (where l is the latest
completed learning phase) and the normal packets that are
observed by IDS during continuous detection.
During this comparison, we assume that the packet traffic
consists of two main properties, inter-transmission time (T T )
and the packet length (P L) since these properties can be
considered as the basis of traffic metrics, which are the inputs
of the IDS. Inter-transmission time (T T ) refers to the duration
between the transmissions of consecutive packets, while packet
length (P L) denotes the size of each packet in the network
traffic. These properties are crucial as they directly reflect the
behaviour and characteristics of network traffic, thus serving as
fundamental metrics for IDS to analyse and detect anomalies
or malicious activities effectively.
We further assume that packet arrivals –any sample collected from the network traffic– has a Poisson distribution
so that the inter-transmission time T T is an Exponentiallydistributed random variable. The packet length P L is also
assumed to be an Exponentially-distributed random variable
because the header length is considerably larger than the message length for the majority of IoT applications. In addition,
T T and P L are considered to be independent. On the other
hand, for particular applications, these assumptions and the
traffic model can be changed and the below methodology can
easily be adapted for the new traffic model with a new set of
assumptions.
Furthermore, let SlT T and SlP L respectively denote the sets
of the inter-transmission times and lengths of all packets

5676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

learned at the end of l, and SoT T and SoP L respectively denote
the same of all normal packets observed during continuous
detection. In addition, according to our assumptions, SlT T and
SoT T have exponential distributions with means of 1/λl and
1/λo while SlP L and SoP L also have exponential distributions
with means of 1/µl and 1/µo .
1) KL-Divergence for Inter-Transmission Times: For the
set of inter-transmission times, D K L (SoT T ||SlT T ) is KLDivergence from SlT T to SoT T measuring the information
gain achieved if SoT T would be used instead of SlT T which
has been used during the learning phases of SSID. Note
that small KL-Divergence means low information gain, and
D K L (SoT T ||SlT T ) = 0 shows that SoT T and SlT T provide the
same amount of information. Accordingly, using the definition
of KL-Divergence [60], we first calculate D K L (SoT T ||SlT T ),
which can shortly be denoted by D KT TL , as
Z ∞
f (x; λo )
TT
) dx
DK L =
f (x; λo )log(
f (x; λl )
−∞

f (x; λo ) 
= E f (x;λo ) log(
)
f (x; λl )


λo
= E f (x;λo ) log( ) − x(λo − λl )
(22)
λl

Therefore, in order to obtain the representativeness factor,
we first normalize each of D KT TL and D KP LL as

where f (x; λo ) and f (x; λl ) denote the probability distribution functions of SoT T and SlT T respectively with parameters
λo and λl . This leads to the result of

where c1 ≤ 1 and c2 ≤ 1 are positive constants that satisfy
c1 + c2 = 1.
In order to weigh transmission times and packet lengths
equally, we take c1 = c2 = 0.5. That is, we take their average:

D KT TL = log(

λo
(λo − λl )
)−
λl
λo

(23)

2) KL-Divergence for Packet Lengths: Similarly with transmission times, for the set of packet lengths, D K L (SoP L ||SlP L )
is KL-Divergence from SlP L to SoP L , which is shortly denoted
by D KP LL , and is calculated as
Z ∞
f (x; µo )
) dx
f (x; µo )log(
D KP LL =
f (x; µl )
−∞

f (x; µo ) 
= E f (x;µo ) log(
)
f (x; µl )


µo
= E f (x;µo ) log( ) − x(µo − µl )
(24)
µl
where f (x; µo ) and f (x; µl ) denote the probability distribution functions of SoP L and SlP L respectively with parameters
µo and µl . This results in:
D KP LL = log(

(µo − µl )
µo
)−
µl
µo

(25)

3) Representativeness Factor Based on Normalized KLDivergence: For both transmission times and packet lengths,
we now obtained the KL-Divergence between the set of
observed packets and the set of packets learned. However, the
KL-Divergence cannot directly be used as a representativeness
factor because of the following reasons: 1) It has no upper
bound but the representativeness factor Cr ep ∈ [0, 1]. 2) KLDivergence is decreasing function of the similarity between
two sets but we need an increasing function of that as the
name “representativeness” suggests. 3) This factor should be
the combination of D KT TL and D KP LL .

TT

D KT TL−nor m = e−D K L ,

(26)

−D KP LL

(27)

D KP LL−nor m = e

.

which solve the issues 1) and 2) stated above. Each of these
normalized divergence measures can also be written in terms
of only the traffic parameters:


(λ −λ )
− log( λλo )− oλo l
l
D KP LL−nor m = e
hλ
i
l − (λl λ−λo )
o
=
(28)
e
λo
Similarly,


(µ −µ )
− log( µµo )− oµo l
l
D KP LL−nor m = e
hµ
i
l − (µlµ−µo )
o
=
e
µo

(29)

Then, we combine D KT TL−nor m and D KP LL−nor m into the
“representativeness factor” Cr ep as
Cr ep = c1 D KT TL−nor m + c2 D KP LL−nor m

(30)


1 TT
D
+ D KP LL−nor m
2 K L−nor m
1
TT
PL 
= e−D K L + e−D K L
(31)
2
We can rewrite (31) only in terms of the traffic parameters
using (28) and (29):
µl − (µlµ−µo ) i
1 h λl − (λl λ−λo )
o
o
+
e
e
(32)
Cr ep =
2 λo
µo
Cr ep =

E. Generalization Ability of IDS (C gen )
As stated above, we consider the generalization ability of
the IDS as one of two factors that define the trustworthiness
of intrusion decisions. To this end, the aim of this subsection
is to determine the generalization ability of the IDS in simple
terms to make its computation as easy as possible using the
available measures during the execution of SSID. Accordingly,
we start with the basic definition of generalization [61]:
Generalization ≡ Data + Knowledge
stating that the generalization depends on the “Data”, which is
denoted by 1 and refers to the adequacy of the packet samples
that are used for learning, and the “Knowledge”, which is
denoted by κ and refers to the knowledge of the IDS obtained
from packets learned. Therefore, we define the generalization
factor C gen as
C gen = c3 1 + c4 κ

(33)

where c3 and c4 are positive constants such that c3 , c4 ≤ 1,
and c3 + c4 = 1.

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

1) Data Adequacy (1): We evaluate the adequacy of the
packet samples that are used for learning with respect to the
number of learnable parameters in the IDS. Although there is
no hard rule for determining the adequacy of the learning data
(i.e., the number of training samples required) for a given DL
model, most studies have shown its relationship to the total
number of learnable parameters in the model and taken the
minimum number of required training samples as a multiple
of the number of parameters [62].
Therefore, we define the 1 as the counterpart of the ratio
of the number of learnable parameters in the IDS to the
total number of packet samples used for learning up to and
including learning phase l:
i
h

W
,1
(34)
1 = 1 − min Pl
k
k=0 |B |
P
where lk=0 |B k | is the total number of packet samples that
are sequentially used to learn model parameters until the end
of learning phase l. Clearly, 1 takes value in [0, 1]. While W
is a constant number and |B l | ≥ 1 for any learning phase l (in
which a learning
P is performed), liml→∞ (1) = 1. In addition,
1 = 0 when lk=0 |B k | ≤ W .
2) Knowledge (κ): We consider knowledge to be the measure of the DL model’s expected performance for the upcoming traffic packets. Subsequently, we measure the knowledge
(i.e. expected performance) of the IDS based on its performance on the packet samples used for learning and on the
online available validation data.
To this end, in this paper, we consider the worst-case
scenario when there is no validation data available. E(l) is
the empirical error measured at the end of learning phase l on
both packet samples learned and validation data (if available),
such that 0 ≤ E(l) ≤ 1. We then define the knowledge κ as
the counterpart of the exponentially weighted moving average
of empirical errors for all learning phases up to and including
the l–th phase:
κ =1−

l
X
1
( )(l−k+1) E(k)
2

(35)

k=0

where the multiplier is set as 1/2 to keep the value of κ in
[0, 1]. That is, if the empirical training error decreases with the
successive learning phases (i.e. E(l) is the decreasing function
of l), the knowledge of the IDS increases converging to its
maximum.
In practice, at the end of each learning phase l, κ can easily
be updated using only its previous value and the empirical
error E(l) as
i
1 1h
κ ← − E(l) − κ
(36)
2 2
3) Generalization Factor: We now easily calculate the
generalization factor C gen combining the “data adequacy”
1 (34) and “knowledge” κ (35) using the definition of the
generalization factor (33):
C gen
l
h X
h
i
i
1
W
, 1 +c4 1−
( )(l−k+1) E(k)
= c3 1 − min Pl
k
2
k=0 |B |
k=0
(37)

5677

We particularly set c3 = c4 = 0.5 representing that the data
and knowledge are equally important for generalization:
C gen
=1−

min W/

Pl

k
k=0 |B |, 1



+
2

Pl

k=0 (1/2)

(l−k+1) E(k)

(38)
V. R ESULTS
We now evaluate the performance of SSID framework for
two different intrusion detection tasks to identify malicious
traffic packets and compromised devices.
A. Parameter Settings for SSID
First, we set the parameters of SSID as follows: trust
threshold 2 = 0.95, number of packets observed for decision
I = 10, minimum number of training packets K = 100, and
intrusion threshold γ = 0.25. That is, SSID aims to keep
the trust in the IDS above 0.95 while it considers a packet
as malicious if the output of the IDS is above 0.25. IDS
analyses I = 10 packets to make robust intrusion decisions,
which allows IDS to make early decisions while not being too
reactive to instantaneous changes. In addition, the parameters
are updated using at least K = 100 packets in a learning batch
for computational efficiency.
B. Datasets
Since the proposed SSID framework provides online learning for the IDS, its performance is evaluated using two
well-known datasets, Kitsune [17], [63] and Bot-IoT [18],
which contain the actual packet transmissions for both normal
and malicious traffic over time. These are two of the most
recent and used datasets on Botnet and DDoS attacks.
Some other examples of such datasets are UNSW-NB15
[64], CICIDS 2017 [65], and IoT-23 [34]. The UNSW-NB15
dataset focuses on general network intrusion detection, not
specifically focuses on botnet activities, capturing a wide
range of network activities, while CICIDS 2017 emphasizes
both traditional and IoT-specific attacks in controlled lab
environments. IoT-23 is tailored for studying IoT-specific
security challenges, offering data from various IoT devices.
Meanwhile, Bot-IoT and Kitsune datasets specifically focuses
on IoT DoS and DDoS attacks. They include realistic IoT
device behaviors and various types of botnet activities, such as
command and control communication, malware propagation,
and reconnaissance scans. These datasets offer a comprehensive collection of normal and malicious traffic data for
benchmarking attack detection and compromised device identification systems.
In the rest of this section, for malicious traffic detection
and compromised device identification during Mirai Botnet
attack, we first use the well-known Kitsune dataset [17],
which contains 764, 137 packet transmissions of both normal and attack traffic cover a consecutive time period of
roughly 7137 seconds. Of the total 764, 137 packets exchanged
between 107 distinct IP addresses in this dataset, 121, 621 are

5678

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 4. ROC curve for the performance of AADRNN-based IDS under the
SSID framework for malicious traffic detection.

Fig. 5. Predictions of SSID and the value of trust coefficient 0 with respect
to time.

normal packets and 642, 516 are malicious packets. Then, for
compromised device identification, in addition to the Mirai
Botnet, we use the following data: 1) SYN DoS attack from
the Kitsune dataset, 2) DDoS attacks using HTTP, TCP and
UDP protocols from the Bot-IoT dataset, and 3) DoS attack
using HTTP protocol from the Bot-IoT dataset. The data of
SYN DoS, DDoS HTTP, DDoS TCP, DDoS UDP, and DoS
HTTP are respectively comprised of “2, 771, 276”, “19, 826”,
“19, 548, 235”, “18, 965, 736”, and “29, 762” packets.
C. Performance Evaluation for Malicious Traffic Detection
The performance of SSID is first evaluated for malicious
traffic detection during Mirai Botnet attack. Figure 4 displays
the ROC curve, where the x-axis of this figure is plotted in
logarithmic scale. We see that AADRNN-based IDS trained
under our novel SSID framework achieves significantly high
TPR above 0.995 even for very low FPR about 10−5 .
In more detail, in Figure 5, we present the predictions
and 0 of SSID with respect to time. This figure reveals an
important fact that while the IDS is completely indecisive at
the beginning, SSID framework enables it to learn the normal
traffic very quickly. As a result, SSID makes significantly low
false alarms although it learns –fully online– during real-time
operation based only on its own decision using no external
(offline collected) dataset. We also see that 0 accurately
reflects the trustworthiness of decisions made by AADRNN.
In addition, although 0 slightly decreases as a result of random
packet selection, especially after attack starts, the parameters
of AADRNN are not updated by SSID as the traffic is detected
as malicious.
1) Comparison With Incremental and Offline Learning:
We further compare the performance of AADRNN under
SSID with the performance of AADRNN with incremental
and offline learning. All methods with offline learning are
trained using the first 83, 000 benign traffic packets while the
AADRNN with incremental learning is trained periodically for
the window of 750 packets using AADRNN’s own decision,
where the first 750 packets received are assumed to be normal
packets during the cold-start of the network.
Figure 6 displays the performances of SSID and the
AADRNN, with incremental and offline learning. The results
in this figure first reveal that the fully online trained AADRNN
using the SSID framework achieves competitive results with

Fig. 6. Performance comparison between the AADRNN under SSID and
the AADRNN with incremental and offline learning.

the AADRNN which is trained offline using approximately
83, 000 packets. We also see that the SSID significantly
outperforms the AADRNN with incremental learning with
respect to all performance metrics. Also note that the SSID
learned from a total of 4, 161 packets while also conducting
real-time attack detection.
In contrast with offline and incremental learning, SSID
framework assumes only that the first packet is known to be
benign so the duration of cold-start equals the transmission
of a single traffic packet. That is, using no offline dataset
or requiring no cold-start, the SSID framework is able train
an DL-based IDS to achieve considerably high performance
which is highly competitive against the DL models trained on
significantly large dataset.
2) A Different DL Model –MLP– Under the SSID Framework: During the performance evaluation of the SSID
framework, we also use MLP, which is one of the most popular
feed-forward neural networks used for various tasks such as
signal processing, forecasting, anomaly detection, etc. As also
reviewed in Section II, various works [19], [22], [23], [30]
used MLP to develop different IDS methods.
Similar to the AADRNN, the MLP model that we use is also
comprised of M layers with M neurons each. Each neuron has
sigmoid activation function as
1
,
(39)
1 + e−3
where 3 is an input to the neural activation.
In both the initial and online learning stages, the parameters
of the MLP are updated using the state-of-the-art optimizer
Adam. In each online learning phase, incremental learning is
ζ (3) =

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

Fig. 7. Performance comparison between the SSID-MLP and the MLP with
incremental and offline learning.

applied by starting parameter optimization from the connection
weight values already in use at the beginning of that phase.
In order to further analyze the impact of the proposed
SSID framework on the performance of a different DL model,
we evaluate the performance of the well-known MLP under the
SSID framework (called SSID-MLP) and compare it with the
performance of MLP with offline and incremental learning,
respectively. The results of this performance evaluation is
presented in Figure 7.
Figure 7 shows that SSID-MLP achieves slightly higher
Accuracy and TPR than MLP with offline learning, although
MLP with offline learning raises no false alarms at all (i.e.
with 100% TNR). Moreover, we see that SSID-MLP significantly outperforms the MLP model that is also trained via
incremental learning periodically for every 750 packets based
on its own output.
3) Comparison of Different DL Models: We further compare the performance of AADRNN under SSID (called
SSID-AADRNN for clarity) and SSID-MLP with those of
some well-known ML models, including KNN and Lasso with
offline learning. Note that models with offline learning are
trained using a labeled normal traffic data. Also, note that
Lasso, KNN, and MLP are well-known and commonly used
models for Botnet attack detection and compromised device
identification [22], [23], [29], [41]. Figure 8 displays the
performance of all compared models with respect to Accuracy,
TPR and TNR. The results in this figure show that SSIDMLP achieves the second-best performance with respect to all
performance metrics. In addition, both SSID-MLP and SSIDAADRNN achieve highly competitive results with the offline
trained DL models, while the SSID framework completely
eliminates the need for data collection and labeling.
D. Performance Evaluation for Compromised Device
Identification
We now evaluate the performance of CDIS [8] (using
the methodology in Section III) under the SSID framework,
in short SSID-CDIS, on six different attacks, from the two
distinct datasets Kitsune and Bot-IoT. For each dataset, the
performance of SSID-CDIS is compared with the CDIS technique with sequential learning. Using the same methods as
in [8], compromised device identification is performed for a
10 seconds long time window. The performance is evaluated
using the Balanced Accuracy [66].

5679

Fig. 8. Performance comparison between the ML models under the SSID
framework and those with offline learning.

Fig. 9.
Performance comparison of the CDIS trained under the SSID
framework with that under sequential learning on Kitsune dataset.
TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF AVERAGE P ERFORMANCE OVER IP A DDRESSES
B ETWEEN SSID-CDIS AND D IFFERENT ML M ODELS FOR M IRAI
B OTNET F ROM THE K ITSUNE DATASET

Figure 9 displays the performance of SSID-CDIS and its
comparison with CDIS to identify compromised IP addresses,
for each of the Mirai Botnet and SYN DoS attacks in the
Kitsune dataset. Specifically it shows that while the SSID
framework provides the same performance as sequential learning to identify compromised devices during a Mirai Botnet
attack, it significantly improves the overall performance of
CDIS during a SYN DoS attack. The box plot on the right
of Figure 9 shows that SSID-CDIS achieves 100% median
balanced accuracy when there is only one outlier IP address
with around 85% accuracy. On the other hand, the sequentially
trained CDIS has two outlier IP addresses with performances
of 50% and 1%, respectively.
In Table II, we present the average performance of the
SSID-CDIS against each of Lasso, KNN, and MLP with
respect to Balanced Accuracy, TPR and TNR on Kitsune
Mirai dataset. The results in this table show that SSID-CDIS
achieves much higher Balanced Accuracy and TNR than other

5680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 10.
Performance comparison of the CDIS trained under the SSID
framework with that under sequential learning on Bot-IoT dataset.

models. Although its average TPR is considerably low, SSIDCDIS provides a reasonable compromised device identification
accuracy with a much lower false alarm rate compared to other
models.
Figure 10 exhibits the performance of the SSID-CDIS
system, and compares it with CDIS, to identify compromised
IP addresses during DDoS and DoS attacks, using different
communication protocols available in the Bot-IoT dataset.
These results show that the SSID framework achieves higher
identification performance, as compared to the use of CDIS
sequential learning for the majority of attack types.
Starting with the box plot displayed at the far left of this
figure, we observe the following results:
1) For the DDoS HTTP attack, the overall performance
is almost the same for SSID and CDIS with sequential learning. However, as expected, performance varies
slightly for individual IP addresses.
2) For the DoS HTTP attack, using SSID improved the
performance by 2% on average with a minimum of 75%
balanced accuracy.
3) For the DDoS TCP attack, SSID significantly improved
the median accuracy by 18%, where SSID-CDIS
achieves 91% median accuracy. In addition, while the
balance accuracy of CDIS with sequential learning is
below 80% (with a minimum of 49%) for 9 out of
13 unique IP addresses, the balance accuracy of SSIDCDIS is equal to 79% for only 2 IP addresses and above
80% for the rest.
4) Similar to the results for the DDoS TCP attack, SSID
was seen to provide significant performance improvement to identify compromised devices during a DDoS
UDP attack. The median accuracy increased by 11%,
achieving above 88% balanced accuracy for all IP
addresses.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper has proposed a novel Self-Supervised Intrusion
Detection (SSID) framework which is designed to train any
given IDS (whose parameters are calculated using the network
traffic) fully online with no need for human intervention
or prior offline training. The SSID framework comprises
two successive learning stages, namely initial learning and
online learning. Initial learning aims to quickly adapt the IDS
parameters to the network where the IDS is deployed. Online
learning aims to update the parameters whenever it is required
to ensure high detection accuracy of the IDS.

During the real-time operation of the IDS, in parallel to
detection, the SSID framework performs the following main
tasks:
• It continually estimates the trustworthiness of intrusion
decisions to identify normal and malicious traffic. It also
measures the ability of the IDS to learn and generalize
from data provided by SSID and the extent to which
this data can represent the current online network traffic
patterns.
• In order to provide training data for the IDS, the SSID
framework selects and labels network traffic packets in
a self-supervised manner based only on the decisions
of IDS, and on the trust of SSID with regard to those
decisions.
• The SSID framework determines when the IDS parameters need to be updated, based on the trustworthiness of
the IDS, the selected training packets, and the latest state
of network security.
Thus the proposed SSID framework eliminates the need for
offline data collection, it prevents human errors in data labeling
avoiding labor and computational costs for model training
and data collection through experiments. Its most important
advantage is in terms of performance, and it enables IDS to
easily adapt to the time varying characteristics of the network
traffic.
We also evaluated the performance of the SSID framework
for two tasks: malicious traffic detection and compromised
device identification to enhance the security of an IoT network.
For malicious traffic detection, two different DL models,
AADRNN and MLP, have been deployed with the SSID
framework and tested on the Kitsune dataset. The results we
obtain reveal that the DL models trained under the SSID
framework without offline training also achieve considerably
high performance compared to the same models with offline
and incremental learning.
For compromised device identification, the performance of
the state-of-the-art CDIS has been tested under sequential
learning and the SSID framework on data from six different
cyberattacks provided by the two publicly available Kitsune
and Bot-IoT datasets. The results show that the use of SSID
significantly improves the performance of CDIS for the majority of cases considered.
Future work will evaluate the use of SSID for adapting
a pre-trained IDS for use across different networks whose
traffic has not been learned a priori, which seems to be
a promising approach for fast, self-supervised, and successful adaptation of the IDS parameters for various networks.
It would also be interesting to examine security assurance
methods targeting distributed systems that combine the SSID
framework with Federated Learning and attack prevention or
mitigation algorithms. It seems that a successful integration
of the SSID framework with Federated Learning may provide
secure, distributed and self-supervised online learning for
collaborative systems.
A PPENDIX
Table III and Table IV respectively display the list of
abbreviations and the list of symbols seen throughout this
paper.

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

TABLE III
L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ( IN A LPHABETIC O RDER )

5681

TABLE IV
(Continued.) L IST OF S YMBOLS

R EFERENCES

TABLE IV
L IST OF S YMBOLS

[1] C. Douligeris and A. Mitrokotsa, “DDoS attacks and defense mechanisms: Classification and state-of-the-art,” Comput. Netw., vol. 44, no. 5,
pp. 643–666, Apr. 2004.
[2] D. Goodin. (Dec. 2017). 100,000-Strong Botnet Built on Router
0-Day Could Strike At Any Time. Ars Technica. [Online]. Available:
https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2017/12/100000-strongbotnet-built-on-router-0-day-could-strike-at-any-time/
[3] Imperva. (2022). Imperva Bad Bot Report. [Online]. Available: https://
www.imperva.com/resources/resource-library/reports/bad-bot-report/
[4] B. Tushir, H. Sehgal, R. Nair, B. Dezfouli, and Y. Liu, “The impact of
dos attacks onresource-constrained IoT devices: A study on the Mirai
attack,” 2021, arXiv:2104.09041.
[5] Cisco. (Mar. 2020). Cisco Annu. Internet Rep. (2018–2023). [Online].
Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/executiveperspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.html
[6] H. Liu and B. Lang, “Machine learning and deep learning methods for
intrusion detection systems: A survey,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 20, p. 4396,
2019.
[7] M. Nakip and E. Gelenbe, “Botnet attack detection with incremental
online learning,” in Security in Computer and Information Sciences,
Nice, France. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 51–60.
[8] E. Gelenbe and M. Nakip, “Traffic based sequential learning during
botnet attacks to identify compromised IoT devices,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 126536–126549, 2022.
[9] H. M. Song and H. K. Kim, “Self-supervised anomaly detection for
in-vehicle network using noised pseudo normal data,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1098–1108, Feb. 2021.
[10] Z. Wang, Z. Li, J. Wang, and D. Li, “Network intrusion detection model
based on improved BYOL self-supervised learning,” Secur. Commun.
Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–23, Oct. 2021.
[11] X. Zhang, J. Mu, X. Zhang, H. Liu, L. Zong, and Y. Li, “Deep anomaly
detection with self-supervised learning and adversarial training,” Pattern
Recognit., vol. 121, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108234.
[12] H. Kye, M. Kim, and M. Kwon, “Hierarchical detection of network
anomalies: A self-supervised learning approach,” IEEE Signal Process.
Lett., vol. 29, pp. 1908–1912, 2022.
[13] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A selfsupervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030.
[14] W. Wang, S. Jian, Y. Tan, Q. Wu, and C. Huang, “Robust unsupervised network intrusion detection with self-supervised masked context
reconstruction,” Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103131.
[15] M. Abououf, R. Mizouni, S. Singh, H. Otrok, and E. Damiani, “Selfsupervised online and lightweight anomaly and event detection for IoT
devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 24, pp. 25285–25299,
Dec. 2022.

5682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

[16] B. H. Meyer, A. T. R. Pozo, M. Nogueira, and W. M. N. Zola, “Federated
self-supervised learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI), Dec. 2023, pp. 822–828.
[17] (Aug. 2020). Kitsune Network Attack Dataset. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/ymirsky/network-attack-dataset-kitsune
[18] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things
for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X18327687
[19] T. A. Tuan, H. V. Long, L. H. Son, R. Kumar, I. Priyadarshini, and
N. T. K. Son, “Performance evaluation of botnet DDoS attack detection
using machine learning,” Evol. Intell., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 283–294,
Jun. 2020.
[20] Z. Shao, S. Yuan, and Y. Wang, “Adaptive online learning for IoT botnet
detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 574, pp. 84–95, Oct. 2021.
[21] M. Shafiq, Z. Tian, A. K. Bashir, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “CorrAUC:
A malicious bot-IoT traffic detection method in IoT network using
machine-learning techniques,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 5,
pp. 3242–3254, Mar. 2021.
[22] R. Doshi, N. Apthorpe, and N. Feamster, “Machine learning DDoS
detection for consumer Internet of Things devices,” in Proc. IEEE Secur.
Privacy Workshops (SPW), May 2018, pp. 29–35.
[23] I. Letteri, M. Del Rosso, P. Caianiello, and D. Cassioli, “Performance
of botnet detection by neural networks in software-defined networks,”
in Proc. ITASEC, 2018, pp. 1–10.
[24] M. Banerjee and S. Samantaray, “Network traffic analysis based IoT
botnet detection using honeynet data applying classification techniques,”
Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Secur., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 61–66, 2019.
[25] C. D. McDermott, F. Majdani, and A. V. Petrovski, “Botnet detection
in the Internet of Things using deep learning approaches,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2018, pp. 1–8.
[26] C. Tzagkarakis, N. Petroulakis, and S. Ioannidis, “Botnet attack detection at the IoT edge based on sparse representation,” in Proc. Global
IoT Summit (GIoTS), Jun. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[27] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-Based detection of IoT botnet
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul. 2018.
[28] C. S. Htwe, Y. M. Thant, and M. M. Su Thwin, “Botnets attack detection
using machine learning approach for IoT environment,” J. Phys., Conf.,
vol. 1646, no. 1, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 012101.
[29] S. Sriram, R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, and K. Soman, “Network
flow based IoT botnet attack detection using deep learning,” in Proc.
IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, Jul. 2020,
pp. 189–194.
[30] Y. N. Soe, Y. Feng, P. I. Santosa, R. Hartanto, and K. Sakurai, “Machine
learning-based IoT-botnet attack detection with sequential architecture,”
Sensors, vol. 20, no. 16, p. 4372, Aug. 2020.
[31] G. De La Torre Parra, P. Rad, K.-K.-R. Choo, and N. Beebe, “Detecting
Internet of Things attacks using distributed deep learning,” J. Netw.
Comput. Appl., vol. 163, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 102662.
[32] J. Liu, S. Liu, and S. Zhang, “Detection of IoT botnet based on deep
learning,” in Proc. Chin. Control Conf. (CCC), 2019, pp. 8381–8385.
[33] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
A. Pescapé, “Network anomaly detection methods in IoT environments
via deep learning: A fair comparison of performance and robustness,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103167.
[34] S. Garcia, A. Parmisano, and M. J. Erquiaga, “IoT-23: A labeled dataset
with malicious and benign IoT network traffic,” Zenodo, Jan. 2020, doi:
10.5281/zenodo.4743746.
[35] A. Kumar and T. J. Lim, “Early detection of Mirai-like IoT bots in
large-scale networks through sub-sampled packet traffic analysis,” in
Proc. Future Inf. Commun. Conf. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019,
pp. 847–867.
[36] M. Chatterjee, A. S. Namin, and P. Datta, “Evidence fusion for malicious
bot detection in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data),
Dec. 2018, pp. 4545–4548.
[37] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan,
and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DÏoT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst.
(ICDCS), Jul. 2019, pp. 756–767.
[38] N. V. Abhishek, T. J. Lim, B. Sikdar, and A. Tandon, “An intrusion
detection system for detecting compromised gateways in clustered IoT
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Tech. Committee Commun.
Quality Rel. (CQR), May 2018, pp. 1–6.

[39] M. Taneja, “An analytics framework to detect compromised IoT devices
using mobility behavior,” in Proc. Int. Conf. ICT Converg. (ICTC),
Oct. 2013, pp. 38–43.
[40] A. O. Prokofiev, Y. S. Smirnova, and V. A. Surov, “A method to
detect Internet of Things botnets,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Russian Young
Researchers Electr. Electron. Eng. (EIConRus), Jan. 2018, pp. 105–108.
[41] T. N. Nguyen, Q.-D. Ngo, H.-T. Nguyen, and G. L. Nguyen, “An
advanced computing approach for IoT-botnet detection in industrial
Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 11,
pp. 8298–8306, Nov. 2022.
[42] A. Hristov and R. Trifonov, “A model for identification of compromised
devices as a result of cyberattack on IoT devices,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Inf. Technol. (InfoTech), Sep. 2021, pp. 1–4.
[43] T. Trajanovski and N. Zhang, “An automated and comprehensive framework for IoT botnet detection and analysis (IoT-BDA),” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 124360–124383, 2021.
[44] H. Bahsi, S. Nõmm, and F. B. La Torre, “Dimensionality reduction for
machine learning based IoT botnet detection,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf.
Control, Autom., Robot. Vis. (ICARCV), Nov. 2018, pp. 1857–1862.
[45] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[46] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
[47] J. Yu, H. Yin, X. Xia, T. Chen, J. Li, and Z. Huang, “Self-supervised
learning for recommender systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 335–355, Jan. 2024.
[48] E. Gelenbe and Y. Yin, “Deep learning with random neural networks: I,”
in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2016, pp. 1633–1638.
[49] E. Gelenbe and Y. Yin, “Deep learning with dense random neural
networks: II,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Man-Machine Interact. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 3–18.
[50] E. Gelenbe, “Random neural networks with negative and positive signals
and product form solution,” Neural Comput., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 502–510,
1989.
[51] E. Gelenbe, “Learning in the recurrent random neural network,” Neural
Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 154–164, 1993.
[52] O. Brun et al., “Deep learning with dense random neural networks for
detecting attacks against IoT-connected home environments,” in Proc.
Int. ISCIS Cyber-Security Workshop. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018,
pp. 79–89.
[53] O. Brun, Y. Yin, and E. Gelenbe, “Deep learning with dense random
neural network for detecting attacks against IoT-connected home environments,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 134, pp. 458–463, Jan. 2018.
[54] M. Nakip and E. Gelenbe, “Mirai botnet attack detection with autoassociative dense random neural network,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 01–06.
[55] E. Gelenbe and M. Nakip, “G-networks can detect different types of
cyberattacks,” in Proc. 30th Int. Symp. Model., Anal., Simul. Comput.
Telecommun. Syst. (MASCOTS), Oct. 2022, pp. 9–16.
[56] E. Gelenbe, “G-networks: A unifying model for neural and queueing
networks,” Ann. Oper. Res., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 433–461, Oct. 1994.
[57] S. Evmorfos, G. Vlachodimitropoulos, N. Bakalos, and E. Gelenbe,
“Neural network architectures for the detection of SYN flood attacks
in IoT systems,” in Proc. 13th ACM Int. Conf. Pervasive Technol. Rel.
Assistive Environments, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[58] A. Beck and M. Teboulle, “A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding
algorithm for linear inverse problems,” SIAM J. Imag. Sci., vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 183–202, Jan. 2009.
[59] N.-Y. Liang, G.-B. Huang, P. Saratchandran, and N. Sundararajan,
“A fast and accurate online sequential learning algorithm for feedforward
networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1411–1423,
Nov. 2006.
[60] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” Ann.
Math. Statist., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951.
[61] O. Bousquet, S. Boucheron, and G. Lugosi, “Introduction to statistical
learning theory,” in Proc. Summer School Mach. Learn., Tübingen,
Germany, 2004, pp. 169–207.
[62] A. Alwosheel, S. van Cranenburgh, and C. G. Chorus, “Is your dataset
big enough? Sample size requirements when using artificial neural
networks for discrete choice analysis,” J. choice Model., vol. 28,
pp. 167–182, Sep. 2018.
[63] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune:
An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,”
in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.

NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

[64] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[65] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[66] K. H. Brodersen, C. S. Ong, K. E. Stephan, and J. M. Buhmann,
“The balanced accuracy and its posterior distribution,” in Proc. 20th
Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Aug. 2010, pp. 3121–3124.

Mert Nakıp (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
(Hons.) and M.Sc. degrees in electrical-electronics
engineering from Yaşar University, Izmir, Turkey,
in 2018 and 2020, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Institute of Theoretical and Applied
Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Gliwice,
Poland, in January 2024. His design of a multisensor fire detector utilizing ML achieved the
national no. 1 ranking at the Industry-Focused
Undergraduate Graduation Projects Competition
organized by Turkish Scientific and Technological
Research Council (TÜBİTAK). His M.Sc. thesis focuses on applying machine
learning techniques to massive access of IoT supported by the National Graduate Scholarship Program of TÜBİTAK 2210C in high-priority technological
areas. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Polish Academy of
Sciences. He is also involved in the DOSS Project. He has participated in
projects funded by TÜBİTAK and European Commission, concerning IoT,
cybersecurity, and machine learning.

5683

Erol Gelenbe (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the
degree from METU, Turkey, the Ph.D. degree
from the Polytechnic Institute of NYU, and the
D.Sc. degree from Sorbonne University. He pioneered system performance evaluation methods and
invented the random neural networks, while helping to develop commercial products, including the
queueing network analysis package and the manufacturing simulator FLEXSIM. He has graduated
over 90 Ph.D. students, including 94 women. He is
currently a Professor with the Institute of Theoretical
and Applied Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences. Previously, he chairs
at Imperial College, the University of Central Florida, Duke University,
Université Paris-Descartes, Paris-Saclay University, and Université de Liège.
He was a Principal Investigator of numerous European Union research projects
and a Coordinator of FP7 NEMESYS and H2020 SerIoT. He has also been
supported by the U.S. NSF, ONR, ARO, UKRI, and the industry. He is a fellow
of ACM, IFIP, RSS, and IET. He is an Elected Fellow of Academia Europaea;
the French National Academy of Technologies; the Science Academies of
Hungary, Poland, and Turkey; and the Royal Academy of Belgium. His prizes
include the Parlar Foundation Science Award (Turkey), the Grand Prix France
Télécom, the ACM SIGMETRICS Life-Time Achievement Award, the U.K.
IET Oliver Lodge Medal, and the Mustafa Prize. He was awarded Chevalier de
la Lègion d’Honneur, Chevalier des Palmes Académiques, and Commandeur
du Mérite by France; a Commander of the Order of the Crown of Belgium,
Commendatore al Merito, and Grande Ufficiale dell’Ordine della Stella by
Italy; and an Officer of the Order of Merit of Poland.