IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

3500111

Overcoming Limited Fault Data: Intermittent Fault
Detection in Analog Circuits via Improved GAN
Xiaoyu Fang , Jianfeng Qu , Bowen Liu , and Yi Chai

Abstract— Owing to the characteristics of intermittent
faults (IFs), such as short duration and randomness in analog
circuits, it is difficult to collect a sufficient amount of manually
labeled fault data for training detection model. To this end,
this article explores the application of generative adversarial
network (GAN) in the field of IF detection for analog circuits. The
proposed model consists of two networks, an autoencoder and a
discriminator, which are trained by competing against each other
while working together to grasp the underlying concepts in the
target. In addition, a spatial Fourier convolution (SFC) block
is proposed and introduced into the discriminator to enhance
the detection performance of the model. The training process is
divided into two stages, the first stage through the autoencoder
and the discriminator of the adversarial learning, so that the
discriminator has the initial fault detection ability. The second
stage trains the autoencoder and the discriminator with a few
fault samples to enhance the fault detection capability of the two
networks working cooperatively. The proposed method is applied
to two typical analog circuits, namely, a power amplifier circuit
and a low-pass filter circuit. The results show that, guided by
only a small number of fault samples, the proposed method has
a great advantage over other state-of-the-art detection methods.
Index Terms— Analog circuits, generative adversarial network (GAN), intermittent fault (IF) detection, limited fault data,
spatial Fourier convolution (SFC) block.

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

NALOG circuits, being essential components of complex
electrical instruments, perform the main tasks of signal
generation, arithmetic operations, signal conversion, power
amplification, and signal filtering [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. In electronic systems with mixed analog–digital circuits, the analog
circuits comprise less than 20% of the total, yet they are
responsible for approximately 80% of faults [5], [6], [7], [8].
Moreover, intermittent faults (IFs) in circuits tend to occur
approximately 10–30 times more frequently than permanent
faults (PFs) [9]. Failure to detect IFs early can result in severe
harm to the system when they progress into PFs [10], [11].
Manuscript received 10 August 2023; revised 4 October 2023;
accepted 26 October 2023. Date of publication 8 November 2023; date of
current version 21 December 2023. This work was supported in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U2034209
and in part by the Science and Technology Research Program of Chongqing
Municipal Education Commission under Grant KJQN202301502. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Ke Feng. (Corresponding
author: Jianfeng Qu.)
Xiaoyu Fang, Jianfeng Qu, and Yi Chai are with the School of
Automation, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China (e-mail:
xiaoyu_fang@foxmail.com; qujianfeng@cqu.edu.cn; chaiyi@cqu.edu.cn).
Bowen Liu is with the School of Intelligent Technology and Engineering,
Chongqing University of Science and Technology, Chongqing 401331, China
(e-mail: lbwlyr@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2023.3331419

Thus, precise measurement of IFs in analog circuits within
electronic systems is of utmost importance.
An IF is a fault that reoccurs at the same location within
a short duration and is caused by the same reason [12].
IFs are primarily caused by temporary interruptions in the
circuit. Examples of such interruptions include loose solder
joints, corroded or oxidized connections, and exposure to
extreme environments [13], [14]. In the solder joint of a
circuit, poor contact leads to the formation of electrical contact
resistance (ECR) at the component connection [15]. The ECR
intermittently manifests under the influence of vibration. IFs
are cumulative, as ECRs gradually build up over time, leading
to eventual complete breaks and circuit shutdowns [16], [17].
Hubner-Obenland and Minuth [18] discovered that the majority of ECRs are more than two orders of magnitude higher,
with durations mostly in milliseconds. According to the U.S.
military’s standard definition, millisecond IFs for electronic
systems have a time duration not exceeding 5 ms, and the
associated ECR is higher than 500  [19].
In general, IF diagnosis comprises two aspects: IF detection
and IF recognition [15], [20]. Due to the short duration of
IFs, the acquired signals contain numerous redundant faultfree signals. Therefore, the initial step involves detecting the
moments of appearance and disappearance of IFs using fault
detection methods and subsequently extracting the IF signals
for fault recognition purposes. To detect the appearance and
disappearance of IFs, the length of the detection window
is typically required to be smaller than the fault signal
length [21]. Some scholars have conducted research related
to IF detection. Huang et al. [22] proposed a fractional-order
transient chaotic system for intermittent sensor fault detection.
Sheng et al. [23] used the reduced-order observer to detect
IFs for linear discrete-time stochastic multiagent systems.
Zhang et al. [24] used the lifting method and a reduced-order
observer for the IF detection of discrete-time linear stochastic
systems with time delay. Nonetheless, analytical models often
fail to fully represent the complexity of the actual system and
are challenging to accurately model.
Data-driven approaches for IF detection, which do not
require the construction of precise mathematical models,
are gaining the interest of researchers. Zhong et al. [25]
used the Fourier transform to detect IFs in analog circuits.
Shen et al. [26] proposed a wavelet packet transform (WPT)based denoising method for IF detection. Melani et al.’s [27]
principal component analysis (PCA) was used to IF detection.
Zhao et al. [28] proposed a moving average (MA) method
to detect IFs. Tian et al. [29] proposed a k-nearest neigh-

1557-9662 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3500111

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

bor (KNN) distance for IF detection. Nonetheless, shallow machine learning models typically rely on manually
designed signal processing and feature extraction methods,
which may lack generalizability. Moreover, it becomes challenging to identify an effective feature extraction scheme
when there is insufficient knowledge of the system’s fault
mechanism.
End-to-end deep learning methods are gaining attention
in the detection field. Moreover, researchers have made
efforts due to the limited accessibility of fault anomaly data.
González-Muñiz [30] proposed a deep variational autoencoder (DVAE) for fault detection. Fang et al. [31] proposed
an adaptive multiscale and dual subnet convolutional autoencoder (AMDSCAE) to detect IFs of analog circuits in
noise environment. These autoencoder models solely rely on
fault-free data for training. As a result, when faulty data are
encountered during detection, the models generate significant
reconstruction errors, which can be exploited for fault detection. However, the high capacity of deep learning also results
in improved reconstruction of certain fault signals, which,
in turn, impacts the detection performance. To solve this
problem, a prior knowledge-guided teacher–student (PKGTS)
model based on self-supervised learning was proposed for
IF detection of analog circuits [32]. By introducing prior
knowledge, the detection residuals of fault signals are
increased, and the problem of limited fault data is alleviated. Similarly, Wang et al. [33] employed a self-supervised
signal representation learning (SSRL) approach to improve
the model’s comprehension of the signal. In addition, they
fine-tuned the model with limited fault samples. Nonetheless, both the PKGTS and SSRL models still rely on
human intervention to design the prior signal transformation
scheme.
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) have
offered fresh insights in the field of anomaly and fault
detection, addressing the challenge of detecting faults with
limited data. The GAN’s discriminator attains its initial
detection capability by distinguishing between real data and
fake data generated by the generator, and this process
solely relies on fault-free data. Different from DVAE [30]
and AMDSCAE [31], GAN not only utilizes the generator reconstruction bias to detect faults, but also utilizes
the detection capability of the discriminator, and the two
work in concert to further enhance the detection capability.
Sabokrou et al. [34] proposed adversarially learned one-class
classifier (ALOCC) for anomaly detection. Jiang et al. [35]
proposed a GAN-based anomaly detection (GBAD) approach
to solve the data imbalance problem with limited anomalous
data. These two GAN-based detection methods collaborate
for detection through generators and discriminators. However, the generator goal in the detection problem is to make
the fake samples as close as possible to the real normal
samples, which may cause the discriminator to confuse the
normal samples with the fake samples, thus resulting in
poor detection. Zaigham Zaheer et al. [36] proposed a old
is gold (OIG) framework, which leverages low-quality data
generated by the generator during the early training epochs as
pseudo-anomaly samples to enhance the detection capability

of the discriminator. However, this method is mainly aimed at
image anomaly detection, and the single-scale local convolution used makes it difficult to rapidly increase the receptive
field. Therefore, it is necessary to develop an effective
GAN-based detection method for analog circuits.
A well-designed architecture should incorporate units with
the broadest possible receptive field at an early stage. For
example, it is believed in [31] that large-scale convolutions
are advantageous for noise suppression, while small-scale
convolutions are useful for capturing local details. Consequently, a three-branch multiscale convolution fusion module
is proposed to enhance the IF detection capability in analog
circuits. Moreover, Ding et al. [37] demonstrated that using
oversized kernel convolution is advantageous in enhancing
model accuracy. However, given the short duration of IFs, the
detection algorithm needs to achieve high efficiency, and large
kernel convolutions might not be suitable for computationally
efficient scenarios. Therefore, in this article, a spatial Fourier
convolution (SFC) block is proposed and introduced into the
GAN’s discriminator. Different from [31], the computational
burden of acquiring large receptive fields can be reduced by
the fast algorithm, fast Fourier transform (FFT). Shi et al. [38]
and Kumawat et al. [39] employ Fourier transform block, but
the proposed SFC block still exhibits differences. Different
from [38], which obtains global information solely through
the FFT block, the proposed SFC block not only captures
global information but also supplements local information,
potentially resulting in a richer set of information. In [39], it is
considered that low-frequency components contain most of the
information, and thus, a short-term Fourier transform (STFT)
block is used to combine low-frequency components to obtain
a new information representation. However, this may not
be applicable to analog circuits, e.g., the signals in some
high-pass filtering circuits are usually high frequency. Therefore, unlike [39], our designed SFC block filters real and
imaginary parts through maximum pooling. We believe that
information with larger amplitudes is valuable, because noise
amplitudes in circuits are usually smaller than signal amplitudes. Furthermore, [39] is primarily designed for action
recognition and cannot be directly applied to the field of analog
circuits. Developing targeted IF detection methods for analog
circuits is of significant importance.
In this article, a new detection framework is designed based
on the characteristics of IFs in analog circuits. The proposed
framework contains pretraining of GAN and fine-tuning with
a small amount of fault data. The proposed training strategy
enables enhanced collaboration between the generator and
the discriminator, resulting in improved IF detection capabilities. Furthermore, the SFC block enables the model to
achieve coverage of the signal’s receptive field at relatively
shallow layers through the use of the FFT. Moreover, SFC
operates in both the spatial and Fourier domains, thereby
enhancing the model’s noise robustness and feature capturing
ability.
The contributions of this article are summarized as follows.
1) To tackle the issue of limited IF data in analog circuits,
a novel detection framework is proposed that utilizes a
small amount of fault data-guided GAN.

FANG et al.: OVERCOMING LIMITED FAULT DATA: IF DETECTION IN ANALOG CIRCUITS

3500111

Fig. 1. Proposed GAN-based detection framework. The “conv C@k × j, s” represents that the 1-D convolution kernel size is “k × j,” the number of
channels is C, and the stride of the convolution is s. LR represents activation function LeakyReLU. BN represents batch normalization.

2) The proposed two-stage training strategy effectively
facilitates the collaboration between the generator and
the discriminator during the testing phase, enhancing the
model’s sensitivity to fault signals.
3) The proposed SFC block learns the local details and
global information of the signal through the spatial
and Fourier domains, respectively, which contributes
to enhancing the detection performance and noise
robustness.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
presents the details of the proposed IF detection framework.
Section III validates the proposed framework. Section IV
provides a summary of the entire article.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Overview GAN-Based Detection Framework
Due to limited data on IFs and tendency to be masked by
noise, a two-stage training strategy is proposed to address the
issue of limited fault data, while the SFC block enhances the
model’s detection performance and noise robustness. GANs
are built upon a two-player game involving two distinct
networks, which are trained simultaneously in an unsupervised
manner. One of the networks is called generator, which consists of an encoder and a decoder to produce realistic data,
such as circuit signals. The other network functions as the
discriminator and aims to differentiate between the real data
and the fake generated data. Fig. 1 illustrates the detailed
structure of the proposed framework.
First, the voltage signals from the circuit measurement
point are gathered, and then, the signals are segmented using

a sliding window. As outlined in [21] and [23], it is recommended that the window length be shorter than the IF
duration. Therefore, the faulty sample should include part
of fault signal. In the context of this article’s investigation
into millisecond IFs, the sliding window duration must be
under 1 ms. The segmented signal contains a large number of
fault-free samples and a small number of faulty samples. Next,
during the first stage of training, only fault-free samples are
utilized. The generator functions as a denoising autoencoder
to improve noise robustness, and its output is treated as fake
by the discriminator. On the other hand, the discriminator
treats clean fault-free samples as real sample. This process
provides the GAN with an initial fault detection capability,
demonstrated by the fact that when a faulty sample is fed
into the generator, since the generator has not been exposed
to faulty samples during the initial training, the generated
sample differs from the real fault-free samples, leading the
discriminator to identify it as a fake, indicating a fault. During
the second training stage, the generator and discriminator
collaborate for the fault detection task instead of undergoing
adversarial training. In this stage, only a small number of
fault-free and faulty samples are utilized to guide the training
of the GAN. The generator only ensures accurate reconstruction of fault-free samples, while the discriminator strives to
differentiate between the reconstruction results of fault-free
and faulty samples generated by the generator. This aims to
strengthen the discriminator’s ability to recognize faults by
further refining the generator’s bad reconstruction of fault samples. Finally, a threshold is determined based on the likelihood
of faults in the discriminator output. Finally, detection can

3500111

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

be accomplished by threshold comparison during the testing
stage.
B. Network Architecture
1) GAN: The detailed parameters of GAN are given
in Fig. 1. The generator is a denoising autoencoder consisting
of 1-D convolution, batch normalization (BN), and activation
function LeakyReLU. The 1-D convolution extracts features
along the time direction for voltage signals. The discriminator
is stacked by SFC blocks to enhance the ability to identify
faults. Finally, the discriminator output, i.e., the likelihood
that the current sample is faulty, is obtained from the fully
connected layer and the sigmoid activation function.
2) SFC Block: The SFC block is based on FFT and 1-D
convolution and can obtain information about the receptive
field covering the whole signal and local details. SFC divides
the channel into two parallel branches: a global branch and
a local branch. The local branch employs conventional convolution, while the global branch utilizes FFT to consider the
global context. In addition, noise signals and circuit signals
often have different frequency bands, and the FFT transform
can obtain the information of different frequency bands, which
is conducive to improving the noise robustness. Assume that
the signal with noise is denoted as X̂ ∈ RC×L , where C
denotes the number of channels and L denotes the length.
The calculation process of SFC can be expressed as follows.
In the global branch of the Fourier domain, the real part
X̂ real ∈ RC×(L/2) and imaginary part X̂ img ∈ RC×(L/2) of
the spectrum are obtained by the FFT. Because the real and
imaginary parts exhibit redundant symmetry, we extract the
first half sequences of the real and imaginary parts as inputs
to the subsequent modules, aiming to reduce the computational
complexity of the subsequent computations.
Since noise increases the complexity of the analysis, Fourier
domain filtering is performed using maximum pooling to
obtain the filtered real and imaginary parts

L
(1)
X̂ ′real = f MaxPool,s X̂ real , X̂ ′real ∈ RC× 2s

L
′
′
C× 2s
X̂ img = f MaxPool,s X̂ img , X̂ img ∈ R
(2)
where s denotes the stride.
Then, the real and imaginary parts are concatenated and fed
into the 1-D convolution, BN, and activation function

h
i
L
(3)
Ô = σ f conv,BN X̂ ′real , X̂ ′img
, Ô ∈ R2C× 2s
where f conv,BN (•) denotes 1-D convolution and BN operation
with kernel size 1 × 1 and stride 1, σ (•) is the LeakyReLU
activation, and [•] is concatenation operation.
Then, Ô is split to obtain new real and imaginary parts,
written as follows:

L
X̂ ′′real , X̂ ′′img = f split Ô , X̂ ′′real , X̂ ′′img ∈ RC× 2s
(4)
where f split (•) denotes split operation.
Moreover, the new real part X̂ ′′real and imaginary part X̂ ′′img
are transformed to the complex domain, and the final result is
obtained by the inverse FFT (IFFT), written as follows:



(5)
OFourier = f IFFT f complex X̂ ′′real , X̂ ′′img

where OFourier ∈ RC×(L/s) is the final extracted feature of the
global branch.
In the spatial domain of local branch, conventional 1-D
convolution is used to capture information about the local
details of the signal, which can be written as follows:

L
(6)
Ospatial = σ f conv,BN X̂ , Ô ∈ RC× s
where f conv,BN (•) denotes 1-D convolution and BN operation
with kernel size k × 1 and stride s and Ospatial ∈ RC×(L/s) is
the final extracted feature of the local branch.
Finally, the features of the two branches are summarized,
and then, a 1 × 1 convolution is used to obtain the output
features of the SFC block, which can be written as follows:

OSFC = f conv Ospatial + OFourier
(7)
where OSFC denotes the output features of the SFC block and
f conv (•) denotes convolution with kernel size 1 × 1.
C. Two-Stage Training Strategy
1) Adversarial Training: The first stage of training uses
adversarial learning to equip the GAN with initial fault
detection capabilities. The generator then deceives the discriminator as much as possible. Assume that the training set
X = [X normal , X fault ] consists of fault-free samples X normal
and a small number of fault samples X fault . The generator G
produces a sample that is treated as a fake sample by the
discriminator D, while the real circuit signal X is treated as
a real sample by the discriminator D. Since the generator
G is a denoising autoencoder, we get X̂ = [ X̂ normal , X̂ fault ]
after adding noise η to the training set. The corresponding
sample produced by the generator can be denoted as e
X =
[e
X normal , e
X fault ]. It should be noted that in the first training
stage, it requires only fault-free samples to complete the
training. The loss function for adversarial learning can be
expressed as follows:



min max L G+D = E X normal log(1 − D(X normal ))
G
D


+E X̂ normal log D G X̂ normal
(8)
where E[•] denotes expectation calculation. If we let 0 denote
the real fault-free sample and 1 denote the fake sample, then
the purpose of the generative network G is to generate samples
as close to true samples as possible, i.e., D(G( X̂ normal )) is
as close to 0 as possible. At this point, L G+D becomes
smaller. The purpose of the discriminant network D is to keep
D(X normal ) close to 0 and D(G( X̂ normal )) close to 1, at which
point L G+D will increase.
In addition, the generator G needs to reconstruct the noiseless samples, thus imposing an additional loss
1
2
X normal − X̃ normal 2
(9)
NM
where N represents the total number of fault-free samples,
M represents the length of samples, and ∥ • ∥2 represents the
calculation operation of L 2 distance.
Therefore, the loss function for generator G can finally be
expressed as follows:
LG =

L G total = L G + λ L G+D

(10)

FANG et al.: OVERCOMING LIMITED FAULT DATA: IF DETECTION IN ANALOG CIRCUITS

where λ is used to control the relative importance of the two
terms.
2) Supervised Learning: In the second learning stage, the
supervised learning paradigm is followed, and a limited number of labeled signals are used to train the proposed generator
and discriminator to make them suitable for our target task.
Moreover, the learning rate for training is halved, and a small
number of epochs are used. The generator G only guarantees
the reconstruction effect of the fault-free samples and ignores
the fault samples, so the loss function of the generator remains
as (9). The purpose of this is to have the generator G
produce worse and more distinguishable reconstructions of
faulty samples compared with normal samples, which helps
the discriminator D in identifying faults. The purpose of
the discriminant network D is to keep D(G( X̂ normal )) close
to 0 and D(G( X̂ fault )) close to 1, which can be expressed as
minimizing the following loss function:


L D = E X̂ normal log D G X̂ normal


+ E X̂ fault log 1−D G X̂ fault
.
(11)

3500111

Fig. 2.

CUT-1: power amplifier circuit.

Fig. 3.

CUT-2: low-pass filter.

Fig. 4.

Actual circuit experiment platform.

D. IF Detection
The detection threshold is determined by the discriminator output D(G( X̂ normal )). Using a kernel density estimation (KDE) method, a threshold is obtained by taking a
confidence limit of 0.95. More details about the KDE can
be found in [31] and [32]. During the detection task, a fault
is deemed to have occurred when the fault probability of
the corresponding discriminator’s output D(G( X̂ test )) within
the sliding window surpasses a predefined threshold value;
otherwise, it is considered fault-free. Finally, IF detection
results are obtained by testing each sliding window.
III. E XPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
A. Experimental Environment and Fault Setting
Active filter circuits and power amplifier circuits are typical
objects in the study of analog circuit IF detection. Active filter
circuits have important role that they play in circuit protection, signal processing, and controller modules [1], [2], [3].
The main function of power amplifier circuits is to amplify
low-power electrical signals to a sufficiently high power and
is often used in communication systems, electric motors,
radar systems, medical systems, and audio systems [40], [41].
Accordingly, the circuit under test (CUT) consists of two
types, namely, the power amplifier circuit and the low-pass
filter circuit. These two circuits (CUT-1 and CUT-2) are shown
in Figs. 2 and 3. CUT-1 is set to a tolerance of 5% by Multisim.
CUT-2 is obtained by testing in the actual platform shown
in Fig. 4.
The input excitation of the CUT-1 is composed of 20-kHz,
0.5-V ac signal and 50-kHz, 0.5-V ac signal. The input
excitation signal of the CUT-2 is composed of 5-kHz, 1-V ac
signal and 10-kHz, 2-V ac signal. The acquisition signals
for both circuits are selected from the voltage signals at the
output points. The IF injection module consists of a sliding
resistor and a voltage-controlled switch connected in parallel.
It is connected in series to the corresponding position, and

the duration of the IF injection is controlled by pulse width
modulation (PWM) waves. Detailed fault settings are shown
in Table I. In CUT-1 and CUT-2, nine and eight components,

3500111

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

respectively, are considered to be key elements corresponding
to the measurement points. In CUT-1, Q1 − e indicates the
emitter of the triode. Since the faulty components in the same
series line have the same effect on the output measurement
points, there are two fuzzy sets in CUT-1, namely, {c2, r 3}
and {c4, r 5}. For millisecond IFs, each component is set to
four fault levels based on different sizes of ECR.
B. Model Training and Validation Strategy
A window length that is too large beyond the duration of
the fault will result in an inability to accurately detect the start
and end of the fault, and a window length that is too small
will result in an increased computational burden. According to
the description in Section II-A, the window length needs to be
less than 1 ms. Given the sampling interval of 0.005 ms, this
corresponds to a window length of fewer than 200 sampling
points. In this study, a window length of 100 is selected,
aligning with this criterion. Thus, the length of each sample
is 100. The number of fault-free samples used for training
in CUT-1 and CUT-2 is 7960 and 7998, respectively. The
number of samples in the testing set is 95 760 and 80 000,
respectively. In the first stage of training, the learning rates
of the generator and discriminator are 0.0001 and 0.00005,
respectively. The reason the generator’s learning rate is higher
than the discriminator’s is to alleviate the problem of the
generator’s gradient vanishing due to the discriminator being
trained too well [42]. The epoch and batch size are set to
50 and 512, respectively. The λ in (10) is empirically taken
as 1. In the second stage, which is a fine-tuning training,
the learning rate of the generator and discriminator is halved
compared with the previous. The epoch is 10. The batch size
is set to the same size for each class of IFs. In order to
test the performance of the model with different numbers of
fault samples, numbers of 10, 30, and 50 are used in the
second training stage for each type of fault. In addition, unless
otherwise noted, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is 10 dB to
test the noise robustness of the different algorithms. All test
results are averaged over five runs of the algorithm. The fault
detection rate (FDR) and the false alarm rate (FAR) are utilized
to evaluate the performance of IF detection, which are defined
as follows:
TP
(12)
FDR =
TP + FN
FP
FAR =
(13)
FP + TN
where TP, FP, TN, and FN denote the respective numbers of
true positive, false positive, true negative, and false negative
samples. A superior detection performance is indicated by a
higher FDR and a lower FAR.
C. Parameter Analysis
Using the CUT-1 as an example, this section analyzes the
parameters λ in (10) and the epoch parameters of the two
training stages in CUT-1. The detection performance curve
combines FDR and FAR for all fault categories.
Fig. 5 shows the impact of the parameter λ on the model’s
detection performance over the range {0.2, 0.4, . . . , 5}. It can

Fig. 5.

Detection performance with different values of λ .

Fig. 6.

Detection performance at different epochs in training stage 1.

be seen that the FAR remains essentially at 5%, and the FDR
stays at a high level in the range [1, 2), and the FDR is
lowest in the interval [0.2, 1). After λ > 2, the FDR shows
a slight decline but stabilizes for the most part. Overall, the
performance does not show significant fluctuations.
Fig. 6 shows the impact of epoch in the range {5, 10, . . . ,
100} on the model’s detection performance during training
stage 1. In the experimental process, the number of epochs
for training the second stage is fixed, while only the number
of epochs for the first stage is changed. It can be observed
that FDR shows a slight increasing trend, and after reaching
50 epochs, FDR remains at around 90%, while FAR stabilizes
at about 5%.
Fig. 7 shows the impact of epoch in the range {5, 10, . . . ,
100} on the model’s detection performance during training
stage 2. During the experiment, the number of epochs for
training the first stage is fixed, with only the number of epochs
for the second stage being altered. It can be seen that, due to
the pretraining in the first stage, FDR achieves a high level
with very few epochs, and after epoch 10, FDR essentially
stabilizes. Therefore, only a small number of epochs are
needed for the second stage.
D. Effectiveness of the Proposed Method
1) Influence Under Different Numbers of Fault Samples:
To investigate the impact of using a limited number of fault
samples during training on the performance of the proposed

FANG et al.: OVERCOMING LIMITED FAULT DATA: IF DETECTION IN ANALOG CIRCUITS

Fig. 7.

3500111

Detection performance at different epochs in training stage 2.
TABLE I

Fig. 8. Detection curve for r 3 in CUT-1 at different fault levels. (a) Fault
level I. (b) Fault level II. (c) Fault level III. (d) Fault level IV.

FAULT S ETTINGS

TABLE II
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITH D IFFERENT
S AMPLE N UMBERS FOR E ACH FAULT T YPE IN CUT-1

TABLE III
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITH D IFFERENT
S AMPLE N UMBERS FOR E ACH FAULT T YPE IN CUT-2

Fig. 9. Detection curve for c3 in CUT-2 under different numbers of training
samples. (a) Ten samples per category. (b) Thirty samples per category.
(c) Fifty samples per category.
TABLE IV
FAR S (%) W ITH D IFFERENT S AMPLE N UMBERS
FOR E ACH FAULT T YPE IN CUT-1

model, only 10, 30, and 50 samples for each class of faults are
used for training, and the test results are obtained accordingly.
The test results are shown in Tables II–V. As can be seen
from Tables IV and V, the FAR of our proposed method
is around 5% in both CUT-1 and CUT-2. In Tables II and
III, the FDR of the proposed method is enhanced, as the
number of fault samples used for training increases. Moreover,
while maintaining a small fluctuation of the FAR, the FDR
increases, as the fault level is enhanced. This indicates that as
the ECR increases, the output deviation to the circuit begins
to increase, resulting in IFs that are easier to detect than
before. Fig. 8 shows the detection curve for r 3 in CUT-1 at
different fault levels. The blue detection curve is above the red
threshold line representing the detection of a fault. It can be
noticed that as the fault level increases, the detection curve
gets closer to 1 at the moment of the fault. Fig. 9 shows
the detection curve for c3 in CUT-2 for different numbers

of training samples. Observably, with an increase in training
samples, the fluctuation of the detection curve during fault-free
periods diminishes, and the amplitude of the detection curve
during fault occurrences rises.
2) Influence Under Different SNRs: In order to test the
effect of different noise intensities on the performance of
the proposed model, the two circuits is tested at three SNRs
(10, 15, and 20 dB). For training, the number of fault samples
is fixed at 10 for each class. The test results are shown
in Tables VI–VIII. It can be seen that the FDR gradually
increases, as the SNR increases. For example, at fault level I
of 15 dB, the FDR of CUT-2 is improved by 19.68% compared
with 10 dB, with little difference in the FAR. In two circuits,

3500111

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

TABLE V

TABLE XI

FAR S (%) W ITH D IFFERENT S AMPLE N UMBERS
FOR E ACH FAULT T YPE IN CUT-2

FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITHOUT T RAINING S TAGE 2

TABLE XII
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITHOUT
THE SFC B LOCK IN CUT-1
TABLE VI
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITH D IFFERENT SNR S IN CUT-1

TABLE XIII
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITHOUT
THE SFC B LOCK IN CUT-2
TABLE VII
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITH D IFFERENT SNR S IN CUT-2

TABLE VIII
FAR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITH D IFFERENT SNR S

TABLE IX
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITHOUT
T RAINING S TAGE 1 IN CUT-1

TABLE X
FDR S (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD W ITHOUT
T RAINING S TAGE 1 IN CUT-2

the FDR is less than 80% at fault level I of 10 dB, indicating
that the SNR of 10 dB and fault level I are the performance
limits of the model. However, the proposed model remains
ahead of the state-of-the-art methods in the subsequent comparative validation.
3) Effectiveness of Training Stage 1 for Adversarial Learning: In order to verify the effectiveness of the training stage 1,
Network-1 is constructed in this section. Compared with the

proposed method, Network-1 removes the training strategy
of adversarial learning and retains only the second stage of
supervised learning. Tables IV, V, IX, and X demonstrate the
performance of Network-1. The FAR for Network-1 in CUT-1
is not much different from the proposed method, and there is
a small decrease in the FAR in CUT-2. However, compared
with the FDRs of the proposed methods in Tables II and III,
Network-1 shows a significant decrease in the FDR. This
phenomenon is even more pronounced in CUT-2. For example,
the FDR of fault level I in CUT-2 under ten fault samples
decreased by 40.33%. This indicates that adversarial learning
in training stage 1 can provide the model with initial detection
capabilities and helps to reduce the dependence on the number
of fault samples for training.
4) Effectiveness of Training Stage 2 for Supervised Learning: Network-2 is used to validate the training stage 2.
Network-2 removes the second stage of training in the proposed method, which is equivalent to training without using
any fault samples. As can be seen in Tables IV, V, and XI,
there is a significant degradation in Network-2 performance.
This indicates that supervised learning with fewer samples in
training stage 2 is beneficial in guiding the model to detect
IFs and discover fault information hidden in the noise.
5) Effectiveness of the SFC Block: To verify the effectiveness of the SFC block, Network-3 replaces the SFC block with
a 1-D convolution module. The detection results of Network-3
are shown in Tables IV, V, XII, and XIII. Without the help
of the SFC block, the FARs in CUT-1 have increased, and the
robustness to noise has weakened. The FDRs for both circuits
also show some decrease compared with those in Tables II and
III. This demonstrates that learning local and global features
from the spatial and Fourier domains facilitates learning local
details of the signal under noise and expanding the receptive
field.

FANG et al.: OVERCOMING LIMITED FAULT DATA: IF DETECTION IN ANALOG CIRCUITS

3500111

TABLE XIV
FDR S (%) W ITH D IFFERENT S TATE - OF - THE -A RT D EEP L EARNING M ETHODS

TABLE XV
FAR S (%) W ITH D IFFERENT S TATE - OF - THE -A RT D EEP L EARNING M ETHODS

TABLE XVI
T RAINING AND T ESTING T IME OF N ETWORKS

E. Compared With State-of-the-Art Deep Learning Methods
In this section, six state-of-the-art methods of detection are
used to compare the proposed methods, including SSRL [33],
PKGTS [32], OIG [36], GBAD [35], AMDSCAE [31], and
DVAE [30]. For the problem of limited fault data, these
six approaches have made efforts from different perspectives.
During the comparison, both our proposed method and the
SSRL method used only ten samples per fault class for
training. Moreover, the OIG method needs to replace the 2-D
convolution with a 1-D convolution to accommodate the signal
patterns in this article. Noise is added during testing to make
the SNR of 10 dB.
The comparison results are shown in Tables XIV and XV.
It can be found that the FARs of the OIG method are slightly
higher, and the FARs of the other methods basically remain
around 5%. In addition, the FDRs of the proposed method
has a significant advantage. For example, compared with the
second effective SSRL method in CUT-2, the proposed method
exhibits improvement in FDRs by 0.24%, 7.22%, 10.37%,
and 10.14% for different fault levels, respectively. This shows
that the proposed method has better results under the condition of limited fault samples and facilitates the detection
of IFs.
F. Computational Burden of the Networks
Since IFs have a short duration, it is necessary for
the algorithm to be highly efficient during online testing.

Training, on the other hand, can be done offline, so the
computational efficiency requirements for the training stage
are not as high as for the testing stage. Using CUT-1 as
an example, the training time represents the cumulative time
for all samples, while the testing time denotes the average
time spent detecting each sample. Table XVI displays the
training and testing times of the proposed method and the
comparative methods. Due to the need to train two models in PKGTS, it took the longest training time, and the
multibranch structure of AMDSCAE increased the complexity,
taking 80.996 s for training. The proposed method requires
training in two stages, and as a result, the training time is
relatively long, totaling 78.277 s. During the testing stage, the
proposed method has a detection time second only to the OIG
method, with an average time of 0.080 ms per sample, which
is sufficient for millisecond-level fault detection. Compared
with the time-consuming AMDSCAE, the detection time is
reduced by 17.53%. The proposed method leads all compared
methods in detection accuracy while maintaining detection
speed.
IV. C ONCLUSION
This article investigates the utilization of GAN in the realm
of IF detection for analog circuits. The proposed two-stage
training strategy and SFC block can effectively improve fault
detection. The two-stage training strategy initially prepares
the model for detection without using fault data via adversarial learning. Subsequently, a small amount of fault data is

3500111

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

employed to guide the model’s perception of faults through
supervised learning. The proposed SFC block learns the local
details and global information of the signal through the spatial
and Fourier domains, respectively, thus enhancing the detection performance and noise robustness. The effectiveness of
the proposed method is demonstrated through studies based on
two typical circuits. In future work, we will focus on further
optimizing the algorithm’s operational efficiency to meet the
demands of real-time detection scenarios.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. Yang, “Analog circuit faulty parameter identification based on twoobjective evolutionary algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70,
pp. 1–11, 2021.
[2] Z. Jia, Z. Liu, Y. Gan, C.-M. Vong, and M. Pecht, “A deep
forest-based fault diagnosis scheme for electronics-rich analog circuit
systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 10087–10096,
Oct. 2021.
[3] J. Yang, T. Gao, and S. Jiang, “Energy-based adversarial transfer network
for cross-domain fault diagnosis of electro-mechanical systems,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–11, 2022.
[4] W. He, Y. He, and B. Li, “Generative adversarial networks with
comprehensive wavelet feature for fault diagnosis of analog circuits,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 6640–6650,
Sep. 2020.
[5] J. Shi, Y. Deng, Z. Wang, and Q. He, “A combined method for analog
circuit fault diagnosis based on dependence matrices and intelligent
classifiers,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 782–793,
Mar. 2020.
[6] L. Ji, C. Fu, and W. Sun, “Soft fault diagnosis of analog circuits based
on a ResNet with circuit spectrum map,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I,
Reg. Papers, vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 2841–2849, Jul. 2021.
[7] S. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Jia, and Z. Li, “Incipient fault diagnosis of
analog circuit with ensemble HKELM based on fused multi-channel
and multi-scale features,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 117, Jan. 2023,
Art. no. 105633.
[8] T. Gao, J. Yang, and S. Jiang, “A novel incipient fault diagnosis method
for analog circuits based on GMKL-SVM and wavelet fusion features,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–15, 2021.
[9] A. A. Ismaeel and R. Bhatnagar, “Test for detection and location of
intermittent faults in combinational circuits,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 46,
no. 2, pp. 269–274, Jun. 1997.
[10] D. Zhou, Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, X. He, and M. Gao, “Review on diagnosis
techniques for intermittent faults in dynamic systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 2337–2347, Mar. 2020.
[11] R. Su, “A language-based diagnosis framework for permanent and
intermittent faults,” Automatica, vol. 154, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 111077.
[12] The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms, Seventh Edition,
IEEE Standard 100-2000, 2000.
[13] H. Li, K. Lyu, Z. Yong, W. Xiaolong, J. Qiu, and G. Liu, “Multichannel
parallel testing of intermittent faults and reliability assessment for
electronic equipment,” IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol.,
vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 1636–1646, Oct. 2020.
[14] C. Huang, Z. Shen, J. Zhang, and G. Hou, “BIT-based intermittent fault
diagnosis of analog circuits by improved deep forest classifier,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[15] X. Fang, J. Qu, Q. Tang, and Y. Chai, “Intermittent fault recognition of
analog circuits in the presence of outliers via density peak clustering
with adaptive weighted distance,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 13351–13359, Jun. 2023.
[16] M. Yu, Z. Wang, H. Wang, W. Jiang, and R. Zhu, “Intermittent
fault diagnosis and prognosis for steer-by-wire system using composite
degradation model,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst., vol. 13,
no. 2, pp. 557–571, Jun. 2023.
[17] C. Xiao and P. Zheng, “Integrated system-level prognosis for hybrid
systems subjected to multiple intermittent faults,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf.,
vol. 238, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 109401.
[18] F. Hubner-Obenland and J. Minuth, “A new test equipment for high
dynamic real-time measuring of contact resistances,” in Proc. 45th IEEE
Holm Conf. Electr. Contacts, Oct. 1999, pp. 193–202.
[19] Electronic Test Equipment, Intermittent Fault Diagnostic (Electrical), Revision A, United States Dept. Defense, Pentagon, VA, USA,
2022.

[20] J. Qu, X. Fang, Y. Chai, Q. Tang, and J. Liu, “An intermittent fault
diagnosis method of analog circuits based on variational modal decomposition and adaptive dynamic density peak clustering,” Soft Comput.,
vol. 26, no. 17, pp. 8603–8615, Sep. 2022.
[21] Y. Niu, L. Sheng, M. Gao, and D. Zhou, “Distributed intermittent fault
detection for linear stochastic systems over sensor network,” IEEE Trans.
Cybern., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 9208–9218, Sep. 2022.
[22] P. Huang, F. Qi, Y. Chai, and L. Chen, “Intermittent sensor faults
detection based on fractional-order transient chaotic system,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[23] L. Sheng, S. Zhang, and M. Gao, “Intermittent fault detection for linear
discrete-time stochastic multi-agent systems,” Appl. Math. Comput.,
vol. 410, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 126480.
[24] S. Zhang, L. Sheng, M. Gao, and D. Zhou, “Intermittent fault detection
for discrete- time linear stochastic systems with time delay,” IET Control
Theory Appl., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 511–518, Feb. 2020.
[25] T. Zhong, J. Qu, X. Fang, H. Li, and Z. Wang, “The intermittent fault
diagnosis of analog circuits based on EEMD-DBN,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 436, pp. 74–91, May 2021.
[26] Q. Shen, K. Lv, G. Liu, and J. Qiu, “Dynamic performance of
electrical connector contact resistance and intermittent fault under vibration,” IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 216–225, Feb. 2018.
[27] A. H. D. A. Melani, M. A. D. C. Michalski, R. F. da Silva, and
G. F. M. de Souza, “A framework to automate fault detection and
diagnosis based on moving window principal component analysis
and Bayesian network,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 215, Nov. 2021,
Art. no. 107837.
[28] Y. Zhao, X. He, M. G. Pecht, J. Zhang, and D. Zhou, “Detection
and detectability of intermittent faults based on moving average T 2
control charts with multiple window lengths,” J. Process Control, vol. 92,
pp. 296–309, Aug. 2020.
[29] J. Tian, C. Morillo, M. H. Azarian, and M. Pecht, “Motor bearing
fault detection using spectral kurtosis-based feature extraction coupled
with K-nearest neighbor distance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.,
vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 1793–1803, Mar. 2016.
[30] A. González-Muñiz, I. Díaz, A. A. Cuadrado, and D. García-Pérez,
“Health indicator for machine condition monitoring built in the latent
space of a deep autoencoder,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf., vol. 224, Aug. 2022,
Art. no. 108482.
[31] X. Fang, J. Qu, Y. Chai, and B. Liu, “Adaptive multiscale and dual
subnet convolutional auto-encoder for intermittent fault detection of
analog circuits in noise environment,” ISA Trans., vol. 136, pp. 428–441,
May 2023.
[32] X. Fang, J. Qu, and Y. Chai, “Self-supervised intermittent fault detection
for analog circuits guided by prior knowledge,” Rel. Eng. Syst. Saf.,
vol. 233, May 2023, Art. no. 109108.
[33] H. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Ge, and D. Peng, “Self-supervised signal representation learning for machinery fault diagnosis under limited annotation
data,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 239, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 107978.
[34] M. Sabokrou, M. Khalooei, M. Fathy, and E. Adeli, “Adversarially
learned one-class classifier for novelty detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Salt Lake City, UT, USA,
Jun. 2018, pp. 3379–3388.
[35] W. Jiang, Y. Hong, B. Zhou, X. He, and C. Cheng, “A GAN-based
anomaly detection approach for imbalanced industrial time series,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 143608–143619, 2019.
[36] M. Zaigham Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Old is
gold: Redefining the adversarially learned one-class classifier training
paradigm,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, Jun. 2020, pp. 14171–14181.
[37] X. Ding, X. Zhang, J. Han, and G. Ding, “Scaling up your kernels to 31×31: Revisiting large kernel design in CNNs,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 11963–11975.
[38] H. Shi, G. Cao, Y. Zhang, Z. Ge, Y. Liu, and D. Yang, “F3 Net:
Fast Fourier filter network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–18, 2023.
[39] S. Kumawat, M. Verma, Y. Nakashima, and S. Raman, “Depthwise
spatio-temporal STFT convolutional neural networks for human action
recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 9,
pp. 4839–4851, Sep. 2022.
[40] G. Nikandish, R. B. Staszewski, and A. Zhu, “Breaking the bandwidth
limit: A review of broadband Doherty power amplifier design for 5G,”
IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 57–75, Apr. 2020.

FANG et al.: OVERCOMING LIMITED FAULT DATA: IF DETECTION IN ANALOG CIRCUITS

[41] V. Camarchia, R. Quaglia, A. Piacibello, D. P. Nguyen, H. Wang,
and A.-V. Pham, “A review of technologies and design techniques of
millimeter-wave power amplifiers,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn.,
vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 2957–2983, Jul. 2020.
[42] M. Arjovsky and L. Bottou, “Towards principled methods for training
generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
Nov. 2016, pp. 1–12.

Xiaoyu Fang received the B.E. degree in automation from the Zhengzhou University of Aeronautics,
Zhengzhou, China, in 2015. He is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree in control theory and control engineering with the School of Automation, Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China.
His research interests include fault detection and
diagnosis, signal analysis and process, and pattern
recognition.

Jianfeng Qu received the Ph.D. degree in control
theory and control engineering from Chongqing University, Chongqing, China, in 2009.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Automation, Chongqing University. His
research interests include information fusion, fault
diagnosis, intelligent system, machine learning, control theory, and their applications.

3500111

Bowen Liu received the B.E. and M.S. degrees
in electrical engineering from Guangxi University,
Nanning, China, in 2013 and 2017, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in control theory and control engineering from the School of Automation, Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China, in 2022.
He is currently a Lecturer with the Chongqing
University of Science and Technology, Chongqing.
His research interests include fault detection and
diagnosis, pattern recognition, and their application
to large-scale process systems.

Yi Chai received the B.E. degree from the Department of Electronic Engineering, National University
of Defense Technology, Changsha, China, in 1982,
and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department
of Automation, Chongqing University, Chongqing,
China, in 1994 and 2001, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Automation, Chongqing University. His research
interests include nonlinear dynamic systems, signal
processing, information fusion, fault detection and
diagnosis, and intelligence systems.