IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

5009013

Pixel-Level Contrastive Pretrainer for
Industrial Image Representation
Bingke Zhu , Yingying Chen , Ming Tang , Member, IEEE, and Jinqiao Wang , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Industrial quality inspection aims to identify
defective parts in industrial production processes. Commonly
used methods for industrial quality inspection rely on feature
representations that have been pretrained on natural image
datasets, such as ImageNet. However, these pretrained models
are not specifically tailored for industrial scenarios and therefore
do not transfer well to downstream industrial tasks. In this
study, we have curated a large-scale industrial production
dataset called Ind-2M, which is specifically collected from
industrial scenarios. This dataset serves to enhance the industrial
representation of pretraining models. Additionally, we propose a
Pixel-level COntrastive (PiCO) pretrainer for industrial image
representation. PiCO not only improves the global industrial
representation through industrial production classification, but
also enhances the local industrial representation through pixellevel self-supervision. Experimental results demonstrate that
PiCO effectively transfers to downstream industrial tasks,
such as multilabel defect classification and anomaly detection,
outperforming existing pretrained methods. We hope PiCO can
initiate a new paradigm for industrial image pretraining.
Index Terms— Ind-2M, industrial image representation, Pixellevel COntrastive (PiCO), pixel-level contrastive learning,
pretrainer.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

NDUSTRIAL quality inspection is a critical endeavor that
seeks to identify and evaluate defects within the realm
of industrial manufacturing [1]. Nonetheless, this process
is confronted with inherent limitations, such as a scarcity
of proficient inspectors and the substantial time investment
required to thoroughly examine industrial productions. Consequently, there is a pressing need for automated systems capable
of detecting defects within industrial contexts. Furthermore,
Manuscript received 6 October 2023; revised 10 December 2023;
accepted 24 December 2023. Date of publication 29 January 2024; date
of current version 31 January 2024. This work was supported in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2021ZD0114600; and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62276260, Grant 62206283, and Grant 62176254. The
Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Wenqiang Liu.
(Corresponding author: Yingying Chen.)
Bingke Zhu, Yingying Chen, and Ming Tang are with the Foundation
Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: bingke.zhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn;
yingying.chen@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; tangm@nlpr.ia.ac.cn).
Jinqiao Wang is with the Foundation Model Research Center, Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, also
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China, also with the Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan
430073, China, and also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066,
China (e-mail: jqwang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3353860

Fig. 1. Pretraining paradigm for industrial image representations. (a) Existing
natural image pretraining paradigm learns the common representations from
the natural image dataset and transfers to the downstream industrial tasks
directly. (b) PiCO pretraining paradigm learns the image-level industrial
representations from the large-scale industrial dataset Ind-2M and the
pixel-level representations from the fused images, and then transfers to the
downstream industrial tasks.

automated industrial quality inspection represents a crucial
research area within the instruments and measurements field.
It plays a significant role in facilitating the advancement
of surface defect detection technologies, such as Strip Steel
Surface Defect [2], [3], [4], [5], glass defect detection [6],
[7], pavement defect detection [8], [9], [10], LED defect
detection, as well as improve industrial anomaly detection
technologies [11], [12], [13]. This leads to the overall
improvement of various industrial quality inspection practices.
In recent years, the field of industrial defect detection has
garnered significant attention, as evidenced by the growing
body of research exploring various approaches. These include
supervised defect detection and segmentation techniques [14],
[15], unsupervised anomaly detection methods [16], [17],
and self-supervised anomaly generation approaches [18], [19].
Although considerable advancements have been made in
defect detection methods over the past few decades, it is
noteworthy that existing techniques commonly rely on feature
representations pretrained on ImageNet [20], a natural image
dataset. These pretrained features are then directly transferred
to downstream industrial tasks, as depicted in Fig. 1(a).
The pretraining of features using natural image datasets
may not adequately capture the representation needed for
industrial applications for several reasons. First, natural image
datasets lack images from real industrial production settings,
which hinder their ability to effectively represent industrial
scenarios. Second, critical features required for tasks such as
defect detection or anomaly detection in industrial settings

1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5009013

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Examples of Ind-2M dataset. Left: image examples of industrial products. Right: image examples of industrial defects.

are often localized and small, whereas features in natural
image datasets tend to be global and large in scale. This
disparity poses a challenge in utilizing natural image datasets
for industrial representation. Third, in industrial products, the
regions exhibiting defects are often similar in appearance to
the regions without defects, making it difficult to distinguish
between defective and non-defective features. On the other
hand, natural image datasets typically consist of objects that
are more easily distinguishable.
To address the aforementioned challenges associated with
pretraining models for industrial applications, we have curated
a comprehensive dataset called Ind-2M. This dataset has been
specifically collected from the industrial scenarios, as depicted
in Fig. 2. Ind-2M comprises a vast collection of 2.2 million
industrial images, sourced from both publicly available
industrial datasets and data obtained through web crawling.
The dataset encompasses 1.6 million images of non-defective
industrial products, as well as 0.6 million images depicting
various defects found in industrial settings. By leveraging the
Ind-2M dataset, our objective is to facilitate the advancement
of industrial representation through pretraining models.
We additionally propose a Pixel-level COntrastive (PiCO)
pretrainer for enhancing industrial image representation,
as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). PiCO is designed to acquire comprehensive industrial representations by performing classification
tasks on industrial products. The labels for these tasks are
obtained either from data gathered from the internet or from
the product types within the dataset. Furthermore, given that
the Ind-2M dataset includes 0.6 million defect images obtained
from internet sources, PiCO is capable of learning defectrelated features through the classification of industrial defect
images.
Moreover, acquiring a sufficient number of defective
product images can be challenging. To address this issue,
we present a heuristic data generation approach that allows us
to generate a substantial quantity of defective product images.
This method leverages the classification activation mapping
(CAM) [21] for product and defect classification within PiCO.
By utilizing CAM, we can extract the approximate regions
of both the products and defects. Subsequently, we employ
Poisson Blending [22] to seamlessly merge these product

regions with the corresponding defective regions, resulting in
realistic defective product images.
In order to obtain the defective regions using the
CAM technique, our proposed method, PiCO, incorporates
a hybrid triplet mining loss to constrain the pixel-level
representation. This constraint is achieved through supervised
feature learning. Specifically, when the same defect is inserted
into different industrial product images, the feature distance
between defects within these images should be smaller than
the feature distance between defects and industrial products.
During the pretraining of the convolutional neural network
(CNN) model, we modify the architecture by abandoning
the last stride of the CNN and instead using the dilated
CNN approach, as proposed by [23]. This modification
allows us to recover the receptive field, thereby enabling
the industrial feature representations to retain more detailed
features. PiCO can be also applied to vision transformer
(ViT) [24] without modification. Furthermore, we constrain
the pixel-level representation of the features obtained from
either the dilated CNN or ViT.
In our experimental evaluation, we assess the performance
of PiCO on downstream industrial tasks, specifically multilabel
defect classification and anomaly detection. Our results
demonstrate that PiCO surpasses existing pretrained methods
in terms of performance. Notably, pretraining method PiCO
with the large-scale industrial dataset Ind-2M yields a
significant improvement compared to previous pretrained
models based on ImageNet.
The primary motivation driving this research stems from
the inadequacy of existing pretraining methods for industrial
intelligent quality inspection. Consequently, we address this
issue by introducing the Ind-2M dataset, a comprehensive
large-scale dataset specifically designed for pretraining largescale industrial models. Furthermore, we propose PiCO,
a novel approach tailored for pretraining these models.
In summary, the main contributions of this work can be
summarized as follows.
1. We have curated a large-scale industrial dataset, Ind-2M,
specifically designed to capture real-world industrial
scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, Ind-2M
represents the first comprehensive industrial dataset for

ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION

pretraining industrial image models. Ind-2M dataset is
available at https://github.com/BingkeZhu/Ind-2M.
2) In this work, we introduce PiCO, a pixel-level
contrastive pretrainer that aims to enhance industrial
image representations. PiCO incorporates both global
and local representations, employs a heuristic data
generation approach, and leverages pixel-level features.
Notably, PiCO is model-agnostic, capable of benefiting
both CNN and ViT models, thereby facilitating improved
industrial representations and enhancing performance on
downstream industrial tasks.
3) Through extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that
both the Ind-2M dataset and the PiCO pretrainer yield
significant improvements in industrial representations
compared to previous models pretrained on ImageNet.
We believe that the introduction of the Ind-2M dataset
and the PiCO pretrainer marks the beginning of
a new era in industrial image pretraining, fostering
advancements in this domain.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Industrial Defect Detection
Industrial quality inspection is an important step in
industrial production. Automatic industrial defect detection
can reduce time costs and labor costs effectively, and thus
receives much research attention. Feature collection and
compression network [25] adopt the compressed multiscale
feature merging for real-time defect detection. The attentionguided segmentation network [14] combines UNet and
biConvLSTM to improve the pixel-level welding defect
detection performance. An encoder–decoder structure [26]
is proposed to fuse multibranch and multiscale features
for surface defect detection. Also, a fake-to-real domain
transformation GAN is used to transform the rendered samples
from the fake domain into the real defect domain. DCAMNet [27] proposes a rapid detection network based on
deformable convolution and attention mechanism. It introduces
CLAHE for data augmentation, an EDE-block for capturing
complex and irregular defects, and a CA module for improved
defect localization. MANet [8] utilizes the encoder–decoder
architecture with MobileNet as the backbone network
for feature extraction. Multiscale convolution kernels are
employed in depthwise separable convolution (DSConv)
layers, and a hybrid attention mechanism is incorporated
to infer spatial points and interchannel relationship features.
NDP-Net [28] utilizes an encoding module to extract
multiscale discriminative features and incorporates artificial
defects and a pixel-level defect perception loss to enhance
defect detection. Additionally, a reference-based attention
module and a multiscale defect segmentation module are
introduced for precise defect detection and segmentation.
MRD-Net [29] is a multiscale feature enhancement fusion and
reverse attention network for real-time and end-to-end defect
segmentation.
In the past, these industrial defect detection methods were
based on fine-tuning a network pretrained on ImageNet using
specific industrial defect detection task data. However, this

5009013

article questions the suitability of this ImageNet pretraining
approach for industrial defect detection tasks. To address this
issue, this article proposes a large-scale pretraining dataset
specifically designed for industrial defect detection tasks.
Additionally, a pixel-level contrastive learning-based pretraining method is introduced for this dataset, aiming to enhance
the model’s pretraining feature representation capability for
industrial defect detection tasks and consequently improve
accuracy in downstream industrial defect detection tasks.
B. Anomaly Detection
Recently, anomaly detection has raised a large amount of
interest for unsupervised defect detection [16], [30], [31].
Anomaly detection trains only on the normal images, and
detects the defects on the anomaly images, thus reduces the
labeling costs. PatchCore [16] uses a maximally representative
memory bank of nominal patch features. PaDim [17] makes
use of a pretrained CNN for patch embedding, and of
multivariate Gaussian distributions to get a probabilistic
representation of the normal class. SSPCAB [32] proposes
to integrate the reconstruction-based functionality into a selfsupervised predictive architectural building block. Reverse
distillation [33] proposes a T–S model consisting of a teacher
encoder and a student decoder and introduce a simple yet
effective “reverse distillation” paradigm accordingly. Recently,
uniAD [30] is proposed to accomplish anomaly detection
for multiple classes with a unified framework with a
novel transformer-based decoder. OTB-AAE [34] proposes
an anomaly detection framework based on adversarial
autoencoder (AAE) to capture the normality distribution
of high-dimensional images in industry and introduces the
output-turn-back structure (OTB) and combine L1 loss and
structural similarity (SSIM) loss functions to enhance the
discriminant capability of the discriminator. SMCC [35]
utilizes a pretrained model for feature extraction and employs
a Gaussian mixture model to cluster and obtain cluster
centers. This enables better discrimination between normal
and abnormal sample features, as normal sample features are
tightly distributed around the cluster centers. By leveraging
competition among different tasks in a self-supervised
multitask setting, MTHM [36] learns compact and efficient
representations for detection tasks. Additionally, introducing
other semantic tasks allows the shared encoder to learn beyond
image reconstruction, improving the model’s reconstruction
capability for anomalies.
Similar to industrial defect detection tasks, these industrial
anomaly detection methods also rely on models pretrained
on ImageNet. They extract features from the ImageNet
pretrained models for feature transformation, enabling the
identification of abnormal regions. It is worth noting that
ImageNet pretrained features are particularly important in
anomaly detection tasks. Fine-tuning the pretrained ImageNet
portion of the model can lead to a drastic decrease in
performance [30]. Therefore, designing a pretraining method
specifically suitable for industrial anomaly detection tasks is of
great research significance in order to improve the performance
of industrial anomaly detection models.

5009013

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

C. Network Pretraining
ImageNet [20] pretraining is the most common network
pretraining method for image representation [37], [38], [39],
[40], [41]. Recently, the contrastive learning-based selfsupervised methods like MoCos [42], [43] have attracted much
attention. Also, the mask reconstruction-based self-supervised
methods like MAE [44] improve the image representations
of ViT largely. SimCLR [45] simplifies contrastive selfsupervised learning algorithms without requiring specialized
architectures or a memory bank. SimSiam [46] provides
a hypothesis on the implication of stop-gradient, and
further shows proof-of-concept experiments. SimMIM [47]
simplifies MAE-based methods without special designs such
as blockwise masking and tokenization via discrete VAE or
clustering.
The existing network pretraining methods are designed for
general object recognition tasks. However, these methods do
not take into account the characteristics of industrial defect
detection tasks. For example, these methods are pretrained
on the ImageNet dataset, resulting in features that lack
understanding of industrial products and defects, such as the
inability to understand scratches. Additionally, these methods
are focused on large target areas with prominent features in
the images. However, they may not yield significant results
for industrial defects that are less obvious in the image,
such as cracks. Therefore, there is a need to research a
pretraining method specifically tailored for industrial feature
representation tasks.
Existing methods have failed to address the pretraining
paradigms that are suitable for intelligent quality inspection
in industrial settings for the following reasons: first,
obtaining industrial data is challenging because the production
environment typically contains a substantial number of normal
samples to ensure production quality, but lacks defect samples.
Second, the defect area in industrial images is often small
compared to the entire image, whereas commonly used general
intelligence recognition datasets like ImageNet primarily
consist of images where the target occupies a significant
area. Lastly, current methods primarily focus on training the
entire image and do not incorporate pixel-level differential
contrastive learning, which poses difficulties in accurately
identifying defects. In contrast to previous approaches, our
work specifically targets industrial scenarios. To address the
issue of difficult access to industrial data, we introduce a largescale Ind-2M dataset and propose a synthetic defect generation
method to augment a large number of defect training samples.
To tackle the problems of small defect areas and the lack of
pixel-level differential constraints, this article introduces pixellevel contrastive learning as a solution.
III. M ETHOD
Fig. 3 provides an overview of the PiCO framework, which
encompasses three distinct stages in each iteration, namely the
image classification stage, the image blending stage, and the
pixel-level representations stage.
In image classification stage, PiCO classifies the product
images and defect images with predefined product and defect

categories. Then, we can obtain the CAM for product regions
and defect regions. In image blending stage, PiCO fuses the
industrial product images and defect images using Poisson
Blending, and the previous CAM can be used to guide the
blending process. In pixel-level representations stage, the
previous classifying CNN removes the last striding, and uses
dilation convolution [23] to remedy the receptive field. Then,
PiCO optimizes the pixel-level representations by the proposed
hybrid triplet mining.
In this section, we will first elaborate on the large-scale
industrial image dataset, Ind-2M dataset. Then, we will
introduce three stages of PiCO, respectively. Finally, we will
present the overall pipeline of PiCO.
A. Ind-2M Dataset
In order to acquire robust image representations for
industrial applications, we have curated a comprehensive
dataset known as Ind-2M. This dataset is specifically tailored
for industrial scenarios and comprises a vast collection of
2.2 million industrial images. The images within Ind-2M are
sourced from both publicly available industrial datasets and
data obtained through web crawling. Notably, the dataset
consists of 1.6 million product images and 0.6 million defect
images.
As shown in Table I, the Ind-2M dataset consists
of 18 publicly available datasets, 31 web-crawled industrial product scene data, and 30 web-crawled industrial
defect scene data. The open-source datasets include SewerML [15], Aluminum Profile [48], Kylberg [49], NEU
surface defect database [2], Severstal [50], DAGM 2007 [51],
RSDDs [52], KTH-TIPS [53], PKU-Market-PCB [54],
AITEX [55], elpv-dataset [56], KolektorSDD [57], DeepPCB [58], SDNET2018 [59], Fabric Defect [60], Insulator
Defect Image Dataset [61], BSData [62], and TILDA
Textile Texture-Database [63] datasets. These datasets cover
11 different scenes including pipeline damage, aluminum
profiles, textile industry, steel strip, magnetic tiles, railway
tracks, concrete, printed circuit boards, solar panels, metal,
and wires. Each dataset typically focuses on a specific product
category. To enable PiCO classification, we annotate the
images in each dataset with their corresponding product
category labels.
Additionally, we employ web crawling techniques to acquire
industrial product images from the internet. We meticulously
amassed a comprehensive dataset of 221 062 images sourced
from a variety of industrial e-commerce websites, industrial
image websites, and similar platforms. These images were
acquired by employing 31 carefully selected keywords,
including height gauge, caliper, gloves, safety helmet, light
bulb, lighting fixture, cable, clock, shoe covers, screen,
sensor, chemicals, personal protective equipment, transformer,
inverter, security products, locator, mirror, pipe inspection
device, syringe, laboratory equipment, power supply, instruments, tools, electrical distribution equipment, cleaning tools,
electrical and electronic tools, projector, and socket. The
aggregation of these images forms our dataset, which focuses
specifically on industrial products. Consequently, the obtained

ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION

5009013

TABLE I
C OMPOSITION OF THE I ND -2M DATASET. T HE I ND -2M DATASET C ONSISTS OF 18 P UBLICLY AVAILABLE I NDUSTRIAL DATASETS , 31 W EB -C RAWLED
I NDUSTRIAL P RODUCT S CENE I MAGES , AND 30 W EB -C RAWLED I NDUSTRIAL D EFECT S CENE I MAGES

industrial product images are associated with specific product
category labels, facilitating subsequent PiCO classification
tasks.
Furthermore, we have created the Ind-2M dataset, which
encompasses a staggering 0.6 million industrial defect
images meticulously obtained through web crawling. Our
comprehensive web crawling process allowed us to aggregate
a total of 614 002 images, guided by 30 carefully selected
keywords. These keywords include cracks, repairs, dents,
protrusions, deformations, defects, cuts, holes, fractures, oil
stains, wrinkles, loose threads, contamination, extrusions,

punctures, worn areas, misalignments, bubbles, blemishes,
collapses, scratches, burn marks, adhesions, cracks, looseness,
pitting, decay, peelings, mold, and impurities. This extensive
collection of images forms our industrially focused defect
dataset, encompassing a wide range of defect categories found
within the industrial domain.
In order to guarantee the integrity and validity of the
collected data through web crawling, we implemented a
rigorous validation process. Following the accumulation of a
substantial volume of industrial product and defect images,
we enlisted the expertise of ten highly skilled data engineers

5009013

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

who possessed professional training in the domain. These
individuals were tasked with meticulously reviewing and
filtering the crawled data. Their extensive knowledge and
understanding of industrial products and defects enabled them
to identify and eliminate images that did not align with the
designated product names or correspond to the specified defect
categories. By employing such manual filtering, we ensured
the data’s accuracy and adherence to the intended industrial
context, contributing to the overall validity of our dataset.
B. Industrial Image Classification
The image classification stage serves two purposes in the
PiCO pretrainer. First, it facilitates the acquisition of global
semantic understanding capabilities by pretrained models,
akin to previous supervised pretraining methods employed
in deep learning models. Second, it leverages CAM to
obtain approximate positions of industrial products and
defects, establishing a positional foundation for the subsequent
blending of industrial defect images.
During the industrial image classification stage, the CNN or
ViT models are employed to classify the predefined industrial
product categories and industrial defect categories using both
the industrial product images and defect images. For this
purpose, PiCO utilizes two fully connected layers, one for
product classification and the other for defect classification.
Notably, PiCO ensures that the product images are classified
without considering the defect categories, and vice versa.
Subsequently, the CAM can be obtained for both the product
regions and defect regions by multiplying the category weights
with the corresponding feature representations.
Formally, given the input industrial product image I P and
industrial defect image I D , the classification process can be
represented as
X i = F(Ii ), i ∈ {D, P}
Ci = f ci (X i ), i ∈ {D, P}

(1)
(2)

where X i denotes the feature representations, F denotes the
CNN or transformer networks, f c denotes the fully connected
layers, and C denotes the classification categories.
C. Industrial Image Blending
The industrial image blending stage is capable of
synthesizing a substantial number of industrial defect images,
thereby alleviating the scarcity and challenges associated with
acquiring such images. Moreover, it generates masks that
facilitate the subsequent learning of pixel-level representations.
In the image blending stage, PiCO employs Poisson
blending to fuse industrial product images and defect images.
Guided by the previous CAM, the defects are randomly pasted
onto the product regions. Initially, the top 50% challenging
samples, denoted as S D , are selected from the defect images
in each batch based on the previous defect classification
loss L CE (C D , gt D ). Subsequently, the defect CAM S D is
normalized and binarized using a threshold of 0.5 to generate
defect masks. The paste product locations are then randomly
chosen based on the normalized CAM probability S P . For

Algorithm 1 PiCO
Input: Product Image I A , Product Image I B , Defect Image IC ,
Random Initialized Model F, Iterative Time T
Output: Pre-trained Model F
1: for t = 1 : T do
2:
if t%2 == 0 then
3:
Inputing I A , I B , IC to model F, update the model
parameters with cross entropy loss.
4:
Calculating the CAM of products and defects,
obtaining S A , S B , SC .
5:
else
6:
Fusing I A and IC using CAM S A and SC , with
Poisson Blending, as well as I B and IC , obtaining
I AC and I BC .
7:
Using dilated CNN or ViT to obtain the pixel-level
representations, and using defect masks to split the
product and defect regions.
8:
Updating model using hybrid triplet mining loss.
9:
end if
10: end for

each challenging defect image, the defects are pasted onto
the selected locations of two product images using Poisson
blending. The fusion consistency of the divergence field is
optimized during this process, expressed as follows:
ZZ
min
|∇ f − v|2 , with f |∂Ω = f ∗ ∂Ω
(3)
f

Ω

where f is the fused image, ∇ f is the gradient of f , Ω
denotes the defect image, and v is the gradient of defect image,
while f ∗ denotes the product image.
D. Industrial Pixel-Level Representation
The industrial pixel-level representation stage employs
contrastive learning techniques to enhance the discrimination
of local detailed features at the pixel level. This enables
pretrained models to effectively distinguish industrial products
and defects, thereby establishing a strong foundation for
downstream industrial intelligent defect detection.
In the pixel-level representation stage, when employing a
CNN model for pretraining, the final striding of the CNN
is eliminated, and dilation convolution [23] is employed to
address the receptive field. Alternatively, when utilizing a ViT
as backbone, the vanilla transformer can be used for pixel-level
representations, as the total striding of the ViT is 16. It should
be noted that the model in the pixel-level representation stage
shares weights with the image classification stage.
Both CNN and ViT architectures play crucial roles in
industrial applications. Consequently, we propose a pixellevel representation pretraining approach for both CNN
and ViT. In CNN architectures, which typically involve
five downsampling operations in the spatial dimensions,
removing a downsampling operation leads to a reduction in
the receptive field for subsequent convolutional operations.
To tackle this issue, we employ dilated convolutions in each
convolutional layer following the removal of a downsampling

ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION

5009013

Fig. 3. Framework of PiCO. In image classification stage, both of industrial product images and defect images are used to image classification, and
obtain the categories of products as well as defects. In image blending stage, industrial product images and defect images are fused using CAM-guided
Poisson blending. In pixel-level representations stage, the blended images are sent into the shared weights dilated CNN or transformer to learn pixel-level
representations, optimized by the proposed hybrid triplet mining.

operation to effectively enlarge their receptive fields. For more
comprehensive details, please refer to the Deeplab [23]. On the
other hand, in the case of ViT, there are no downsampling
operations in the spatial dimensions, eliminating the need
to remove downsampling operations or employ dilated
convolutions to compensate for the receptive field.
Then, PiCO optimizes the pixel-level representations by the
proposed hybrid triplet mining. That is, the distance of same
defects from different images is smaller than that of defects
and products. Formally, given the defective product features
FA,C and FB,C , we use the blended mask MC1 and MC2 to
split the features, respectively. Then, we constrain the product
feature R A , R B , and defect feature RC1 , RC2 with hybrid triplet
mining, represented as follows:
L tri1 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R A , RC1 ) + α]+
L tri2 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R B , RC1 ) + α]+
L tri3 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R A , RC2 ) + α]+
L tri4 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R B , RC2 ) + α]+

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

where d(·, ·) is the L2 distance between features, and α is
the hyperparameter for triplet loss, which set to 1 by default.
Thus, the hybrid triplet loss can be represented as
L hybrid = λ1 · L tri1 + λ2 · L tri2 + λ3 · L tri3 + λ4 · L tri4 .

(8)

In Fig. 4, we illustrate the process of pixel-level representation. We adopt a pixel-wise separation approach in the
deep feature space for the same industrial defect observed on
two different industrial products. This involves extracting the
distinct product features, denoted as R A and R B , respectively.

Fig. 4. Illustration of industrial pixel-level representation. For the same
industrial defect and two industrial products, we perform pixel-wise separation
in the deep feature space, extracting the product features R A and R B . The
defect features RC1 and RC2 of the same defect on the two products are then
obtained. We use the hybrid triplet loss to ensure the consistency of RC1 and
RC2 features, while keeping them far apart from the R A and R B features.

Furthermore, we obtain the defect-specific features, RC1 and
RC2 , corresponding to the same defect across the two products.
To ensure the consistency of these defect features, while
simultaneously maintaining their separation from the product
features, we employ the hybrid triplet loss strategy. This
loss function effectively preserves the similarity between RC1
and RC2 , reinforcing their alignment, while simultaneously
enforcing a substantial distance between them and the productrelated features, R A and R B . By employing this approach,

5009013

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

we aim to effectively enhance the discriminative power of
the extracted features, enabling accurate classification and
differentiation of industrial defects on various products within
the deep feature space.
E. Overall Pipeline
The complete algorithm of PiCO is depicted in Algorithm 1.
In each iteration, the model parameters are updated alternatively through classification and hybrid triplet mining.
The iterations involve the processes of image classification,
image blending, and pixel-level representation. The product
classification and defect classification contribute to the
learning of global and local representations, while the hybrid
triplet mining aids in acquiring pixel-level representations.
It is worth noting that PiCO is a model-agnostic pretraining
method that can be utilized for both CNN and ViT
models. By incorporating PiCO into the model pretraining
process, better feature representations can be obtained.
Rather than proposing a complex neural network architecture,
our approach focuses on enhancing the transferability of
features through global and local feature learning in the
pretraining pipeline. This approach allows for significant
performance improvements in downstream industrial tasks
without introducing additional model parameters, thereby
preserving computational efficiency.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we will first introduce the datasets and
implementation details. Then, we will conduct ablation studies
to validate the effectiveness of each main component of PiCO.
Finally, we will report the quantitative comparisons on several
downstream industrial benchmarks.
A. Experimental Settings
1) Dataset and Evaluation Metric: We study the effectiveness of PiCO on the multilabel defect classification dataset,
SewerML [15], and the downstream anomaly detection and
localization dataset, MVTec-AD [1]. For evaluation metric,
we use the F1normal score and F2CIW defect score following
SewerML [15]. While on MVTec-AD dataset, we use AUC
score as evaluation metric for both of anomaly detection and
anomaly localization.
SewerML benchmark evaluates the model performance
using two metrics incorporating domain knowledge, based on
the Fβ metric [64]

Prc × Rcll
(9)
Fβ = 1 + β 2 × 2Prc
β
+ Rcll
where Prc and Rcll are the precision and recall of the classifier,
respectively, and β is weighting of recall, such that the recall
β times more important that precision.
False negatives in sewer inspections have greater economic
consequences than false positives. This is because false
negatives can result in undetected faulty pipes, whereas human
verification of predicted classes precedes any renovation
decisions. Hence, to incorporate this domain knowledge into
the evaluation, SewerML benchmark sets β = 2 when

evaluating the annotated classes. Then, SewerML benchmark
introduces F2CIW metrics to measure the performance using
class-importance weights (CIWs)
PC
F2c × CIWc
(10)
F2CIW = c=1
PC
c=1 CIWc
where CIWc and F2c are the CIW and F2-score for class c,
respectively.
To assess the ability of the tested methods to handle the
absence of classes and avoid solely maximizing the F2CIW
score by continuously predicting classes, SewerML benchmark
also utilizes the F1-score for normal pipes (F1normal ), where
we set β = 1 to evaluate the performance of normal class.
The F2CIW computation excludes normal pipes as the normal
case lacks a CIW.
AUC stands for “Area under the ROC curve.” That is, AUC
measures the entire 2-D area underneath the entire ROC curve.
2) SewerML: dataset focuses on the multilabel defect
classification problem and contains 1.3 million images
collected over a nine year period. The data are split into a
preset training, validation, and test split, containing 1 million,
130k, and 130k images each [25]. The defect classification
problem consists of 17 different classes as well as the implicit
normal class.
3) MVTec-AD: dataset is a comprehensive, multiobject, multidefect industrial anomaly detection dataset with
15 classes. For each anomalous sample in the test set,
the ground truth includes both image label and anomaly
segmentation.
4) Implementation Details: We implement PiCO on Ind-2M
dataset with 200 epoch.1 Following the ImageNet pretraining,
we randomly resize images with a ratio of [0.75, 1.25],
and crop the images into size of 224 × 224. Random
horizontal flipping is used for data augmentation. Also,
RandAugment is used for color jittering and geometry
augmentation. For SewerML fine-tuning, we follow the data
augmentation introduced in SewerML paper, i.e., resizing to
224 × 224, random horizontal flipping, as well as random
color jittering. For the downstream task anomaly detection on
MvTec AD dataset, we follow the configuration of uniAD [30],
fixing the backbone model, and only training the transformer
decoder. The images are resized to 224 × 224 without data
augmentation, and the anomaly location can be obtained by
the difference between output features and the fixing backbone
features. To ensure a fair comparison between the pretraining
methods of ImageNet and SewerML, we have ensured that all
hyperparameters in the experiments remain consistent.
B. Ablation Studies
1) Pretrained Dataset: In the present study, we aim to
explore the influence of utilizing different pretrained datasets
for the purpose of industrial image representations. The
obtained experimental findings, as outlined in Table II,
effectively demonstrate that the adoption of the Ind-2M dataset
1 The epoch here is different from the common definition. We define one
epoch as the maximum between the length of product images and the one of
defect images.

ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION

5009013

TABLE II

TABLE IV

E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
I MPACT OF P RETRAINED DATASET. W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON
VARIOUS DATASET, AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON
S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
I MPACT OF P IXEL -L EVEL R EPRESENTATIONS . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL
ON VARIOUS P IXEL -L EVEL S ETTINGS ON I ND -2M, AND
F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

TABLE III
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
I MPACT OF C LASSIFICATION C ATEGORIES . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON
VARIOUS C ATEGORIES ON I ND -2M, AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON
S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

for pretraining purposes leads to significantly enhanced performance when compared to alternative pretraining datasets,
such as ImageNet and Sewer-ML. Notably, the model that
is pretrained on the Ind-2M dataset exhibits noteworthy
improvements of 1.37% and 0.31% in relation to the F1normal
and F2CIW metrics, respectively, when compared to the model
that is pretrained on ImageNet. Furthermore, in terms of the
F1normal and F2CIW metrics, the model that is pretrained on
Ind-2M outperforms the model that is pretrained on Sewer-ML
by 2.67% and 1.02%, respectively.
2) Classification Categories: In our study, we investigate
the influence of classification categories on industrial image
representations, as presented in Table III. The experimental
results reveal that the defect categories have a more significant
impact compared to the product categories. Specifically, when
both classification categories are utilized for pretraining, the
model demonstrates superior performance. More specifically,
the model pretrained with both product and defect categories
exhibits a significant improvement over the model pretrained
with product categories alone. This improvement is reflected in
the performance metrics F1normal and F2CIW , where the former
increases by 2.5% and the latter by 0.78%. This indicates
that incorporating both product and defect categories during
pretraining enables the model to better capture the underlying
patterns and features associated with the industrial images.
Furthermore, the model pretrained with both product and
defect categories also outperforms the model pretrained with
defect categories alone. The improvement is evident in the
performance metrics F1normal and F2CIW , which increase by
1.46% and 0.73% respectively. This suggests that the inclusion
of product categories in addition to defect categories enhances
the model’s ability to discriminate between different types of
defects and accurately classify industrial images. Our findings
highlight the importance of considering both product and
defect categories in the pretraining phase of industrial image
analysis models.
3) Pixel-Level Representations: In this study, we explore
the impact of pixel-level representations on industrial image
representations, as depicted in Table IV. The experimental

TABLE V
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
I MPACT OF THE WAY OF I MAGE B LENDING . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL
ON VARIOUS WAYS OF I MAGE B LENDING ON I ND -2M, AND
F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

TABLE VI
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
I MPACT OF D ILATED CNN. W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON VARIOUS
P IXEL -L EVEL S ETTINGS ON I ND -2M, AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL
ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

TABLE VII
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
I MPACT OF H YBRID T RIPLET L OSS . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON
VARIOUS P IXEL -W ISE L OSS S ETTINGS ON I ND -2M, AND
F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

findings reveal that the model exhibits remarkable performance
in multilabel classification when trained using pixel-level
supervision. Notably, the model trained with pixel-level
supervision surpasses the performance of the model trained
without such supervision by 0.77% and 1.5% in terms
of F1normal and F2CIW , respectively. The results highlight
the significance of incorporating pixel-level information in
the training process, as it enables the model to capture
fine-grained details and spatial relationships within the
images. By leveraging pixel-level supervision, the model
becomes more adept at distinguishing subtle differences and
accurately identifying various defects or anomalies present in
industrial images. These findings underscore the importance
of considering pixel-level representations when developing
models for industrial image analysis tasks.
4) Image Blending: In order to investigate the impact
of different image blending techniques on industrial image
representations, we conducted a comparative analysis as
presented in Table V. The evaluated blending methods
include copy-paste, Poisson blending, and CAM-guided

5009013

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

TABLE VIII
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED TO V ERIFY THE E FFECTIVENESS
OF PiCO ON VARIOUS BACKBONES . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL
ON VARIOUS BACKBONES W ITH D IFFERENT P RETRAINED
M ETHODS , AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON
S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

Fig. 5. Curves of the variation of hyperparameter λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , and λ4 under
various settings. (a) Curves of the variation of hyperparameter λ1 . We compare
the performance curves of ResNet-50 and VGG-16 under different
λ1 hyperparameter settings, while keeping λ2 = λ3 = λ4 = 1. (b) Curves
of the variation of hyperparameter λ2 . We compare the performance curves
of ResNet-50 and VGG-16 under different λ1 hyperparameter settings,
while keeping λ1 = λ3 = λ4 = 1. (c) Curves of the variation of
hyperparameter λ3 . We compare the performance curves of ResNet-50
and VGG-16 under different λ1 hyperparameter settings, while keeping
λ1 = λ2 = λ4 = 1. (d) Curves of the variation of hyperparameter
λ4 . We compare the performance curves of ResNet-50 and VGG-16 under
different λ1 hyperparameter settings, while keeping λ1 = λ2 = λ3 = 1.

Poisson blending. Our experimental results demonstrate that
CAM-guided Poisson blending exhibits superior performance
compared to both direct copy-paste and Poisson blending
techniques. Specifically, the model pretrained with CAMguided Poisson blending achieves notable improvements over
the model pretrained with copy-paste in terms of F1normal
and F2CIW , with gains of 0.84% and 1.43%, respectively.
Furthermore, the model pretrained with CAM-guided Poisson
blending also outperforms the model pretrained with Poisson
blending, yielding enhancements of 0.19% and 0.03% in
F1normal and F2CIW , respectively. These findings emphasize
the significance of the image blending method in enhancing
the performance of industrial image representations. The
superiority of CAM-guided Poisson blending in comparison to
alternative techniques underscores its potential for improving
the quality and effectiveness of pretrained models in industrial
image analysis tasks.
5) Dilated CNN: We also explore the impact of dilated
CNNs, as presented in Table VI. By employing dilated
convolutions and eliminating the last striding operation in the
CNN architecture, the resulting features are able to preserve
more fine-grained information. Our experiments demonstrate
that the utilization of dilated CNNs can significantly enhance
the performance of pixel-level representations. Specifically,
we observe improvements of 0.85% and 1.62% in F1normal
and F2CIW , respectively, when employing dilated convolution
in the pretrained model. These findings underscore the
effectiveness of dilated CNNs in capturing and leveraging
detailed information for industrial image analysis.
6) Pixel-Wise Loss: In order to evaluate the impact of
the hybrid triplet loss on industrial image representations,
we conducted experiments as presented in Table VII. While
it may seem intuitive to directly employ the Softmax cross

TABLE IX
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ViT-B TO C OMPARE THE
P RETRAINED M ETHODS . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL W ITH VARIOUS
P RETRAINED M ETHODS , AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON
S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

entropy loss for pixel-level supervision, this approach faces
challenges in effectively distinguishing between intrinsic
defects in the product images and blended defects. To address
this issue, we opted to utilize the triplet loss as an
indirect means of supervising the pixel-level representations.
The experimental results demonstrate a significant drop in
performance when employing the Softmax cross entropy loss
for supervision. This can be attributed to the inherent limitation
of classifying intrinsic defects as belonging to the normal
class. On the other hand, models pretrained with the hybrid
triplet loss exhibit superior performance compared to those
pretrained with the Softmax cross entropy loss, achieving
improvements of 2.47% and 2.29% in terms of F1normal
and F2CIW scores, respectively. These findings highlight
the effectiveness of the hybrid triplet loss in enhancing
the representation learning process for industrial image
analysis.
7) Hyperparameter λ: As shown in Fig. 5, we compared
the various of the hyperparameter λ in loss weight under
different settings. First, as shown in Fig. 5(a), we fixed
λ2 = λ3 = λ4 = 1 and conducted experimental comparisons
with different λ1 values for VGG-16 and ResNet-50. Through
the comparative experiments, we found that for VGG-16,
the best performance accuracy can be obtained when λ1 =
0.5, while for ResNet-50, λ1 = 1.0 yields the best results.
Similarly, VGG-16 and ResNet-50 also have different optimal
hyperparameters for λ2 , λ3 , and λ4 . Therefore, different
networks may have different optimal hyperparameters. For
simplicity, we maintained the setting of λ1 = λ2 = λ3 =
λ4 = 1 throughout all other experiments.

ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION

C. Quantitative Evaluation
1) Backbones Comparison: In order to evaluate the
performance of the PiCO and ImageNet pretrained models,
we conducted experiments using different backbones, namely
ResNet-18, ResNet-50, ResNet-101, VGG-16, MobileNetV3,
and ViT-B. The results of these experiments are summarized
in Table VIII. The findings indicate that the PiCO pretrained
model consistently outperforms the ImageNet pretrained
model across all backbones and evaluation metrics. This
suggests that PiCO has the ability to learn superior industrial
representations on the Sewer-ML dataset, regardless of the
specific backbone architecture employed.
2) Comparison of Pretrained Methods: As presented in
Table IX, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation to
compare the performance of PiCO with other pretrained
methods, namely ImageNet, MAE, and MoCo v3. The
evaluation was performed on the Sewer-ML dataset, aiming to
assess the effectiveness of PiCO in learning industrial image
representations. The experimental results clearly demonstrate
that PiCO surpasses the other pretrained methods in terms
of performance. This suggests that PiCO has the ability
to acquire superior representations for industrial images,
surpassing the capabilities of other pretrained methods trained
on natural image datasets. Specifically, when compared to
ImageNet pretraining, PiCO achieves an improvement of
0.58% and 1.5% in terms of F1normal and F2CIW scores,
respectively. Moreover, in comparison to MAE pretraining,
PiCO exhibits enhancements of 0.47% and 1.79% in F1normal
and F2CIW scores, respectively. Lastly, when compared to
MoCo v3 pretraining, PiCO demonstrates improvements of
0.15% and 1.38% in F1normal and F2CIW scores, respectively.
These results provide strong evidence that PiCO outperforms
other pretrained methods across various evaluation metrics,
highlighting its effectiveness in learning representations for
industrial images.
In addition, we also compared the training efficiency
of our pretraining method with other pretraining methods,
as presented in Table IX. It can be observed that the training
duration of PiCO is slightly increased compared to ImageNet
pretraining, while the training efficiency is similar to that of the
MoCo v3 pretraining method. However, the MAE pretraining
method requires a larger number of epochs to achieve better
pretraining results, resulting in significantly longer training
time compared to the PiCO pretraining method.
3) MvTec AD Detection: In Table X, we present a comparative analysis of PiCO’s performance in the downstream task of
anomaly detection. The experimental results demonstrate that
PiCO exhibits the capability to enhance the performance of the
uniAD method. Notably, the feature representations employed
in uniAD are pretrained using conventional recognition tasks,
thereby prompting our belief that PiCO has the potential
to acquire superior industrial representations in comparison
to the ImageNet pretrained models. Remarkably, the uniAD
model pretrained with PiCO surpasses its ImageNet-pretrained
counterpart by 1.62% in terms of the AUC metric, thereby
underscoring the substantial improvement achieved through

5009013

TABLE X
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-101 TO V ERIFY THE
E FFECTIVENESS OF PiCO ON D OWNSTREAM I NDUSTRIAL TASK ,
A NOMALY D ETECTION . W E F IX THE M ODEL R EPRESENTATIONS
AND U SE UNI AD FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION ON
MVT EC -AD DATASET

TABLE XI
E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-101 TO V ERIFY
THE E FFECTIVENESS OF PiCO ON D OWNSTREAM I NDUSTRIAL
TASK , A NOMALY L OCALIZATION . W E F IX THE M ODEL R EPRESEN TATIONS AND U SE UNI AD FOR A NOMALY L OCALIZATION
ON MVT EC -AD DATASET

the utilization of PiCO in learning representations tailored
specifically for industrial anomaly detection tasks.
4) MvTec AD Localization: In order to assess the effectiveness of PiCO in the downstream task of anomaly localization,
we conducted a comparative analysis, the results of which
are presented in Table XI. The experimental findings clearly
demonstrate that the utilization of PiCO leads to a notable
enhancement in the performance of the uniAD framework.
It is worth noting that the feature representations employed
in uniAD remain fixed throughout the anomaly detection
process. However, we posit that PiCO has the capacity to
acquire more refined representations specifically tailored for
industrial scenarios, surpassing the capabilities of ImageNet
pretrained models. Remarkably, when uniAD is pretrained
with PiCO, it achieves a superior performance compared
to its counterpart pretrained with ImageNet, exhibiting an
improvement of 1.57% in terms of the AUC metric. This
substantial advancement further substantiates the efficacy of
PiCO in learning representations that are particularly wellsuited for the task of industrial anomaly detection.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we present the collection of a largescale industrial production dataset, namely Ind-2M, aimed
at facilitating the pretraining of more effective industrial
image representations. Ind-2M is specifically curated from
industrial scenarios, thereby emphasizing the relevance of
the dataset to pretraining models in the industrial domain.
Additionally, we introduce a novel pixel-level contrastive
pretraining method called PiCO, which is designed to
learn industrial image representations. PiCO enhances the
global industrial representation through industrial production
classification, while simultaneously improving the local
industrial representation through a pixel-level self-supervised
approach. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of both Ind-2M and PiCO in enhancing industrial image
representations. When pretrained on the Ind-2M dataset, PiCO

5009013

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

exhibits strong transferability to tasks such as multilabel defect
classification, anomaly detection, and anomaly localization.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The
MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset
for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 4,
pp. 1038–1059, Apr. 2021.
[2] Y. He, K. Song, Q. Meng, and Y. Yan, “An end-to-end steel surface
defect detection approach via fusing multiple hierarchical features,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1493–1504, Apr. 2020,
doi: 10.1109/TIM.2019.2915404.
[3] X. Cheng and J. Yu, “RetinaNet with difference channel attention
and adaptively spatial feature fusion for steel surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–11, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2020.3040485.
[4] J. Yu, X. Cheng, and Q. Li, “Surface defect detection of steel strips
based on anchor-free network with channel attention and bidirectional
feature fusion,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022,
doi: 10.1109/TIM.2021.3136183.
[5] C.-C. Yeung and K.-M. Lam, “Efficient fused-attention model for
steel surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71,
pp. 1–11, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2022.3176239.
[6] Y. Chen, J. Pan, J. Lei, D. Zeng, Z. Wu, and C. Chen, “EEENet: Efficient edge enhanced network for surface defect detection of
glass,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2023.3320746.
[7] W. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, D. Xu, and T. Pan, “Development of
machine vision system for off-line inspection of fine defects on glass
screen surface,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–8, 2022,
doi: 10.1109/TIM.2022.3190052.
[8] J. Chen, Y. Wen, Y. A. Nanehkaran, D. Zhang, and A. Zeb, “Multiscale
attention networks for pavement defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3298391.
[9] J. Feng, Q. Li, Q. Xiao, and G. Wang, “A method of Rayleigh wave
combined with coil spatial pulse compression technique for crack defects
detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2023.3244850.
[10] W. Ding et al., “An ensemble of one-stage and two-stage detectors
approach for road damage detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data
(Big Data), Dec. 2022, pp. 6395–6400.
[11] S. Wang, C. Lv, Z. Zhang, and X. Wei, “Dual-branch learning with
prior information for surface anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3300458.
[12] K. Xiao, J. Cao, Z. Zeng, and W.-K. Ling, “Graph-based active
learning with uncertainty and representativeness for industrial anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2023.3279422.
[13] M. Xu, X. Zhou, X. Gao, W. He, and S. Niu, “Discriminative
feature learning framework with gradient preference for anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2022.3228007.
[14] L. Yang, S. Song, J. Fan, B. Huo, E. Li, and Y. Liu, “An automatic
deep segmentation network for pixel-level welding defect detection,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[15] J. B. Haurum and T. B. Moeslund, “Sewer-ML: A multi-label sewer
defect classification dataset and benchmark,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13451–13462.
[16] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 14298–14308.
[17] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A
patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and
localization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Nov. 2020,
pp. 475–489.
[18] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9664–9674.
[19] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “SPotthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” 2022, arXiv:2207.14315.

[20] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition
challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
[21] B. Zhou and A. Khosla, “Learning deep features for discriminative
localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Las
Vegas, NV, USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 2921–2929.
[22] P. Pérez, M. Gangnet, and A. Blake, “Poisson image editing,” ACM
Trans. Graph, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 313–318, 2003.
[23] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille,
“DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets,
atrous convolution, and fully connected CRFs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, Apr. 2018.
[24] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), May 2021, pp. 3–7.
[25] Y. Gao, J. Lin, J. Xie, and Z. Ning, “A real-time defect detection method
for digital signal processing of industrial inspection applications,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3450–3459, May 2021.
[26] J. Cao, G. Yang, and X. Yang, “A pixel-level segmentation convolutional
neural network based on deep feature fusion for surface defect
detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[27] H. Chen, Y. Du, Y. Fu, J. Zhu, and H. Zeng, “DCAM-Net: A rapid
detection network for strip steel surface defects based on deformable
convolution and attention mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3238698.
[28] W. Luo, H. Yao, and W. Yu, “Normal reference attention and
defective feature perception network for surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2023.3268658.
[29] P. Lu, J. Jing, and Y. Huang, “MRD-Net: An effective CNN-based segmentation network for surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–12, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2022.3200361.
[30] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
[31] Z. Gu, B. Zhu, G. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “AnomalyGPT:
Detecting industrial anomalies using large vision-language models,”
2023, arXiv:2308.15366.
[32] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13566–13576.
[33] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[34] X. Li, J. Jing, J. Bao, P. Lu, Y. Xie, and Y. An, “OTB-AAE: Semisupervised anomaly detection on industrial images based on adversarial
autoencoder with output-turn-back structure,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3280508.
[35] Y. Liu, X. Gao, J. Z. Wen, and H. Luo, “Unsupervised image anomaly
detection and localization in industry based on self-updated memory and
center clustering,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3271754.
[36] C. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Tan, “MTHM: Self-supervised multitask
anomaly detection with hard example mining,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3276529.
[37] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[38] J. Fang, B. Zhu, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and M. Tang, “Explicit attention
modeling for pedestrian attribute recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Multimedia Expo. (ICME), Jul. 2023, pp. 2075–2080.
[39] Y. Zhu, B. Zhu, Y. Chen, and J. Wang, “Uncertainty-aware boundary
attention network for real-time semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Chin.
Conf. Pattern Recognit. Comput. Vis. (PRCV). Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2023, pp. 388–400.
[40] B. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “Progressive cognitive human
parsing,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 32, no. 1, 2018,
pp. 7607–7614.
[41] B. Zhu, Y. Chen, J. Wang, S. Liu, B. Zhang, and M. Tang, “Fast deep
matting for portrait animation on mobile phone,” in Proc. 25th ACM Int.
Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2017, pp. 297–305.
[42] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[43] X. Chen, S. Xie, and K. He, “An empirical study of training selfsupervised vision transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9620–9629.

ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION

[44] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[45] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [Online]. Available:
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html
[46] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758.
[47] Z. Xie et al., “SimMIM: A simple framework for masked image
modeling,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9643–9653.
[48] Tianchi. (2016). Aluminum Profile Dataset. [Online]. Available:
https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/dataDetail?dataId=140666
[49] G. Kylberg. The Kylberg Texture Dataset V. 1.0. [Online]. Available:
https://kylberg.org/kylberg-texture-dataset-v-1-0
[50] Kaggle. Severstal: Steel Defect Detection. Accessed: Dec. 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://kaggle.com/competitions/severstal-steeldefect-detection
[51] Kaggle. (2007). Dagm 2007 Competition Dataset. [Online].
Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mhskjelvareid/dagm-2007competition-dataset-optical-inspection
[52] J. Gan, Q. Li, J. Wang, and H. Yu, “A hierarchical extractor-based
visual rail surface inspection system,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 17, no. 23,
pp. 7935–7944, Dec. 2017.
[53] Kth-Tips Dataset. Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.csc.kth.se/cvap/databases/kth-tips/credits.html
[54] PKU-Market-PCB. Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://robotics.pkusz.edu.cn/resources/dataset/
[55] Aitex Fabric Image Database. Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nexuswho/aitex-fabric-image-database
[56] L. Pratt, J. Mattheus, and R. Klein, “A benchmark dataset for defect
detection and classification in electroluminescence images of PV
modules using semantic segmentation,” Syst. Soft Comput., vol. 5,
Dec. 2023, Art. no. 200048.
[57] D. Tabernik, S. Šela, J. Skvarč, and D. Skočaj, “Segmentation-based
deep-learning approach for surface-defect detection,” J. Intell. Manuf.,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 759–776, May 2019.
[58] S. Tang, F. He, X. Huang, and J. Yang, “Online PCB defect detector on
a new PCB defect dataset,” 2019, arXiv:1902.06197.
[59] M. Maguire, S. Dorafshan, and R. Thomas. SDNET2018: A
Concrete Crack Image Dataset for Machine Learning Applications. Accessed: Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available: [Online]. Available:
https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/all/48
[60] Tianchi. (2020). Smart Diagnosis of Cloth Flaw Dataset. [Online].
Available: https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/dataDetail?dataId=79336
[61] X. Tao, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Liu, H. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Detection
of power line insulator defects using aerial images analyzed with
convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. Syst.,
vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1486–1498, Apr. 2020.
[62] T. Schlagenhauf, M. Landwehr, and J. Fleischer, “Industrial machine
tool component surface defect dataset,” 2021, arXiv:2103.13003.
[63] I. Andersen. (Oct. 2021). Tilda Fabric Dataset. [Online]. Available:
https://universe.roboflow.com/irvin-andersen/tilda-fabric
[64] C. J. van Rijsbergen, Information Retrieval. London, U.K.: Butterworth,
1979.
[65] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
[66] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324.

5009013

Bingke Zhu received the B.E. degree from the
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing,
China, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree from
the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, in 2021.
He is currently an Assistant Professor of pattern recognition and intelligence systems with
the Foundation Model Research Center, Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing. His current research interests include pattern
recognition and machine learning, image and video
processing, semantic segmentation, and visual anomaly detection.

Yingying Chen received the B.S. degree from the
Communication University of China, Beijing, China,
in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree from the University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in 2018.
She is currently an Associated Professor of
pattern recognition and intelligence systems with
the Foundation Model Research Center, Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing. Her current research interests include
pattern recognition and machine learning, image and
video processing, and intelligent video surveillance.

Ming Tang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in computer science and engineering and
the M.S. degree in artificial intelligence from
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 1984 and
1987, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in pattern
recognition and intelligent systems from the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2002.
He is currently a Professor with the Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
current research interests include computer vision
and machine learning.

Jinqiao Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree from the Hebei University of Technology,
Tianjin, China, in 2001, the M.S. degree from
Tianjin University, Tianjin, in 2004, and the
Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligence
systems from the National Laboratory of Pattern
Recognition, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China, in 2008.
He is currently a Professor with the National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Chinese Academy
of Sciences. His research interests include pattern
recognition and machine learning, large multimodel model, and image and
video analysis.