IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

4851

Practical Cyber Attack Detection With Continuous
Temporal Graph in Dynamic Network System
Guanghan Duan , Hongwu Lv , Huiqiang Wang , Guangsheng Feng , and Xiaoli Li , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Deep learning (DL) greatly enhances cyber anomaly
detection capabilities through effective statistical network characteristic. However, previous methods have not fully addressed
two real-world scenario-driven challenges. 1) Frequent node
access and disconnection sourced from free-bounded 5G/B5G
cyberspace introduce unfamiliar communication behavior patterns, reducing the detection ability of the pre-trained DL model.
2) Low-frequency or sporadic communication behaviors lack
stable patterns, posing a challenge for existing AI-driven models,
including DL-based detection methods. To address these issues,
we propose a cyber anomaly detection framework based on
Continuous Temporal Graph (CTG) neural network from a
new interaction-centered perspective. The proposed framework
refines the concrete information interaction between network
entities into the CTG evolution process, thereby naturally incorporating new node access behaviors into feature extraction
on CTG neural network. We furthermore present a message
aggregation scheme on CTG with fusion of spatio-temporal
neighborhood, the actual time distribution and the historical
state, thus transforming communication into a more stable
pattern for the learning of low-frequency interactions. Extensive
experiments on 4 novel datasets, including ToN-IoT, UNSWNB15,
CIC-Dark2020, J.P. Morgan payment, demonstrate that our
approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods, particularly in
detecting new access and low-frequency behaviors.
Index Terms— Graph neural network, intrusion detection,
anomaly detection, semisupervised learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION
T IS estimated that by the end of this year, 5.3 billion
people and 29.3 billion devices will be interconnected by
prospering networking technologies such as Beyond FifthGeneration (B5G) and the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
[1]. Consequently, people, machines, and things are more
closely interacting than ever before. The rapid growth of
networked devices and a significant increase in interactive

I

Manuscript received 28 September 2023; revised 23 February 2024;
accepted 27 March 2024. Date of publication 4 April 2024; date of current
version 7 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272126, in part by
the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities, in part by the
Special Project for Industrial Foundation Reconstruction and High Quality
Development of Manufacturing Industry by the Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology under Grant TC220A04X-1, and in part by the
Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang under Grant LH2021F001. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it
for publication was Dr. Z. Berkay Celik. (Corresponding author: Hongwu Lv.)
Guanghan Duan, Hongwu Lv, Huiqiang Wang, and Guangsheng Feng are
with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: lvhongwu@hrbeu.edu.cn).
Xiaoli Li is with the Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
138632, and also with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3385321

data are driving the attack surface to inflate rapidly. Therefore, the malicious behaviors of cybercriminals can be easily
blended into these complex, massive, and (especially) multisource interactive data, just like a needle in a haystack.
Network threats mixed with frequent interactions, i.e., phishing campaigns, unsolicited cryptomining, ransomware, and
information-stealing malware, are intensively becoming a
systemic challenge. Therefore, the detection of anomalous
network behaviors among massive interactive data plays an
essential role in ensuring the sustainability and security of
cyberspace.
Extensive research has been conducted to analyze and
classify various types of abnormal cyber behaviors, e.g.,
expert systems, signature-based network behavior analysis
approaches, modern machine learning (ML)-based methods
and advanced deep neural network models. However, most
of these techniques focus on behavioral attributes rather
than interactive processes. In reality, these methods based on
behavioral feature representation often exhibit limited effectiveness due to some unavoidable factors, such as anonymity
technology and privacy protection. For instance, signaturebased methods cannot cope with encrypted data [2], while
the additional regulatory and privacy requirements within
financial services usually disclose limited historical data and
few available features [3].
Furthermore, targeting better detection performance, other
researchers are attempting to mine temporal and spatial information in cyberspace by employing graph-based learning
approaches, e.g., Anomal-E [4], a dynamic line graph [5],
a spatial-temporal graph convolutional network [2], a wrongdoing monitor [6], and WTAGRAPH [7]. Each of these
graph-based methods contributes to achieving superior data
representation capabilities. For the aforementioned successful
works, the topological and temporal information encapsulated in network user interactions reflects distinct behavioral
characteristics. Understanding these characteristics can aid in
uncovering potential security risks. However, several challenges persist in previous methods.
The first limitation is that the extraction of spatial-temporal
features is restricted to a fixed topological structure by the
existing graph-based methods [4], [5], which hinders the
discovery of anomalies from new connections and interactions. Concretely, these methods generally treat the network
topology as a consistent adjacency matrix during training
and testing, which means that new topological information is
difficult to fully learn and express. However, we are facing a

1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

4852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

more complicated and unbounded cyber environment [29]; for
instance, attackers may use new virtual hosts to launch DDos
attacks, and scammers can utilize new accounts to commit
fraud.
The second challenge lies in the inefficiency of most
anomaly detection methods when confronted with the nonuniform distribution of network traffic traces across spatial and
temporal domains. This inefficiency is particularly pronounced
in handling low-frequency communication behavior among
network hosts [30], [31]. For instance, statistics from the
Ton-IoT, CIC-Darknet, and CIC-IDS2018 datasets show that
5% of all host pairs have contributed more than 50% of
the communication behaviors contained in all test sets, while
the frequency of communication between the remaining 95%
of the host pairs is less than 20 times. Traditional deep
learning (DL) methods have difficulty mining stable statistical patterns from these low-frequency sporadic behaviors.
Additionally, graph-based detection methods such as those
of [2] and [5] assume that the spatial topology behind network
communication is uniformly distributed in the time dimension
while incorporating spatial-temporal characteristics. Specifically, these methods first extract the spatial information of
each graph snapshot and adopt sequence models to model
the sequence associations between these pieces of spatial
information. In the face of these occasional interaction events,
the sequence models adopted by [2] and [5] may not capture
effective information for numerous time slices.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel adversarial
interaction behavior detection framework based on a continuous temporal graph neural network (CTGNN) to capture both
the attribute and complex behavior information of network
interactions. Specifically, the proposed framework refines the
concrete information interaction processes between each pair
of entities as corresponding interactive edges on a continuous
temporal graph (CTG) so that the behavior generated by
a new node access event can be naturally expressed as a
CTG update. Furthermore, low-frequency behaviors are no
longer processed in isolation but are incorporated into an
entire spatiotemporal neighborhood for message aggregation,
thus transforming them into a more stable pattern for model
learning. By adopting richer cyberspace behavior features
during the interaction process, the characteristics of network
interactions can be more effectively learned, analyzed and
summarized to efficiently distinguish malicious behaviors. The
main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We propose a cyberattack detection framework leveraging
a CTG to address the challenge posed by fixed topologies
in detecting newly connected entity behaviors. For the first
time, the proposed method refines anomaly detection from a
macroscopic topology level to a granular level, focusing on
concrete information interactions between pairs of network
entities. This approach naturally accommodates new node
access behaviors within feature extraction.
• To independently track the long-term historical status of
the interaction process, we develop a CTGNN model. Unlike
previous methods that primarily rely on sequence relationships
to capture historical information [8], our CTGNN model offers
a more detailed analysis by incorporating information updates

and topological changes between network entity pairs. This
enriched representation capability enhances the effectiveness
of the detection model.
• We propose a message aggregation scheme based on
spatiotemporal neighborhoods to mitigate the impact of lowfrequency interactions. Our method systematically integrates
interaction behavior details, including contextual neighborhood representations, temporal distributions, and historical
states. This comprehensive approach improves detection performance, particularly for occasional interactions.
• Extensive experiments are conducted on 4 datasets
covering different interactive scenarios, including intrusion
detection in the IIoT [9] and the intranet [10], J.P. Morgan
fraud detection in transactional networks [3] and darknet
traffic analysis [11]. The obtained results demonstrate that the
proposed method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
approaches.
This paper is structured as follows. The related works are
reviewed in Section II. Section III provides the formal problem
definition. Section IV describes the employed methodology.
In Section V, extensive experiments and results are presented.
Section VI is devoted to the conclusions and further work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Abnormal Detection in Interactive Network Behavior
The detection and mitigation of abnormal interaction
behaviors have long been prominent trends in the field of
cybersecurity, including anomaly detection and darknet analysis in network traffic. Different from early rule-based methods
such as Snort [12], ML- and DL-based methods have been
widely explored to better detect malicious cyber activities with
favorable scalability and high accuracy [13]. For instance,
Marteau [14] proposed a semisupervised anomaly detection
approach based on binary trees with random partitioning. Bitton and Shabtai [15] proposed an anomaly detection technique
based on PCA and K-means for detecting malicious TCP
packets, which can carry exploits aimed at a remote desktop
server.
Compared with above mentioned ML-based methods, flexible deep architectures and end-to-end learning processes
enable DL-based methods to capture more sophisticated attack
patterns. Yang et al. [16] developed a conditional variational
autoencoder with extreme value theory to perform unknown
intrusion detection by leveraging flow-level features. Kravchik
and Shabtai [17] examined a cyberattack detection method for
industrial control systems based on 1D convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) and autoencoders. Moreover, Zhao et al. [8]
presented an error-resilient recurrent neural network (RNN)
for network-induced phenomena, thereby effectively detecting encrypted traffic. The above methods emphasize explicit
attribute features, while implicit behavioral and topological
features are difficult to deal with.
B. Graph-Based Abnormal Interactive Detection
Recently, several pioneering works have intensively
explored NIDSs based on GNNs to exploit the spatial information of actual networks to varying degrees. For instance,

DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM

Caville et al. [4] presented a static graph-based intrusion
detection method that leverages edge features and a graph
topology structure in a self-supervised manner. Moreover,
Wang and Zhu [6] integrated the inter- (event-level) and
intra- (property-level) associations of behaviors into a unified
graph for anomaly detection purposes. Furthermore, temporal
information concerning topological structures has attracted
researchers’ attention. Among them, Cao et al. [2] mapped
a data plane-programmable SDN to a graph and deployed a
spatial-temporal graph convolutional network to detect DDoS
attack flows. Similarly, Duan et al. [5] converted network
traffic into a series of line graphs and employed a dynamic line
GNN-based NIDS to achieve improved intrusion detection performance. However, the underlying GNNs in the literature [2],
[4], [5], [6] are all traditional static GNNs, which are limited
to invariant topological structures. In other words, it is difficult
for these methods to satisfy actual network environments, such
as 5G NFV or 6G space-air-ground integrated networks, with
time-varying characteristics, unbounded cyber environments
and diverse connection densities.
C. Dynamic Graph Representation Methods
Dynamic graph representation is an emerging DL paradigm
for learning evolving relationships among various entities
across temporal dimensions. In general, dynamic graphs
can be broadly classified into two categories: discretetime dynamic graphs (DTDGs) and continuous-time dynamic
graphs (CTDGs). The evolution process of a DTDG can be
described by a sequence of static graph snapshots sampled at
regularly spaced times. Actually, the spatiotemporal graph and
dynamic line graph representations used in the above anomaly
detection methods [2], [5] can be regarded as different types
of DTDGs.
Different from a DTDG, a CTDG is modeled as a stream of
serial events that occurs sequentially and has a finer temporal
granularity. Zuo et al. [18] mentioned that snapshot-based
methods (such as [2] and [5]) model temporal correlations as a
fixed topological structure, thus ignoring the fine-grained topological variation process. Reference [18] suggested utilizing
the neighborhood formation process to describe the evolution
of a node and adopting a Hawkes process to generate the
corresponding node representation. Ma et al. [19] proposed
a novel CTDGNN framework that continuously updates node
information by capturing the interaction information and the
time intervals of edges. TGAT [20] utilizes a graph-based
temporal attention mechanism to capture the temporal neighborhood information of a node, where the positional encoding
of the attention mechanism is replaced by a temporal encoding.
Based on that, Rossi et al. [21] added a memory module to
TGAT to trace the long-term dependencies of different nodes.
However, the above methods impose a certain upper limit
on abnormal cyber interaction detection performance. Specifically, typical DGNNs usually focus on node embedding-driven
tasks such as temporal link prediction or node classification,
whereas abnormal cyber interaction detection tasks aim at
the link states and communications between network agents.
Moreover, the message aggregation mechanisms adopted by

4853

the previous DGNNs tend to aggregate high-frequency node
signals from nodes with more connections, making it challenging to fully represent low-frequency or isolated behaviors.
III. P ROBLEM D EFINITION
A. Threat Model
Our abnormal cyber behavior analysis task involves detecting malicious network behaviors by understanding their
underlying interactive communication processes. Assuming
an unbounded network environment, such as the Internet of
Things, 5G or a trading network, would allow possible entities
access and induce disconnections. Additionally, considering
the diverse connection density characteristics of actual networks, some communication-intensive nodes possess frequent
interactions, while other inactive entities only send a small
amount of information. Malicious actors can exploit network
entities to carry out various malicious activities, including
DDoS attacks, brute-force attacks, money laundering, and
fraudulent transactions.
We assume that security analysts are capable of recording
the interactive behaviors between cyber entities. Taking the
intrusion detection scenario as an example, the network traffic
interaction can be recorded in the network flow format, which
is indexed by the following default five-tuple: <Source IP,
Source Port, Destination IP, Destination
Port, Protocol>. These recordings can represent the
protocol-related, size-related and time-related basic features
of the interaction between the server host and the network
switch. In addition to the attribute features in the traditional
network security analysis process, we combine the topology,
interaction, and timing features between interactive events to
introduce more information, which provides a new CTG-based
modeling paradigm for cyber anomaly detection.
B. Continuous Temporal Graph
An interactive CTG is defined as a directed multigraph
G = (V, E, Event), where V represents an initial node set,
and each e ∈ E denotes a communication link between pairs of
nodes. Each event ∈ Event represents a bipartite interaction
event between nodes that corresponds to a network traffic flow
or transaction record. Since multiple interactions directed from
host u to host v are permitted in network G, we use different
t
timestamps eventu,v
to indicate the interactions among the
links (u, v). Moreover, when a new node i accesses the
network and communicates with node u, a corresponding intert is generated. Intuitively, the CTG can
action event eventi,u
represent the interaction processes and temporal associations
in a time-varying network. As shown in Fig. 1, each node
denotes a host IP, while each interaction represents a specific
netflow issued from the source host to the destination host.
In line with real network characteristics, multiple bidirectional
events occur between nodes, each representing different network interaction records.
C. CTG-Based Interaction Representation and Classification
With the above definition, the task of abnormal cyber
interaction detection is formally converted to a classification

4854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 1.
An example of the traffic temporal graph constructed from
UNSW-NB15 network traffic.

problem in the proposed CTG. Following the terminology
in [22], we employ an encoder-decoder pair to resolve the
interaction event representation learning and classification
problem, where the encoder maps all interaction events
to corresponding edge embeddings on the CTG. Formally,
given a CTG G = (V, E, Event), the goal is to design a
temporal graph encoder f ω : x n×e → Rn×d (d ≪ e) that
generates a d-dimensional representation for n input events
with e-dimensional interaction features in G. Furthermore,
a decoder takes interaction representations as inputs and outputs the prediction ŷ, where each component of ŷ represents
the conditional probabilities of each class. Specifically, our
tasks in this work include classifying interaction events as
benign or malicious and further distinguishing between different attack categories. The learned edge representations can
be utilized in different ways, including supervised learning,
semisupervised learning, unsupervised clustering, and fewshot learning.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
As illustrated in Figure 2, the proposed CTGNN is composed of four components. Specifically, the temporal graph
builder first constructs a sequence of temporal graphs from
interaction records and determines the local event neighborhoods and event features. Next, the Bochner time encoder
is deployed to map the time span to a d-dimensional vector. Subsequently, the interactive event update component
has the ability to trace and update long-term dependencies
across the corresponding events. The interaction event aggregation scheme fuses interaction behavior details including
temporal-topological neighborhood information, the actual
time distribution and the historical evolution process of each
event.
A. Continuous Temporal Graph Construction
First, we transform the original interactive records into a
CTG, as exemplified in Figure 1. Taking the interactive traffic
in the UNSW-NB15 dataset as an example, all intercepted
traffic flow records are treated as interaction events between
corresponding source and destination hosts. With this setting,
each node of the CTG represents a specific IP address. The
edge features of the CTG are different network flow statistics
that depend on the specific flow format and the exported flows,
such as the protocol, duration, number of incoming flow bytes,
and number of bytes per packet. It should be emphasized that

the proposed CTG does not consist of a fixed adjacency matrix.
Referring to [19] and [20], the proposed CTG dynamically
updates the topology structure and edge feature through the
interaction relationships in chronological order. Particularly,
in traffic interaction scenarios, the interaction relationship
is determined by the following quadruple: <Source IP,
Destination IP, Time, Index>.
In traditional GNNs, the local neighborhoods of nodes
are naturally defined by explicit edge connections. Notably,
in the interactive CTG, both network topology information
determined by entities (such as IPs and transaction senders)
and contextual relationships between interaction events in the
time dimension are included. As shown in Figure 1, for event

t
t
enn
its 1-hopoo
neighborhoods N eu,v
=
u,v at time t, weoconsider
n
 0
0
0
t−
t−
t−
e , . . . , eu,n ∪ e1,v , . . . , en,v \ eu,v , . . . , eu,v , where
n u,1
o
0
t− indicates the interaction events launched from
eu,1 , . . . , eu,n
n
o
0 , . . . , et−
source node u, e1,v
stands for the interaction
n,v
 0
t−
events received by destination node v, and eu,v
, . . . , eu,v
is the set of historical events occurring between u and v.
Such neighborhood settings are mainly based on the following
considerations. If an interactive record is a malicious network
behavior, then the initiator of the interaction may send malicious messages to other entities. Similarly, other behaviors
accepted by the interaction destination of this record may also
be malicious behaviors. By defining the local neighborhoods of
interaction events, we can further design a corresponding message passing mechanism, thus fusing the temporal-topological
information between interaction events.
B. Bochner Time Encoder
Sequence models such as long short-term memory (LSTM)
and gated recurrent units (GRUs) can mainly understand
contextual relations, but it is difficult for them to model the
actual time distribution between interactive events. Therefore,
a Bochner time encoder [23] is deployed to extract and express
the potential periodicity and translation invariance of the actual
time distribution among interactive events. Formally, suppose
we are given a function mapping 8 : T → Rd , where T
and Rd are the continuous time domain and a d−dimensional
vector space, respectively. Assume that for two time points
t1 , t2 ∈ T = [0, tmax ], the corresponding time kernel can
be defined as K (t1 , t2 ) := ⟨8 (t1 ) , 8 (t2 )⟩ and K (t1 , t2 ) =
ψ (t1 − t2 ) , ∀t1 , t2 ∈ T for some ψ : [−tmax , tmax ] → R.
We adopt the Bochner time encoder [23] to map the time
interval to a d−dimensional vector.
According to Bochner's Theorem, this time kernel K could
be expressed as follows:
K (t1 , t2 ) = ψ (t1 , t2 )
Z


=
eiω(t1 −t2 ) p(ω)dω = Eω ξω (t1 ) ξω (t2 )∗ (1)
R

where ξω (t) = eiωt . Since the probability measure p(ω) is a
real-valued function, the real part of equation 1 is denoted as:
K (t1 , t2 ) = E ω [cos (ω (t1 − t2 ))]
= E ω [cos (ωt1 ) cos (ωt2 ) + sin (ωt1 ) sin (ωt2 )] (2)

DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM

Fig. 2.

4855

The framework of the dynamic-graph-based NIDS model.

The above expectation can be approximated by
i.i.d
Monte Carlo integral. Assuming ω1 , . . . , ωd ∼ p(ω),
theP time kernel K (t1 , t2 ) could be estimated as
d
1
i=1 (cos (ωi t1 ) cos (ωi t2 ) + sin (ωi t1 ) sin (ωi t2 )).
d
Therefore, Bochner's theorem motivates the time feature
mapping t 7 → 8B
d (t) as:
r
1
(cos (ω1 t) , sin (ω1 t) , . . . , cos (ωd t) , sin (ωd t)) (3)
d
In our follow-up design, we combine the Bochner time encoder
and GRU to model the time distribution of interaction events
in a more fine-grained manner.
C. Interactive Event Update Mechanism
To understand differentiated interaction processes between
different entities, we model their fine-grained behavioral patterns from an interaction perspective. Specifically, we propose
an interactive event update mechanism to independently track
and summarize the historical evolution of interaction events
between correspondin entities. The interactive event update
mechanism maintains a historical state list comprising a set of
vectors that summarizes the history of events between different
entities. Whenever a subsequent event occurs, its historical
state will be updated by the GRU and Bochner time encoder.
t
Formally, the historical state of an interaction event eu,v
consists of a vector h tu,v with d−dimensional features summat . It should be emphasized
rizing the historical evolution of eu,v
that since the CTG is a directed graph, we allocate separate
′
t ′ . The historical state h t
historical states h tv,u for ev,u
u,v is
t+ occurs, where t+
updated when the subsequent event eu,v
t+ ,
denotes a time stamp after t. For each subsequent event eu,v
a response signal can be computed as follows:

t+
t+
ru,v
= ResPonse h tu,v ∥8(t + − t)∥euv
(4)
where ∥ indicates the concatenation operation, 8(·) represents
the Bochner time encoder that captures the time distribution,
t+ denotes the feature vector of subsequent events. Addiand euv
tionally, ResPonse signifies learnable functions that merges the
current state, the compressed historical state, and the actual

time span feature. Multiple choices could be considered for
the learnable function such as MLP, CNN, Transformers, our
model selects MLP as the learnable function.
To effectively reduce the computational overhead, the
historical state is updated with a batch cycle. We deploy
an aggregation mechanism to handle the corresponding
responses when multiple events occur on a specific link. Let
t1
t ) denote the events on links (u, v) in a batch;
J (eu,v
, . . . , eu,v
the aggregation operation can be written as
t+
t1
t
r̄u,v
= agg(ru,v
, . . . , ru,v
)

(5)

Note that we select the average of all responses as the
aggregation operation. It should be emphasized that the above
aggregation operation is also performed on other interaction
event sets of different links, such as (u, j) and (v, j). Thereafter, the historical state h tu,v is updated by applying
t
t+
h t+
u,v = Update(h u,v , r̄u,v )

(6)

Here, we deploy a GRU as the update function. The new
embedding of the historical state h t+
u,v is refined by incorporating historical information concerning interactive events, the
time distribution and context relationships.
D. Interaction Event Contexts Aggregation
Typically, GNNs generate node embeddings in a simple
homogenous graph by aggregating neighborhood information
and graph topology features for tasks such as node classification, node clustering, and link prediction. For the task of
network attack detection, we employ an event aggregation
mechanism to fuse the neighborhood information of events
and generate a embedding representation for each event at
(ℓ)
any time t. Specifically, the temporal representation su,v (t) of
t
event eu,v at layer ℓ can be calculated as


(ℓ−1) ′
(ℓ)
′
s̃(ℓ)
(t)
=
AGG
s
(t
)∥8(t
−
t
)
u,v
i, j


(ℓ)
(ℓ)
(ℓ−1)
su,v (t) = MLP
su,v (t)∥s̃(ℓ)
(7)
u,v (t) ,
(ℓ−1)

where si, j (t ′ ) represents the temporal representations of

′
t
neighbor evnets (ei,t j ) ∈ N eu,v
at layer ℓ − 1, 8(t − t ′ )

4856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

denotes the time span feature between neighbor evnets and
origin events. There are multiple implementations of the AGG
operation, including parameterized functions like MLP, MultiHead Attention, Informer, et al. In our practice, we adopt
a multi-head attention mechanism to model the impact of
different neighbors on event embeddings. The AGG operation
based on the multi-head attention can be computed as follows:


(l)
s̃(ℓ)
q (l) (t), K (l) (t), V (l) (t)
u,v (t) = MultiHeadAttention
q (l) (t) = s(ℓ−1)
u,v (t)∥8(0)
K (l) (t) = V (l) (t)
h
i
(ℓ−1)
(ℓ−1)
= su ′ ,v ′ (t1′ )∥8(t − t1′ ), . . . , su ′ ,v ′ (t1′ )∥8(t − t N′ )
1

1

N

N

(8)
(ℓ)

where the initial representation of each event s̃u,v (t) =
t ∥h t ) exploits both the compressed historical state h t
(eu,v
u,v
u,v
t . The query q (l) (t) denotes
and the current event feature eu,v
a reference event, and the keys K (l) (t) and values V (l) (t)
denote the information of its neighbors. In this case, we adopt
scaled dot-product attention to calculate the attention scores
of different neighbor events and their temporal distribution,
although in principle, any other type of attention mechanism
can be utilized. Following the typical GNN message passing
mechanism, an MLP aggregates the neighborhood information
and the reference event representation.

Algorithm 1 The Overall Process of the Proposed Method
0 , . . . , et ; CorInput: Interaction events with time steps: e1,2
u,v
n×e
responding feature matrices X ∈ R
Set hyperparameters: Number of events in each batch, number of events in the neighborhood of a specific interaction,
labeled data percentage, dropout probability
Output: Prediction ŷ
1: Divide interaction events into batches and establish a
CTG, initialize historical state to 0
2: while not converged do
3:
for each batch = 1 : Maxbatch do
4:
Responses for the new events in the current batch
t+ ← ResPonse(h t ∥8(t + − t)∥et+ )
ru,v
u,v
uv
t1
t )
5:
Aggregate the response signals agg(ru,v
, . . . , ru,v
6:
Obtain the updated historical state by aggregated
t
t+
signals and previous state h t+
u,v ← Update(h u,v , r̄u,v )

7:
8:
9:

Fuse the features from the local
 spatiotemporal neigh
(ℓ)
(ℓ−1)
borhood: s̃u,v (t) ← AGG(ℓ) si, j (t ′ )∥8(t − t ′ )
Compute final embeddings combining
neighborhood


(ℓ)
(ℓ−1)
(ℓ)
information su,v (t) ← MLP(ℓ) su,v (t)∥s̃u,v (t)
Compute the classification loss L on the labeled data

10:
Gradient descent and model parameter update
11:
end for
12: end while
13: return Prediction ŷ

E. Traffic Events Classifier
To adapt topology-varying network environments, the proposed CTGNN is designed to support any topology during
the test phase, including node connections and disconnections.
We initialize new memory structures for nodes and interaction
events that are not observed during training. The embeddings
of the new interaction events and their memory are calculated
by the trained components. During the training phase, all computational components (i.e., all learnable functions) involved
in the embedding calculation are expected to contribute to
the gradient update. Thus, the model first updates the events’
memories by compressing and aggregating the historical signal
at the beginning of each subbatch and then combines the
updated memories and neighborhood features to infer the
embeddings of the training events. As a result, the gradient
update process depends on all computational components ever
calculated. We summarize the training process of the proposed
model in Algorithm 1.
In addition, we adopt two different training strategies to test
the performance capabilities of our CTGNN. The difference
between them is that the fully supervised process uses all event
labels from the training dataset, while the semisupervised
process only utilizes parts of the training dataset labels.
We combine the representations of temporal events into a
classification subnetwork that includes a softmax function and
minimizes the cross-entropy loss for event classification tasks.
Furthermore, in the evaluation phase, we calculate the class
probabilities of the test samples and compare them with their
actual labels to assess the performance of the model.

V. I MPLEMENTATION AND E VALUATION
A. Experimental Implementation and Setup
1) Datasets and Data Preparation: We choose 4 newly
published public datasets with spatial information to evaluate
the proposed methods: ToN-IoT 2021 [9], UNSW-NB 15 [10],
Darknet 2020 [11] and J.P. Morgan payments dataset [3].
These 4 datasets cover different application scenarios and
follow different data distributions so that the performance of
the model can be effectively tested. Specifically, the ToN-IoT
and the UNSW-NB 15 datasets were both created by the Cyber
Range Lab of UNSW Canberra. Among them, the ToN-IoT
dataset was created by a realistic Industry 4.0 network environment incorporating a combination of normal traffic and various
types of attack traffic. The UNSW-NB15 dataset is a hybrid
dataset consisting of authentic normal and attack records.
Its network packet volume is approximately 100 gigabytes,
generating 2,540,044 observations with 47 features. The CICDarknet2020 dataset is published by the Canadian Institute
for Cybersecurity and consists of 134,348 benign samples and
24,311 darknet samples with 78 features. The J.P. Morgan
payment dataset contains a large variety of transaction types
representing normal activities as well as abnormal/fraudulent
activities. The features of the payment data include the number
of clients, time duration, etc.
The data preparation phase consists of the following 2 steps.
We first convert the network flows into a temporal graph as
described above, with each network flow corresponding to an

DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM

4857

TABLE I
C HARACTERISTICS I NFORMATION OF A LL THE 4 DATASETS

event. Second, preserving the contextual information process,
we divide the interactive events into 3 groups in order of
their appearance. The first 80% of the interactive events are
treated as the training set, and the middle 5% and the last
15% are designated as the validation and test sets, respectively.
In combination with the subsequent data preparation process,
we further present the details of these datasets in Table I. More
detailed information and the corresponding resource list can
be found in the website repository1234 . The operating environment for the experiments includes a 4.7-GHz i7-10710U CPU,
16 GB of RAM, and the 64-bit Windows 10 operating system.
Regarding the utilized software versions, we employ Python
3.8, PyTorch 1.9.0, CUDA 11.1, and PyTorch Geometric 2.0.2.
2) Evaluation Metrics: Five classic metrics are adopted to
evaluate the performance of our NIDS model, namely, the
accuracy (ACC), recall (DR), false alarm rate, precision and
F1 score [24] metrics. In the multiclassification experiment
conducted to identify different attack types, we use the macroDR and macro-F1 scores as evaluation indicators. They are
calculated as shown below:
n
1X
Macro F1 =
F1x
(9)
n
Macro DR =

1
n

x=1
n
X

D Rx

(10)

x=1

where Macro F1 and Macro DR are the unweighted means
of the corresponding F1 and DR scores of different classes,
respectively. It’s need to emphasize that macro metrics give
equal importance to the majority and minority classes, allowing us to still obtain objective results on imbalanced datasets.
3) Baselines: We compare the performance of the proposed
method against the following detection methods:
CNN-BiLSTM [25] is a classical DL model that joins a
CNN and bidirectional LSTM to analyze network traffic.
Stacked Random Forest [26] is an ensemble ML model
that combines the predictions derived from multiple random
forest algorithms for the intrusion detection task. We train the
classifier based on the sklearn.ensemble and mlxtend.classifier
modules following the setup developed in the literature [26].
1 https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/toniot-datasets
2 https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/unsw-nb15-dataset
3 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/darknet2020.html
4 https://www.jpmorgan.com/technology/artificialintelligence/initiatives/synthetic-data/payments-data-for-fraud-detection

CVAE-EVT [16] synthesized conditional variational auto
encoder and extreme value theory to boost known/unknown
attack performance in a two-stage training. Since the author
conducted unknown attack detection in the second stage,
we only compare with the first stage of the known attack
detection.
TMG-GAN [32] is a generative adversarial network based
attack detection method to deal with imbalanced traffic distribution. TMG-GAN first performs data augmentation for
tail attack categories. Subsequently, a three-layer dense DNN
classifier is used to identify different attack traffic.
MTH-IDS [33] refers to a stacking ensemble model that
enhances multi-attack detection by integrating four tree-based
algorithms including Decision Tree, Random Forest, Extra
Trees, and XGBoost. In particular, MTH-IDS trains these classifiers for initial attack assessment and then uses an additional
XGBoost classifier for final decision making.
Anomal-E [4] leverages edge-level and topological information to generate an efficient edge embedding representation
for anomaly detection.
B. Experimental Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate the proposed CTGNN under
different learning settings. We first present its overall
performance, including binary and multiclass classification
performance, and conduct a detailed comparison between the
CTGNN and the state-of-the-art baseline methods. Second,
we systematically evaluate the proposed model and baseline
methods in the face of new access node behaviors as well
as interactions with low frequency. Third, we perform additional ablation experiments to evaluate the effectiveness and
contributions of the key computational components used in
our method. Subsequently, we evaluate the performance of
our work under a semisupervised setting with fewer label
participated.
1) Intrusion Detection Scenarios: In the intrusion detection
scenario, our main goals include (1) detecting anomalous
network traffic in a network and (2) distinguishing different
malicious attacks in background traffic for network administrators to respond to. Table II summarizes the binary classification
performance achieved by the tested methods on the UNSWNB15 and ToN-IoT datasets. Overall, the proposed method
exhibits remarkable performance in the binary intrusion detection scenario, with higher accuracy, a higher anomalous

4858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

TABLE II
B INARY C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A LGORITHMS

behavior detection rate, and a lower false-positive rate. For
example, the detection accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score
and FAR of the proposed method on the ToN-IoT dataset are
99.98%, 99.98%, 99.94%, 99.96% and 0.015%, respectively.
Several interesting implications can be derived from these
results. Although binary classification is a fairly simple task,
the performance of traditional DL methods such as CNNLSTM and CVAE-EVT on the TON-IoT dataset is not as
powerful as expected. We speculate that the relatively worse
performance achieved by the traditional DL methods on
the TON-IoT dataset may be attributable to their copious
amounts of Boolean or string features, such as dns_query,
ssl_version, etc. Furthermore, our proposed CTGNN and
the Anomal-E model outperform all of the remaining baseline
methods. This implies that by benefiting from implicit topological features and neighborhood information, GNN methods can
achieve satisfactory performance in binary intrusion detection
scenarios. Moreover, by comparing the message aggregation
results of the CTGNN to those of the traditional static GNN,
we find that the former achieves better detection performance
due to its finer-grained understanding of interaction behavior
details. We further verify this point of view in the follow-up
multicategory intrusion detection scenario.
In the multicategory malicious attack recognition scenario,
more challenges are encountered, including a copious amounts
of attack categories and an extremely unbalanced data distribution. We mainly focus on the following indicators in the
multiclassification setting: the detection rate, the F1 value of
each category and the corresponding weighted macro value
for the whole model. Tables III and IV summarize the detection performance achieved by the proposed method and the
baseline methods on 16 categories of malicious behaviors in
the TON-IoT and UNSW-NB15 datasets, respectively. Overall,
the proposed method outperforms all baseline models on most
attack categories.
On the ToN-IoT dataset, the proposed method achieves
detection rates and F1 scores exceeding 95% for 8 types

of traffic behavior (i.e., Benign, Backdoor, DDoS, DoS,
mitm, ransomware, scanning, and Xss attacks). Fig. 3
demonstrates that some of the password attacks in the
TON-IoT dataset are misclassified as DoS and injection
attacks; this may be related to the similar context interaction characteristics of these attack behaviors. We review the
source IPs involved in the password attacks (192.168.1.31,
192.168.1.30), and these source IPs also perform DoS attacks
and injection attacks on parts of the same communication
links. These findings demonstrate from another perspective
that our method can effectively capture the context interaction
characteristics of a network. On the UNSW-NB15 dataset,
the proposed method and baseline methods exhibit worse
performance attributes due to the extremely unbalanced data
distribution. In this case, the macro-DR and macro-F1 scores
of our method are 60.34% and 51.67%, respectively, which
are also better than those of the other baselines. The proposed
methods still maintain good detection rates for each category.
2) Encrypted Traffic Scenario: In the encrypted traffic classification scenario, we mainly conduct binary classification
experiments. Figure 4 presents the performance of the proposed model and the remaining baseline methods. Although
the darknet dataset has 78-dimensional attribute features, some
baseline methods do not perform as expected, especially the
static graph-based methods mentioned in the literature [4].
Static graph-based models may not be a panacea for any
scenario. We believe that the poor performance of the AnomalE methods may be due to the way they model static graphs.
Anomal-E maps all interaction processes (IP: ports) to a
complete whole graph, but in encrypted traffic scenarios,
anonymous technologies such as port forwarding, port randomization and tunneling protocols make it difficult for these
methods to capture the spatial characteristics of interactive
behaviors. Repeated interaction patterns originating from the
same machine, such as video services and chat services,
may produce unpredictable results for static graph modeling
methods. In contrast, the proposed model can predict the

DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM

4859

TABLE III
W EIGHTED AND M ACRO M ETRIC R ESULTS O BTAINED ON THE T O N-I OT DATASET

TABLE IV
W EIGHTED AND M ACRO M ETRIC R ESULTS O BTAINED ON THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET

Fig. 4. The performance achieved by the proposed and baseline methods on
the CIC-Darknet 2020 dataset.

Fig. 3. Confusion matrix of the multiclass classification results obtained on
the Ton-IoT 2021 dataset.

141,481 requests of 28,296 testing interaction records in the
CIC-Darknet dataset with an accuracy of 99.72%, a detection
ratio of 98.99%, a precision level of 98.00%, an F1 score of
97.18%, and an FAR of 1.01%. It becomes evident that our

temporal graph-based models outperform static graph-based
models, indicating the power of a finer-grained understanding
of interaction behavior details.
3) Fraud Payment Detection Scenario: In fraud detection
datasets, we are faced with extremely uneven data distributions
and quite a few available data features. Fig. 5 shows the
fraud detection results of the proposed model and the baseline
methods. Notably, the CTGNN consistently outperforms all

4860

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 5. The performance achieved by the proposed and baseline methods on
the Fraud Payment dataset.

baselines with an accuracy of 96.09%, a detection ratio of
81.80%, a precision level of 78.33%, an F1 score of 80.03%,
and an FAR of 18.19%. There are two possible reasons for the
performance discrepancy exhibited by the baseline methods.
First, only 8 features are available, including USD_amount,
Sender_Id, Sender_Account, Transaction_Type,
and Sender_Country, in the entire transaction network,
so most of the learning methods based on feature representations have worse performance. Second, we discover one
limitation of the static graph-based models such as [4]: they
may not be the most suitable solutions for these particular
highly imbalanced datasets. For example, only 69.71% of the
fraud behavior in the J.P. Morgan synthetic transaction network
is detected by Anomal-E, while 34.17% of the macro-average
DR is reported on the UNSW-NB15 dataset (Table IV). The
traditional message passing mechanism reveals the inclination
toward learning majority classes. Due to our fine-grained
link history modeling method, spatiotemporal interactions, and
temporal patterns, our method successfully overcomes the
detrimental effects mentioned above in most of our considered
datasets.
4) Analysis of New Access Nodes: To further verify the
impact of behaviors generated by new access nodes on
anomaly detection, we conduct a set of manual verifications
on the ToN-IoT and CIC-Darknet2020 datasets. As shown
in Table I, in the testing phase, 2,529 new access nodes in
the IIoT network generate 2,603 interaction records, including
normal traffic as well as four types of attack behaviors, i.e.,
DoS, mitm, password, and scanning attacks. In the
CIC-Darknet2020 dataset, 612 new interactive IPs generate
820 flow records that occupy 2.89% of the total testing
samples. Table V shows the comparison between the results
obtained by the proposed CTGNN and the suboptimal baseline
methods on these flow records generated by new access nodes.
On the ToN-IoT dataset, the performance of the three methods
on these newly generated records is worse than that attained
on all test samples. To our surprise, SRF does not detect
the abnormal behavior generated by the new access nodes.

Anomal-E detects 2 of the 4 types of attacks, while our
proposed method detects 3 categories and achieves higher DR
and F1 values. On CIC-Darknet2020, facing the encrypted
traffic generated by the new access IP, SRF’s classification
DR and F1 score drop by 12.78% and 11.49%, respectively; Anomal-e’s DR and F1 score drop by 16.24% and
9.92%, respectively. In contrast, the proposed CTGNN method
still maintains satisfactory performance when confronted with
these behaviors.
There are 2 potential reasons for these performance differences. First, we find that 2,544 of the 2,603 newly generated
flow records only appeared once, which means that pretrained
DL and ML methods are completely unfamiliar to these 2,544
records. The network behavior generated by the new access
nodes contains novel feature patterns that are difficult for
traditional DL and ML to reason. Although Anomal-E maps
all network behaviors to a large graph, these behaviors are
isolated nodes in the overall graph structure. Anomal-E does
not aggregate enough information to distinguish between different anomalous behaviors. Second, through the aggregation
of spatial-temporal neighborhood information, the CTGNN
makes these discrete and isolated behavior patterns continuous
and compact in the local neighborhood. In other words, the
CTGNN incorporates these novel behavior patterns into the
local node interaction processes that have been more effectively learned and summarized during the training process,
thus better reasoning about these unseen patterns.
5) Analysis of Behaviors With Low Frequencies: Noting
that most of the behaviors generated by new access nodes
occur only once, we further systematically analyze the impact
of the frequencies of behaviors on the resulting model performance. Since Anomal-E maps all behaviors to a large graph
(all edges appear only once), we compare the CTGNN with
SRF on the ToN-IoT dataset. We first count the communication
frequency between each pair of IPs in the test set. Specifically,
there are 5,680 IP pairs in the test set that produce 92,208 flow
records, among which 5,463 pairs of IPs have communication
frequencies below 20, generating 10,497 flow records. Furthermore, the frequency of communication between 5,630 IP
pairs is less than 300, corresponding to 22,925 flow records.
Fig. 6 presents the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves produced by the SRF and CTGNN methods, where
f denotes different communication frequencies.
As seen from the above figures, although SRF performs
well on the overall test samples in Fig. 6a, its performance
is not stable when faced with low-frequency traffic records
(shown in Figs. 6b and 6c). In fact, Figs. 6a and 6d reveal
that the excellent performance of SRF may be mainly concentrated in the behaviors with the majority frequency, the
frequencies of these behaviors are greater than 300, but only
accounts for 0.88% of the total IP pairs. In contrast, benefiting
from utilizing the historical state, the local spatiotemporal
neighbor information and the actual time distribution, the
proposed CTGNN alleviates the negative impact of the lowfrequency interaction distributions. As shown in Figs. 6a
and 6d, the proposed approach maintains encouraging performance for most IP pairs, which is essential for real-world
scenarios.

DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM

4861

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W HILE C ONSIDERING THE B EHAVIORS G ENERATED BY N EW ACCESS N ODES

Fig. 6. For the Ton-IoT 2021 dataset, RoC curves are generated by SRF with communication frequency (b) f ≤ 20, (c) f ≤ 300, or (d) f >300, as well as
RoC curves on CTGNN with (f) f ≤ 20, (g) f ≤ 300, or (h) f >300.

6) Ablation Analysis: We conduct additional ablation experiments to demonstrate the contributions of each component of
our model to its overall performance. Essentially, we introduce
historical representations (summarized by the interactive event
update mechanism), spatiotemporal neighborhood information,
and the time interval encoding process in the interaction behavior analysis. We design a simple and direct ablation experiment
to verify the effect of each component on the overall performance. To eliminate the influence of the multihead attention
mechanism on the proposed method, an MLP-based message
aggregation approach is deployed to verify the role of each
component in the interaction network analysis. To clarify how
different components impact the interactive network analysis,
we conduct ablation studies on the following message aggregation strategy variants: (1) a variant without neighborhood
information, (2) a variant without the interactive event update
mechanism, and (3) a variant without time interval encoding.
Fig. 7 presents the overall performance achieved in these
confirmatory experiments compared with that of the MLP
message aggregation-based CTGNNs and the base MLP.
These CTGNN variants outperform the vanilla MLP model
but perform slightly worse than the complete CTGNN. For
instance, without neighborhood information aggregation, the

accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score of the MLP message
aggregation-based CTGNN drop by 1.26%, 7.64%, 4.22% and
5.98%, respectively. These results imply that (1) the introduced
additional interactive event update mechanism, spatiotemporal
neighborhoods, and time interval encoding components are
all conducive to improving the performance achieved in the
interaction behavior analysis. (2) The adopted computing
components are not limited to a specific computing framework,
such as multihead attention; in fact, these components are compatible with different feature aggregation schemes, including
MLPs and transformers. (3) Neighborhood information has
a greater impact on model performance than the other two
computational components.
To further explore the expressive ability of our model,
we conduct semisupervised learning with 20% of the labels
sampled from the training sets of the ToN-IoT, CIC-Darknet
and fraud payment datasets. Considering that the training set
accounts for 80% of the total samples, the semisupervised
learning process only uses 16% of the labels of the total
samples. As shown in Table VI, when only 16% of the labels
are utilized for these datasets, the results do not exhibit a
large gap relative to those obtained when employing 80% of
the labeled samples. The performance achieved with 16% of

4862

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 7.

Results of ablation experiments.

TABLE VI
ACCURACY AND F1 ACHIEVED W ITH D IFFERENT L ABEL P ROPORTIONS
FOR S EMISUPERVISED L EARNING ON 3 DATASETS

Fig. 8.

Dimension-reduced visualizations of the embeddings.

the labeled samples decreases by only 0.58% and 0.45% on
the CIC-Darknet and ToN-IoT datasets, respectively. In other
words, when only 16% of the samples are labeled, our model
already has sufficient expressive power for distinguishing
between different types of behaviors.
Subsequently, we utilize the uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) [27] algorithm to reduce the
dimensionality of the high-level embedding representation
obtained by our model. The visualization results in Fig. 8 a
show the visualization results obtained with the original sample distribution of the ToN-IoT datasets. As shown in Fig. 8 b,
the embedding representation of the network flows obtained
with only 16% of the labeled samples already exhibits obvious
classification boundaries. This visualization experiment presented in Fig. 8 further verifies that our model has sufficient
expressive ability for distinguishing between different attack
categories when few labeled samples are utilized.
7) Summary: Our contributions in this paper, as supported
by the experiments above, can be summarized as follows.

(1) A novel network abnormality detection method that
refines the concrete information interaction processes between
each pair of entities is proposed, complementing substantial
detailed behavior information. In the graph-based detection
methods proposed in previous research [2], [4], [5], the
extraction of temporal and spatial features is restricted to
a fixed topology structure. In our work, via a customized
CTGNN, we refactor the spatiotemporal correlation information as more granular entity interactions, which enhances
the detection ability of the network and breaks through the
fixed topology limitation. Experimental results show that this
method works well on realistic scenarios, including intrusion
detection, darknet analysis, and anti-fraud cases.
(2) We reveal the inherent shortcomings of traditional
anomaly detection methods in the face of new node interactions and low-frequency or sporadic communication behaviors.
Although traditional anomaly detection methods perform well
on the overall test set, their good detection capabilities can
only cover a small number of network entities that generate
frequent interactions. The proposed CTGNN systematically
utilizes the historical state, the local spatiotemporal information of neighbors and actual time decodings to maintain
good performance in most of the tested node communication
settings. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to alleviate
the negative impact of low-frequency communication in the
field of anomaly detection.
(3) Ablation experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
each component in our proposed model. The key computing components include the CTG update mechanism, local
spatiotemporal domain information, and time encoder, which
exhibit good compatibility with various computational models
and can strengthen their ability to detect anomalies. Furthermore, when only 16% of the total samples are labeled, our
model achieves classification accuracies of 99.14%, 97.75%,
and 95.49% on the CIC-Darknet2020, ToN-IoT, and Fraud
Payment datasets, respectively, which are much higher than the
accuracies achieved by the methods proposed in [4] and [26]
when trained on 80% labeled samples. In an actual application
scenario, these characteristics make our model competitive
with other state-of-the-art methods via the imposition of a
flexible computing overhead and weaker sample requirements.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In various scenarios, the Continuous Temporal Graph Neural Network (CTGNN) consistently demonstrates its effectiveness in detecting anomalies across both binary and multiclass
classification settings. Specifically, CTGNN achieves outstanding anomaly detection results, with F1 scores of 97.03%,
99.96%, 99.18%, and 81.95% on the UNSW-NB15, ToNIoT, CICDarknet, and Fraud Payment datasets in binary
classification settings. Moreover, our proposed method attains
remarkable detection rates and F1 scores, surpassing 95%,
across eight distinct traffic behavior types within the ToN-IoT
dataset. Notably, CTGNN also achieves the highest macro-F1
score when applied to the UNSW-NB15 dataset.
Furthermore, manual verification results underscore the limitations of traditional detection methods, revealing oversights
in the detection of behaviors generated by new access nodes

DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM

and behaviors characterized by low-frequency occurrences.
CTGNN effectively addresses these challenges by harnessing
the natural interaction processes of network entities in both
temporal and spatial dimensions, thereby maintaining robust
detection performance for these elusive behaviors.
Ablation experiments validate the versatility of the key computing components within CTGNN, showcasing their ability
to enhance anomaly detection across various computational
models. As we look ahead, our research will be dedicated
to addressing the issue of strong data imbalance as well as
further enhancing the interpretability of abnormal behavior
detection methods. Furthermore, improving intrusion detection
within the context of concept drift, characterized by shifts in
traffic distribution and feature evolution, represents a challenge
warranting considerable attention.
R EFERENCES
[1] Cisco. (2023). Cisco Annual Internet Report (2018–2023). [Online].
Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/executiveperspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.html
[2] Y. Cao, H. Jiang, Y. Deng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, and W. Luo, “Detecting
and mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN using spatial–temporal graph convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19,
no. 6, pp. 3855–3872, Nov. 2022.
[3] S. A. Assefa, D. Dervovic, M. Mahfouz, R. E. Tillman, P. Reddy,
and M. Veloso, “Generating synthetic data in finance: Opportunities,
challenges and pitfalls,” in Proc. 1st ACM Int. Conf. AI Finance,
Oct. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[4] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A selfsupervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030.
[5] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
2023.
[6] C. Wang and H. Zhu, “Wrongdoing monitor: A graph-based behavioral
anomaly detection in cyber security,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2703–2718, 2022.
[7] Z. Yang et al., “WTAGRAPH: Web tracking and advertising detection
using graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP),
May 2022, pp. 1540–1557.
[8] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted traffic detection towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., pp. 1–18, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3242134.
[9] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and
F. T. H. D. Hartog, “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need
for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion
data sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022.
[10] N. Moustafa, G. Misra, and J. Slay, “Generalized outlier Gaussian mixture technique based on automated association features for simulating
and detecting web application attacks,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput.,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 245–256, Apr. 2021.
[11] A. H. Lashkari, G. Kaur, and A. Rahali, “DIDarknet: A contemporary
approach to detect and characterize the darknet traffic using deep image
learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., Nov. 2020,
pp. 1–13.
[12] B. Caswell and J. Beale, Snort 2.1 Intrusion Detection. Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier, 2004.
[13] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki,
“Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701,
3rd Quart., 2019.
[14] P.-F. Marteau, “Random partitioning forest for point-wise and collective
anomaly detection—Application to network intrusion detection,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2157–2172, 2021.
[15] R. Bitton and A. Shabtai, “A machine learning-based intrusion detection
system for securing remote desktop connections to electronic flight
bag servers,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 1164–1181, May 2021.

4863

[16] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion
detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
2021.
[17] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in
industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197,
Jul. 2022.
[18] Y. Zuo, G. Liu, H. Lin, J. Guo, X. Hu, and J. Wu, “Embedding
temporal network via neighborhood formation,” in Proc. 24th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD). New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, pp. 2857–2866,
doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220054.
[19] Y. Ma, Z. Guo, Z. Ren, J. Tang, and D. Yin, “Streaming graph neural
networks,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020,
pp. 719–728, doi: 10.1145/3397271.3401092.
[20] D. Xu, C. Ruan, E. Korpeoglu, S. Kumar, and K. Achan, “Inductive
representation learning on temporal graphs,” 2020, arXiv:2002.07962.
[21] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, and
M. Bronstein, “Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic
graphs,” 2020, arXiv:2006.10637.
[22] S. M. Kazemi et al., “Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 2648–2720, Mar. 2020.
[23] D. Xu, C. Ruan, E. Korpeoglu, S. Kumar, and K. Achan, “Self-attention
with functional time representation learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–11.
[24] F. D. Keersmaeker, Y. Cao, G. K. Ndonda, and R. Sadre, “A survey
of public IoT datasets for network security research,” IEEE Commun.
Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1808–1840, 3rd Quart., 2023.
[25] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for
network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 223–231.
[26] T. Zebin, S. Rezvy, and Y. Luo, “An explainable AI-based intrusion
detection system for DNS over HTTPS (DoH) attacks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2339–2349, 2022.
[27] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “UMAP: Uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” 2018,
arXiv:1802.03426.
[28] H. Studiawan, F. Sohel, and C. Payne, “Anomaly detection in operating
system logs with deep learning-based sentiment analysis,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2136–2148, Sep. 2021.
[29] J. Cao et al., “A survey on security aspects for 3GPP 5G networks,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 170–195, 1st Quart.,
2019.
[30] O. Ajibuwa, B. Hamdaoui, and A. A. Yavuz, “A survey on AI/ML-driven
intrusion and misbehavior detection in networked autonomous systems:
Techniques, challenges and opportunities,” 2023, arXiv:2305.05040.
[31] G. Andresini, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, C. Loglisci, A. Appice, and
L. Cavallaro, “INSOMNIA: Towards concept-drift robustness in network
intrusion detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
Nov. 2021, pp. 111–122.
[32] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for network
intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 1156–1167, 2024.
[33] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered
hybrid intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.

Guanghan Duan received the B.A. degree in computing science and technology from Chongqing
University, China, in 2017. He is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree in computing science and technology with Harbin Engineering University, China.
His research interests include graph-based DL methods for modeling network traffic and adversarial
examples.

4864

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Hongwu Lv received the B.A. degree in information
and computing science and the Ph.D. degree in
computer applied technology from Harbin Engineering University, China, in 2006 and 2011,
respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor
with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University. His research
interests include formal modeling and performance
evaluation, particularly regarding the availability of
cloud computing and edge cloud modeling.

Guangsheng Feng received the B.E. degree from
Harbin Engineering University (HEU) in 2003, the
M.E. degree from Harbin Institute Technology (HIT)
in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree from HEU in 2009.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
the College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University. His research
interests include the security of edge computing,
LTE (LTE-A) networks, and wireless channel access
control.

Huiqiang Wang received the B.A. degree in computer systems and engineering from Harbin Institute
of Technology, China, in 1982, the M.S. degree
in computer applications from Harbin Shipbuilding
Engineering Institute, China, in 1985, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer applied technology from Harbin
Engineering University, China, in 2005. He is currently a Professor with the College of Computer
Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University. He has published more than 100 journal
and conference papers. His research interests include
the security of distributed systems, particularly regarding cognitive networks,
cloud computing, and indoor positioning.

Xiaoli Li (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Principal
Scientist with the Institute for Infocomm Research,
A*STAR, Singapore. He is also an adjunct full
professor position with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include AI,
machine learning, data mining, and bioinformatics.
He has been the Area Chair/a Senior PC Member
of leading AI and data mining-related conferences,
including IJCAI, AAAI, KDD, and ICDM. He is the
Editor-in-Chief of World Scientific Annual Review
of Artificial Intelligence and an Associate Editor
of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON A RTIFICIAL I NTELLIGENCE and Machine
Learning With Applications (Elsevier).