IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

11751

Produce Once, Utilize Twice for Anomaly Detection
Shuyuan Wang , Qi Li , Member, IEEE, Huiyuan Luo, Chengkan Lv , Member, IEEE,
and Zhengtao Zhang , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Visual anomaly detection aims at classifying and
locating the regions that deviate from the normal appearance.
Embedding-based methods and reconstruction-based methods
are two main approaches for this task. The embedding-based
methods typically predict the anomaly by measuring the distances
between the deep representations of the test samples and a
limited number of nominal samples, which enables these methods
to be efficient but struggle in providing a fine-grained pixellevel anomaly location. The reconstruction-based methods rely
on the pixel-level reconstruction errors to locate the anomaly,
thereby the anomaly predictions are fine-grained. However, there
are repetitive feature extractions and usually extra modules to
guarantee the quality of the reconstructed images, resulting
in unsatisfactory detection efficiency. In a nutshell, the prior
methods are either not efficient or not precise enough for
the industrial detection. To deal with this problem, we derive
POUTA (Produce Once Utilize Twice for Anomaly detection),
which improves both the accuracy and efficiency by reusing the
discriminant information potential in the reconstructive network.
We observe that the encoder and decoder representations of
the reconstructive network are able to stand for the features
of the original and reconstructed image respectively. And the
discrepancies between the symmetric reconstructive representations provides roughly accurate anomaly information. To refine
this information, a coarse-to-fine process is proposed in POUTA,
which calibrates the semantics of each discriminative layer by
the high-level representations and supervision loss. Equipped
with the above modules, POUTA is endowed with the ability
to provide a more precise anomaly location than the prior arts.
Besides, the representation reusage also enables to exclude the
feature extraction process in the discriminative network, which
reduces the parameters and improves the efficiency. Extensive
experiments show that, POUTA is superior or comparable to the
prior methods with even less cost. Furthermore, POUTA also
achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art few-shot
anomaly detection methods without any special design, showing
that POUTA has strong ability to learn representations inherent
in the training data.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, detection efficiency, representations reusing.

Manuscript received 21 December 2023; revised 29 April 2024;
accepted 20 June 2024. Date of publication 28 June 2024; date of current version 27 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U21A20482, Grant
62303458, Grant 62303461, and Grant 62076240; in part by Beijing Municipal
Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4222054; and in part by the Youth
Innovation Promotion Association of the Chinese Academy of Sciences under
Grant Y2023143. This article was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Tao.
(Corresponding author: Zhengtao Zhang.)
The authors are with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: wangshuyuan2020@ia.ac.cn; qli@
nlpr.ia.ac.cn; huiyuan.luo@ia.ac.cn; chengkan.lv@ia.ac.cn; zhengtao.zhang@
ia.ac.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3420775.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3420775

I. I NTRODUCTION
NSUPERVISED anomaly detection has drawn much
attention in recent years [26], [32], [54], since it requires
no defect samples for training [25], [29], [31], which benefits the scenario where the collection of defect samples
is costly, e.g. industrial detection [28], [30]. There are two
main approaches for anomaly detection, reconstruction-based
methods and embedding-based methods. The reconstructionbased methods train a reconstructive network to build a normal
version of the input [27], as shown in Figure 1. Generally,
the deviation lies solely in the abnormal regions before and
after reconstruction. By analyzing the reconstruction errors,
the anomaly can be located [2], [49], [54]. As illustrated
in Figure 2, due to the analysis on pixel-level reconstruction errors, the reconstruction-based methods are endowed
with the capability to locate the anomaly at the fine-grained
pixel-level. However, there are strict requirements for the
reconstructive network. Specifically, abnormal regions should
be repaired to normal, while the normal regions are supposed
to remain unchanged. Otherwise, the reconstruction errors will
not conform to the anomaly, resulting in failure in detection,
as shown in the carpet of Figure 2. Prior studies [6], [33]
always design extra modules for the reconstructive network to
meet the aforementioned requirements. Due to the intricate
structure, the reconstruction-based methods fall flat when
comparing the inference time with the embedding-based methods. The embedding-based methods typically exploit the deep
representations to do a feature matching between the test
sample and the nominal samples, as indicated in Figure 1.
Since the nominal samples for feature matching are usually
limited in number [16], the embedding-based methods achieve
tremendous progress on the detection efficiency. However,
the deep representations are typically of lower resolution
than the input, which makes the embedding-based methods
to struggle in providing a fine-grained pixel-level anomaly
location, as shown in Figure 2. In a nutshell, both of the above
methods have some deficiencies, and it is an ambitious goal
for the prior arts to provide a fine-grained pixel-level anomaly
location efficiently.
There are two approaches to overcome the aforementioned
deficiencies. For the embedding-based methods, to obtain the
fine-grained location, it is necessary to analyze the shallow
representations to add details about the anomaly. RD [18]
follows this way, which utilizes a distillation mechanism
and introduces a student network to upsample the features
from the teacher network to measure the shallow representations, as depicted in Figure 1. Specifically, RD believes the
teacher network which is pre-trained on other dataset (such as

U

1051-8215 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

11752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 1.
The network architectures of the reconstruction-based method
(DRÆM [5]), embedding-based method (PatchCore [16]), the improved
embedding-based method (RD [18]) and the proposed POUTA which is
improved based on the vanilla reconstruction-based method [5].

Fig. 2.
The qualitative examples of the embedding-based method
(PatchCore [16]), the improved embedding-based method (RD [18]), reconstruction-based method (DRÆM [5]), and the proposed POUTA.

ImageNet) has the ability to demonstrate the anomaly well,
while the student network trained only on the current dataset
does not have this ability. Therefore, the cosine distance
between the features of the teacher network and student
network reveals the anomaly location. However, modeling or
feature matching the shallow representations is sophisticated.
As shown in Figure 2, the predicted location of RD is finer
than the embedding-based method, but as it identifies anomaly
in the feature layer whose resolution is close to that of the
input, the predicted anomaly location is not as fine-grained
as that of the reconstruction-based methods. It is because that
the shallow representations are not as homogeneous as the
deep ones, it requires to record the shallow representations
elaborately to obtain an accurate anomaly location, which is
costly and may deprive the efficiency. Therefore, we turn to
another solution, improving the accuracy and efficiency of the
reconstruction-based methods.
Recent reconstruction-based methods follow a paradigm,
which involves a reconstructive network and a discriminative
network [5], [35], [48], as demonstrated in Figure 1. The
discriminative network is employed to locate the anomaly
by analyzing the discrepancies between the original and
reconstructed images, demonstrating significantly better performance than simply measuring the absolute distance between
these two images. Despite the impressive efforts, two critical
issues still exist. Firstly, this paradigm yet relies on the
reconstruction errors to identify anomaly. The requirements for
the reconstructive network are strict as usual. While the quality
of the reconstructed image is sometimes not so ideal, resulting
in the unsatisfactory prediction, as shown in the carpet and

Fig. 3. In POUTA, the representation distributions of the last reconstructive
encoder layer and the first reconstructive decoder layer are visualized by
t-SNE [42]. The red points correspond to the representations of the abnormal
regions, and the green ones refer to the normal representations. Each column
on the right represents the input, the anomaly predicted only by the differences
in representation of the aforementioned two layers, and the ground truth,
respectively.

capsule of Figure 2. Even if the reconstructed image is of high
quality, it is still a challenging problem to indicate anomaly
completely when the color of abnormal region is close to
the normal one. The second lies in the excessive computing
consumption caused by the repetitive feature extraction in
the reconstructive and discriminative network. Both of them
extracts the features of the input in their encoders. It seems
impossible to solve both of the above problems simultaneously within the conventional reconstruction-based paradigm,
as achieving better performance necessitates enhancing the
quality of reconstruction, which inevitably leads to increased
computing consumption. This enlightens us to propose a new
reconstruction-based paradigm.
We argue that, in the reconstructive network, the encoder
and decoder representations are able to stand for the hierarchical representations of the input and reconstructed images.
It is more suitable for the discriminative network to locate
the anomaly by analyzing the discrepancies between the
symmetric representations in the encoder and decoder directly.
To verify our assumption, the encoder and decoder representations are visualized in Figure 3. Figure 3 indicates that, in the
encoder, most of the abnormal representations are apart from
the normal ones. While in the decoder, since the abnormal
regions are repaired to normal, their representations are shifted
to the distribution of the normal data. The above phenomena are consistent with our assumption. Since the normal
regions and the abnormal regions in the input have different
appearances, they naturally belong to different distributions.
While the abnormal regions are repaired to normal in the
reconstructed image, their representations will shift to the
normal distribution in the decoder. Therefore, it is feasible
to identify the anomaly by the representation discrepancies
between encoder and decoder. As shown in Figure 3, by analyzing the disparities between the last reconstructive encoder
layer and the first reconstructive decoder layer, the anomaly
can be located roughly accurately.
Based on the above conclusion, we derive a neat and
effective approach, POUTA (Produce Once Utilize Twice
for Anomaly detection), as an effective remedy for the
reconstruction-based methods on both accuracy and efficiency,
fully reusing the discriminant information potential in the
reconstructive network. POUTA is established with a view

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 4.

11753

The qualitative examples and visualizations (provided by Grad-CAM [4]) of the vanilla reconstruction-based (DRÆM [5]-like) and POUTA.

to the availability of the multi-scale reconstructive representations, aggregating hierarchical symmetric representations to
identify anomaly through a lightweight coarse-to-fine discriminative network, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, in the
discriminative network, firstly, there is a MSS (Multi-scale
Semantic Supervision) module to ensure clear differentiation for the abnormal regions between encoder and decoder
representations. Secondly, a differential module named FCM
(Feature Contrast Module) is designed to analyze the distribution shift of the same representation between the encoder
and decoder in the feature space. The representations of the
normal regions remain in the same distribution, while those
of the abnormal ones shift, which can serve as a signal for
detection. In addition, HSG (High-level Semantic Guidance)
module calibrates the hierarchical representations output by
FCM progressively, resulting in rich and precise spatial details.
It can be observed that our method compares the shallow
representations in the encoder with their symmetric decoder
representations. While the anomaly information drawn from
the discrepancies between these representations is calibrated
by the deep semantics through the HSG module and also the
MSS module, which enables the prediction to be more accurate
and fine-grained simultaneously.
Due to reusing the reconstructive representations, POUTA
suffices to identify anomaly more precisely than the vanilla
reconstruction-based method with even lower cost. We take
Grad-CAM [4] to visualize the semantic differences captured
by the vanilla method and POUTA in Figure 4. There is no
significant discrepancy between the reconstructed images from
both methods, while POUTA obtains more complete semantics
of anomaly regions through the representations and therefore
the predictions of POUTA are more precise. This indicates that
the reconstructive representations are more informative than
reconstruction errors. It is reasonable since the information
loss occurs when reconstructing an image from its representations. As a result of this loss, the pixel-level reconstruction
errors might be incomplete, or even inaccurate, potentially
leading to detection failures in certain cases, especially those
of fine-grained anomalies. As shown in Figure 4, the colors
of the abnormal regions in wood and pill are close to the

normal ones, the vanilla method fails to locate anomalies
without surprise, but POUTA still identifies anomaly precisely.
Besides, the discriminative network in POUTA directly reuses
the reconstructive representations, which distinctively allows
for the exclusion of feature extraction in the discriminative
network, thereby improving efficiency. In summary, by directly
reusing informative representations, POUTA relaxes the strict
requirement for reconstructive network, and this new paradigm
is able to achieve higher accuracy at lower cost.
Our main contributions can be listed as follows:
• Different from previous reconstruction-based methods,
the discriminative network in POUTA directly reuses the
representations in the reconstructive network, which filled
the gap that the previous arts are typically inefficient.
• POUTA utilizes the discrepancies between the reconstructive representations to locate the anomaly, which provides
more accurate and complete anomaly information than
the previously used reconstruction error, endowing the
capability to identify the anomaly more precisely.
• Experimental results show the superiority of the proposed unsupervised method POUTA. It outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on MVTec AD and VisA
dataset and achieves a comparable performance with the
best-performing supervised method on DAGM dataset.
• POUTA also achieves superior performance on few-shot
anomaly detection without any special design, which
indicates that POUTA has strong ability to learn representations inherent in the nominal data.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Anomaly detection is an unsupervised detection task, where
only the normal data is involved amid training [58]. The
anomaly detection model is required to distinguish between
samples being drawn from the training data distribution and
those outside its support [16], [61]. Given respective nominal samples and test samples, anomaly detection can be
converted to calculating distances between the nominal deep
representations and the test ones, or analyzing the differences
before and after reconstruction, which corresponds to the
embedding-based methods and reconstruction-based methods.

11754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

A. Embedding-Based Methods
The embedding-based methods typically extract the deep
representations and then calculate the distance to k nearest nominal neighbors or the probability in the distribution.
DeepSVDD [39] and MLBFD [59] propose to find the data
centers and set corresponding radii. Data where the distance
from its corresponding center exceeds the radius is considered
as an anomaly. This approach is effective in fault diagnosis
task. While DeepSVDD extracts the deep representations
describing the entire image, which limits the model to obtaining only the existence of the anomaly but not to locating
it. To mitigate this problem, PatchSVDD [3] extracts the
deep representations for the image patch, which provides
the rough anomaly location. Similarly, PaDim [40] generates
patch embeddings from the pretrained network to estimate
the Gaussian distribution moments (mean and covariance) for
patch-level Mahalanobis distance. GLCF [28] points out that
the performance of prior arts are limited since only the local
knowledge is relied to identify anomaly. Therefore, GLCF
proposes a two-branch approach to extract the local and global
features, respectively. Despite improving the performance, the
efficiency degrades. Other distribution learning methods can
also be utilized, such as the normalizing flow (NF) [41]. DifferNet [36] takes the NF to measure the anomaly. To obtain the
more informative representations, CSflow [37] builds a crossscale NF, which enables the model to predict the anomaly more
precisely while increase the model scale at the same time.
Some works turn the anomaly detection task into a matter of
distances to k nearest neighbors. SPADE records the nominal
representations extracted from a pretrained network in a memory bank, and then calculates the average distances between
the test data and k nearest nonimal neighbors [15]. To notably
reduce the inference cost, PatchCore [16] subsamples the
memory bank. Moreover, Patchcore extracts locally aware
patch features to achieve high performance. The traditional
embedding-based methods suffer from the coarse anomaly
prediction. RD [18] proposes to utilize a distillation mechanism into the embedding-based method. A student network
is employed to upsample the representations of the teacher
network, allowing to modelling the shallow representations
whose resolution is close to the input. This approach slightly
alleviates the difficulty of modelling the shallow representations, but also results in a predicted anomaly map that is not
as fine-grained as that of the reconstruction-based methods.
Unlike RD, we choose a different solution to consider both the
efficiency and accuracy, improving the reconstruction-based
methods by reusing the reconstructive representations. In this
paper, our POUTA is compared with PatchCore and RD,
known for their efficiency and finer location, respectively,
among the above methods. The embedding-based methods
generally enjoys higher efficiency than the reconstructionbased methods, but the anomaly locations are generally not
as fine-grained as the reconstruction-based methods.
B. Reconstruction-Based Methods
The reconstruction-based anomaly methods reconstruct
a normal version of the input, typically through the

autoencoder [10]. Since the anomaly is located by analyzing
the pixel-level differences between the images before and after
reconstruction, the anomaly prediction is always fine-grained.
The early arts predicts the anomaly by the reconstruction error,
typically in L1 distance [26], [27]. EaLDL [60] employs the
L2 distance to calculate the reconstruction error. A threshold
is set to distinguish normal and abnormal regions. Including
the reconstruction error, SSR-AE [62] also calculate the L2
distance between the applied and predicted transformation on
the original image, in order to enlarge the gap of anomaly
scores between normal and abnormal images. SSAGAN [63]
applies Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) to calculate the
prediction error between the actual pixels and the predicted
ones provided by a self-attentive predictor. Besides, a selfsupervised rotation angle prediction task is proposed to enlarge
detection errors for abnormal pixels. TAC-Net [64] transforms
the instances and incorparates contrastive learning during the
training stage. The anomaly score is also measured by PSNR.
These methods are effective in certain practical applications,
such as process monitoring and video anomaly detection.
Recently, to meet the requirements of more complex and
changing industrial scenarios, there is a paradigm shift towards
analyzing the reconstruction errors using a discriminative
network [5], [21], [35], [48], [51]. Namely, the vanilla framework comprises a reconstructive network and a discriminative
network in series. The input of the discriminative network
contains only the input image and the reconstructed image.
However, the procedure that compresses the representations to
build a reconstructed image inevitably results in information
loss, which may ultimately lead to inconsistencies between
the reconstruction errors and the anomalies. Lots of effort has
been invested in enhancing the quality of the reconstructed
image to ensure that the reconstruction errors provide more
precise anomaly information. And most turns to incorporate
an additional module into the reconstructive network, such as a
memory bank [6], [10], [24], [27], codebook [21], or attention
mechanism [26], [33]. Turning the reconstruction sub-task
to the image inpainting task, where the input is gridded
and then reconstructed in patch [11], [22], [23], [46], also
facilitates the construction of a high-quality reconstructed
image. It also proposes to utilize the mathematical expectation
map of the training dataset as the supplement of normal
appearance [33], aiming to assist the reconstructive network
to build a high-quality normal image. Based on the paradigm
composed of a reconstructive network and a separate discriminative network, NIGSF [25] provides an insight into the
normal appearance through another normal image, which is
beneficial for identifying semantic anomaly. But the unavoidable inconsistencies between the input and the introduced
one in details might lead to misjudgment. Despite being a
smaller model, the performance drops on certain metrics.
The above methods aim to build a high-quality reconstructed
image, which follows the vanilla idea to locate the anomaly
by analyzing the pixel-level reconstruction errors. It is costly
but still can not deal with certain anomaly, such as the colorclose-to-normal one. Aiming at improving both the accuracy
and efficiency, it is necessary to propose a new paradigm.
Our method opts to reuse the reconstructive representations,

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

which provides more precise anomaly information, endowing
our method to achieve better performance with less costs than
the vanilla method.
C. Few-Shot Anomaly Detection
Few-shot anomaly detection aims to indicate the anomaly
with only a few nominal samples as the training support [20].
TDG [9] incorporates a hierarchical generative module to
model the distribution of multi-scale patches. To enhance
the representations, TDG uses image transformations and
optimizes discriminators to distinguish between real and fake
patches, as well as between different transformations applied
to the patches. The anomaly predictions are obtained by aggregating the patch-based votes of the correct transformations.
Similarly, RegAD [20] applies the transformations as well,
but on the features, learning the category-agnostic feature
registration flexibly. Therefore, RegAD can detect anomaly
in new categories with just a few normal images, without
requiring fine-tuning [20]. MSMC [43] proposes to employs a
global memory bank and an individual memory bank to record
the features of the entire image and a single object respectively.
The prior few-shot anomaly detection methods implement
focused design for the few-shot context, whereas our method
POUTA is initially designed for the typical anomaly detection.
Despite this, POUTA still exhibits considerable performance
on the few-shot anomaly detection, indicating strong learning
ability towards the representations inherent in the training data.
III. M ETHOD
As depicted in Figure 5, instead of analyzing the pixel-level
reconstruction errors in the vanilla method, POUTA predicts
the anomaly by analyzing the discrepancies in the symmetric
reconstructive representations. POUTA is a neat and effective framework which comprises two networks that we will
describe in sequence: self-supervised learning with reconstructive network (III-A) and coarse-to-fine discriminative
network (III-B).
A. Self-Supervised Learning With Reconstructive Network
Different from conventional methods, the reconstructed
image does not need to repair the anomaly flawlessly, and it is
sufficient to offer a tendency towards repairing it in POUTA.
Therefore, no additional elements are added to produce a
flawless reconstructed image, and the reconstructive network
is requested to rectify the synthetic anomaly using contextual
information, which has been proven to be an effective strategy
to enhance the representational learning ability [12], [17], [53].
The synthetic abnormal image Iin is generated by seamlessly blending an augmented image Iaug within a predetermined region M of an image Iori from the training dataset.
Iin = Iori ⊙ (1 − M) + Iaug ⊙ M
Iaug = β × g(Iori ) + (1 − β) × Iun

(1)
(2)

where Iaug is formed by merging a transformed version g(·) of
the original image Iori (e.g. translation, rotation or identity)
with an image Iun obtained from an unrelated dataset [13].

11755

Perlin generator [44] is used to determine the abnormal region.
M is a binary map, which indicates the regions on a random
Perlin noise map that is greater than a random threshold
between 0 and 1. M is a zero matrix when the input is
a normal image, all the numbers in the Perlin noise map
are smaller than the threshold at this time. This situation
rarely happens, in general, the inputs are mainly images with
synthetic anomalies. β is a random number between 0 and 0.8.
The input in Figure 5 exemplifies the synthetic image.
There are three parts in reconstructive network: the encoder,
the mapping layer, and the decoder. Given the input image, the
encoder outputs hierarchy representations FEi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4).
Then, the mapping layer maps the representation FE4 to the
normal latent space, and outputs as FM . Subsequently, the
decoder samples up FM and obtains the multi-scale normal
representations FDi (i = 4, 3, 2, 1). Finally, an image with
normal appearance Ir is reconstructed. Ir is supposed to be the
same with the original one Iori . Therefore, the reconstructive
loss L r ec is calculated between Ir and Iori by the mean
square error (MSE) and structure similarity index measure [34]
(SSIM). As mentioned in [5], MSE is a regular reconstruction
loss but assumes the independence between neighboring pixels. Following recommendations in [5], we add SSIM loss into
the reconstruction loss.
L r ec = L M S E (Ir , Iori ) + L SS I M (Ir , Iori )

(3)

B. The Coarse-to-Fine Discriminative Network
The discrepancies between the symmetric reconstructive
representations can accurately indicate the anomaly positions
in some cases, as shown in Figure 2. While we find that
the anomaly information contained in the reconstructive representations is coarse, which makes the indicated anomaly
positions in other cases unclear or incomplete (we will present
these cases in ablation study). Previous methods follow the
vanilla paradigm to compress the representations into images.
Nevertheless, the compression inevitably results in the loss
of information, which leads to the pixel-level reconstruction
errors not align with the anomalies. To address this, the
previous methods focus on enhancing the quality of the
reconstructed image by using sophisticated skills [6], [33],
which typically requires extra space or computing resources.
Instead, the reconstructive representations are directly
employed as discriminative representations in this paper. This
approach eliminates the information loss associated with the
compression from representations to images. To obtain a more
precise result, we propose a coarse-to-fine strategy to analyze the discrepancies between the symmetric reconstructive
representations. Three well-designed modules are proposed
to detect and refine the anomaly location. Specifically, the
Feature Contrast Module (FCM) initially acquires the coarse
anomaly information within the reconstructive representations,
which is the coarse stage. And then the High-level Semantic
Guidance (HSG) and Multi-scale Semantic Supervision (MSS)
refine the anomaly information, and identify the anomalies
precisely.
1) FCM: FCM treats the encoder representations FEi
(i = 1, 2, 3, 4) and the decoder representations FDi

11756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 5. The vanilla method and the proposed POUTA. Vanilla method is composed of an autoencoder-like reconstructive network and a U-Net [45]-like
discriminative network, where the discriminative network obtains only the concatenation of the input and reconstructed image. While in POUTA, the
discriminative network obtains the representations of the symmetric layers in the reconstructive network. The reconstructive representations contains more
precise information about anomaly than the pixel-level reconstruction errors, which enables POUTA to identify anomaly more precisely. Each layer (except
the first one) in the discriminative network involves a coarse(FCM module)-to-fine(HSG and MSS module) process.

(i = 1, 2, 3, 4) as the features of the input and reconstructed
image respectively. By analyzing the discrepancies between
them, the preliminary anomaly information exists in the
contrastive feature maps FCi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4). Specifically,
as demonstrated in Figure 5, FEi and FCi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4)
go through their respective 1 × 1 convolutional layers. Next, a
1 × 1 convolutional layer is used to capture the discrepancies
(distribution shift) between them by their channel-wise concatenation, and its output is denoted as FCi . FCi contains the
roughly precise information about the anomaly location.
2) HSG: HSG aims to refine the anomaly information
′ (i =
in FCi . And the refined version is denoted as FCi
1, 2, 3). Generally speaking, the shallow representations (highresolution) contain the information about anomaly details, but
they are also susceptible to interference from noise. And
modelling the shallow representations is too sophisticated
to be absolutely accurate, due to the various details in the
shallow representations. Although the deep representations
(low-resolution) generally cannot provide detailed anomaly
information, they reveal accurate anomaly semantics and are
less affected by noise. To refine the anomaly information

contained in FCi (i = 1, 2, 3), a natural idea is to filter the
shallow FCi with the deep one FC(i+1) .
As illustrated in Figure 5, the last refined representation
′
FC(i+1)
i = 2, 3 or FC4 are used to filter the current representation FCi (i = 1, 2, 3). Specifically, the deep representation
′
FC(i+1)
i = 2, 3 (or FC4 ) is firstly upsampled to the current
resolution, and then passes through a 3 × 3 convolution. Next,
it generates weight maps at spatial dimension Wsp(i) and
channel dimension Wcn(i) as filters. To generate the spatial
weight map Wsp(i) , a 1 × 1 convolution is added to adjust
the channel number to 1. As for the channel-wise weight
map Wcn(i) , a global average pooling is used to adjust the
spatial size to 1 × 1, and then Wcn(i) is generated by a
1 × 1 convolution. By multiplying Wsp(i) and Wcn(i) to FC(i) ,
′
a refined contrastive feature map FC(i)
is obtained:
(
Wsp(i) =
(
Wcn(i) =

′
f sp(i) (FC(i+1)
), i = 1, 2
f sp(i) (FC4 ),
i =3

(4)

′
f cn(i) (FC(i+1)
), i = 1, 2
f cn(i) (FC4 ),
i =3

(5)

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

′
= Wsp(i) ⊙ FCi ⊙ Wcn(i) ,
FCi

i = 1, 2, 3

(6)

where the f sp(i) represents the operations of upsample and
convolution, and f cn(i) represents the operations of upsample,
′ is involved to
convolution and global average pooling. FCi
refine the next contrastive feature map FC(i−1) (i = 2, 3).
3) MSS: POUTA establishes on the observation that the
representations of the encoder and decoder in the reconstructive network refer to the features of the input and reconstructed
image respectively. Under this observation, we further propose
a multi-scale semantic supervision (MSS) module to refine the
anomaly information by ensuring a clear discrepancy between
the symmetric reconstructive representations. MSS requires
′ (i = 1, 2, 3) and F
FCi
C4 to be able to predict the abnormal
regions M p(i) through their corresponding predictive head.
As shown in Figure 5, the predictive head consists of an
upsample layer, a 1 × 1 convolution for dimensional reduction
and a softmax layer. Note that MSS module is only used during
training. To supervise the anomaly prediction of each layer,
we add semantic supervision loss L SS(i) to each predictive
head, which is represented as:
L SS(i) = L f ocal (M p(i) , M)+ L 1 (M p(i) , M),

i = 1, 2, 3, 4
(7)

where L 1 (·) denotes the ℓ1 -norm-based loss function,
L f ocal (·) is the focal loss [7], M is a binary map for ground
truth, which indicates the abnormal regions. It can be noticed
that we use the L1-norm in Eq. 7 because it has been verified
to be beneficial in segmentation more accurately, and retains
less edge information than the L2-norm [52]. MSS forces the
intermediate representations to pay more attention to anomaly
information. The total loss of MSS L M SS is the weighted sum
of L SS(i) on each scale:
L M SS =

4
X

λi L SS(i)

(8)

i=1
′ , F ′ , F ′ and
Finally, the channel-wise aggregation of FC1
C2
C3
FC4 is required to predict a pixel-level anomaly heatmap M p .
Inspired by the vanilla method [5], the image-level anomaly
score S is the maximum of the 21 × 21 average pooling result
of M p . The loss of the predicted heatmap L pr e is measured
by focal loss and L1 loss. L pr e presses the predicted anomaly
map M p to be as close to M as possible.

L pr e = L f ocal (M p , M) + L 1 (M p , M)

(9)

The total loss of POUTA L total are represented as follows:
L total = α1 L r ec + α2 L pr e + α3 L M SS

(10)

L total forces the reconstructed image Ir and predicted
anomaly map M p to be as close to Iori and M as possible,
respectively.
IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset: POUTA is evaluated on MVTec AD [14],
VisA [19], MPDD [68] and DAGM [47] dataset. MVTec

11757

AD is a benchmark dataset for visual anomaly detection,
which contains 5,354 images in 15 image categories. VisA
contains 10,821 images with 9,621 normal and 1,200 abnormal
samples. As for MPDD, it incorporates 1,346 samples in
6 classes. Since abnormal images only exist in the testing
set for MVTec AD, MPDD and VisA, they are mainly used
to train unsupervised anomaly detection methods. Different
with the above datasets, DAGM has defect images in training
set and is mainly used to train supervised anomaly detection
methods. It contains 16100 images in 10 categories. Note that
POUTA doesn’t use any real defect images to train the model
on all of the datasets, and it is only trained on the normal
images in training data with the synthetic anomalies.
2) Metric: In order to have a fair comparison with
other methods, both the image-level classification performance (CLS) and pixel-level location performance (LOC)
are exploited in this paper. The metric to measure CLS and
LOC is the area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC). We notice that many methods report high
performance on MVTec AD, even close to 1, on AUROC
metric. Therefore, we add another metric, average precision
(AP) to measure LOC. On MVTec AD dataset, both CLS
and LOC are evaluated. Since the annotations of DAGM is
coarse, only the CLS is tested. Similar with other state-of-theart methods, CLS is measured on VisA and MPDD.
3) Implementation Details: λ1 , λ2 , λ3 and λ4 in Eq. 8 are
empirically set to 0.4, 0.3, 0.2 and 0.1 respectively. To confirm
the reweight parameters α1 , α2 , and α3 in Eq. 10, we conduct
25 groups of experiments as shown in Figure 6. We first adopt
AP metric to evaluate the performance, due to AP is more
sensitive to performance changes than AUROC. Since the
performances of the current methods vary acutely on carpet,
cable, pill, toothbrush, and transistor classes, as demonstrated
on Table II, we thereby test the performance of the reweighted
POUTA on these five objects. The distribution of the average
performance on them is close to a normal distribution, the
mean locates around α1 = 1.0, α2 = 1.0, α3 = 1.0, which is
finally adopted in POUTA. POUTA is trained for 600 epochs
with a batch size of 8. The learning rate of the Adam optimizer
is set to 0.0002 and multiplied by 0.2 at epoch 480 and epoch
540. Images are resized to 224 × 224.
4) Training Algorithm: Every experiment is trained from
scratch, and initialized randomly, including the few-shot experiment. All the networks in POUTA is trained simultaneously
as shown in Algorithm 1. L total will force the reconstructive network to keep the features of the input in encoder,
repair the features of the abnormal regions in mapping layer,
and upsample the normal features in decoder. Regarding the
discriminative network, L total endows it with the ability to
identify the discrepancies between the symmetric reconstructive representations. Figure 7 exhibits an example of L total loss
curve, which demonstrates that despite slight fluctuations, the
overall tendency is a gradual decline that ultimately converges.
B. Anomaly Detection
The proposed POUTA is compared with previous methods
on MVTec AD, VisA and DAGM. The comparison results are
shown in Table I, II, III and V.

11758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 6.
The average performance of carpet, cable, pill, toothbrush, and
transistor on AP metric. It can be seen that the best performance achieves
when α1 = 1.0, α2 = 1.0, α3 = 1.0.

Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm
Data: original training image Iori
Result: reconstructed image Ir , anomaly prediction in MSS
M p(i) , i = 1, 2, 3, 4, final predicted anomaly map M p
random initialization
for epoch ← 1 to 600 do
Synthesize abnormal image Iin from Iori as in Equ. 1;
Reconstructive network:
compute reconstructed image Ir ;
Calculate reconstruction loss L r ec as in Equ. 3;
Discriminative network:
Each FCM: compute FCi , i = 1, 2, 3, 4;
′ , i = 1, 2, 3;
Each HSG: compute FCi
MSS: compute M p(i) , i = 1, 2, 3, 4;
Calculate MSS loss L M SS as in Equ. 8;
Compute the final anomaly prediction map M p
Calculate prediction loss L pr e as in Equ. 9;
Calculate total loss L total as in Equ. 10;
Back propagate L total to optimize POUTA.
end

Fig. 7.

The loss curve of L total during training POUTA on connector.

1) MVTec AD: We report the quantitative classification
(CLS) and location (LOC) results of the prior methods and
POUTA on MVTec AD dataset in Table I and II, respectively.
PatchCore in this section is conducted using its official code
with 1% training data as coreset remaining. As depicted by
Table I, POUTA shows highest classification performance on
most cases, and outperforms the improved embedding-based
method RD [18] in all classes except for metal nut. Especially
on capsule, POUTA outperforms the runner-up by 1.4%.
We also notice that the difference between POUTA and the
best result is 2% on cable, which may due to changes in cable’s

orientation, as well as the background. They prevent POUTA
from modeling the normal appearance of cable, causing to
judge these changes as anomalies. For the average performance
of CLS, POUTA attains a comparable performance with SOTA
results.
And for the LOC results in Table II, POUTA also demonstrates satisfactory performance in the majority cases, with
little performance difference in the remaining cases. In addition, POUTA shows better average performance than the
improved embedding-based method RD [18]. For the AUROC
metric, POUTA surpasses the SOTA by 2.6% on transistor,
which is because of the more complete anomaly location
predicted by POUTA, especially when the anomaly is large.
The performance improvement is more clear on AP metric.
On wood, cable, and transistor, POUTA outperforms the SOTA
by 6.9%, 9.1%, and 7.0%. On the average LOC results,
POUTA is 0.3% and 2.9% higher than SOTA measured by
pixel-level AUROC and AP metric respectively.
A qualitative comparison with the vanilla method
(DRAEM [5]) and embedding-based method (PatchCore [16])
is presented in Figure 8, indicating that POUTA is able to
precisely predict the anomaly with more details. The improved
embedding-based method, RD [18] provides finer anomaly
location than the embedding-based method PatchCore [16],
while it is still cruder than the one of POUTA. It is worth
mentioning that, Figure 8 shows POUTA is able to identify
the minor anomalies, since the information about the minor
anomalies can be delivered to POUTA by the discrepancies
between the low-level reconstructive representations.
2) VisA: As shown in Table III, POUTA outperforms the
prior methods on most cases. Especially on capsules and
macaroni2, POUTA shows 21.0% and 17.1% improvement
on the image-level AUROC metric. Both of these are the
categories where the position of the object changes drastically
per image. This indicates that POUTA is more flexible than
others to adapt to these position changes. And as for the
average classification performance, POUTA is 0.4% higher
than the SOTA. Sample segmentations in Figure 9 offer a
qualitative anomaly localization of POUTA, showing that
POUTA can locate the anomaly accurately.
3) MPDD: Table IV depicts the quantitative results on
MPDD. POUTA also outperforms others, including the
improved embedding method RD [18], on most classes and
average performance. This is particularly evident in the bracket
brown and bracket white, where the color of the anomaly is
often close to that of the normal one. While POUTA learns
the anomalies semantically by the discrepancies between the
reconstructive representations, which enables it to identify the
color-close-to-normal anomalies. The only area for improvement lies in bracket black for 1.6% less than the SOTA
on AUROC metric, as POUTA considers some changes in
detail, such as the lighting changes as anomalies, as shown
in column 2 of Figure 10. Other qualitative results of POUTA
in Figure 10 indicates that POUTA can identify most of the
anomalies accurately. The predicted maps in columns 4, 6,
7, 8, and 9 in Figure 10 are almost identical to the ground
truth. In certain instances, such as columns 3 and 5, the
ground truth labels are crude. While as a reconstruction-based

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

11759

TABLE I
I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF THE VANILLA M ETHOD DRÆM, S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED
M ETHODS , E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHOD AND O UR M ETHOD POUTA ON MVT EC AD DATASET.
T HE B EST R ESULT FOR E ACH C LASS I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

TABLE II
P IXEL -L EVEL L OCATION (LOC) ( IN %) OF THE VANILLA M ETHOD DRÆM, S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED
M ETHODS , E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHOD AND O UR M ETHOD POUTA ON MVT EC AD DATASET. T HE B EST
R ESULT FOR E ACH C LASS I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

TABLE III
I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED M ETHODS , E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHODS ,
AND O UR POUTA ON V IS A DATASET (AUROC). T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

TABLE IV
I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS AND O UR POUTA ON MPDD
DATASET (AUROC). T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

method, POUTA provides a more fine-grained location in
columns 3 and 5. Due to the varying shooting angles of the
training images and the limited number of training images,

it is challenging to model the normal appearance in POUTA,
leading to some misjudgments in the anomaly predictions for
columns 3 and 5.

11760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 8.

The qualitative results of PatchCore [16], RD [18], DRAEM [5], and POUTA on MVTec AD [14].

Fig. 9.

The qualitative results of POUTA on VisA dataset [19].

Fig. 10.

The qualitative results of POUTA on MPDD dataset [68].

4) DAGM: In addition, the quantitative evaluations on
DAGM dataset are presented in Table V. POUTA outperforms all the unsupervised methods, including the improved

embedding-based method, RD [18] on all the categories except
for Class4. It is worth mentioning that on Class8, POUTA
is 38.6% higher than PatchCore, which measures anomaly

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

11761

TABLE V
I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF S EVERAL U NSUPERVISED M ETHODS , S UPERVISED M ETHODS , AND O UR POUTA
ON DAGM DATASET (AUROC). T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

TABLE VI
I MAGE -L EVEL F EW-S HOT C LASSIFICATION (CLS) (AUROC IN %) OF
THE P RIOR F EW-S HOT A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS (I NCLUDING
TDG [9], D IFFER N ET [36], R EG AD [20], AND POUTA ON MVT EC
AD DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

by calculating the distances between the test sample and the
coreset’s training samples. However, the texture of Class8
varies, which makes it to be impossible to include all possible
textures in the training data, resulting in a non-ideal detection
performance. While POUTA learns the distribution of the
texture in the reconstructive network, which results in minimal
texture changes before and after reconstruction, leading to
more accurate detection results. The average performance is
also higher than the prior unsupervised methods. Besides,
POUTA achieves a comparable performance with the best
supervised methods. While POUTA requires no real anomaly
for training, which enables POUTA to be more flexible to the
situation where the real anomaly is hard to collect.
C. Few-Shot Anomaly Detection
POUTA represents satisfactory performance on MVTec AD
with the entire training data. To assess the performance with
a limited number of training images, we conduct a few-shot
experiment. Few-shot anomaly detection becomes a hot topic
recently since it is suitable for practical applications where the
normal samples are hard to collect as well. Experiments are
also done to analyze the effectiveness of POUTA on this task.
We train POUTA only with the support set (k training
images, k = 2, 4, 8) for each category. All the settings keep
the same with the ones in regular anomaly detection, we just
reduce the number of the training images. Table VI demonstrates the quantitative results of TDG [9], DifferNet [36],
RegAD [20] and POUTA on MVTec AD. TDG and TegAD
are designed for the few-shot anomaly detection methods, and
DifferNet is an embedding-based anomaly detection methods
with the normalizing flow. Moreover, the qualitative results are
represented in Figure 11.
Table VI indicates that POUTA achieves better performance
than the prior few-shot anomaly detection methods. In 2-shot,
4-shot, and 8-shot, POUTA surpasses the run-up by 4.5%,
3.7%, and 4.8%, respectively. Whereas there is no special

design for the few-shot detection in POUTA. This is a surprising result, showing that POUTA has a strong ability to
learn representations inherent in the training data.
Figure 11 demonstrates the qualitative results of POUTA for
both the few-shot and regular anomaly detection. As shown in
Figure 11, the obvious anomaly can be identified by POUTA
even in the 2-shot setting. When rising the k to 8, the
prediction for the obvious anomaly can rival the one provided
by the model trained on the entire data, indicating that POUTA
is able to learn a near accurate distribution of the normal data.
As for the subtle anomaly, it is challenging for the few-shot
model to precisely locate the anomaly. The location accuracy
increases with the number of training images rising. The subtle
anomaly can be partially predicted in some cases with the
8-shot setting, but it is still not as comprehensive as the predicted anomaly map output by the model trained on the entire
dataset. In that the subtle anomaly tends to be close to the
edge of the normal data distribution, definitely requiring more
training data to construct an accurate distribution. In terms
of the changable object, the prediction accuracy is obviously
related to the number of the training images k. The qualitative
result under k = 8 is close to the one under entire data training,
and much more accurate than the one under k = 2 and k = 4.
This is due to the fact that the more training images there
are, the more the model acquires information about the object
in various rotations, leading to a better understanding of its
normal appearance.
The performance of POUTA under a few-shot setting can
be summarized as follows: The performance is determined by
whether the k training images can represent comprehensive
information about the normal appearance to enable the model
to clearly define the boundary between normal and abnormal.
As for the obvious anomaly, it significantly differs from the
normal appearance, making it easy to identify. Regarding the
subtle anomaly, it is always on the edge of the normal data
distribution and thereby close to the decision boundary. When
k is small, it is challenging to fit the learned decision boundary
closely to the real one, making it possible to take certain
subtle anomaly as normal. When it comes to the changeable
object, a few training images may not be sufficient to help
the model fully understand the normal appearance. Hence, the
anomaly prediction is not satisfactory when k is small, but
the results markedly improve even with a few training images
added (from k = 2 to k = 8).
The reconstructive representation distributions of POUTA
in few-shot and regular anomaly detection are visualized in
Figure 12. It can be seen that, similar with the distributions in

11762

Fig. 11.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

The qualitative few-shot and regular anomaly detection results of POUTA on MVTec AD [14].
TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDY OF POUTA ON MVTec AD. T HE B EST
R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

Fig. 12. The visualization of the encoder and decoder representations of
POUTA through t-SNE [42]. The red points correspond to the representations
of the abnormal regions, and the green ones refer to the normal representations.

regular anomaly detection, the distributions in the few-shot
setting also follow the rule: In the encoder, the normal
and abnormal representations are separated from each other
(though not obvious), while in the decoder, they are distributed
together as the abnormal representations have been repaired
to normal. Besides, the visualization shows that with a few
more training images (from 2-shot to 8-shot), the distribution
established by POUTA is greatly improved, approaching to
the distribution of the entire data training. For example, the
normal and abnormal representations are separated more and
more clearly from each other in the encoder. This confirms
the strong ability to learn the inherent distribution of normal
data.
D. Ablation Study
To investigate the effect of each component in POUTA, five
groups of ablation experiments are conducted on MVTec AD.
All the experiments share the same implementation details.

1) Quantitative Results: The quantitative results are shown
in Table VII. Vanilla refers to the vanilla method as shown in
Figure 5 (a), which utilizes only the pixel-level reconstruction
errors to analyze the anomaly. POUTA-base is POUTA without
HSG and MSS modules, that is, there is no refined step in
the discriminative network and the coarse information from
reconstructive network is directly used to locate the anomaly.
POUTA-basezHSG and POUTA-base+MSS add only HSG or
MSS module to POUTA-base respectively. And POUTA adds
both HSG and MSS modules to POUTA-base.
1) Reconstruction errors vs representation reusing:
Experiments Vanilla and POUTA-base in Table VII are
conducted to verify the effectiveness of the representation reusing. The results shows that by reusing the
reconstructive representations instead of the pixel-level
reconstruction errors, the performance improves. This
demonstrates that reusing representations from the
reconstructive network provides more accurate anomaly
information than the conventional reconstruction errors.
2) HSG module: To investigate the effectiveness of HSG,
experiments POUTA-base and POUTA-base+HSG are

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

conducted. POUTA-base+HSG adds only HSG module
to POUTA-base, and the results show improvement in
terms of the detection performance in Table VII. This
shows that HSG module can be used to refine anomaly
information. However, we also find that adding HSG
only has marginal performance improvement. Due to
the lack of MSS, the representations of the encoder
and the decoder cannot represent the features of the
original and reconstructed image fully. The semantic
differences between the last few encoder representations
and the first few decoder representations might not be
obvious enough, resulting in unclear information about
the abnormal regions at the high-level semantics, which
affects the ability to guide the low-level representations.
3) MSS module: POUTA-base+MSS adds MSS module
to POUTA-base. As shown in Table VII, the detection
performance increases by adding MSS module. MSS
requires each layer of discriminative network to predict
the anomaly precisely, which enhances the ability to
distinguish the normal and abnormal regions. While
without HSG, each layer predicts the anomaly based
on the representations of the current scale, which might
be not robust and accurate enough since it has not
been calibrated by the high-level semantic information.
Therefore, adding only MSS module provides limited
improvement.
4) The coarse-to-fine process: POUTA adds both HSG and
MSS modules to POUTA-base. There is a significant
performance increase as shown in Table VII. POUTA
also shows a noticeable improvement when compared
with POUTA-base+HSG and POUTA-base+MSS. The
above results demonstrate that the collaboration between
HSG and MSS plays an important role in refining
the semantic information about the anomaly, allowing
a better performance than adding only one or neither
module.
5) Parameters, computation and inference time. We
calculate the average inference time (including the
time for deep network, and time for feature matching if it is an embedding-based method) per image
on the embedding-based method PatchCore [16],
the improved embedding-based method RD [18], the
reconstruction-based method Vanilla, and the proposed
method POUTA. Also, the computational cost (FLOPs
and parameters of each model) are calculated. Calculation and parameters are metrics for network, while half
of the procedure in PatchCore [16] is not completed
by network, thereby only the inference time of [16]
are measured and compared. The results are shown in
Table VIII. The parameters of POUTA are obviously less
than those of Vanilla, while the computation is slightly
less than that of Vanilla. This is because POUTA utilizes
the existing information more extensively and refines it.
It can be seen from the inference time that POUTA is
significantly more efficient than Vanilla, and marginally
more efficient than PatchCore. Despite the floating
point operations (FLOPs) of POUTA are slightly higher
than those of the improved embedding-based method

11763

TABLE VIII
T HE C ALCULATION C OST (FLOP S ), PARAMETERS AND AVERAGE
I NFERENCE T IME P ER I MAGE OF VANILLA R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED
M ETHOD (S AME A RCHITECTURE W ITH DRÆM [5]),
E MBEDDING - BASED (PATCH C ORE [16]), I MPROVED
E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHOD (RD [18]), AND POUTA.
T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

RD [18], there is no discernible difference in inference
times between POUTA and RD, and the parameters of
POUTA are considerably less than those of RD. Besides,
POUTA demonstrates superior performance in terms of
accuracy, as shown in Table I and II.
2) Qualitative Results: The qualitative results are exhibited
in Figure 13. Also, we take Grad-CAM [4] to visualize the
semantic differences captured by the five groups of models in
Figure 13.
1) Reconstruction errors vs representation reusing:
Figure 13 demonstrates that the reconstructive representations enable the model to capture more accurate
anomaly semantics, resulting in POUTA-base to locate
the anomaly more completely and precisely than Vanilla.
2) HSG module: As shown in Figure 13, the visualization
of Grad-CAM shows that the addition of HSG enables
the model to capture more accurate semantic differences,
leading to predicting anomalies more precisely. This
indicates that by introducing the high-level semantic
information to the low-level feature through HSG module, it does benefit to calibrate the semantics. But the
gains are limited, since without MSS, the high-level
semantic difference is not clear enough to describe the
anomaly, which weakens the ability to guide the lowlevel representations.
3) MSS module: As exemplified in Figure 13, itPOUTAbase+MSS alleviates the misjudgment problem in
POUTA-base through MSS module. We take t-SNE [42]
to visualize the representation distribution before and
after mapping layer (the last encoder representations and
the first decoder representations) in the reconstructive
network with or without the MSS module, as shown
in Figure 14. It can be seen that, the main differences
exist in the distributions of the encoder, where the
encoder representations are significantly more separable
with MSS, leading to a more obvious distribution shift
between the encoder and decoder. The above phenomena verifies that MSS effectively improves the ability
to distinguish the normal and abnormal information.
However without HSG, the anomaly predictions of
POUTA-base+MSS are still not ideal enough in some
cases as shown in Figure 13, indicating that even if
MSS module is added, HSG module is still necessary
to calibrate the semantics.
4) The coarse-to-fine process: As presented in Figure 13,
the anomaly predictions are significantly more precisely
after adding HSG and MSS modules simultaneously.

11764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 13. The qualitative examples and visualizations (proivded by Grad-CAM [4]) of vanilla method, POUTA-base and POUTA. POUTA obtains a more
comprehensive set of anomaly information to locate the anomaly more precisely.

the anomaly, allowing a significantly better performance
than adding only one or neither module.
V. L IMITATION AND F UTURE P OTENTIALS

Fig. 14. We take t-SNE [42] to visualize the representation distribution before
and after mapping layer (the last encoder representations and the first decoder
representations) in reconstructive network under with or without MSS module.
The red points correspond to the representations of the abnormal regions, and
the green ones refer to the normal representations.

With HSG, the semantic information of each layer in
the discriminative network is more accurate, since it
has been calibrated by the high-level features, further
enabling MSS to achieve better supervision effect. And
MSS enables the distribution discrepancies between
encoder and decoder to be more obvious and makes
the high-level semantic anomaly information to be more
clear by the supervision loss. The collaboration between
HSG and MSS refines the semantic information about

As depicted in Figure 15, POUTA fails in some cases. The
two cables placed on the bottom are the blue one on the left
and the gray one on the right in the training data, but this input
reverses their positions. POUTA points out the reversion and
marks it on the predicted anomaly map. While the ground truth
does not consider this to be an anomaly. POUTA shows the
capability to identify numerous subtle anomalies, as indicated
in Figure 8. While it is possible for POUTA to provide
incomplete predictions when the anomaly is very insignificant,
as presented in the second and third columns in Figure 15.
It is possible to happen, since the minor anomalies always
locate closely to the decision boundary, and the inconsistency
between the fitted decision boundary and the real decision
boundary is almost unavoidable. In the toothbrush shown in
Figure 15, including the abnormal regions identified by the
ground truth, POUTA also highlights additional regions where
the bristles appear disorganized. But ground truth considers
them as normal. And it is the same with the chewing gum in
Figure 15, POUTA also highlights the bumpy regions, which
are not considered as anomalies by the ground truth.
We propose POUTA as a lightweight and efficient model
for the regular anomaly detection. POUTA demonstrates a
strong capability to learn the inherent distribution of normal
data, even in the few-shot setting. On the other hand, we find
that POUTA is not suitable for the general anomaly detection
(GAD). General anomaly detection aims to train a single

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 15.

Examples of failure cases.

anomaly detection model that can generalize to identifying
anomaly in various datasets [65], [66], [67]. In general, there
are a large number of parameters in the GAD model, which are
much larger than those in POUTA. As a lightweight model,
it is challenging for POUTA to accurately build the normal
appearances of numerous datasets in a single model.
The anomaly detection towards the object in 3-dimension
(3D) recently draws much attention. By replacing the reconstructive network with a 3D-aware network, it is possible to
achieve 3D anomaly detection through POUTA.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we verifies that reusing the reconstructive
representations is more reliable than the pixel-level reconstruction errors for reconstruction-based anomaly detection.
Then a new approach named POUTA is proposed locating
the anomaly by analyzing the distribution shift between the
reconstructive encoder and decoder, which enables to predict
the anomaly more precisely with lower cost than the vanilla
method. Moreover, POUTA further refines the anomaly information by HSG and MSS modules in each discriminative layer,
which also enhances the separability between the symmetric
reconstructive representations. Finally, POUTA outperforms
the prior methods on MVTec AD, VisA and DAGM dataset,
and achieves a comparable results with the best-performing
supervised methods on DAGM dataset. Surprisingly, POUTA
also achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art fewshot anomaly detection methods without any special design,
showing that POUTA has strong ability to learn representations
inherent in the training data.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P.-A. Heng, “Learning semantic
context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, May 2021, pp. 3110–3118.
[2] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly:
Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc.
14th Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2019, pp. 622–637.
[3] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly
detection and segmentation,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis. (ACCV),
Nov. 2020, pp. 375–390.
[4] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.

11765

[5] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively
trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
[6] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[7] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[8] J. Wang and A. Cherian, “GODS: Generalized one-class discriminative
subspaces for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8200–8210.
[9] S. Sheynin, S. Benaim, and L. Wolf, “A hierarchical transformationdiscriminating generative model for few shot anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 8495–8504.
[10] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381.
[11] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13576–13586.
[12] M. Z. Zaheer, J. Lee, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Old is gold: Redefining
the adversarially learned one-class classifier training paradigm,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 14183–14193.
[13] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi,
“Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613.
[14] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[15] N. Cohen and Y. Hoshen, “Sub-image anomaly detection with deep
pyramid correspondences,” 2020, arXiv:2005.02357.
[16] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Jun. 2022, pp. 14318–14328.
[17] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9659–9669.
[18] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[19] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408.
[20] C. Huang, H. Guan, A. Jiang, Y. Zhang, M. Spratling, and Y. F. Wang,
“Registration based few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 303–319.
[21] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DSR a dual subspace reprojection network for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 539–554.
[22] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[23] N. Madan et al., “Self-supervised masked convolutional transformer
block for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 525–542, Jan. 2024.
[24] P. Xing and Z. Li, “Visual anomaly detection via partition memory bank
module and error estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3596–3607, Aug. 2023.
[25] P. Xing, Y. Sun, D. Zeng, and Z. Li, “Normal image guided segmentation
framework for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 4639–4652, Jun. 2024.
[26] X. Zhang, J. Fang, B. Yang, S. Chen, and B. Li, “Hybrid attention
and motion constraint for anomaly detection in crowded scenes,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2259–2274,
May 2023.
[27] K. Wu, L. Zhu, W. Shi, W. Wang, and J. Wu, “Self-attention memoryaugmented wavelet-CNN for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1374–1385, Mar. 2023.

11766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

[28] H. Yao, W. Yu, W. Luo, Z. Qiang, D. Luo, and X. Zhang, “Learning global-local correspondence with semantic bottleneck for logical
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34,
no. 5, pp. 3589–3605, May 2024.
[29] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, Y. Hu, P. Tang, and F. Ren, “Bidirectional spatiotemporal feature learning with multiscale evaluation for video anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 12,
pp. 8285–8296, Dec. 2022.
[30] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, T. Chen, and J. Chen, “Pull & push: Leveraging
differential knowledge distillation for efficient unsupervised anomaly
detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2176–2189, May 2023.
[31] C. Guo, H. Wang, Y. Xia, and G. Feng, “Learning appearancemotion synergy via memory-guided event prediction for video anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 3,
pp. 1519–1531, Mar. 2024.
[32] Y. Zhang, X. Nie, R. He, M. Chen, and Y. Yin, “Normality learning
in multispace for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 3694–3706, Sep. 2021.
[33] S. Wang, C. Lv, Z. Zhang, and X. Wei, “Dual-branch learning with
prior information for surface anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[34] W. Zhou, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, Apr. 2004.
[35] C. Lv, F. Shen, Z. Zhang, D. Xu, and Y. He, “A novel pixel-wise defect
inspection method based on stable background reconstruction,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–13, 2021.
[36] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but DifferNet:
Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE
Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 1907–1916.
[37] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully
convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
pp. 1088–1097.
[38] D. Racki, D. Tomazevic, and D. Skocaj, “A compact convolutional neural
network for textured surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter
Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2018, pp. 1331–1339.
[39] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[40] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489.
[41] D. P. Kingma and P. Dhariwal, “Glow: Generative flow with invertible
1×1 convolutions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 31,
2018, pp. 1–10.
[42] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008.
[43] C. Huang, A. Jiang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Multi-scale memory comparison for zero-/few-shot anomaly detection,” 2023, arXiv:2308.04789.
[44] K. Perlin, “An image synthesizer,” ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph.,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 287–296, Jul. 1985.
[45] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351, 2015,
pp. 234–241.
[46] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal. Process. Italy: Springer, May 2022,
pp. 394–406.
[47] M. Wieler and T. Hahn. (2007). Weakly Supervised Learning
for
Industrial
Optical
Inspection.
[Online].
Available:
https://hci.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/content/weakly-supervised-learningindustrial-optical-inspection
[48] S. Yamada, S. Kamiya, and K. Hotta, “Reconstructed student-teacher
and discriminative networks for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2022, pp. 2725–2732.
[49] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Skip-GANomaly:
Skip connected and adversarially trained encoder–decoder anomaly
detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
[50] D. Dehaene, O. Frigo, S. Combrexelle, and P. Eline, “Iterative energybased projection on a normal data manifold for anomaly localization,”
2020, arXiv:2002.03734.
[51] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
2022, arXiv:2211.11317.

[52] M. Yang, P. Wu, and H. Feng, “MemSeg: A semi-supervised method
for image surface defect detection using differences and commonalities,”
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 105835.
[53] P. Liznerski et al., “Explainable deep one-class classification,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–25.
[54] J. Yang, K. Zhou, Y. Li, and Z. Liu, “Generalized out-of-distribution
detection: A survey,” 2021, arXiv:2110.11334.
[55] J. Guo, S. Lu, L. Jia, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “ReContrast: Domainspecific anomaly detection via contrastive reconstruction,” 2023,
arXiv:2306.02602.
[56] T. Liu, B. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Du, B. Jiang, and L. Geng, “Reconstruction
from edge image combined with color and gradient difference for
industrial surface anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2210.14485.
[57] J. Bozic, D. Tabernik, and D. Skocaj, “Mixed supervision for surfacedefect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput.
Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459.
[58] J. Liu et al., “Deep industrial image anomaly detection: A survey,” Mach.
Intell. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 104–135, Feb. 2024.
[59] K. Huang, S. Wu, B. Sun, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “Metric learningbased fault diagnosis and anomaly detection for industrial data with
intraclass variance,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35,
no. 1, pp. 547–558, Jan. 2024.
[60] K. Huang, H. Zhu, D. Wu, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “EaLDL: Elementaware lifelong dictionary learning for multimode process monitoring,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Dec. 25, 2023, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3343937.
[61] P. Yan et al., “A comprehensive survey of deep transfer learning for
anomaly detection in industrial time series: Methods, applications, and
directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 3768–3789, 2024.
[62] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervision-augmented deep autoencoder for
unsupervised visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 13834–13847, Dec. 2022.
[63] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial networks for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9389–9403, Nov. 2023.
[64] C. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Wen, Y. Xu, Q. Jiang, and Y. Wang, “Abnormal
event detection using deep contrastive learning for intelligent video
surveillance system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8,
pp. 5171–5179, Aug. 2022.
[65] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
[66] J. Zhu and G. Pang, “Toward generalist anomaly detection via in-context
residual learning with few-shot sample prompts,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 17826–17836.
[67] Y. Cao, X. Xu, C. Sun, X. Huang, and W. Shen, “Towards generic
anomaly detection and understanding: Large-scale visual-linguistic
model (GPT-4V) takes the lead,” 2023, arXiv:2311.02782.
[68] S. Jezek, M. Jonak, R. Burget, P. Dvorak, and M. Skotak, “Deep
learning-based defect detection of metal parts: Evaluating current methods in complex conditions,” in Proc. 13th Int. Congr. Ultra Modern
Telecommun. Control Syst. Workshops (ICUMT), 2021, pp. 66–71.
[69] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
(WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107.
[70] X. Zhang, M. Xu, and X. Zhou, “RealNet: A feature selection network with realistic synthetic anomaly for anomaly detection,” 2024,
arXiv:2403.05897.
[71] J. Tebbe and J. Tayyub, “Dynamic addition of noise in a diffusion model
for anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2401.04463.

Shuyuan Wang received the M.Sc. degree from
the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China, in 2023. Her
research interests include 3D vision (especially 3D
editing) and anomaly detection.

WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

11767

Qi Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree
from China University of Petroleum in 2011 and
the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing,
China, in 2016. He is currently an Associate Professor with the New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
(NLPR), State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, and also with the School of Artificial
Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. His research interests include face
recognition, computer vision, and machine learning.

Chengkan Lv (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
degree from Shandong University, Jinan, China,
in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CASIA), Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently
an Assistant Researcher with CASIA. His research
interests include neural networks, computer vision,
and anomaly detection.

Huiyuan Luo received the B.S. degree from
Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China,
in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree from Changchun
Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics,
Chinese Academy of Science, Changchun, China,
in 2021. Since 2022, he has been a Post-Doctoral
Researcher and an Assistant Researcher with the
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China. He has been
engaged in saliency detection, industrial anomaly
detection, unsupervised learning, and intelligent
manufacturing.

Zhengtao Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. degree from China University of Petroleum,
Dongying, China, in 2004, the M.Sc. degree from
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China,
in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in control science
and engineering from the Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing,
in 2010. He is currently a Professor with Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAS) Engineering Laboratory for Intelligent Industrial Vision, Beijing.
His research interests include visual measurement,
micro-assembly, and automation.