IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

1271

ProFi: Scalable and Efficient Website Fingerprinting
Patrick Krämer , Member, IEEE, Benedikt Baier , Niklas Landerer,
Philip Diederich , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Alexander Griessel , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
Oliver Hohlfeld, Andreas Blenk , Martin Mieth, and Wolfgang Kellerer , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Website Fingerprinting (WFP) attacks infer the
websites or webpages a user is visiting from encrypted traffic. To
date, it remains uncertain if WFP can attack many users from
a central location in an online scenario. We close this gap with
P RO F I, a WFP attack that detects websites based on the initial
TLS connection from the client to the server using at most the
connection’s first 30 packets. P RO F I achieves a precision and
recall of 86.51 % and 85.35 % in a closed-world, and 68.90 %
and 78.71 % in an open-world scenario, which is competitive to
state-of-the-art (SoA) WFP attacks, while taking a fraction of the
time of SoA attacks to classify a webpage. Further, we implement P RO F I as a micro service-based prototype and evaluate the
attack in an online scenario with real traffic traces. We show that
P RO F I can monitor up to 100 websites at 10 G, corresponding
to up to 424 webpages per second. We also show that P RO F I has
the potential to interfere with a victim’s webpage access.
Index Terms—Website fingerprinting, machine learning, privacy, time series modeling, probabilistic graphical models.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NCRYPT every transfer [1] is a major step towards
securing the privacy of Internet users: DNS over TLS1
(DoT) [2], and DNS2 over HTTPS3 (DoH) [3] secure the
user’s DNS queries; HTTPS with the Encrypted Server
Name Indication (ESNI) extension [4], and its successor,
the Encrypted Client Hello (ECH) extension [5], secure the
communication between clients and remote servers. Hence,
adversaries, legitimate or not, can no longer analyze DNS
traffic, packet payload, the Server Name Indication (SNI),
or the information in the TLS Application-Layer Protocol

E

Manuscript received 1 September 2022; revised 6 February 2023
and 23 May 2023; accepted 13 September 2023. Date of publication
25 September 2023; date of current version 7 February 2024. This work is
partially funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) as part of the
ADVISE project (grant ID - 438892507) and the SDN APP AWARE project
(grant ID - 316878574), and by the Germany Federal Ministry of Education
and Research (BMBF) as a part of the SoftwareCampus initiative (grant ID
01IS17049) and the AI.NET PROTECT project (grant ID 16KIS1318). The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for
publication was L. Y. Chen. (Corresponding author: Patrick Krämer.)
Patrick Krämer, Benedikt Baier, Niklas Landerer, Philip Diederich,
Alexander Griessel, and Wolfgang Kellerer are with the Chair of
Communication Networks, Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich,
Germany (e-mail: patrick.kraemer@tum.de).
Oliver Hohlfeld is with the Distributed Systems Group, University of
Kassel, 34127 Kassel, Germany.
Andreas Blenk is with the T CED INW-DE, Siemens AG, 81739 Munich,
Germany.
Martin Mieth is with the Deep Packet Inspection Development, ipoque
GmbH - A Rohde & Schwarz Company, 04109 Leipzig, Germany.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3318508
1 Transport Layer Security (TLS).
2 Domain Name Service (DNS).
3 Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS).

Negotiation (ALPN) extension [6]. This poses a severe
problem to censors since encrypting every transfer forces them
to choose between censoring all traffic or none [7]. Censoring
all traffic, as done before [8], can be expensive and severe
ties to large portions of the Internet. In 2019, at least 10 % of
the Alexa top 1 Million websites supported ESNI and would
have been unavailable [7]. Thus, adversaries must rely on other
methods to analyze users’ communication. We thus believe
that Website Fingerprinting (WFP) [9] will become relevant
beyond anonymity networks such as the The Onion Router
(Tor) network. WFP allows adversaries to infer visited websites from encrypted traffic using patterns in the data exchange
between client and server.
However, launching WFP attacks at scale in the network
is challenging. The attack is likely to occur at a location
that allows the monitoring of multiple users, i.e., the attack
must operate live in the network at higher link rates (say
10 Gbit/s) on a traffic aggregate. Previous attacks [9], [10],
[11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32],
[33], [34], [35] are not applicable in this scenario. Previous
attacks are evaluated offline, target individual users, and use
Machine Learning (ML) models that take milliseconds to evaluate and thus do not scale to high-volume links. Further, most
previous attacks use features calculated from entire page loads,
i.e., require extracting individual page loads from the traffic
aggregate. Extracting page loads is difficult considering that
simply detecting the onset of one concurrent page load in a
single user scenario is already challenging [19], [22], [29],
[36]. Thus, it remains unclear if WFP poses a threat beyond
the surveillance of individuals. Consequently, the goal of this
work is to design, implement and evaluate a WFP attack that
can operate live in the network to establish the potential threat
WFP poses to general Internet users.
To show that WFP is a threat in a general setting, we
design, implement, realize, and evaluate P RO F I (PRObabilistic
FIngerprinting). In contrast to previous work, P RO F I’s design
includes three aspects beyond the mere detection rate: Data
availability during operation, inference speed, and continuous operation. P RO F I uses Probabilistic Graphical Models
(PGMs) [37] to model the initial TLS connection established
during webpage retrieval based on the direction, size, and TLS
records among the connection’s first 30 packets, which are, as
we show in a prototypical implementation, readily obtainable
in practice. Contrary to previous attacks, P RO F I handles traffic
aggregates without further processing because of the flowbased classification. P RO F I shows competitive performance

1932-4537 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Classifications per second that P RO F I and state-of-the-art (SoA)
approaches achieve in an offline setting on one Central Processing Unit (CPU)
core. Values are obtained for models from Section IV-D on our data described
in Section V-A.

to three state-of-the-art WFP attacks, achieving precision and
recall of 86.51 % and 85.35 % in a closed-world, and 68.90 %
and 78.71 % in an open-world scenario. Further, the PGMs
have few parameters, enabling inference within microseconds. In contrast to previous attacks, P RO F I’s ML models
allow P RO F I to classify thousands of webpages per second,
as Fig. 1 shows. The PGMS further simplify the continuous
operation of the attack since the PGMs readily indicate data
drift through their log-likelihood. Other ML models require
more involved monitoring, e.g., by observing and evaluating
samples during production [38]. Further, the PGMs enable
a modular microservice-based implementation amenable to
deployment on top of, e.g., Multi-Access Edge Computing
(MEC) [39] infrastructure. We evaluate the performance of
the resulting system in testbed measurements. We show that
P RO F I’s microservice-based implementation can handle more
than 400 webpage accesses per second on a 10 G link at full
rate. Overall, our contributions are as follows:
• Collection of an extensive dataset of traffic from 4 800
webpages of 96 websites collected over 70 days.
• Implementation of a TLS dissector for feature extraction.
• Design, implementation, and evaluation of P RO F I , a
PGM-based WFP attack that is designed for the operation
live in the network.
• A microservice-based testbed implementation and evaluation of P RO F I.
• We show that P RO F I can handle 100s of website accesses
per second. This is the first implementation and evaluation of a WFP attack’s potential to operate live in the
network and has relevance beyond WFP, i.e., extends to
ML-based traffic classification in general.
• The design of a readily-implementable defense against
P RO F I reducing precision and recall to less than 10 %
and 20 % while causing a bandwidth overhead of 150 %.
The remainder is organized as follows. Section II introduces the attack scenario, Section III introduces background
information and related work. Section IV presents the design
of the P RO F I attack and the defense method. Section V introduces the dataset and analyzes the training process. Section VI
evaluates the classification performance of the P RO F I attack
and compares P RO F I to three baselines. Section VII presents
the microservice-based implementation of P RO F I, and evaluates its throughput, scalability, and labeling speed. Section VIII
discusses ethical considerations, and Section IX concludes this
paper.

Fig. 2.

P RO F I attack scenario.

II. ATTACK S CENARIO
Fig. 2 illustrates the attack scenario of P RO F I: Multiple
users share a common access point to the Internet—a typical
Internet access scenario (e.g., home network or public WiFi).
The user view: The users are situated behind a Network
Address Translation (NAT)-capable router, as in a typical home
or campus network, which renders a realistic attack scenario.
The users share the same public Internet Protocol (IP) address;
hence, they cannot be differentiated by their IP addresses.
Since most of today’s Web traffic is carried by large Content
Delivery Networks (CDNs) [40], [41], [42], we focus on a
scenario where users retrieve webpages from CDNs. We focus
on CDNs since CDNs serve many popular websites [30], and
websites can use CDNs to hide from censors [43]. Since a
CDN server can deliver any website hosted by the CDN,
this makes the attack more challenging since the server’s IP
address does not identify one website. We do not investigate
the effect of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) on the attack.
More than two third of Internet users do not use a VPN [44].
The attacker view: The goal of the attacker (e.g., a censor)
is to discern the website a user is accessing, where a website consists of multiple webpages. The attacker is situated on
the path between the NAT router and the CDN. Contrary to
previous WFP attacks, the attacker has no access to the private
network of the users. However, the attacker still has access to
traffic in both directions. The traffic is encrypted with TLS, and
the SNI and ALPN extensions in the TLS handshake are also
encrypted. This prevents usage of either feature for fingerprinting [8]. Further, the attacker knows only the public IP of the
NAT router for every user. Furthermore, as websites are hosted
on CDNs, attackers cannot fingerprint websites based on the
IP addresses of destination (cache or edge) servers. Thus, we
investigate a scenario where the attacker is left with statistical
information about the frequency, volume, and direction of data
transfers within a flow.
Per-Flow Classification: Our attack classifies based on the
first TLS connection the user’s client establishes to retrieve
a webpage. Our attack uses observable features of the traffic,
such as the frame size, TLS record size, and the direction
of packets. The underlying assumption that we confirm in
our evaluation is that the server and client exchange unique
information in the initial flow, which reflects in a specific pattern of exchanged packets in the network. Thus, the attack
can classify each flow individually, sidestepping the extraction

KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING

1273

of individual webpage calls from the traffic aggregates, as
previous attacks require, which is very challenging to perform
in practice. Previous work shows that even solely identifying
the start of overlap for two overlapping webpage calls of a
single user is difficult [19], [22], [29], [36].
Practical feasibility: Since we want to investigate whether
WFP is a threat to the general public, the attack must be
able to process large traffic volumes, requiring fast and efficient WFP mechanisms. Further, the attack must be deployable
and continuously operational, i.e., we consider not only training and evaluation but also the full life cycle of an ML
application [38]. Therefore, we decided against more complex models like Random Forests, Support Vector Machines
(SVMs), and Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).4 Specifically,
there is a trend of using DNNs for WFP [23], [24], [27],
[29], [34]. However, these DNNs are large, with many layers and parameters. For example, Var-CNN [27] uses two
Convolutional Neural Networks with 18 layers and an input
layer with 5 000 neurons each. Despite their size, simpler
ML models can outperform DNNs on traffic classification
tasks [45]. Further, executing DNNs requires specialized hardware and a specifically designed system architecture to operate
online in the network [46]. Further, DNNs are susceptible to
shortcut learning, and results are difficult to verify [47]. Thus,
we focus on simple ML models that run on commodity hardware and are easy to interpret. This makes the development
and deployment of WFP attack faster and the attack more
severe, but also helps in understanding WFP attacks to mitigate
them.

the websites a victim visits. That is, the attacker can train
the attack model for every visited website—no other websites are visited. This is the easiest variant of the attack. In
the more realistic open-world scenario, the attacker does not
know which websites the victim access. That is, the victim also
visits websites that were not included in the attacker’s training data. Generally, the open-world scenario is considered the
more challenging scenario. We evaluate both scenarios.
WFP attacks: Many recent attacks perform webpage fingerprinting, e.g., try to detect the landing pages of websites [9],
[11], [12], [15], [16], [18], [19], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25],
[27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [36], [50], [51],
[52]. Fewer works perform the more challenging website fingerprinting [13], [20], [26], [35]. Except for [18], [19], [22],
[26], [35], [36], previous work makes the single-page-load
assumption [19], i.e., users load only one webpage and there
is no background traffic. All previous work evaluates their
attacks under a single-user assumption, i.e., only one active
user or process generates traffic. Closest to our approach is the
work of Shen et al. [28], Zhuo et al. [26], Hoang et al. [30],
and Trevisan et al. [35]. Shen et al. classify normal TLS traffic from one website and use only traffic from TLS sessions
with the SNI of the top-level domain, the first 100 packets
of a webpage load and the kNN classifier. Zhuo et al. use a
Profile Hidden Markov Model (PHMM) and consider subsequent webpage accesses of a single user. Hoang et al. build
fingerprints from the IP addresses of webpage calls and is
thus computationally efficient. Trevisan et al. [35] use perflow features and a Random Forest classifier to label flows
with domain names. In contrast, P RO F I uses a novel WFP
classification method based on PGMs and anomaly detection
that makes P RO F I easy to train and execute. The main contribution of this work is the evaluation of the attack in a testbed,
i.e., the investigation if and at what scale WFP can be executed
online in the network and interfere with user traffic. P RO F I is
different from previous WFP attacks on the Tor network in the
following ways. P RO F I makes predictions for flows and does
not need access to all packets of each webpage call. Further,
P RO F I does not assume the monitoring of an individual user.
WFP defenses: A number of mechanisms to mitigate WFP
attacks exists [14], [17], [31], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57], [58],
[59], [60], [61], [62], [63], [64], [65], [66], [67], [68], [69]. The
goal of the defenses is to mitigate WFP in the Tor network.
To mitigate WFP, the defenses mutate various aspects of the
communication to render previously identified features useless.
However, mitigating WFP attacks results in bandwidth and
latency overheads. We consider a simple defense based on the
padding of TLS records. The defense is similar in spirit to
existing defense methods such as CS-BuFLO [17]. Instead of
the Tor network, the defense focuses on the TLS protocol and
uses only mechanisms available in the current TLS standard.
General traffic classification: Beyond WFP, statistical
approaches have been used for general network traffic classification [70], [71]. These works focus on broadly identifying
application classes, e.g., P2P, e-mail, or Web, using behavioral analysis [72] or detecting SSH and Skype flows [73] or
Android Apps [74], both using flow-level features. Similarly,
TLS features were used to identify services (e.g., Web vs.

III. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
WFP infers the websites a user is accessing from passive
network traffic observations [12].
Website vs. webpage: Attacks can infer websites and
webpages [13]. A webpage is identified by a specific Unified Resource Locator (URL). A website consists of multiple webpages below a Second Level Domain
(SLD). For example, www.nih.gov/grants-funding
and www.nih.gov/research-training are two webpages from one website. Related work often performs WFP
on the level of webpages, e.g., the landing page—here, the
attacker has to learn a model that recognizes only this single
page. This task is easier than learning a model for arbitrary
webpages of one website. A website’s webpages show different content, resulting in different packet sequences. Thus,
website fingerprinting has to cope with a larger variance in
the data compared to webpage fingerprinting [13], making
the data more difficult to model [48], [49]. P RO F I performs
the more challenging website fingerprinting attack, i.e., P RO F I
extracts patterns that generalize from examples of webpages
of websites to the traffic of unseen webpages of that site.
Open vs. closed world: Two evaluation scenarios exist
for WFP attacks: the closed-world and the open-world scenario [12]. In the closed-world scenario, the attacker knows
4 Random Forests and SVMs can also yield large models that take milliseconds to evaluate a sample and thus not suitable for WFP attacks at scale. For
example, CUMUL in Fig. 1 is based on an SVM.

1274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

video) and applications (e.g., Facebook chat vs. Google
Drive) [75] or Web services [76]. Unlike application or service detection, P RO F I focuses on performing WFP attacks in
both an open and a closed-world scenario. However, the principle behind P RO F I could be applied to more general traffic
classification, which we leave as future work.
Real Time Traffic Classification: FENXI [46] introduces a
system that uses specialized hardware accelerators for deep
learning to accelerate and enable the application of deep
learning to packet processing. ILSY [77] implements four
ML models in programmable data planes with the P4 language and shows the limitations of these approaches. Similarly,
Xavier et al. [78] investigate how ML algorithms can be executed in the data plane. N2Net [79] and BaNaNa Split [80]
discuss the implementation of binarized neural networks in the
data plane. Pacheco et al. [81] review ML-based solutions to
network traffic classification. In contrast to previous work, we
do not rely on special hardware nor highly optimized frameworks targeting specific application scenarios only. Instead, we
show how existing frameworks and commodity hardware can
be used to realize WFP attacks.

IV. ATTACK M ODEL AND D EFENSE
This section introduces P RO F I’s classifier using probabilistic models of packet sequences and the associated feature
engineering. The classifier is designed for computational efficiency, i.e., relies on models with few parameters. Further,
the classifier is designed for implementation as micro-services
in a cloud-native deployment scenario. The design aligns
with future networking concepts that feature networking on
top of a MEC infrastructure, thus increasing P RO F I’s attack
potential. The design assumes that P RO F I is situated between
the user and the CDN, routing is symmetric, and no VPN
is used. Further, this section introduces three state-of-the-art
approaches to WFP as baselines for later evaluations.
A. Overview
To operate on the flow level, P RO F I learns the characteristics of the first TLS connection that is established between
a user’s client when retrieving a webpage. We refer to this
connection as M AIN F LOW. Thus, classifiers in P RO F I answer
the question: Is this flow a M AIN F LOW to a webpage of one
of the websites that should be detected? Specifically, P RO F I
does not require correlating flows from an individual client
to make a prediction. Furthermore, P RO F I requires only samples of M AIN F LOWs from monitored websites during training,
i.e., P RO F I does not require samples of M AIN F LOWs from
unmonitored websites or flows other than M AIN F LOWs. As a
consequence, P RO F I doesn’t have to extract flows constituting a webpage retrieval from the traffic aggregate, i.e., the data
P RO F I requires is readily available during operation. Further,
detecting webpage calls based on the initial connection can
enable active interference, e.g., by dropping all traffic for a
specific IP for a short time after the call is detected.
Fig. 3 illustrates the high-level operation of P RO F I. The
attack translates a flow’s packets into a sequence of nominal

Fig. 3. Data-flow diagram of the classification procedure of P RO F I. Italic
script identifies meta-data.

symbols and labels the sequence with a classifier. More formally, the attack consists of three functions: The S YMBOLIZER
σ, the C OORDINATOR, and the C LASSIFIER κ. In addition,
there are three data sources and sinks, the Network, a C ACHE
to store intermediate results, and persistent storage for the classification results. First, P RO F I receives a packet u ∈ U from
the network. The set U corresponds to all IP packets occurring
during a TLS session. A S YMBOLIZER σ converts the packet
into an ordered set of abstract symbols M ⊂ W, where W is
the set of all possible symbols. M together with a flow identifier is passed to the C OORDINATOR. The C OORDINATOR
accumulates Mt = σ(ut ) derived from T packets u1 , . . . , uT
of the same flow. Once the Tth packet of a flow arrives, the
C OORDINATOR passes the accumulated sequence of symbols
to a C LASSIFIER κ. The C LASSIFIER determines whether the
flow is a M AIN F LOW from one of the monitored websites
y ∈ Y and returns the result to the C OORDINATOR, where it
is stored.
B. Extracted Features
To classify flows, P RO F I uses packet-level data from, at
most, the first 30 packets, corresponding to the 10th percentile
of M AIN F LOW lengths from our collected data. The exact
number of packets used by P RO F I is subject to parameter
optimization of the attack.
P RO F I extracts features on the level of the packet and the
level of the TLS records. For each packet, P RO F I extracts the
size in bytes, the TLS record types, and the direction, i.e.,
whether the packet travels from the client to the server or
the other way around. For each TLS record in the packets
P RO F I extracts the TLS record length, the TLS record type,
and the direction. Since existing tools such as ssldump do not
provide all of these features, we implemented a custom traffic dissector that extracts the features from the packet capture
files. P RO F I does not use timing information between packets
or TLS records. Latency, especially on the Internet, expresses
high variance not caused by the visited website [82]. Instead,
geographic location and difficult-to-observe conditions such
as the network load explain the latency’s variance [82].
Including latency would thus increase the requirements for
data collection to avoid the risk of overfitting.
Fig. 4 illustrates the extracted features for two websites:
www.google.es and www.primevideo.com. Negative
numbers in Fig. 4 correspond to traffic sent from the

KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING

Fig. 4.

1275

Frame-/TLS record sizes: negative (positive) values indicate traffic send by the client (server), resp.

client to the server. Positive numbers indicate the opposite
direction. Fig. 4 shows clear differences in the constructed
sequences for the websites. For example, Fig. 4(a) shows
that www.google.es has a high variance during the
TLS handshake, and the client sends larger packets to the
server. In contrast, www.primevideo.com in Fig. 4(b)
has a different handshake behavior, and the client sends
fewer data to the server. Also, the order is important: for
example, www.google.es in Fig. 4(a) has characteristic dips between records seven and ten. The sequence of
www.primevideo.com in Fig. 4(b) has small records after
the handshake until frame 15, after which the record sizes
become highly variable. Moreover, websites can have a multimodal behavior. For example, www.google.es in Fig. 4(a)
has three TLS handshakes that vary in size and number
of TLS records. The varying handshake lengths then shift
the entire sequence. The remaining steps in P RO F I, i.e., the
S YMBOLIZER and the C LASSIFIER, have to preserve and
extract these patterns.
Lastly, the sequences constructed from TLS records and
frames can differ. For example, the sequence of frame sizes
for www.primevideo.com in Fig. 4(c) differs markedly
from the TLS record sizes in Fig. 4(b). TLS can package
multiple records into one Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
segment. Similarly, a TLS record can span multiple TCP segments. Thus, the sequences of TLS record sizes and the frame
sizes that carry the records can differ strongly. In fact, the way
TLS records are packaged into TCP segments is a discriminating feature on its own [76]. In our collected data, the number
of TLS records and packets is approximately equal on average
but varies from website to website, confirming the potential
value of this feature.
C. Symbolizer
The S YMBOLIZER converts the features extracted for each
packet and record into a sequence with nominal elements that
the C LASSIFIER can process. Each sequence element is constructed from three features: direction, size of record or packet,
and TLS record type(s). The size of the packet or record is
numerical and the direction, and TLS record types are nominal. We map the direction, size, and record types to an abstract
symbol. To reduce the observation space and account for small
deviations in the lengths of packets and records, we discretize
the packet and record lengths.

Fig. 5. Shows how the TLS 1.3 handshake and one packet of application
data are mapped to a sequence of symbols. For illustration, the handshake is
simplified. The sequence diagram shows the flow of packets, and labels on
the arrows indicate TLS records. The resulting sequences for packet and
record are below the diagram.

Formally, we define the S YMBOLIZER as a function σ : U ×
T → 2W . The set T corresponds to the element for which
a symbol should be created, i.e., packet or record. The
output is an ordered set of symbols. The order is established
with the help of a function pos : W ∪ R → N+ , which returns
the position of the passed element inside the flow. The symbol
is formed by combining the record type(s), size, and direction.
To represent the record types, the S YMBOLIZER uses the corresponding decimal code from the TLS standard. For example
23 for application_data records, and 22 for records in
the handshake, e.g., 22:1 for the client_hello and 22:2
for the server_hello [83]. Further, the S YMBOLIZER represents the direction through a letter C when the sequence
element originates at the client, and S when the sequence
element originates at the server.
For instance, Fig. 5 shows an example mapping the beginning of a TLS connection to a sequence of symbols. For
brevity, this paragraph will elaborate on the fourth packet in
Fig. 5 only. The fourth packet in Fig. 5, referred to as u, travels from the server to the client and carries three application

1276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

data records. The packet u has a size of 1310 Bytes. The
records have lengths of 510, 399 and 401 Bytes. For a T
of packet, packet u would be mapped to one symbol
{(23|23|23;1310;S)}, i.e., σ returns a singleton-set. In
the case of T of record, packet u is mapped to three symbols. One symbol per record: {(23;620;S), (23;340;S),
(23;350;S)}.
For both sequence elements packet and record, symbols are categorical, i.e., symbols can be interpreted as separate
characters in an alphabet. Thus, two symbols that look similar,
e.g., (23;620;C) and (23;620;S) are different - just as
two characters such as e and c are different.
The input to the C LASSIFIER is the union of the return values of σfor the first n packets of a flow F := {u1 . . . , un }:
O :=
u∈F σ(u). This forms a sequence with nominal
elements that are sorted based on the order in which the
corresponding packets occur in the flow.
D. Classifier
The S YMBOLIZER returns sequences with nominal elements, and P RO F I uses ML techniques that can operate on
those. We consider two ML techniques: first-order Markov
Chains (MCs) [76], and Profile Hidden Markov Models
(PHMMs) [84], [85]. In addition, we consider as baselines the k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) classifier [86] with the
Levenshtein distance [87] to measure similarity, the SVMbased CUMUL [20] attack, and the set-based IPFP [30]
attack. All techniques are trained on a dataset X consisting
of calls to multiple webpages of websites. We denote with
Xij the jth webpage of the ith website.
MC and PHMM belong to the class of Probabilistic
Graphical Models (PGMs). The PGMs describe the nominal
sequences, the S YMBOLIZER converts M AIN F LOWs to, with
the language of probability theory [37]. That is, one PGM represents M AIN F LOWs of one website y ∈ Y. We chose PGMs
over other ML models because PGMs have few parameters, are
interpretable, extensible, and signal data drift. A small number of parameters is important to make P RO F I memory and
computationally efficient, allowing P RO F I to scale to many
concurrent webpage accesses. At the same time, a small number of parameters aids the interpretability of the model, which
is further improved through the specific structure of, e.g., the
PHMM [84]. PGMs are readily extensible, e.g., it is straightforward to include additional variables that can improve the
classification [37], e.g., the information of the CDN that is
contacted. Lastly, PGMs model the data directly and thus provide a measure of how well the model fits the data. This is an
important aspect for the operation of P RO F I since it allows the
detection of data drift, i.e., the data distribution in operation
changes over time compared to the distribution of the training
data. An effect that has been previously reported [51] and that
we also find in our data.
PGMs do not return a specific label. Instead, PGMs compute
the likelihood, i.e., the probability py (O) of a sequence O
given the model for website y [37]. A Maximum Likelihood
Classifier (MLC) can use the likelihood for classification: An
MLC returns the label corresponding to the model with the

largest likelihood, i.e., the model under which the observation
has the highest probability [85]. However, MLCs are not suited
for an open-world scenario. An MLC will always return a
label, even if every model has a probability of zero.
To overcome this issue, we treat classification as anomaly
detection. The classifier’s PGMs modeling each website’s
M AIN F LOW represent the normal behavior. If observation
shows anomalous behavior, i.e., has a low probability under the
PGM describing the website’s behavior, the classifier rejects
the observation. We define anomalous behavior based on the
anomaly score βy (O) of a website as:
βy (O) :=

log p(y(O))

.
γ maxj log py Xyj

(1)

Here, py (O) corresponds to the model of website y ∈ Y, and
γ ∈ R+ is a scaling factor. The score βy (O) corresponds to
the ratio of the log-likelihood of the model for website y to the
largest log-likelihood from the training set. The free parameter
γ can be used to tune the ratio. The interpretation of the ratio is
as follows: If βy (O) ≤ 1, then the given sequence fits equally
well to the model as the training data. If βy (O) > 1, then the
sequence is less likely than all training sequences.
In the closed-world scenario, the classifier returns the website of the model with the smallest score. This results in a
multi-class classifier that returns a label y ∈ Y for every observation. In the open-world scenario, the classifier uses the score
to turn each PGM into a binary classifier. If βy (O) > 1, then
the model rejects the observation O, i.e., observation O does
not correspond to a M AIN F LOW of website y. If βy (O) ≤ 1,
then observation O is labeled as an instance of website y. This
results in 3 cases: 1) All models reject sequence O, 2) one
model accepts O, and 3) multiple models accept sequence O.
In case one, the sample is classified as background traffic. In
case two, the sample is classified as the website the model
corresponds to. In case three, the classifier returns the website
whose model has the smallest score.
Adjusting γ allows trading false positives for false negatives. A value smaller one reduces the risk of false positives
and increases the risk of false negatives, i.e., the classifier is
stricter. A value larger one increases the risk of false positives
and reduces the risk of false negatives, i.e., the classifier is
more lenient in its opinion of what is normal.
This approach has five advantages: 1) PGMs for websites
can be trained independently from each other. Thus, models
for new websites can easily be added, and existing ones can
be updated without changing other models, and P RO F I does
not need samples for the background class, as, e.g., CUMUL
does. 2) We can vary the pre-processing steps for each website independently. Varying the pre-processing steps changes
the observation spaces for PGMs. Thus, the log-likelihood of
PGMs cannot be directly compared since the log-likelihood
is not calibrated [37]. The anomaly score solves this problem
by quantifying how normal an observation behaves compared
to others of the same class. 3) The likelihood of the PGMs
can be used to detect changes in the data distribution and thus
indicate a reduction in reliability [37]. 4) The PGMs P RO F I
uses are computationally efficient and can consume data in a
streaming manner. That is, the symbols extracted from packets

KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING

1277

by the S YMBOLIZER can be fed one-by-one into the models
without the need to store the full sequence.

login. We decided against including this type of traffic since
its acquisition requires tools such as Selenium, or virtualized environments that could impact the feature distribution.
Websites are known to detect such technologies, potentially
blocking or responding in different ways than normal [89].
Further, to log in, users normally have to access a publicly
accessible landing page first. Similarly, we did not passively
listen to real traffic since we did not have access to such a
monitoring location.

E. Defense
We implement and evaluate a defense based on the padding
in the TLS record protocol, which we call Random TLS
Record Size Defense (RT LS RS). RT LS RS randomly draws
TLS record sizes from a uniform distribution U (lmin , lmax ),
and pads records to the desired length if necessary. After each
record, RT LS RS randomly chooses between adding the next
record to the data or handing the current data to the transport
protocol. Thus, the sizes and sequence of packets and TLS
Records change - the features that P RO F I uses to detect patterns. The TLS 1.3 [83] standard allows the padding of TLS
records to arbitrary sizes up to 214 Bytes. Thus, the defense
can readily be implemented in SSL libraries.
Characteristics that are not protected with this defense
are the TLS handshake and characteristic exchanges between
client and server. The handshake protocol does not support padding [83]. Thus we leave the messages as they are.
Characteristic exchanges, i.e., a specific sequence of contacts
between client and server, could, in principle, be obfuscated
with deterministic sending of decoy packets, albeit at the
expense of more bandwidth overhead. Our evaluation shows
that the simple defense suffices to thwart P RO F I.
Our goal with RT LS RS is to present an easy-to-implement
and effective defense against P RO F I. RT LS RS is not intended
to outperform previous WFP defenses. In principle, existing WFP defenses should also effectively mitigate P RO F I.
However, existing defenses, e.g., HTTPOS [64] or CSBuFLO [17], are often complex to implement and require
continuous effort to maintain, which might hinder their
adoption.
V. M ODEL T RAINING
A. Data Acquisition
To evaluate the attack, we consider 96 websites located in
three popular CDNs. For each CDN, we selected the top 30
websites based on the Alexa Top 1000 [88]5 ranking. For each
website, we selected 50 random sub-pages using a javascriptenabled Web-crawler. We obtain a data set consisting of 4 800
webpages. We gathered traces of every webpage daily for 70
days. We loaded every website with Chromium and the Firefox
browser in headless mode. This resulted in 100 samples for
each website, and a total of 9 600 traces per day. In total, we
collected 3 TB of traces.
Docker containers were executed on three separate physical
machines running Ubuntu 20.04 and used to isolate traffic of
webpage access and to maintain equal conditions for all pages.
The browser is started from inside the docker container in
headless mode. We traced traffic for 7 s, after which the docker
container is terminated. Traffic was collected inside the docker
container with the tcpdump utility.
The gathered data is limited in that it does not contain mobile traffic and webpages that require a previous
5 As of May 1st , the Alexa service is no longer available.

B. Data Split and Training Procedure
We evaluate MC, PHMM, kNN, CUMUL, and IPFP in a
closed-world and an open-world scenario. We divide the websites into two sets: Foreground Sites and Background Sites. The
Foreground Sites are the sites that the classifiers should detect.
The Background Sites are the sites that should be ignored. In
the closed-world scenario, the classifiers must differentiate the
pages in the Foreground Sites. In the open-world scenario, the
classifiers must detect whether traffic belongs to a page from
the Foreground Sites, and if so, from which one. We create the
sets by randomly assigning websites to one of the two sets,
such that each website type is represented in each set. For
example, we ensured that both sets contain sites with adult
content, news pages, etc.
The classifiers are trained on M AIN F LOWs from all 70 days
from the Foreground Sites. Flows other than M AIN F LOWs are
not used for training, as their characteristics differ from those
of M AIN F LOWs, thus hampering the ability of the PGMs to
model the M AIN F LOWs’ characteristics. For training, we split
the webpages of a website into three disjoint sets: training,
validation, and test set. The training set contains 60 % of the
webpages, the validation and test sets contain 20 % each. For
hyper-parameter optimization, we fit the models to the training
set and evaluate the performance on all 70 days in the validation set. For CUMUL, we include a background class in
the open-world scenario as suggested in [20]. The background
class consists of traces of one webpage from every website in
the Background Sites. We select the parameters that resulted
in the best precision on the validation set. That is, we prefer
the models with fewer false positives. For the final results, we
train the classifiers on the combined training and validation
set with the selected hyper-parameters and evaluate them on
all 70 days in the test set.
C. Hyper-Parameter Optimization
We use a grid-search for hyperparameter optimization.
Table I lists the parameter space. The Binning Method, number
of bins, number of packets, and sequence element is optimized
for PHMM, MC and kNN. For kNN, we convert each of the
symbols a packet is mapped to into Unicode characters and
concatenate the characters to a string. As a hyperparameter
for kNN, we vary the number of neighbors. In case of the
PHMM, we vary its length. For CUMUL, we evaluate the
hyper-parameter space of the SVM as suggested in [20]. IPFP
does not have hyperparameters.
In the case of kNN, we apply the same function σ to
M AIN F LOW packets from all websites. That is, the same

1278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE I
PARAMETER S PACE O PTIMIZED OVER

in Fig. 6 indicate how many models used the respective
sequence type. Fig. 6 shows that 25 PHMMs use records and
25 PHMMs use frames. The PHMMs using records require up
to 10 packets only, i.e., the records contained in the first 10
packets of each M AIN F LOW. PHMMs using frames require 5,
10, 15 and 30 packets. For the MC models, 23 use frames,
and 27 records as sequence elements. The length of sequences
varies. For both, MC and PHMM, more than 50 % of the models require only five packets. Note that the models with TLS
records as sequence elements can get sequences longer than
the number of packets, since one packet can carry more than
one TLS record, especially during the handshake.
The fact that many MC and PHMM models rely on the
first 5 packets is surprising. The first 5 packets contain mostly
the TLS handshake. Depending on the TLS configuration, the
size of the handshake packets and records varies. For example,
servers and clients can have different extensions and exchange
certificates of varying sizes [83]. Fig. 4 illustrates this, showing that even for a single website, the TLS handshake varies.
The differences between the websites are enough for the PGMs
to distinguish websites from each other.
E. Summary

Fig. 6. CDF of the discrete sequence lengths and sequence types of PHMM
and MC. Numbers in the figure give the total count of models that use the
corresponding sequence type.

Sequence Element from the same number of packets from all
M AIN F LOWs of all websites are mapped to a symbol with the
same binning method and number of bins.
In the case of MC and PHMM, we take advantage of the fact
that models for websites are independent. We vary the function
σ for every website. Thus, each model has its own function σ.
A flow U is converted to a unique sequence for every model.
With this approach, it is possible to tune the conversion to
symbols in such a way that the PGMs can model them well,
and at the same time, differentiate them from sequences of
other websites. The parameters of the model are estimated
only on the samples of the corresponding website.
D. Selected Hyperparameters
The best configuration for kNN uses 9 neighbors and the
size and direction of the TLS records in the first 30 packets of
the M AIN F LOW. The classifier has 40 bins with record sizes of
E QUALW IDTH binning. The best configuration for CUMUL
is γ = 211 and c = 23 .
MCs and PHMMs have diverse configurations, indicating
that it is beneficial to tune the pre-processing for each website
independently. Of special interest are the selected sequence
lengths and sequence elements, impacting the computational
cost of the attack. Longer sequences require more packets
and more processing. Relying on TLS record information
requires the additional parsing of TLS headers. Fig. 6 shows
the Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) for the best
PHMM and MC models. The CDFs show the distribution over
the sequence lengths and sequence elements. The numbers

PGMs can represent the M AIN F LOWs of websites. The
results show that many websites can be distinguished with
as little as the first 5 to 10 packets. This is in contrast to
previous work on WFP, which relies on all packets sent during the page-load. Future work on PGM-based attacks could
improve the emission model and address potential multi-modal
behavior in the data. Currently, the models rely heavily on the
N ONE binning method, particularly models for websites with
dynamic content. The N ONE binning method requires many
training samples to get sufficient data since the packet and
record sizes are not compressed, i.e., every size that occurs
normally must be captured. Here, non-discrete emission models might better compress the emissions and reduce the risk of
overfitting and the required samples. The mix of discrete and
continuous features makes the improvement of the emission
model challenging. Similarly, our data shows that webpages
can express multi-modal behavior. This poses a challenge
to the used PGMs, since their ability to capture multimodal sequences is limited. Investigating the performance
of mixture models, e.g., a mixture of MC and PHMMs to
model one website could be an interesting aspect for future
work.
We believe that the attack can be thwarted by randomizing
or standardizing packet and record sizes due to the reliance
of the models on packet and record sizes since S INGLE B IN
reduces the average precision to only 20 % on the validation set. Performance decreases because S INGLE B IN removes
the packet and record size information, leaving only direction and TLS record type as information. Randomizing packet
and record sizes has a similar effect since randomizing essentially removes size information from the data. Furthermore,
the large number of models that work well with only five
packets indicate that the TLS handshake is important for classification. Standardizing the TLS handshake, i.e., handshakes

KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING

1279

use the same sequence and size of packets independent of the
concrete TLS settings, could help mitigate WFP as well.
VI. E VALUATION
The evaluation focuses on the metrics precision := TPTP
+FP
and recall := TPTP
+FN , where TP are the true positives, FP the
false positives, and FN the false negatives [86]. High precision
means reliability, i.e., retrieved instances usually belong to the
predicted class. High recall means that the classifier retrieves
most of a class’s samples. Usually, there is an interdependence
between precision and recall, i.e., improving a classifier’s
recall comes at the cost of reduced precision, and vice versa.
P RO F I’s classifier can trade precision for recall by adjusting
the parameter γ appropriately. We do not discuss the accuracy
of the classifiers since the accuracy has little expressiveness.
With almost 100 classes, a classifier can achieve 99 % accuracy
by predicting one class for all samples [86], analogous to classification problems with imbalanced classes. Here, precision
and recall better reflect a classifier’s performance.
We evaluate P RO F I’s classifier in an open- and closed-world
scenario, with and without defense, and under asymmetric
routing. Further, we compare P RO F I’s classifier against three
baselines. We evaluate RT LS RS by sampling record sizes from
a uniform distribution with a lower limit of 100 and an upper
limit in the set {100i + 100 Bytes | i = 0, . . . , 16}.
With asymmetric routing, packets traveling from server to
client can take a different route than packets from client
to server [90]. Thus, P RO F I might not observe both directions. Since asymmetric routing frequently occurs in Wide
Area Networks [90], evaluating P RO F I under its influence is
important.
To relate P RO F I’s performance to that of previous
attacks, we evaluate three baselines: kNN, CUMUL [20],
and IPFP [30]. kNN has been used in previous
attacks [16], [19], [21] and operates on the same feature space as P RO F I, i.e., on the sequence of packets and
TLS frames. kNN stores the training data verbatim and is
thus a strong baseline [86]. CUMUL [20] is one of the most
cited WFP attacks and uses Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
and traffic features from the full page load. IPFP [30] is a
recent attack leveraging the IP addresses that occur during
the page-loads to form fingerprints.
kNN, CUMUL, and IPFP are not directly applicable in
the attack scenario in Section IV. kNN has a large memory
overhead and is costly to evaluate even with appropriate data
structures. CUMUL and IPFP require access to all flows of
a page load, making them hard to use with traffic aggregates. Especially IPFP relies heavily on correctly extracting
page loads from traffic aggregates, a mostly open problem.
In contrast to kNN, CUMUL’s SVM is not suited to model
variable-length sequences with nominal elements.
A. Closed World vs. Open World
Fig. 7(c) shows violinplots for precision and recall for the
open- and closed-world scenarios with and without defense.
Asymmetric routing is indicated with the endings fc2s and
fs2c. For fc2s, the traffic from the client to the server is

Fig. 7. Precision and recall for the closed-, and open world scenario, with
defense (-def) scenarios, filtered traffic from server to client (-fs2c), and from
client to server (-fc2s).

Fig. 8. Line plot showing precision and overhead as a function of RT LS RS’
upper sizes.

unobserved. For fs2c, the traffic from the server to the client
is unobserved. Markers indicate the average, horizontal bars
the median, and small dots are actual samples. Each sample
corresponds to the average for one website in the Foreground
Sites across all days. For example, a sample with 95 % recall
means that the model missed 5 % of the webpages belonging
to the website across all days.
MC and PHMM achieve better precision and recall in the
closed-world scenario, which is expected. In the closed-world
scenario, MC achieves an average precision of 86.5 % and
an average recall of 85.4 %, and the PHMM of 75.7 %, and
73.4 %, respectively. In the open-world scenario, the precision
and recall reduce to 68.9 % and 78.7 % for MC, and 58.6 %
and 70.8 % for PHMM. However, the distribution of precision
and recall is skewed, as Fig. 7(c) shows. Both models achieve
a median precision and recall of > 99 % in the closed-world
scenario. The median precision for MC in the closed-world
scenario is 99.9 %, and 94.2 % for the PHMM. In the openworld scenario, the median precision drops for both models
close to the average. This indicates that the PGMs confuse
Background Sites with Foreground Sites. Still, both models
have a precision of >90 % for one-third of the Foreground
Sites in the open-world scenario.
B. RT LS RS Defense
Fig. 8(c) shows the precision and the overhead as a function of the uniform distribution’s upper size. Fig. 8 shows that
the precision is low for all upper limits, ranging between
8 % and 12 %, with a minimum of 8.71 % for an upper
size of 6 100 Byte. In contrast, Fig. 8(b) shows that the overhead increases linearly with the upper size. An upper size of

1280

Fig. 9.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Development of precision over multiple days.

100 Bytes has the smallest overhead with 150 %. The upper
size of 6 100 has an overhead of 425 %. We thus investigate
the RT LS RS’ effect on the classification performance for an
upper size of 100 Bytes. This reduces the average precision to
9.35 % while keeping overhead low.
Fig. 7(c) shows that the RT LS RS defense from Section IV-E
effectively mitigates P RO F I. The RT LS RS defense reduces the
precision and recall of both models to ∼20 % in the closedworld scenario. In the open-world scenario, RT LS RS reduces
the precision of both models to less than 10 %. The recall is
less affected and reduces to ∼19 %.
The RT LS RS defense thus has two effects: The models
miss many webpages (low recall), and the credibility of the
retrieved webpages is small (low precision). On average, more
than 90 % of the webpages the models classify as belonging to
a specific website belong to another. Still, even in the presence
of defense, a few websites exist for which P RO F I achieves high
precision and recall, as Fig. 7(c) shows.
C. Asymmetric Routing
Fig. 7(c) shows that the effect of asymmetric routing on
P RO F I’s performance depends heavily on the direction of
unobserved traffic. If traffic from the server to the client
remains unobserved, the average precision and recall of MC
and PHMM deteriorate to less than 6 %.
If traffic from the client to the server remains unobserved,
then the average precision of MC and PHMM reduces by
∼3 %. Similarly, the distribution of the recall for the PHMM
shifts towards lower values, as Fig. 7(c) shows. The median
recall reduces by >13 %, while the average reduces by 0.7 %.
For the MC, the average recall improves from 78.7 % to
81.6 %, while the median stays high at 98.9 %.
This outcome is reasonable. Few packets travel from client
to server, amounting to TLS messages and HTTP commands
with small variance, making websites hard to differentiate.
Most packets travel from server to client and have a high variance, as Fig. 4 shows. Missing traffic from the server to the
client deprives the PGMs of much of the information they use
for classification.
D. Training Data Evaluation
Fig. 9(a) shows the average precision over days when training on all training data. Fig. 9(a) shows that the precision of all
models remains approximately constant over time. The recall
scores show similar behavior.

Fig. 10. Development of the NLL for the MC trained on one day. The shaded
area is the bootstrapped 99 % CI of the mean.

Fig. 9(b) shows the average precision per day when training
on traces of the first day. Fig. 9(b) shows that the precision
decreases over time. The average precision of MC and PHMM
drops to 66.2 % and 42.5 %. This behavior is not unexpected
and has previously been observed [51]. This indicates that
attackers must continuously gather new data to update the
deployed models for websites with dynamic content.
Fig. 10 illustrates this and shows the average Negative
Log Likelihood (NLL)6 and its 99 % Confidence Interval
(CI) for the MCs fitted to data from www.medium.com
(Fig. 10(a)), and www.ebay.co.uk (Fig. 10(b)). Fig. 10
shows two examples of distributional drift that can occur in
an operative system: A slow and steady drift and a sudden
change.
Fig. 10(a) shows that the average NLL has an increasing
trend indicating that the input diverges from the data the
model was fitted with. To continuously operate the system,
the adversary thus has to continuously update its training data
and model to track the drift in the input’s data distribution.
In contrast, Fig. 10(b) shows a sudden jump after 42 days.
This indicates a persistent change in the input data’s distribution, making the model unreliable. The change is caused by
a different length of the server’s TLS finished record. If
such a change occurs, the adversary must collect new samples
to adjust the model to the new input distribution.
The advantage of PGMs is that they readily detect drift in
the input’s distribution. Further, PGMs allow the investigation of what changed [37], [76]. Here, the PGMs allow the
identification of the transitions with low probability, directly
pinpointing the change in the exchanged messages.
E. Comparison to Baselines
Table II shows the average precision and recall for MC
and PHMM, and the three baselines kNN, CUMUL, and
IPFP in the closed-, and open-world scenario. Table II shows
that P RO F I is competitive to state-of-the-art models. In the
closed-world scenario, kNN is the best model with an average precision of 91.8 % and an average recall of 91.44 %.
kNN achieves this at the expense of increased memory and
computational requirements, whereas P RO F I relies on computationally cheap ML models with few parameters. Fig. 1
illustrates this fact and shows the number of pages per second classifiers classify in an offline setting. Fig. 1 shows
that kNN achieves short of 10 classifications per second,
6 The NLL is uncalibrated and cannot be compared between models.

KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING

TABLE II
P RECISION , R ECALL AND ACCURACY FOR PHMM, MC, AND THE
BASELINES IN THE O PEN AND C LOSED S CENARIO

1281

the CDN. Extending the classifier with this information could
be an interesting avenue for future work.
VII. P ROTOTYPE D ESIGN & R ESULTS

whereas MC and PHMM achieve between 30 000 and 100 000
classifications per second.7
In the open-world scenario, IPFP is the best model with
a precision of 80.6 % and a recall of 85.2 %. In contrast
to P RO F I, IPFP requires additional pre-processing steps to
extract a user’s page-load from the traffic aggregate. The
authors do not provide a solution to this problem. Detecting for
one user whether the user loads more than one page and detecting the onset of the second page load is already a challenging
task [19], [22], [29], [36]. Extracting one page load from traffic aggregates with high precision is much more complex and
will have limited accuracy in practice.
F. Summary
Our results show that PGMs classify traffic based on the first
5 to 30 packets of the first initiated TLS session when retrieving a webpage and are competitive to state-of-the-art attacks.
This simplifies WFP attacks since page loads do not have to
be retrieved from a mix of traffic. Furthermore, our evaluation shows that the attack works with only the traffic from
the server to the client, i.e., can handle asymmetric routing.
In addition, the computational and memory complexity of the
PGMs is low and could allow adversaries to perform WFP in
real-time and at scale. Our results show that the PGMs have a
higher recall than precision. In scenarios where the precision
is of interest, the attacker can trade recall for precision by
setting the classifier’s parameter γ to a value smaller one. A
value smaller one requires a log-likelihood at inference time
that is smaller than the largest log-likelihood at training time,
i.e., for which the learned model fits better than the worst
model during training. Fortunately, the RT LS RS defense that
SSL libraries can readily implement thwarts the attack at the
cost of a 150 % increase in bandwidth.
Finally, we note that an adversary could easily improve
P RO F I by conditioning the probability of a website on additional variables such as the visited CDN, the time of the day, or
other correlated variables. For example, calculating the probability for a website y could then be p(y | O)p(y | c)p(y | t),
where c identifies the CDN the website is located on and t the
time of the day. For example, conditioning on the CDN would
essentially reduce the hypothesis space to just the websites in
7 Data structures to improve the inference time, e.g., KDTrees, are not
applicable since they require real-valued inputs [91]. Our input consists of
sequences with nominal elements. Further, experiments using the packet size
of the first 30 packets as input features showed that the KDTree reduced the
inference time not as strongly as expected, i.e., only by a factor of three
compared to a linear scan. This is not unexpected [91].

This section presents a micro-service-based prototype that
implements the P RO F I attack. The prototype is based on readily available open-source software and Commodity of the
Shelf (COTS) hardware to showcase the potential threat P RO F I
poses and give an impression of the scale WFP attacks might
operate at, e.g., by operating on MEC infrastructure. After
establishing the ML-related performance in the previous section, this section’s evaluation focuses on networking-related
performance indicators.
A. Design & Architecture
1) Design: NFV and COTS. We believe that the principle of NFV is a good fit for P RO F I. NFV can realize each
PGM as one Virtual Network Function (VNF). NFV enables
the scaling of ProFi across multiple servers, horizontal scaling
of expensive PGMs, and the deployment of new, or updating
of existing PGMs at runtime. This makes P RO F I amenable
to the deployment on top of MEC infrastructure. The low
computational cost of the PGMs alleviates the need for special hardware accelerators and lowers the burden of deploying
ProFi in practice.
Middlebox Design. A middlebox allows the attacker to
interfere with a victim’s traffic. The prototype could drop the
remaining packets of a flagged flow. The alternative, i.e., mirroring traffic to an analysis server, does not easily allow this
type of interference since switches start to sample traffic at
high rates, which will result in incorrect classifications.
2) Architecture: We implement the prototype on top of
the OpenNetVM platform [92]. OpenNetVM is a highperformance, zero-copy NF platform supporting containerization that simplifies the development of VNFs. The prototype
implements the classification procedure from Fig. 3 using
a micro-service-based architecture. Fig. 11 shows the structure of the prototype. We map the procedure in Fig. 3 into
five services, i.e., VNFs: The TLSFilter, TLSRecDet,
Symbolizer, PGM, and Coordinator.
The TLSFilter extracts TLS traffic and forwards it to the
TLSRecDet. The TLSRecDet extracts TLS Records from
the traffic and passes this information to all Symbolizers.
Each Symbolizer converts the extracted meta-data into a
discrete symbol and forwards the symbol to one PGM. The
PGM processes the symbol and, once the PGM processed a
configured amount of symbols for a flow, forwards an anomaly
score to the Coordinator. The Coordinator labels a
flow based on the received anomaly scores.
VNFs communicate with each other using User Datagram
Protocol (UDP) packets. This makes the deployment of P RO F I
to a cluster simple. The micro-service-based architecture
enables the scaling, addition, and updating of models with
new parameters. For example, additional PGMs or data preparations can easily be added by starting a new service. Already
running services can be scaled as needed by deploying new
instances.

1282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 11. Testbed setup and prototype structure. Circles correspond to processes, i.e., VNFs. Rectangles to data sources and sinks. The prototype is implemented
on top of OpenNetVM. VNFs in OpenNetVM exchange information via UDP packets.

TABLE III
T RACE S TATISTICS

B. Prototype Results
1) Material and Methods: The prototype operates on a
server with an Intel Xeon CPU E5-265 with 24 cores, 126 GB
RAM, and an Intel X540-AT2 network card with two 10 Gbit/s
ports (Fig. 11). The server is connected back-to-back to a second server with identical hardware running MoonGen [93].
MoonGen replays PCAPs constructed from the traces we
collected according to Section V-A, i.e., not with passively
collected traces. MoonGen replays the PCAPs as fast as possible, i.e., at the full 10 Gbit/s. The prototype can use 17 out of
the 24 cores for PGMs. OpenNetVM blocks four cores, and
three cores are allocated to the TLSFilter, TLSRecDet,
and Coordinator.
We create two challenging workloads and one regular workload to benchmark the prototype. Table III lists the workload
characteristics. The regular workload consists of a random
sample of webpage calls. The adversarial workloads highpps, and high-fps challenge the prototype with a higher packet
and flow rate than the regular workload. This challenges the
TLSFilter, TLSRecDet, and PGM services, respectively.
Each trace has a volume of around 13 GB, resulting in a 10 s
measurement on 10 G.
2) Number of Classifiable Websites: Fig. 12(c) shows the
number of PGM services that can be co-located on one CPU
core. We evaluate a small and large MC and PHMM model.
The big PHMM model has 639 parameters. The small PHMM
has 114 parameters. The MC models have 11 078 and 5 parameters respectively. The big model require 30 packets, the small
models 5 packets for classification. For each PGM and workload, we vary the number of PGMs in {1, . . . , 10}. We report
the highest number of co-located PGMs that could handle the
traffic.

Fig. 12(c) shows that between 1 and 8 PHMMs can be
co-located on one CPU core. The values are similar across
workloads. Fig. 12(c) shows that between 6 and 8 MCs can be
co-located on one CPU core. A CPU core can fit more MCs
than PHMMs, which is expected since the PHMM requires
more computational resources to compute the log-likelihood
of a sequence. Depending on the models’ sizes, the prototype
could run between 20 and 100 PGM services.
3) Impact on User Traffic: Dataplane traffic traverses only
the TLSFilter service. Fig. 12(a) illustrates the average
processing times of the TLSFilter as violinplot. Each violin is computed from 20 runs. Fig. 12(a) shows that the
TLSFilter is cheap and takes on average between 0.2 µs
and 0.33 µs for each packet. Fig. 12(a) shows that the number of packets needed for classification affects the processing
time of the TLSFilter function. This is expected since more
packets result in a larger state of the TLSFilter function,
which increases the processing time.
4) Time-to-Label (TTL): The TTL is the duration between
the last required packet entering the prototype and when
the label is available [46]. For example, if 30 packets are
required to classify a flow, then the TTL is the difference
between the arrival time of the 30th packet and the time the
Coordinator labels the flow. We do not use the arrival time
of the first packet because this would introduce noise. The TTL
would not only depend on the latency of the prototype but also
on the inter-arrival time of packets in the trace.
We evaluate the TTL for the small and big PGM variants.
We measure the TTL with one PGM each. Fig. 12(b) shows
violin plots of the TTL. Fig. 12(b) shows a large variance in
the TTL, ranging from 0.001 ms up to 1 000 ms. The median
TTL for small models is at ∼0.01 ms for PHMM and MC.
The median values for the big PGMs vary. The big MC has
a median TTL of ∼100 ms, and the PHMM of ∼0.06 ms.
However, the distribution of TLLs for the PHMM is heavy
tailed, resulting in an average of ∼200 ms.
C. Summary
We implemented a prototype that classifies traffic with
PGMs and evaluated it with real traffic traces. The prototype can hold 10 Gbits, corresponding to up to 424 Website

KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING

1283

Fig. 12. (a) Distribution of average processing times of the TLSFilter. (b) Time-to-label for small/large PGMs on the average workload. (c) Number of
PGMs on one CPU core. Suffixes -S/-L refer to small/large model.

calls per second. Statistical traffic classification with PGMs
is thus feasible in the network at line rate. Our evaluations
show that the prototype can monitor up to 100 websites. The
results of this section have an impact beyond the WFP usecase since the P RO F I could also label traffic for legitimate
reasons.
At the same time, our work opens up new research opportunities in the area of traffic classification. We present the first
design of a micro-service-based system able to perform WFP
at the network edge. The investigation of how such systems,
e.g., for statistical traffic classification, might be operated on
top of a MEC infrastructure with computing facilities at different distances to the user could be an interesting avenue of
future work.
VIII. E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
We carefully take steps to ensure that all captured data is
in compliance with ethical standards. First, no personal data
was collected during crawls of public and popular websites.
Second, we limit the crawling rate to ensure that the websites
are not impacted. We limit crawls to 100 per day for websites
within the Alexa Top 1 000 Ranking to minimize the impact
of our study.
P RO F I demonstrates the ability of an adversary to launch
WFP attacks at scale. This raises an ethical question, as censors can use published attacks to violate user privacy. To
mitigate this effect, we present a defense that can readily be
implemented alongside the attack. In addition, we believe that
the preemptive exposure of potential vulnerabilities is necessary to develop effective and efficient countermeasures. With
our results we show the practicability and severity of WFP,
sending an impulse to discuss the implementation of defense
mechanisms not only in the Tor network, but also in common
SSL libraries, and the TLS standard.
IX. C ONCLUSION
Despite the success of the encrypt-everything movement
that resulted in a substantial deployment of TLS, Internet
users are still at risk of pervasive monitoring attacks. To show
the feasibility of pervasive monitoring of Internet traffic at

scale, we design and evaluate P RO F I, a Website Fingerprinting
(WFP) attack on the flow level that de-anonymizes encrypted
network traffic of websites that Internet users visit. To scale
to large traffic aggregates, P RO F I uses computationally cheap
Machine Learning (ML) models and requires only the direction, packet size, and TLS record types of, at most, the first
30 packets of a flow. P RO F I achieves a precision and recall
of 86.51 % and 85.53 % in a closed-world, and 68.90 % and
78.71 % in an open-world scenario with 96 websites and
4 800 webpages. To show that P RO F I could be deployed
by ISPs or other censoring entities at scale, we show that
P RO F I can operate as a middlebox in an online scenario and
evaluate a prototype implementation in a testbed with real
traffic traces. We show that P RO F I has the potential to process up to 424 websites/s at 10 G—a scale that is required
to run the attack on the Internet, yet a scale to which current WFP attacks are not applicable. Further, the prototype
shows that P RO F I can label traffic within one millisecond
after receiving the last required packet, which could allow
active interference with users’ traffic. The results suggest
that WFP can be performed at scale and threatens user privacy. Yet, we show that the attack can be mitigated by
standard features available in TLS 1.3. To improve Internet
privacy, we posit that such defense mechanisms should find
their way into TLS libraries to protect user privacy on the
Internet. Further, our analysis shows that standardizing the
TLS handshake could help to improve privacy since P RO F I
frequently relied on characteristics of the handshake for
classification.
Future work on PGM-based WFP attacks could investigate
the inclusion of auxiliary data into calculating the probability of a website to improve the classification performance. In
addition, attacks using tree-based learners could be evaluated.
Tree-based models can potentially operate in the match-action
pipeline of switches [77] if small enough. We believe the necessary feature engineering and network integration to be challenging, making this evaluation an interesting aspect for future
work. Further, the operation of the proposed microservicebased implementation on top of MEC infrastructure could
be an interesting avenue for future work in statistical traffic
classification.

1284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

R EFERENCES
[1] R. Barnes et al., “Confidentiality in the face of pervasive surveillance:
A threat model and problem statement,” IETF, RFC 7624, Aug. 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7624
[2] Z. Hu, L. Zhu, J. Heidemann, A. Mankin, D. Wessels, and P. E. Hoffman,
“Specification for DNS over transport layer security (TLS),” IETF, RFC
7858, May 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/
rfc7858
[3] P. E. Hoffman and P. McManus, “DNS queries over HTTPS (DoH),”
IETF, RFC 8484, Oct. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.
org/info/rfc8484
[4] C. Huitema and E. Rescorla, “Issues and requirements for server name
identification (SNI) encryption in TLS,” IETF, RFC 8744, Jul. 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8744
[5] E. Rescorla, K. Oku, N. Sullivan, and C. A. Wood (Internet Eng.
Task Force, Fremont, CA, USA). TLS Encrypted Client Hello.
(Aug. 2021). [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
draft-ietf-tls-esni-13
[6] S. Friedl, A. Popov, A. Langley, and S. Emile, “Transport layer security (TLS) application-layer protocol negotiation extension,” IETF, RFC
7301, Jul. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/
rfc7301
[7] Z. Chai, A. Ghafari, and A. Houmansadr, “On the importance of
encrypted-SNI (ESNI) to censorship circumvention,” in Proc. FOCI,
Aug. 2019, p. 19.
[8] K. Bock, L.-H. Merino, D. Fifield, A. Houmansadr, and D. Levin.
“Exposing and circumventing China’s censorship of ESNI.” Jul. 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://gfw.report/blog/gfw_esni_blocking/en/
[9] M. Liberatore and B. N. Levine, “Inferring the source of encrypted
HTTP connections,” in Proc. ACM CCS, 2006, pp. 255–263.
[10] S. E. Coull, M. P. Collins, C. V. Wright, F. Monrose, and M. K. Reiter,
“On Web browsing privacy in anonymized NetFlows,” in Proc. SS,
Boston, MA, USA, 2007, pp. 1–14.
[11] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial
Naïve-Bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM CCSW, Chicago, IL, USA, 2009,
pp. 31–42.
[12] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. ACM
WPES, Chicago, IL, USA, 2011, pp. 103–114.
[13] X. Cai, X. C. Zhang, B. Joshi, and R. Johnson, “Touching from a distance: Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM CCS,
Raleigh, NC, USA, 2012, pp. 605–616.
[14] K. P. Dyer, S. E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton, “Peek-a-boo,
I still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures fail,” in
Proc. IEEE SSP, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 332–346.
[15] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on ToR,” in
Proc. ACM WPES, Berlin, Germany, 2013, pp. 201–212.
[16] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective
attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. SEC,
San Diego, CA, USA, 2014, pp. 143–157.
[17] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A systematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting
defenses,” in Proc. CCS, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, 2014, pp. 227–238.
[18] X. Gu, M. Yang, and J. Luo, “A novel website fingerprinting attack
against multi-tab browsing behavior,” in Proc. IEEE CSCWD, Calabria,
Italy, 2015, pp. 234–239.
[19] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “On realistically attacking ToR with website fingerprinting,” Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2016, no. 4,
pp. 21–36, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/
2016/
[20] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc.
NDSS, San Diego, CA, USA, 2016, p. 6.
[21] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “K-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website
fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. SEC, 2016, pp. 1187–1203.
[22] Y. Xu, T. Wang, Q. Li, Q. Gong, Y. Chen, and Y. Jiang, “A multi-tab
website fingerprinting attack,” in Proc. ACM ACSAC, 2018, pp. 327–341.
[23] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,”
in Proc. ACM CCS, 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[24] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with N-shot
learning,” in Proc. ACM CCS, London, U.K., 2019, pp. 1131–1148.
[25] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juárez, T. v. Goethem, and W. Joosen,
“Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc.
NDSS, San Diego, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 1–8.

[26] Z. Zhuo, Y. Zhang, Z.-L. Zhang, X. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Website
fingerprinting attack on anonymity networks based on profile hidden
Markov model,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 5,
pp. 1081–1095, May 2018.
[27] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A dataefficient Website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” Proc.
Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/2019/popets-2019-0070.php
[28] M. Shen, Y. Liu, S. Chen, L. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Webpage fingerprinting using only packet length information,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Shanghai,
China, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[29] W. Cui, T. Chen, and E. Chan-Tin, “More realistic website fingerprinting using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE ICDCS, Singapore, 2020,
pp. 333–343.
[30] N. P. Hoang, A. A. Niaki, P. Gill, and M. Polychronakis, “Domain
name encryption is not enough: Privacy leakage via IP-based website fingerprinting,” Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2021,
no. 4, pp. 420–440, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/
popets/2021/popets-2021-0078.php
[31] T. Pulls and R. Dahlberg, “Website fingerprinting with website oracles,”
Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2020, no. 1, pp. 235–255, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/2020/popets-20200013.php
[32] T. Wang, “High precision open-world website fingerprinting,” in Proc.
IEEE SP, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 152–167.
[33] Q. Sun, D. R. Simon, Y.-M. Wang, W. Russell, V. N. Padmanabhan, and
L. Qiu, “Statistical identification of encrypted Web browsing traffic,” in
Proc. S&P, 2002, pp. 19–30.
[34] K. Abe and S. Goto, “Fingerprinting attack on ToR anonymity using
deep learning,” in Proc. APAN, Hong Kong, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[35] M. Trevisan, F. Soro, M. Mellia, I. Drago, and R. Morla, “Does domain
name encryption increase users’ privacy?” ACM SIGCOMM Comput.
Commun. Rev., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 16–22, Jul. 2020.
[36] W. Cui, T. Chen, C. Fields, J. Chen, A. Sierra, and E. Chan-Tin,
“Revisiting assumptions for website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc.
ACM AsiaCCS, Auckland, New Zealand, 2019, pp. 328–339.
[37] D. Koller and N. Friedman, Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles
and Techniques—Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2009.
[38] S. Studer et al., “Towards CRISP-ML(Q): A machine learning process model with quality assurance methodology,” Mach. Learn. Knowl.,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 392–413, 2021.
[39] ETSI. “Multi-access edge computing (MEC).” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.etsi.org/technologies/multi-access-edge-computing
[40] C. Labovitz, S. Iekel-Johnson, D. McPherson, J. Oberheide, and
F. Jahanian, “Internet inter-domain traffic,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
New Delhi, India, 2010, pp. 75–86.
[41] B. Ager, W. Mühlbauer, G. Smaragdakis, and S. Uhlig, “Web content
cartography,” in Proc. IMC, Berlin, Germany, 2011, pp. 585–600.
[42] T. Böttger, F. Cuadrado, and S. Uhlig, “Looking for hypergiants in
PeeringDB,” ACM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 13–19,
2018.
[43] D. Fifield, C. Lan, R. Hynes, P. Wegmann, and V. Paxson,
“Blocking-resistant communication through domain fronting,” Proc.
Priv. Enhancing Technol., vol. 2015, no. 2, pp. 46–64, Jun. 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/2015/popets-20150009.php
[44] P. Jauniškis. “VPN statistics: Users, markets, & legality.” Accessed:
Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://surfshark.com/blog/vpn-users
[45] K. Ismailaj, M. Camelo, and S. Latré, “When deep learning may not
be the right tool for traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE IM, Bordeaux,
France, May 2021, pp. 884–889.
[46] M. Gallo, A. Finamore, G. Simon, and D. Rossi, “FENXI Fast innetwork analytics,” in Proc. ACM SEC, 2021, p. 1–8.
[47] R. Geirhos et al., “Shortcut learning in deep neural networks,” Nat.
Mach. Intell., vol. 2, no. 11, pp. 665–673, Nov. 2020.
[48] K. P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective (Adaptive
Computation and Machine Learning Series). Cambridge, MA, USA:
MIT Press, 2012.
[49] W. Aqeel, B. Chandrasekaran, A. Feldmann, and B. M. Maggs, “On
landing and internal Web pages: The strange case of Jekyll and
hyde in Web performance measurement,” in Proc. ACM IMC, 2020,
pp. 680–695.
[50] A. Hintz, “Fingerprinting websites using traffic analysis,” in Proc. PET,
vol. 2482, 2002, pp. 171–178. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/3-540-36467-6_13

KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING

1285

[51] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Diaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A critical
evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM CCS, 2014,
pp. 263–274.
[52] X. Gong, N. Kiyavash, and N. Borisov, “Fingerprinting websites using
remote traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM CCS, Chicago, IL, USA, 2010,
pp. 684–686. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.
1007/978-3-319-45744-4_2
[53] M. Juárez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Díaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an
efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. ESORICS, vol. 9878,
2016, pp. 27–46.
[54] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Walkie–talkie: An efficient defense against
passive website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. USENIX Security,
Aug. 2017, pp. 1375–1390.
[55] D. Lu, S. Bhat, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “DynaFlow: An efficient
website fingerprinting defense based on dynamically-adjusting flows,”
in Proc. ACM WPES, 2018, pp. 109–113.
[56] W. De la Cadena et al., “TrafficSliver: Fighting website fingerprinting
attacks with traffic splitting,” in Proc. CCS, 2020, pp. 1971–1985.
[57] R. Meier, V. Lenders, and L. Vanbever, “DITTO: WAN traffic obfuscation at line rate,” in Proc. NDSS, Apr. 2022, p. 2.
[58] C. V. Wright, S. E. Coull, and F. Monrose, “Traffic morphing: An efficient defense against statistical traffic analysis,” in Proc. NDSS, San
Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2009, p. 2.
[59] G. Cherubin, J. Hayes, and M. Juárez, “Website fingerprinting defenses
at the application layer,” Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2017,
no. 2, pp. 186–203, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/
popets/2017/popets-2017-0023.php
[60] E. Chan-Tin, T. Kim, and J. Kim, “Website fingerprinting attack mitigation using traffic morphing,” in Proc. ICDCS, 2018, pp. 1575–1578.
[61] S. Yu, G. Zhao, W. Dou, and S. James, “Predicted packet padding for
anonymous Web browsing against traffic analysis attacks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1381–1393, Aug. 2012.
[62] H. M. Moghaddam, B. Li, M. Derakhshani, and I. Goldberg,
“SkypeMorph: Protocol obfuscation for ToR bridges,” in Proc. ACM
CCS, Raleigh, NC, USA, Oct. 2012, pp. 97–108, li2012.
[63] W. Cui, J. Yu, Y. Gong, and E. Chan-Tin, “Realistic cover traffic to
mitigate website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. IEEE ICDCS, 2018,
pp. 1579–1584.
[64] X. Luo, P. Zhou, E. W. W. Chan, W. Lee, R. K. C. Chang, and
R. Perdisci, “HTTPOS: Sealing information leaks with browser-side
obfuscation of encrypted flows,” in Proc. NDSS, 2011, p. 2.
[65] S. Shan, A. N. Bhagoji, H. Zheng, and B. Y. Zhao. “A realtime defense against Website fingerprinting attacks.” 2021. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.04291
[66] J. P. Degabriele, “Hiding the lengths of encrypted messages via Gaussian
padding,” in Proc. ACM CCS, ACM, 2021, pp. 1549–1565.
[67] X. Liu, Z. Zhuo, X. Du, X. Zhang, Q. Zhu, and M. Guizani, “Adversarial
attacks against profile HMM website fingerprinting detection model,”
Cogn. Syst. Res., vol. 54, pp. 83–89, May 2019.
[68] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website
fingerprinting,” in Proc. Security, 2020, pp. 717–734.
[69] R. Nithyanand, X. Cai, and R. Johnson, “GLOVE: A bespoke website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. ACM WPES, Scottsdale, AZ, USA,
2014, pp. 131–134.
[70] T. T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for Internet
traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, 4th Quart., 2008.
[71] H. Kim, K. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, and K. Lee,
“Internet traffic classification demystified: Myths, caveats, and the best
practices,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT, 2008, p. 11.
[72] T. Karagiannis, K. Papagiannaki, and M. Faloutsos, “BLINC: Multilevel
traffic classification in the dark,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Comput.
Commun., vol. 35, 2005, pp. 229–240.
[73] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?”
Comput. Netw, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, 2011.
[74] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
traffic,” in Proc. EuroS P, Mar. 2016, pp. 439–454.
[75] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an
increasingly encrypted Web,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–26, Feb. 2021.
[76] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
[77] Z. Xiong and N. Zilberman, “Do switches dream of machine learning? Toward in-network classification,” in Proc. ACM HotNets, 2019,
pp. 25–33.

[78] B. M. Xavier, R. S. Guimarães, G. Comarela, and M. Martinello,
“Programmable switches for in-networking classification,” in Proc. IEEE
INFOCOM, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[79] G. Siracusano and R. Bifulco. “In-network neural networks.” 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.05731
[80] D. Sanvito, G. Siracusano, and R. Bifulco, “Can the network be the AI
accelerator?” in Proc. ACM NetCompute, 2018, pp. 20–25.
[81] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar,
“Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019.
[82] T. Häiland-Järgensen, B. Ahlgren, P. Hurtig, and A. Brunström,
“Measuring latency variation in the Internet,” in Proc. CoNEXT, 2016,
pp. 473–480.
[83] E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol version 1.3,”
IETF, RFC 8446, Aug. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.
org/doc/html/rfc8446
[84] A. Krogh, M. Brown, I. S. Mian, K. Sjölander, and D. Haussler,
“Hidden Markov models in computational biology: Applications to
protein modeling,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 235, no. 5, pp. 1501–1531, 1994.
[85] C. V. Wright, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson, “On inferring application
protocol behaviors in encrypted network traffic,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
vol. 7, pp. 2745–2769, Dec. 2006.
[86] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, and M. A. Hall, Data Mining: Practical Machine
Learning Tools and Techniques, 3rd ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Morgan Kaufmann, 2011.
[87] F. P. Miller, A. F. Vandome, and J. McBrewster, Levenshtein Distance:
Information Theory, Computer Science, String (Computer Science),
String Metric, Damerau Levenshtein Distance, Spell Checker, Hamming
Distance. London, U.K.: Alpha Press, 2009.
[88] “Alexa—The Web information company.” Accessed: May 14, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.alexa.com/
[89] H. Chen, H. He, and A. Starr, “An overview of Web robots detection techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Cyber Security, Dublin, Ireland, 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[90] W. John, M. Dusi, and K. claffy, “Estimating routing symmetry on single
links by passive flow measurements,” ACM TRAC, Randburg, South
Africa, Rep. TR 2010, Mar. 2010.
[91] R. Weber, H.-J. Schek, and S. Blott, “A quantitative analysis and
performance study for similarity-search methods in high-dimensional
spaces,” in Proc. VLDB, 1998, pp. 194–205.
[92] W. Zhang et al., “OpenNetVM: A platform for high performance
network service chains,” in Proc. ACM HotMIddlebox, Florianopolis,
Brazil, 2016, pp. 26–31.
[93] P. Emmerich, S. Gallenmüller, D. Raumer, F. Wohlfart, and G. Carle,
“MoonGen: A Scriptable high-speed packet generator,” in Proc. IMC,
Tokyo, Japan, 2015, pp. 275–287.

Patrick Krämer (Member, IEEE) received the
M.Sc. degree from the Technical University of
Munich (TUM), Germany, in 2017. He joined the
Chair of Communication Networks, TUM, in April
2017, where he is currently working as a Researcher
and a Teaching Assistant. His research is focused on
self-driving networks that learn to utilize the flexibility offered by modern networking technologies.

Benedikt Baier received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and information technology from the
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany,
in 2020. In April 2020, he joined the Chair of
Communication Networks, TUM. His research is
focused on quantum networks and enhancing classical networks with quantum technologies.

1286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Niklas Landerer received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and information technology from
the Technical University of Munich (TUM) in 2020,
where he is currently pursuing the master’s degree.
In 2020, he joined the Chair of Communication
Networks, TUM, as a Research Assistant.

Philip Diederich (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and information technology from the Technical
University of Munich (TUM), Germany, in 2019.
He joined the Chair of Communication Networks,
TUM, in November 2021. His research is focused
on software-defined networks and resource management in network function virtualization.

Alexander Griessel (Graduate Student Member,
IEEE) received the Bachelor of Science and Master
of Science degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the Technical University of Munich
in 2020 and 2022, respectively, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Chair of
Communication Networks, specializing in resource
allocation mechanisms in semantic communication.

Oliver Hohlfeld received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees in computer science from the Darmstadt
University of Applied Sciences, Institute Eurecom,
and the Darmstadt University of Technology, and the
Ph.D. (Dr. rer. nat.) degree from TU Berlin. He is a
Full Professor with the University of Kassel, where
he heads the Distributed Systems Group. Before,
he was a Full Professor with the Brandenburg
University of Technology, heading the Chair of
Computer Networks. Before, he was with RWTH
Aachen University and with TU Berlin/Deutsche
Telekom Innovation Laboratories. He was a Visiting Scholar with the Group
of Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin–Madison, USA.

Andreas Blenk received the Doktor-Ingenieur (Dr.Ing.) degree (summa cum laude) from Technische
Universität München (TUM) in May 2018. He is a
Research Scientist with Siemens AG, where he has
been a part of the Industrial Networks and Wireless
Group (T CED INW-DE) since April 2022. In his
current role, he is focused on the automation, measurement, and validation of industrial networks and
is involved in defining and writing blueprints for
the Siemens AG networking portfolio. Prior to joining Siemens AG, he was a member of the Chair
of Communication Networks, led by Prof. W. Kellerer, at TUM beginning
in June 2012. From 2018 to 2022, he continued his work at TUM as a
Postdoctoral Fellow, further honing his expertise in the field of communication networks. During this time, he also served as a Senior Research Fellow
with the Communication Technologies Group, Faculty of Computer Science,
University of Vienna from March 2019 to January 2022.

Martin Mieth received the M.B.A. degree and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and
information technology. As the Vice President of
Engineering, he is responsible for all aspects of
ipoque’s OEM network analytics solutions with a
strong focus on innovation and research partnerships with universities. Before his current position,
he successfully led the Deep Packet Inspection
Development Department and established an inhouse research team dedicated to ML and AI. He can
rely on more than nine years of managing experience
for several specialized teams, all while applying agile values and methods.
Before joining ipoque, he worked for the German Federal Armed Forces as
an IT Officer in charge of numerous software development and IT projects.

Wolfgang Kellerer (Senior Member, IEEE) is a
Full Professor with the Technical University of
Munich, heading the Chair of Communication
Networks, Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering. Before, he was for over ten years with
NTT DOCOMO’s European Research Laboratories.
He currently serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE
M ANAGEMENT and an Area Editor for Network
Virtualization for IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS
S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS.