IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

2511313

Reconstruction-Based Supervised Contrastive
Learning for Unknown Device Identification
in Nonintrusive Load Monitoring
Yinghua Han , Haoqi Chen , Jingrun Wu , and Qiang Zhao
Abstract— Nonintrusive load monitoring (NILM) involves
deploying monitoring devices at the customer’s bus entrance to
decompose the total power captured into individual operational
data for each device. Existing NILM load identification algorithms primarily adopt closed-set identification, where the same
types of devices are used for both training and testing. However,
a more realistic scenario is open-set identification, where device
types in the training and test sets differ, encompassing not
only devices from the training set but also unknown devices.
To address this challenge, we propose a method leveraging
reconstruction and supervised contrastive learning based on
voltage–current (V –I) trajectories. Supervised contrastive learning improves the coherence of V –I trajectories within identical
appliance classes, facilitating the model’s precise comprehension and emulation of distinctive appliance behavioral patterns.
By introducing an autoencoder (AE) into the model, associating
each appliance class with its unique subset of features. Known
V –I trajectories activate associated features, preserving the
topological characteristics of the trajectory. In contrast, unknown
V –I trajectories lack reconstruction mappings, resulting in
thoroughly mutated trajectories. Moreover, we innovate data
augmentation for contrastive learning by introducing a denoising
AE (DAE). This approach introduces noise in V –I trajectories,
the model learns to remove noise while preserving real appliance
characteristics, generating more robust V –I trajectories. Experimental results on two publicly available datasets demonstrate
the method’s outstanding performance.
Index Terms— Autoencoder (AE), nonintrusive load monitoring (NILM), supervised contrastive learning, unknown devices
detection, voltage–current (V –I) trajectory.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NERGY is one of the driving forces of global development and life, underpinning every aspect of modern
society, from infrastructure to production and everyday life.

E

Manuscript received 23 October 2023; revised 25 December 2023;
accepted 30 January 2024. Date of publication 7 March 2024; date of
current version 19 March 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U21A20475 and
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant N2223001. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was
Dr. Zhenbing Zhao. (Corresponding author: Haoqi Chen.)
Yinghua Han is with the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao 066004, China,
and also with the Hebei Key Laboratory of Marine Perception Network
and Data Processing, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao
066004, China (e-mail: yhhan@neuq.edu.cn).
Haoqi Chen and Jingrun Wu are with the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao
066004, China (e-mail: 2272144@stu.neu.edu.cn; 2272178@stu.neu.edu.cn).
Qiang Zhao is with the School of Control Engineering, Northeastern
University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao 066004, China (e-mail:
zhaoqiang@neuq.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3374287

However, as the world’s population grows and industrialization
accelerates, the energy demand is increasing rapidly, which
raises a complex set of challenges, including energy security,
sustainability, and environmental impacts. Smart grids, as a
necessary solution for innovative energy management systems,
are a key enabler for the future of smart energy consumption [1], [2]. For example, in the United States (USA), where
primary energy and buildings consume more than 38% and
76% of electricity, respectively, reductions of up to 15%–40%
can be achieved using whole-building energy management
systems [3]. The continued deployment of smart meters and
different commercial devices makes it possible to perform
load monitoring in buildings and homes based on a single
measurement of current (and sometimes even voltage).
Load monitoring is categorized into intrusive load monitoring (ILM) and nonintrusive load monitoring (NILM) [4],
[5]. However, ILM methods usually require the installation of
specialized sensors or hardware, which may involve intrusive
modifications to existing systems. To address these issues,
NILM was developed to provide a more flexible, cost-effective,
and nonintrusive way to monitor loads in real-time.
NILM was first proposed by Hart [5]. NILM contains
two main core tasks: decomposition and identification. The
goal of the decomposition task is to separate the power
consumption signal of each electrical device from the overall
aggregated signal. It has been widely developed in the last
decades due to advances in the field of machine learning
and deep learning algorithms. Early NILM research was
mainly based on hidden Markov models (HMMs), which
are commonly used for probabilistic modeling of time series
data [6]. Kong et al. [7] proposed a hierarchical HMM
framework to model home appliances to obtain feature identifiers for multimode electrical devices to improve power
decomposition. Egarter et al. [8] proposed modeling household
consumption using a factorial HMM with particle filtering
to estimate device states. The development of deep learning
solutions introduced a neural network approach in the NILM
environment, which quickly became the basis for state-ofthe-art implementations that outperformed previous research.
Chen et al. [9] proposed self-supervised learning, which does
not require labeled device-level data from the target dataset
or houses. The research presented in [10] had a significant
impact on the NILM literature. The authors proposed a new
sequence-to-point model that was trained to predict the midpoint of the output sequence rather than the entire sequence.
Xiong et al. [11] preprocessed the data using discrete wavelet

1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2511313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

transform. The processed data is transferred to an enhanced
sequence-to-point network for training.
Identification tasks have traditionally been conceptualized as
classification tasks, allowing for the exploration of algorithms
and models applicable to classification. Machine learning’s
success in image processing suggests that voltage–current
(V –I ) trajectory signatures could bridge the gap between
computer vision and NILM [12]. Lam et al. [13] pioneered
the concept of V –I trajectory features, derived from plotting
a device’s operating current against voltage. Load features,
such as area, symmetry, and cyclic direction, were then
extracted from the V –I trajectory. Liu et al. [14] introduced
a transfer learning method leveraging V –I trajectory data to
address challenges associated with limited data label acquisition. de Paula Rodrigues and da Silveira [15] proposed two
steady-state features derived from the curvature scale space of
the V –I trajectory, aiming to enhance the image representation of V –I trajectories by incorporating structural elements
related to their general shape, along with features overlooked
during their generation. Han et al. [16] suggested the application of a semi-supervised smoothed teacher graph learning
network for V –I trajectory recognition. Zhang et al. [17]
introduced a method involving empirical modal decomposition (EMD) to filter sampled data and applied deep
learning for automatic feature extraction from constructed V –I
trajectories.
While the aforementioned approaches for energy decomposition and load identification exhibit commendable performance in closed-set scenarios, it is imperative to acknowledge
that NILM inherently poses a nonsmooth problem [18].
The real-world scenario deviates from a consistent alignment of appliance types between training and testing [19],
[20]. In practical terms, it is more realistic to encounter
incomplete appliance types during training and introduce
unknown appliances during testing, expecting the model to
adeptly identify them. Therefore, when faced with unknown
appliances, the model should demonstrate proficiency in their
recognition [12]. Regrettably, the aforementioned methods
may erroneously categorize an unknown appliance as a known
one in such encounters.
To tackle the issue of unknown devices and enhance the
applicability of NILM in real-world scenarios, researchers
have devised algorithms focused on the detection of unknown
devices. In the pursuit of anomaly detection using NILM,
as discussed in [21], an algorithm was proposed to identify
abnormal behaviors in appliances like refrigerators and air
conditioners. Another noteworthy algorithm, outlined in [22],
not only discerned open devices and their power consumption
levels but also effectively detected the presence of unlearned
unknown devices. Zhao et al. [23] introduced a deep pairwise
supervised hashing method tailored for V –I trajectories. This
method utilized distinct hash codes to differentiate known
devices, generating novel codes for unknown devices and
subsequently identifying them based on Hamming distance.
Yu et al. [24] leveraged a Siamese network to compute V –I
trajectory similarity, achieving load recognition by matching
signatures to a feature library. The identification of unknown
devices was facilitated by dynamically adding new features

to the library. In [25], the potential presence of a new device
was considered if the model’s overall performance dropped
below a predetermined threshold. An innovative approach
proposed in [26] involved mapping V –I trajectories to a
new feature space using a Siamese network, followed by
the assignment of device samples to clusters or marking
them as unidentified using the DBSCAN clustering algorithm.
Han et al. [27] introduced a conditional generative adversarial network that integrated a variational AE (VAE) and
a capsule network. This network adeptly identified known
devices and demonstrated proficiency in detecting unknown
devices. Despite these advancements, these approaches often
overlook the challenge of data imbalance in real-world scenarios, where appliances exhibit diverse usage patterns. For
instance, a refrigerator may run continuously, while a washing
machine might be used intermittently. Most deep learning
algorithms depend on large and balanced datasets, and their
training efficiency is constrained, potentially leading to overfitting and reduced accuracy [28]. Consequently, there is a
compelling need for an algorithm capable of unknown device
detection while effectively addressing the data imbalance
problem.
For the unknown device detection problem, similar to
the open-set identification and anomaly detection problems,
the V –I trajectories of unknown devices can be considered
anomalous data [29]. The rise of contrastive learning in
recent years has also driven the development of open-set
identification and anomaly detection. Yang et al. [30] proposed
a new open-set classifier that created a compact representation
space to reduce false negatives using a supervised contrast
learning approach and proposed an integration-based outof-distribution detection module to reduce false positives at
the pixel and semantic level. In [31], the effectiveness of
supervised contrastive learning for open-set recognition with
fewer parameters was demonstrated. A method was proposed
to compute the anomaly scores for each feature separately and
sum them up in a weighted manner instead of concatenating
them. Vaze et al. [32] first established a strong baseline by
taking state-of-the-art algorithms from new category discovery
and adapting them for this task. Next, a visual converter with
supervised contrastive learning was used in an open-world
environment. Then, unlabeled data was automatically clustered
into visible and invisible classes using a semi-supervised
K -means approach. Methods utilizing reconstruction in
open-set identification and anomaly detection were also widely
used. Huang et al. [33] proposed a class-specific semantic
reconstruction (CSSR) approach that integrated the power of
AE and prototype learning. CSSR replaced prototype points
with manifolds represented by class-specific AEs, then modeled each known class on a single manifold, and measured
class belongingness through AE’s reconstruction error. Oza
and Patel [34] proposed an open-set recognition algorithm
for class conditional AE. The algorithm divided the training process into two subtasks: closed-set classification and
open-set recognition. The encoder learned the first task by
closed-set classification training, while the decoder learned
the second task by reconstructing conditions on class identity.
Kawachi et al. [35] proposed a supervised anomaly detection

HAN et al.: RECONSTRUCTION-BASED SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

algorithm based on a VAE. The proposed method could detect
known anomalies and unknown anomalies in a better way
compared to the traditional unsupervised VAE.
Referring to these methods above, we apply supervised contrastive learning and a reconstruction-based approach to NILM
unknown appliance detection. In load recognition, similar
V –I trajectories occur for different kinds of appliances, e.g.,
compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) and laptops. Such similar
V –I trajectories create a great deal of trouble for unknown
appliance recognition. Contrastive learning is a combination
of deep learning hierarchical learning features and custom
sample distances to handle data imbalance. Supervised contrastive learning maximizes the consistency between the V –I
trajectories of appliances of the same class while excluding
other kinds of appliances in the batch, and it compresses the
V –I trajectories into potential spatial representations, enabling
the model to learn various properties of the V –I trajectories to
facilitate a better distinction between similar V –I trajectories.
When we train the model to maximize the vectors between
similar V –I trajectories, the model learns the clustering of
similar data points in the latent space, which allows the model
to distinguish between similar V –I trajectories. Although there
are previous successful examples of supervised contrastive
learning, such as open-set recognition [31] and intelligent fault
diagnosis [36], this study is the first to apply supervised contrastive learning to device detection. All of the above methods
using reconstruction identify unknown categories by calculating the reconstruction error. Since the AE (or VAE) has learned
images of known categories during training, then images originating from unknown categories generate high reconstruction
errors. However, AE is not robust to noise and impairs the
performance of open and closed sets when the input image
contains redundant information [33], [37], [38]. In the real
world, data collected by sensors may be affected by noise and
outliers [39], [40]. This can lead to instability in AE-based
methods. Therefore, instead of calculating the reconstruction
error, we only seek to maximize the reduction of the known
V –I trajectories, while the unknown electrical V –I trajectories will have a large degree of variation. The difference
between known and unknown can be expanded using this
method [33]. We look at these two aspects to improve the
sensitivity of the algorithm to unknown appliances and ensure
that the known appliances can also be identified with a high
degree of accuracy.
In this article, we introduce a novel algorithm for detecting
unknown devices, enhancing the NILM system’s ability to
identify both known and unknown devices. Our approach’s
primary contributions can be summarized in four key aspects
as follows.
1) A new unknown device detection model is proposed,
which combines supervised contrastive learning and an
AE to effectively detect unknown devices and classify
known devices.
2) We pretrained AE with known V –I trajectories and
inserted them when fine-tuning the classifier to reconstruct the semantic representation of the V –I trajectories, increasing the discrepancy between known and
unknown appliances.

2511313

3) Improved the data augmentation method by DAE on the
V –I trajectory after adding random noise to obtain an
image that is different from the original V –I trajectory,
yet maximizes the preservation of appliance information.
4) We evaluated our detection methodology on two publicly accessible datasets, and the experimental findings
substantiate the effectiveness and superiority of our
proposed method within the academic context.
In the subsequent sections of this article, we structure our
content as follows. In Section II, we provide an elaborate
account of both the problem statement and proposed approach.
Moving on to Section III, we focus on the experimental
design and conduct a comprehensive discussion of the results
obtained. Concluding our article in Section IV, we offer a
concise summary and outline potential directions for future
research.
II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND P ROPOSED A PPROACH
In this section, we begin by outlining the process of extracting appliance V –I trajectories from time series voltage and
current data. We then introduce the challenge of detecting
unknown appliances. Finally, we provide a comprehensive
overview of our proposed model, covering key aspects such
as the supervised comparison loss and its derivation process.
A. V –I Trajectory Feature Extraction
NILM begins by acquiring the user’s voltage and current
measurements or total power consumption data, followed
by the extraction of corresponding feature codes. Device
switching events are detected to gather device signatures
for training the NILM model. Utilizing V –I trajectory features, a classification algorithm effectively identifies these
switching events. To extract each device’s V –I trajectory,
we assume a single device undergoes a state change at a specific time point. We collect total voltage and current values for
T complete cycles once the device stabilizes, denoted as Von ,
Voff , Ion , and Ioff , respectively. The appliance’s steady-state
voltage and current at the switching event can be computed
as (von + voff )/2 and Ioff − Ion . Using load voltage and current
data, we generate a 2-D V –I trajectory image. In this article,
to increase the number of features in the V –I trajectory to
improve the distinguishability of its V –I trajectories from
different devices, Hue, saturation, value (HSV) color space
is used to color-code the V –I trajectory to enhance the
uniqueness of the load features, which is then used to train
the classifier to have identified the appliances [14].
B. Unknown Devices Detection
In a real-world NILM application scenario, the appliances
used by consumers are not static; one or more new appliances
are added according to their needs, and various malfunctioning
or inefficient appliances are eliminated. When an existing
appliance is removed, we can assume that it is turned off
and does not negatively impact overall NILM. However,
most of the existing methods do not take this into account
and when new appliances appear, they may be incorrectly
classified as one of the categories of known appliances,

2511313

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Pipeline of the proposed model for unknown devices detection.

which has an impact on the identification task in NILM.
Therefore, the NILM algorithm needs to both identify known
devices and be able to detect unknown devices. This is an
N + 1 class classification problem, where N stands for
N known devices and 1 stands for unknown devices. Appliances that are present during testing and do not have their
corresponding V –I trajectory during training are uniformly
classified as unknown devices.
C. Proposed Model Architecture
As shown in Fig. 1, our model is a three-stage process
that uses contrast learning to train and test the network.
In the first stage of the supervised contrastive learning process,
we improve the data augmentation approach to better fit the
unknown device detection problem in NILM. Instead of using
the traditional methods of cropping, rotating, and brightness
changing, a better feature extractor is obtained by denoising
the noise-added V –I trajectory to get an image that retains
more device information but is not the same as the original
V –I trajectory. The transformed V –I trajectory and the original V –I trajectory are fed into the supervised contrastive
learning network to compute the supervised contrastive loss.
In the second stage, we freeze and transfer the pretrained
feature extractors from the first stage and discard the projection
network. Then, a multilayer perceptron (MLP) is connected on
top of the frozen feature extractor and trained. Consider that
some device components may operate on the same or similar
principles as other classes of devices, resulting in similarities
in the V –I trajectories of different devices. To mitigate the
resemblance between V –I trajectories of known and unknown
devices, we incorporate a pretrained AE initialized with
V –I trajectories of known devices as an upper layer of the
feature extractor. When the V –I trajectories of known devices
pass through the AE, they can be well reproduced, and the
V –I trajectories of unknown devices pass through the AE with

Fig. 2. Comparison of known and unknown V –I trajectory through the AE.

a larger gap from the original image, so that they can be better
differentiated between the known devices and the unknown
devices, and a visual explanation is provided in Fig. 2. In the
third stage, the V –I trajectories of the known and unknown
devices are fed into the model together, which is used to test
the performance of the model. Next, we delve into the detailed
architecture of the model, breaking it down step by step.
1) Data Augmentation Module, Aug(·): Our data augmentation module differs from the approach used in traditional
data augmentation in that we use a DAE to recover the
V –I trajectory x after adding random noise to obtain x ′ .
Previous methods of data augmentation were achieved
by rotation, cropping, and brightness and color changes.
However, these methods are not fully applicable to the
V –I trajectory. For example, cropping will intercept
a certain part of the image, but this may make the
V –I trajectory intercepted on different appliances
similar. It loses information about features such as
asymmetry, loop direction, and size of the enclosed
region area contained in the shape. Color and brightness
changes are also problematic. The V –I trajectories we

HAN et al.: RECONSTRUCTION-BASED SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

used are HSV color-coded. The color contains characteristic information such as trajectory motion information,
active and reactive power ratios, and trajectory repeatability. When the color and brightness are changed, the
corresponding electrical features are also changed. Some
other data augmentation methods have similar problems.
Therefore, we propose to use DAE for data augmentation [41]. This preserves the color-coded additional
appliance features without drastically changing the trajectory information of the V –I trajectory and reducing
the discrimination.
2) Feature Extractor Network, Fea(·): V –I trajectories usually contain much information in load identification, but
valuable features must be extracted for analysis. The task
of Fea(·) is to remove high-dimensional feature vectors h
from the raw V –I trajectory data x, which may contain
information related to different devices or load patterns.
This feature extractor network consists of nine 32 × 32
convolutional layers with batch normalization and
LeakyReLU (0.2) between each layer. It maps x to the
representation vector h = Fea(x) ∈ R D F . x and x ′ are
fed to the feature extractor separately, resulting in a pair
of representation vectors. h is normalized to the unit
hypersphere in R D F (D F = 2048 in this article).
3) Projection Network, Proj(·): The role of Proj(·) in load
identification includes feature dimensionality reduction,
feature space normalization, distance metric, and feature representation enhancement, all of which help to
improve the performance and robustness of load identification models. We map h to the vector z = Proj(h) ∈
R D P . Proj(·) is instantiated as an MLP with a single
hidden layer of size 2048 and an output vector of size
D P = 128. We again normalize the output of this
network to lie on the unit hypersphere, which enables
the use of the inner product to measure distances in
the projected space. We discard Proj(·) at the end of
contrastive training.
4) MLP Classifier, MLP(·): In the second phase, we train
the MLP(·) for classification using features obtained
using Fea(·) that have been trained in the first phase.
The vectors obtained in supervised contrastive learning
have a higher number of bits than the number of classes
N ; therefore, the MLP(·) searches for the best mapping
between those vectors and the N -dimensional vectors.
The task of MLP(·) is to map the feature vectors
obtained from Fea(·) to load types or device classes.
This step is critical to load identification as it will match
features to known loads to determine which category the
observed load belongs to.
5) AutoEncoder, AE(·): AE(·) is trained with V –I trajectories of known devices, placed before Fea(·). It can
recover the V –I trajectories of the known devices,
while the V –I trajectories of the unknown devices will
have a larger error from the original V –I trajectories
after the AE(·), making the difference between the
V –I trajectories of the known and unknown devices
even larger to allow the model to better distinguish
between known and unknown appliances.

2511313

D. Supervised Contrastive Loss
Supervised contrastive loss is a supervised extension of selfsupervised loss [42] that is very effective in many downstream
tasks. In NILM, V –I trajectory data can be used to learn
feature representations by supervised contrastive loss to better
capture load behaviors and patterns. We first introduce the
self-supervised contrastive loss in self-supervision and then,
describe how it is extended to the fully supervised case.
In self-supervised contrastive learning, this is done by
randomly sampling N sample pairs, each including an anchor
and a positive sample. These sample pairs are used to train
the feature extractor network. In NILM, where the anchor and
the positive sample correspond to similar electrical devices,
these sample pairs can be represented as V –I trajectory data
pairs. For N andomly sampled sample pairs, {xk , yk }k=1,...,N ,
the corresponding batch for training consists of 2N pairs,
{xℓ , yℓ }ℓ=1,...,2N , where x̃ 2k and x̃ 2k−1 are the pair of the
positive sample corresponding to xk (k = 1, . . . , N ), and
ỹ 2k−1 = ỹ 2k = ỹ k . The remaining (2N − 2) samples are called
negative sample pairs. Then, the self-supervised contrastive
learning loss is defined as follows:

X
X
exp z i · z j(i) τ
self
self
(1)
L =
Li = −
log P
a∈A(i) exp(z i · z a )/τ
i∈I
i∈I
where z ℓ = Proj(Fea(x̃ ℓ )) ∈ R D P , the · symbol denotes the
inner (dot) product, and τ ∈ R + is the scalar temperature
parameter. i ∈ I = {1, . . . , 2N } is the index of the augmented
sample and A(i) ≡ I \ i. The index j (i) denotes a positive
sample of the anchor i, and the (2N − 2) indices ({k ∈ A(i) \
{ j (i)}}) represent the negative samples.
For the fully-supervised scenario, the loss in (1) cannot
make use of the label information. To utilize the label information, the following supervised contrastive loss is proposed:

X −1 X
exp z i · z p τ
sup
L =
log P
(2)
|P(i)| p∈P(i)
a∈A(i) exp(z i · z a )/τ
i∈I
where P(i) ≡ { p ∈ A(i): ỹ p = ỹ i } consists of all the
positive indices of the anchor in a base called |P(i)|. As shown
in (2), for each anchor, all other samples with the same label
are considered positive. Using supervised contrastive learning,
we can train the Fea(·) to learn compact embedding for
each class. We give graphical interpretations of self-supervised
contrastive learning and supervised contrastive learning as
shown in Fig. 3.
Three types of devices, CFL, WM, and Fridge, are illustrated in Fig. 3. The left half is self-supervised contrastive
learning, which is based on the idea of closing the distance
between an anchor point and its positive samples and closing
the distance between the anchor point and the other negative
samples of that anchor point. Positive sample pairs are made
up of two subsamples obtained by data augmentation of one
sample, one of which serves as the anchor point, the other
is his positive sample, and the remaining samples are all
considered negative samples. For the sake of esthetics and
to be able to see that the positive samples are obtained by
data augmentation, the V –I trajectories are not all pictures
after data augmentation but are replaced by the original

2511313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Python 3.6, Intel1 Xeon1 W-2133 CPU, 3.60 GHz, 64.00 GB
RAM, and NVIDIA Quadro P2000. To exclude appliances
from power system fluctuations and noise effects at different
times, we set T to 10 to avoid misclassification of the V –I
trajectory. The size of the V –I trajectory was set to 32 × 32.
A. Data Preparation and Metrics

Fig. 3. Illustration of self-supervised contrastive learning and supervised
contrastive learning.

V –I trajectories. In the figure, a V –I trajectory of CFL is used
as an anchor point, its V –I trajectory after data enhancement
is used as its positive sample, and another V –I trajectory
of CFL and V –I trajectories of WM and Fridge are used
as negative samples. Whereas supervised contrastive learning
allows multiple positive samples for an anchor point, the
positive and negative correlation between the samples is shown
by labeling, i.e., all samples belonging to the same class as
the anchor point can be considered as positive samples, and
the remaining ones are considered as negative samples. Thus,
it can be done to bring the distance between the same class
closer and the distance between different classes farther. So all
the V –I trajectories belonging to the same class as CFL in the
figure can be regarded as positive samples and the remaining
V –I trajectories as negative samples.
E. Inference
We use the percentile thresholding (PT) method to compute thresholds to distinguish between known and unknown
appliances. PT is intended to separate known appliances
from unknown appliances when used in unknown appliance
recognition scenarios. The thresholds are set by selecting
the appropriate percentile when training the model. We extract
the logit before the softmax layer when training the MLP
on the training set, ensuring that 99% of the training V –I
trajectories are identified as known to obtain the threshold τ .
The prediction results are adjusted during testing using the
thresholds obtained. Initially, unknown devices were categorized into one of the categories of known devices, and then
compared to the thresholds for the corresponding categories
based on their maximum logit values, with those above the
thresholds being labeled as known and those below the thresholds being labeled as unknown. We refer to this method as
threshold-based prediction filtering (TBPF), and this method
can be used to increase the confidence of predictions.
III. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
In this section, we first introduce the datasets and evaluation
metrics used. Second, we conduct experiments on unknown
appliance detection and multiple unknown appliance detection
on the PLAID and WHITED datasets and compare them with
existing algorithms; the results are discussed and analyzed.
Our experiments were implemented using Pytorch 1.8 and

To assess our proposed algorithm’s performance, we utilized two publicly accessible datasets featuring high-frequency
submetered current and voltage signals: PLAID, released in
2017 [43], and WHITED [44]. The PLAID dataset comprises
current and voltage measurements from various household
appliances in Pittsburgh, PA, USA. The 2017 release includes
data from 82 appliance instances across 11 appliance types in
nine households, totaling 1793 records sampled at 30 kHz.
The WHITED dataset records the initial 5 s of voltage
and current startup measurements for appliances sampled
at 44.1 kHz. WHITED contains 1339 records representing
54 different appliances, offering single-phase measurements
for both domestic and industrial use. These records originate
from locations in Germany, Austria, Indonesia, and Canada.
Commonly used metrics for evaluating algorithm performance in identifying both unknown and known appliances
include the F1-score, F-macro (the average F1-score across
all appliances) [14], and area under the ROC curve (AUROC)
[45]. The F1-score offers a practical measure of classification
accuracy by calculating a weighted average of precision and
recall. In open-set scenarios like unknown appliance detection,
achieving an F1-score typically involves adding a class to the
open set and searching for an appropriate threshold. AUROC,
on the other hand, is a metric that does not require a calibration
process. It assesses the tradeoff between true positive and false
positive rates across various decision thresholds [46].
To validate the proposed algorithm’s effectiveness in
real-world appliance usage scenarios, we employ a two-step
validation process. Initially, we present the results involving
the introduction of a single unknown device. Then, in the
second step, the results of introducing multiple unknown
devices are presented and compared with the literature.
B. Unknown Devices Detection Experiment Results
1) Experimental Results on PLAID Dataset: For unknown
appliance detection, we train the model using the V –I trajectories of N known appliances and then evaluate its performance
on N + 1 appliance types. The performance of the method is
first evaluated on the PLAID dataset in the presence of only
one unknown appliance recognition task, and the performance
of the model is reflected based on the F-macro and AUROC
scores. The training set comprises V –I trajectories from ten
appliances, while the test set includes data from 11 appliances.
In our experiments, we adopted cross-validation to designate
one appliance as the unknown appliance at a time. This process
of training and testing was repeated a total of 11 times.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm,
we compare its experimental results with the latest algorithms.
1 Registered trademark.

HAN et al.: RECONSTRUCTION-BASED SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

2511313

TABLE I
F1-S CORE AND AUROC S CORES FOR U NKNOWN D EVICE D ETECTION U SING D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS ON THE PLAID DATASET

The experimental results are shown in Table I. The first
column signifies appliances treated as unknown appliances.
The corresponding rows display the F1-score for known and
unknown appliances. The last two columns represent the Fmacro and AUROC scores. Cells highlighted in orange signify
the detection results for unknown appliances. The F-macro
and AUROC scores in Table I demonstrate that our proposed
model achieves the best overall performance on the PLAID
dataset, surpassing open-set recognition with supervised contrastive learning (ConOSR) [31], adversarial reciprocal points
learning for open-set recognition (ARPL) [47], and spatial
location constraint prototype loss for open-set recognition
(SLCPL) [48]. Only ConOSR has the best performance on
the washing machine, on the other devices our model is the
highest on both F-macro and AUROC. It can be seen that the
proposed algorithm achieves good results for both unknown
device detection (orange cells) and known device detection
(row indexing). This is because the supervised contrastive
learning algorithm closes the distance between appliances of
the same kind and expands the distance between appliances
of different kinds. We also add an AE to reconstruct the
V –I trajectories to further reduce the similarity between
known and unknown V –I trajectories.

Fig. 4. Confusion matrix when leaving one device out cross-validation is
used on the PLAID dataset.

Fig. 4 presents the count of labels per load type, indicating
accurate predictions and instances of confusion with other
loads. The true label on the left signifies individual treatment
of these loads as known, while the predicted label shows the
corresponding predictions, with each row corresponding to one
experiment. When considering the CFL as an unknown load,
the partial V –I trajectory of the CFL is more similar to the

2511313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

TABLE II
F1-S CORE AND AUROC S CORES FOR U NKNOWN D EVICE D ETECTION U SING D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS ON THE WHITED DATASET

partial V –I trajectory of the laptop. It is easy to confuse the
two in the unknown identification scenario. When a washing
machine is considered as an unknown load, it is easy to be
mistaken for a fridge and laptop. Both fridge and washing
machine are type 5 loads with multiple operating states, and
the key requirements of the washing machine damper are the
same as those of the fridge damper, which both work by
motor drive. Consequently, their V –I trajectories can be easily
misinterpreted. By analyzing the last column of the confusion
matrix, we can determine that the algorithm achieves an
average accuracy rate of 98.62% in identifying unknown loads.
2) Experimental Results on WHITED Dataset: To demonstrate that our model applies to more than just the PLAID
dataset, the proposed model is further tested on the WHITED
dataset. The WHITED dataset consists of 54 devices. To show

the recognition performance more clearly, 12 loads were
selected for the experiment. Replace the fixed 12 appliances
with the following abbreviations: Charger (Ap1), Fan (Ap2),
Game Console (Ap3), Hairdryer (Ap4), Kettle (Ap5), LEDlight (Ap6), LightBulb (Ap7), Microwave (Ap8), Mixer (Ap9),
PowerSupply (Ap10), Toaster (Ap11), and TV (Ap12) [27].
As in the previous experiments, one load was chosen as the
unknown load at a time, and the remaining 11 loads were
trained as the known loads as the training set; 12 loads were
used in the test, and the experiment was repeated 12 times.
According to the last two columns of Table II, it can be seen
that our proposed algorithm also outperforms the different
algorithms, especially in items higher than other algorithms.
When comparing the results to those of the PLAID dataset, it’s
clear that the algorithm’s performance improvement is more

HAN et al.: RECONSTRUCTION-BASED SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

2511313

V –I trajectories with significant similarity. This similarity
poses a challenge for the algorithm to discern fine-grained
distinctions among them. In contrast, our proposed algorithm,
by reducing the similarity between known and unknown loads,
and by bringing the same loads closer to each other and
different loads closer to each other through the supervised
contrastive algorithm, enables the model to better learn the
fine-grained difference information between similar V –I trajectories, with a better recognition effect.
C. Multiple Unknown Devices Detection Experiment Results

Fig. 5. Confusion matrix when leaving one device out cross-validation is
used on the WHITED dataset.

pronounced due to the higher interclass diversity within the
WHITED dataset. In comparison, the PLAID dataset has a
greater intraclass diversity. So, the PLAID dataset is prone to
devices being misidentified.
In the last column of Table II, AUROC scores, it can be seen
that our algorithm is lower than ARPL on both Ap5 and Ap11
but is higher than it. We plotted the confusion matrix, shown
in Fig. 5, to analyze which loads were misclassified, resulting
in the proposed algorithm not reaching the optimum AUROC
score on both Ap5 and Ap11 devices. From Fig. 5, it can be
seen that the proposed algorithm achieves 100% identification
of unknown loads for all ten loads other than Ap5 and Ap11.
Analyzing the last column of the confusion matrix reveals that
the algorithm achieves an average accuracy rate of 96.93% in
identifying unknown loads. This shows that our algorithm can
accurately identify unknown devices. When Ap5 is considered
as an unknown load, some of them are misclassified as Ap3.
When Ap11 is considered as an unknown load, some of them
are considered as Ap6. We check whether these two cases exist
through closed-set experiments, and according to the results
of the closed-set experiments, this misclassification situation
does not exist. The fact that this situation occurs in unknown
device identification indicates that the thresholds we obtained
from the calculation in performing unknown identification are
not sufficient to distinguish them. However, the thresholds we
set are not only for a certain type of appliances, but we are
pursuing universality, and the average value of our F-macro
on WHITED is 0.9725, so this kind of recognition error is
acceptable, and this is also the direction of our improvement
in the future.
As with the PLAID dataset, the experimental results for
both the proposed and compared algorithms are presented in
Table II. It is worth noting that an F1-score of 0 occurs in
SLCPL and ARPL. This is a combination of two things. One is
the reason for the threshold setting: the discrimination thresholds set by these two algorithms, which are not universal, may
perform better on a few appliances or a certain dataset, but perform poorly when tested on other unknown devices or datasets.
In contrast, our model achieves the best performance on both
datasets and most of the experiments. This indicates that our
proposed model generalizes well. In addition, some appliances exhibit closely resembling operating states, resulting in

To demonstrate the scalability of the algorithm and to
get closer to real-world application scenarios, we again
tested the performance of the algorithm when there were
multiple unknown devices present at the same time. Each
time, three devices from the PLAID and WHITED datasets
were selected as unknown devices and the rest as known
devices, and the experiment was repeated five times [27]. The
results of the experiments are shown in Tables III and IV.
In Tables III and IV, the F1-score for unknown and known
loads are listed and the F-macro and AUROC scores for each
experiment are also given in the last two columns. From the
experimental results, it can be seen that the proposed algorithm
still outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of
detection of unknown devices and identification of known
devices even in the presence of multiple unknown devices at
the same time, which proves the scalability and robustness of
the algorithm. This is because we added AE to the contrastive
learning network and redesigned a data enhancement approach
for images like V –I trajectories, which makes the model more
sensitive to unknown loads.
D. Changes in Algorithm Performance When the Number of
Unknown Devices Increases
To elucidate the dynamic changes in F-macro with the
introduction of unknown devices, we conducted a series
of experiments on the PLAID and WHITED datasets. The
datasets were systematically divided into three subsets, each
corresponding to a different number of unknown devices:
1, 3, and 6. To ensure the robustness and accuracy of the
experimental results, each set was subjected to multiple trials,
each of which was unique in terms of the composition of
unknown devices. The recognition performance was evaluated
by calculating the average value of the F-macro. Fig. 6
illustrates the variation of the four algorithms on the PLAID
dataset, where our method remains advantageous in the presence of an increasing number of unknown devices. It is worth
noting that our method consistently outperforms the other three
algorithms, with two methods, ARPL and SLCPL, showing a
significant and rapid drop in performance. When the number
of unknown devices reaches 6, our method is the only one
that exceeds 0.6. In contrast, all other methods fall below
this threshold, with ARPL and SLCPL showing a particularly
pronounced drop below 0.4. Fig. 7 illustrates the variation of
the four algorithms on the WHITED dataset, and it is clear
that our algorithm outperforms the other three algorithms. And
when the number of unknown devices increases, our F-macro
is always higher than 0.8.

2511313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

TABLE III
F1-S CORE AND AUROC S CORES FOR M ULTIPLE U NKNOWN D EVICES D ETECTION U SING D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS ON THE PLAID DATASET

TABLE IV
F1-S CORE AND AUROC S CORES FOR M ULTIPLE U NKNOWN D EVICES D ETECTION U SING D IFFERENT A LGORITHMS ON THE WHITED DATASET

Fig. 6. Changes in algorithm performance as the number of unknown devices
on the PLAID dataset increases.

Fig. 7. Changes in algorithm performance as the number of unknown devices
on the WHITED dataset increases.

IV. A BLATION S TUDY
We conducted ablation experiments on the PLAID and
WHITED datasets and tested them on four algorithms:

traditional open-set supervised contrastive learning (ConOSR),
open-set supervised contrastive learning with our improved

HAN et al.: RECONSTRUCTION-BASED SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

2511313

TABLE V
F -M ACRO S CORES FOR A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE PLAID DATASET

TABLE VI
AUROC S CORES FOR A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE PLAID DATASET

TABLE VII
F -M ACRO S CORES FOR A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE WHITED DATASET

TABLE VIII
AUROC S CORES FOR A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE WHITED DATASET

data augmentation method added (Ours/AE), open-set supervised contrastive learning with AE added (Ours/Aug) and our
proposed method using ConOSR as a baseline.
A. Ablation Experiments on PLAID Dataset
To reduce the contingency, we conducted 11 experiments
for each algorithm, each of which contains only one unknown
appliance and will not be repeated, finally, the results of
the 11 experiments are averaged. Tables V and VI show the
F-macro and AUROC scores of the four algorithms. From the
two tables, it can be seen that our proposed algorithm obtains
the highest scores in both evaluation metrics, and the results of
the remaining two algorithms are also stronger than the baseline. It proves that the improvements we made are effective.
B. Ablation Experiments on WHITED Dataset
To further demonstrate our proposed algorithm, ablation
experiments were again done on the WHITED dataset. The
experimental setup is basically the same as the PLAID dataset.
From Tables VII and VIII, it can be seen that our proposed
algorithm and the improvements made are basically better than
the baseline ones. Once again, the performance of our method
is proven.
V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this article, a reconfiguration-based supervised contrastive
learning is proposed for unknown device identification in

NILM. We integrate supervised contrastive learning and AE
and improve the data augmentation approach. Using V –I
trajectory-signed appliances as input, supervised contrastive
learning clusters together cluster points belonging to the same
class of appliances in the embedding space while separating
appliances of different classes. We change the data enhancement approach so that the V –I trajectory maximizes the
preservation of appliance information but is different from
the original V –I trajectory. We apply AE to the downstream
classification task to reconstruct the semantic representation of
the image so that the boundary between known and unknown
appliances is more obvious. This further improves the performance of the model. We distinguish known from unknown
appliances by assessing the distance between the feature
distributions of the test sample and the known appliance sample. The algorithm shows excellent performance in unknown
appliance detection. In future work, we aim to enhance our
algorithm by incorporating detected unknown appliances into
the model. This approach will enable more efficient detection
of unknown appliances and expand the practical applications
of NILM.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Alahakoon and X. Yu, “Smart electricity meter data intelligence for
future energy systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 425–436, Feb. 2016.

2511313

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

[2] S. S. Hosseini, A. Badri, and M. Parvania, “A survey on mobile
energy storage systems (MESS): Applications, challenges and solutions,”
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 40, pp. 161–170, Dec. 2014.
[3] U. Doe, “An assessment of energy technologies and research opportunities,” in Quadrennial Technology Review. Washington, DC, USA: United
States Department of Energy, 2015, pp. 12–19.
[4] A. Ridi, C. Gisler, and J. Hennebert, “A survey on intrusive load
monitoring for appliance recognition,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Pattern
Recognit., Aug. 2014, pp. 3702–3707.
[5] G. W. Hart, “Nonintrusive appliance load monitoring,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 80, no. 12, pp. 1870–1891, Jun. 1992.
[6] O. Parson, S. Ghosh, M. Weal, and A. Rogers, “Non-intrusive load
monitoring using prior models of general appliance types,” in Proc. 26th
Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), Jul. 2012, pp. 356–362.
[7] W. Kong, Z. Y. Dong, D. J. Hill, J. Ma, J. H. Zhao, and F. J. Luo,
“A hierarchical hidden Markov model framework for home appliance
modeling,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 3079–3090,
Jul. 2018.
[8] D. Egarter, V. P. Bhuvana, and W. Elmenreich, “PALDi: Online load disaggregation via particle filtering,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 64,
no. 2, pp. 467–477, Feb. 2015.
[9] S. Chen, B. Zhao, M. Zhong, W. Luan, and Y. Yu, “Nonintrusive load
monitoring based on self-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[10] C. Zhang, M. Zhong, Z. Wang, N. Goddard, and C. Sutton, “Sequenceto-point learning with neural networks for non-intrusive load monitoring,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 32, 2018, pp. 2604–2611.
[11] C. Xiong, Z. Cai, S. Liu, J. Luo, and G. Tu, “An improved sequenceto-point learning for non-intrusive load monitoring based on discrete
wavelet transform,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–16,
2023.
[12] J. Lu, R. Zhao, B. Liu, Z. Yu, J. Zhang, and Z. Xu, “An overview of nonintrusive load monitoring based on V-I trajectory signature,” Energies,
vol. 16, no. 2, p. 939, Jan. 2023.
[13] H. Lam, K. Ting, W. Lee, and G. Fung, “An analytical understanding
on voltage-current curve of electrical load,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electr.
Eng. (ICEE), 2006, pp. 1–6.
[14] Y. Liu, X. Wang, and W. You, “Non-intrusive load monitoring by
voltage–current trajectory enabled transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 5609–5619, Sep. 2019.
[15] R. de Paula Rodrigues and P. M. da Silveira, “Curvature scale spacebased signatures for electrical load classification in NILM,” Electr. Eng.,
vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 1239–1252, Apr. 2021.
[16] Y. Han, K. Li, H. Feng, and Q. Zhao, “Non-intrusive load monitoring based on semi-supervised smooth teacher graph learning with
voltage–current trajectory,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 34, no. 21,
pp. 19147–19160, 2022.
[17] P. Zhang, B. Gao, H. Chen, and Z. Yu, “Appliance recognition using
V-I trajectories based on deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf.
Power, Intell. Comput. Syst. (ICPICS), Jul. 2022, pp. 239–243.
[18] D. H. Green, A. W. Langham, R. A. Agustin, D. W. Quinn, and
S. B. Leeb, “Adaptation for automated drift detection in electromechanical machine monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 6768–6782, 2023.
[19] C. Dinesh, B. W. Nettasinghe, R. I. Godaliyadda, M. P. B. Ekanayake,
J. Ekanayake, and J. V. Wijayakulasooriya, “Residential appliance identification based on spectral information of low frequency smart meter
measurements,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2781–2792,
Nov. 2016.
[20] H. G. C. P. Dinesh, P. H. Perera, G. M. R. I. Godaliyadda,
M. P. B. Ekanayake, and J. B. Ekanayake, “Residential appliance monitoring based on low frequency smart meter measurements,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Grid Commun. (SmartGridComm), Nov. 2015,
pp. 878–884.
[21] H. Rashid, P. Singh, V. Stankovic, and L. Stankovic, “Can
non-intrusive load monitoring be used for identifying an appliance’s anomalous behaviour?” Appl. Energy, vol. 238, pp. 796–805,
Mar. 2019.
[22] S. Welikala, C. Dinesh, R. I. Godaliyadda, M. P. B. Ekanayake, and
J. Ekanayake, “Robust non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) with
unknown loads,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Inf. Autom. Sustainability
(ICIAfS), Dec. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[23] Q. Zhao, Y. Xu, Z. Wei, and Y. Han, “Non-intrusive load monitoring
based on deep pairwise-supervised hashing to detect unidentified appliances,” Processes, vol. 9, no. 3, p. 505, 2021.

[24] M. Yu, B. Wang, L. Lu, Z. Bao, and D. Qi, “Non-intrusive adaptive
load identification based on Siamese network,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 11564–11573, 2022.
[25] J. Zhang, X. Chen, W. W. Ng, C. S. Lai, and L. L. Lai, “New appliance
detection for nonintrusive load monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 4819–4829, Aug. 2019.
[26] L. De Baets, C. Develder, T. Dhaene, and D. Deschrijver, “Detection of unidentified appliances in non-intrusive load monitoring using
Siamese neural networks,” Int. J. Elect. Power Energy Syst., vol. 104,
pp. 645–653, Jan. 2019.
[27] Y. Han, K. Li, C. Wang, F. Si, and Q. Zhao, “Unknown appliances
detection for non-intrusive load monitoring based on conditional generative adversarial networks,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 6,
pp. 4553–4564, 2023.
[28] A. Gao, F. Mei, J. Zheng, H. Sha, M. Guo, and Y. Xie, “Electricity
theft detection based on contrastive learning and non-intrusive load
monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 4565–4580,
2023.
[29] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult,
“Toward open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, Jul. 2013.
[30] Y. Yang, Y. Ge, B. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Lang, and K. Li, “Multiscenario openset gait recognition based on radar micro-Doppler signatures,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[31] Y. Kodama, Y. Wang, R. Kawakami, and T. Naemura, “Open-set
recognition with supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf.
Mach. Vis. Appl. (MVA), Jul. 2021, pp. 1–5.
[32] S. Vaze, K. Hant, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Generalized category
discovery,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7482–7491.
[33] H. Huang, Y. Wang, Q. Hu, and M.-M. Cheng, “Class-specific semantic
reconstruction for open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4214–4228, Apr. 2023.
[34] P. Oza and V. M. Patel, “C2AE: Class conditioned auto-encoder for
open-set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2307–2316.
[35] Y. Kawachi, Y. Koizumi, and N. Harada, “Complementary set variational autoencoder for supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2018,
pp. 2366–2370.
[36] P. Peng et al., “Imbalanced fault diagnosis by supervised contrastive
learning,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperat.
Work Design (CSCWD), May 2022, pp. 689–692.
[37] Y. Zhang, L. Gao, X. Wen, and H. Wang, “Intelligent fault diagnosis of
machine under noisy environment using ensemble orthogonal contractive
auto-encoder,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 203, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 117408.
[38] R. Wang et al., “Class-aware variational auto-encoder for open set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2023,
pp. 264–269.
[39] K. He, L. Stankovic, J. Liao, and V. Stankovic, “Non-intrusive load
disaggregation using graph signal processing,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1739–1747, May 2018.
[40] B. Zhao, K. He, L. Stankovic, and V. Stankovic, “Improving eventbased non-intrusive load monitoring using graph signal processing,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 53944–53959, 2018.
[41] J. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, X. Guo, and B. Shang, “A multichannel contrastive learning network based intrusion detection method,”
Electronics, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 949, Feb. 2023.
[42] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 18661–18673.
[43] L. De Baets, C. Develder, T. Dhaene, D. Deschrijver, J. Gao,
and M. Berges, “Handling imbalance in an extended plaid,” in
Proc. Sustain. Internet ICT Sustainability (SustainIT), Dec. 2017,
pp. 1–5.
[44] M. Kahl, A. U. Haq, T. Kriechbaumer, and H.-A. Jacobsen, “WHITED—
A worldwide household and industry transient energy data set,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Non-Intrusive Load Monitor., 2016,
pp. 1–4.
[45] C. Geng, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Recent advances in open set
recognition: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43,
no. 10, pp. 3614–3631, Oct. 2021.
[46] W. Moon, J. Park, H. S. Seong, C.-H. Cho, and J.-P. Heo, “Difficultyaware simulator for open set recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2022, pp. 365–381.

HAN et al.: RECONSTRUCTION-BASED SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

[47] G. Chen, P. Peng, X. Wang, and Y. Tian, “Adversarial reciprocal points
learning for open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 8065–8081, Nov. 2022.
[48] Z. Xia, P. Wang, G. Dong, and H. Liu, “Spatial location constraint prototype loss for open set recognition,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand.,
vol. 229, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 103651.
Yinghua Han received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in navigation guidance and control from
the College of Information Science and Engineering,
Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, in 2003,
2005, and 2008, respectively.
She is currently a Professor of electronic and
information engineering with the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Northeastern
University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao, China.
Her research interests include big data analysis in
power systems, fault monitoring of renewable energy
generation systems, and optimal operation of smart grids.
Haoqi Chen received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from the School of Information
Science and Technology, Qingdao University of
Science and Technology, Qingdao, China, in 2022.
He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with
the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao,
Qinhuangdao, China.
His research interests include nonintrusive load
monitoring and energy disaggregation technology,
household energy management systems, and deep
learning.

2511313

Jingrun Wu received the B.S. degree from the
School of Optoelectronics and Information Engineering, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, China,
in 2022. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with the School of Computer and Communication
Engineering, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao, China.
His research interests include demand response,
building energy management systems, and reinforcement learning.

Qiang Zhao received the Ph.D. degree in navigation guidance and control from the College of
Information Science and Engineering, Northeastern
University, Shenyang, China, in 2017.
He is currently a Lecturer of the measurement
and control technology and instrumentation program
with the School of Control Engineering, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, Qinhuangdao,
China. His research interests include electricity theft
detection, fault diagnosis of renewable energy generation systems, and optimal operation of smart
grids.