9136

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Rethinking Robust Multivariate Time Series
Anomaly Detection: A Hierarchical
Spatio-Temporal Variational Perspective
Xiao Zhang , Shuqing Xu , Huashan Chen , Zekai Chen , Fuzhen Zhuang , Hui Xiong , Fellow, IEEE,
and Dongxiao Yu

Abstract—The robust multivariate time series anomaly detection
can facilitate intelligent decisions and timely maintenance in various kinds of monitor systems. However, the robustness is highly
restricted by the stochasticity in multivariate time series, which
is summarized as temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity
specifically. In this paper, we explicitly model the temporal stochasticity variables and the latent graph relationship variables into a
unified graphical framework, which can achieve better robustness
to dynamicity from both the spatial and temporal perspective. First,
within the spatial encoder, every connection exists or not is modeled
as a binary stochastic variable, and the graph structure can be
learnt automatically. Then, the temporal encoder would embed
the highly structured time series into latent stochastic variables to
capture both complex temporal dependencies and neighbors information. Moreover, we design a history-future combined anomaly
score mechanism with both reconstruction decoder and forecasting
decoder to improve the anomaly detection performance. By weighting the historical anomaly factor, the future anomaly factor, and
the prediction error of current timestamp, the anomaly detection
at current timestamp could be more sensitive to anomaly detection.
Finally, extensive experiments on three publicly available anomaly
detection datasets demonstrate our proposed method can achieve

Received 20 May 2023; revised 28 May 2024; accepted 10 September
2024. Date of publication 23 September 2024; date of current version 13
November 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62202273, in part by the Shandong
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant ZR2021QF044,
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant 2022JC016, in part by the Major Basic Research Program of Shandong
Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2022ZD02, in part by the
Joint Key Funds of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
U23A20302, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 92370204, in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant
2023YFF0725001, in part by Guangzhou-HKUST(GZ) Joint Funding Program
under Grant 2023A03J0008, in part by the Education Bureau of Guangzhou
Municipality. Recommended for acceptance by P. Tsaparas. (Corresponding
authors: Huashan Chen; Dongxiao Yu.)
Xiao Zhang, Shuqing Xu, and Dongxiao Yu are with the School of Computer
Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China (e-mail:
xiaozhang@sdu.edu.cn; sqxu@mail.sdu.edu.cn; dxyu@sdu.edu.cn).
Huashan Chen is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China (e-mail: chenhuashan@iie.ac.cn).
Zekai Chen is with Amazon, Seattle, WA 98109-5210 USA (e-mail:
zekaic@amazon.com).
Fuzhen Zhuang is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, SKLSDE,
School of Computer Science, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (email: zhuangfuzhen@buaa.edu.cn).
Hui Xiong is with the Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou 511458, China, and also with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China (e-mail: xionghui@ust.hk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3466291

the best performance in terms of recall and F1 compared with
state-of-the-arts baselines.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, variational autoencoder,
multivariate time series, self-attention.

I. INTRODUCTION
AST amount of multivariate time series data are generated
to monitor systems in various real-world scenarios, such
as kinds of sensory devices from smart IoT infrastructures [1],
smart power grids [2], smart transportation, intelligent industrial
systems [3], etc. Anomalies are quite common in multivariate
time series data [4], accurate and efficient anomaly detection
can help administrators make right decisions and timely maintenance, which has drawn researchers’ wide interests in both
academia and industries in recent years [1], [5], [6], [7], [8].
Based on the data observations, anomalies are usually considered as unexpected values deviating from normal patterns
significantly. Thus, to learn robust representations of normal
patterns from multivariate time series is crucial for anomaly detection. However, the robustness in anomaly detection is highly
restricted by the stochasticity in multivariate time series, which
is summarized as temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity
specifically in our opinions. The temporal stochasticity means
that noises commonly exist in time series, which are usually
caused by various small and random factors [9], which is shown
in Fig. 1(a). The purpose of modeling temporal stochasticity is to enable the model to learn robust representations of
normal patterns, thereby better distinguishing between normal
and anomalous points [6], [10], [11], [12]. Some variational
auto-encoders (VAE) [10], [11], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]
or generative adversarial networks (GANs) [19], [20] based
models have been proposed to model the temporal stochasticity.
The LSTM-VAE [11] uses the LSTM as the encoder and decoder
network of VAE to learn robust latent representations. OmniAnomaly [10] proposes a stochastic recurrent neural network to
learn the temporal dependence between latent representations.
MTAD-GAT [21] maps the connected temporal and spatial
feature learned by GAT to the latent space using a VAE. MADGAN [19] and TadGAN [20] use the GAN to model the temporal
stochasticity and show good robustness.
The spatial stochasticity modeling aims to select reasonable
similarity sequences dynamically for every time series, thereby

V

1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL

Fig. 1. An example of temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity. The
blue blocks indicate noises and the red blocks indicate anomalies.

the learned graph relationships between sequences are dynamic
with time changing [7]. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the similarity relationship is dynamically changing. Specifically, S1 and
S2 are similar in region (1), while in region (2) and region
(3), the similarities vary fast. Some previous works [5], [22]
learn the graph structures by measuring similarities between
embeddings and choosing top-K closest nodes as the spatial
inter-relationships. This can easily lead to information loss on
graph relationships or introduce inappropriate information to
weaken the anomaly detection ability. Therefore, some methods [6], [7] considering spatial stochasticity have been proposed.
For example in GRELEN [7], only latent graph relationship
variables representing spatial stochasticity have been explicitly
created, the latent variables representing temporal stochasticity
have not been explicitly modeled in the framework. In summary, previous literature just utilize temporal latent variables to
model the temporal stochasticity [10], [11], [12], or model the
spatial stochasticity with a specific graph learning strategy [6],
[7]. Hence in this work, we explicitly model the temporal
stochasticity variables and the latent graph relationship variables
into a unified graphical framework, which can achieve better
robustness to dynamicity from both the spatial and temporal
perspective.
Along this line, we propose a hierarchical spatio-temporal
variational autoencoder framework to learn stochastic graph
relations and stochastic latent representations simultaneously in
an end-to-end manner. Within the spatial encoder, a directed
graph structure can be learned by the graph learning strategy based on self-attention mechanism and Gumbel-Softmax
sampling [1], [23]. Every connection exists or not would be
modeled as a binary variable with Bernoulli prior assumption.
The graph learning policy could automatically learn the hidden
connections during training by deciding whether any specific
node’s information could flow to others to achieve the best
performance. Then the temporal encoder embeds the highly
structured time series into latent stochastic variables to capture
both complex temporal dependencies and neighbor information.
In details, the multi-head self-attention mechanism is utilized to
obtain temporal feature representation for each time series and
we use the graph attention networks (GAT) network to further
aggregate the neighbor information for the temporal feature
representation of each sequence according to the graph learned
by the spatial encoder. Finally, since in real-world scenarios,

9137

anomalies often occur in a continuous period of time, we design
a history-future combined anomaly score mechanism with both
reconstruction decoder and forecasting decoder. Specifically,
we use the reconstruction decoder to reconstruct the historical
time series data, and take the maximum reconstruction error in
the history window as the historical anomaly factor at current
timestamp. In the forecasting decoder, we adopt a multi-step
prediction model to calculate the prediction values of current
timestamp and the maximum prediction error of the future time
window as the future anomaly factor. By weighting the historical
anomaly factor, the future anomaly factor, and the prediction
error of current timestamp, the anomaly detection at current
timestamp could be more sensitive to improve the performance.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
r We explicitly model the temporal stochasticity variables
and the latent graph relationship variables into a unified
graphical framework, which can achieve better robustness
to dynamicity from both the spatial and temporal perspective.
r We propose an end-to-end hierarchical spatio-temporal
variational autoencoder framework to address the temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity simultaneously.
Within the spatial encoder, every connection exists or not
is modeled as a binary stochastic variable, and the graph
structure can be learnt automatically. Then the temporal
encoder would embed the highly structured time series
into latent stochastic variables to capture both complex
temporal dependencies and neighbor information.
r We design a history-future combined anomaly score mechanism with both reconstruction decoder and forecasting
decoder to improve the anomaly detection performance. By
weighting the historical anomaly factor, the future anomaly
factor, and the prediction error of current timestamp, the
anomaly detection at current timestamp could be more
sensitive for anomaly detection.
r We conduct extensive experiments on three real-world
datasets to demonstrate the superiority of our frameowrk
over state-of-the-arts comparing with various multivariate
time series anomaly detection baselines. We publicly publish our code on GitHub1 for better reproducibility of our
work.
II. RELATED WORK
Traditionally, time series anomaly detection algorithms can
be divided into three learning types: supervised, unsupervised,
and semi-supervised [24], [25]. Supervised methods [26] such
as SVM [27], random forests [28] can achieve good performance due to the use of normal and anomalous labels. However
labeling is not easy to get, which make supervised methods
hardly practical. The unsupervised methods do not require labels
and has good robustness against novel anomalies that have not
appeared before. The KNN [29], K-means [30], DBStream [31]
use the distance of observations to their nearest neighbors as
anomaly score. In the COPOD [32], DSPOT [33], anomalies
1 https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AD-HSTVAE-11C7

9138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE I
CHARACTERISTIC SUMMARY OF THE BASELINES AND OUR HSTVAE

are considered extreme values in the distribution. The PCA [34]
projects input to a lower-dimensional hyperplane and identifies
data significantly deviating from this plane as anomalies. The
semi-supervised methods use normal training data to guide the
model to learn the normal patterns of the data, then distinguishing the data that deviates from the normal pattern in the
testing set as anomalies. They usually consider the following
aspects: temporal dependence, relationships between sequences,
temporal stochasticity, and spatial stochasticity.
1) Modeling Temporal Dependence: A majority of works
model the temporal dependencies of MTS through RNN network or attention mechanism. The GTA [1] models temporal
dependency using a novel multi-branch attention mechanism.
OmniAnomaly [10] proposes a stochastic recurrent neural network which can model the time dependencies between latent
representations. LSTM-AD [35] designs stacked LSTM networks to learn the normal patterns, and use the predicted errors
to judge anomalies. HealthESN [36] proposes a method based
on the classical echo state network (ESN) and an adaptive detection threshold generation method based on information theory
analysis. Telemanom [8] applies LSTM to anomaly detection in
spacecraft telemetry and proposes a novel dynamic thresholding
method.
2) Modeling Graph Relationships Between Sequences:
MTAD-GAT [21] models the temporal and spatial dependencies
simultaneously by combining a feature-oriented GAT and a
time-oriented GAT. The GDN [22] learns the graph relationships
between sequences by choosing the top-k neighbors, and uses
a GAT to aggregate the selected neighbor feature. To overcome
the limitations of top-k method, the GTA [1] proposes a graph
learning policy based on the Gumbel-Softmax Sampling trick,
which can learn the global bi-directed graph structure involving
all sensors.
3) Modeling Temporal Stochasticity and Spatial Stochasticity:
Many works utilize probability generation models to model temporal stochasticity. The LSTM-VAE [11], OmniAnomaly [10]
utilize VAE to learn robust latent representations and capture
the normal patterns of MTS. MAD-GAN [19], TadGAN [20]
use the adversarial generative networks to model the temporal
stochasticity. Some recent works also consider spatial stochasticity. DVGCRN [6] learns an embedding that follows a Gaussian
distribution for each sequence to model the stochasticity inter

TABLE II
NOTATIONS USED IN THIS WORK

different sequences. GRELEN [7] proposes a self-attentionbased graph relationship learning strategy and assumes the latent graph relationship variable obeys multinomial distribution.
MTAD-GAT [21] combines the output of feature-oriented GAT
and time-oriented GAT, and then maps the global features to a
latent variable.
The comparison details are summarized in Table I. In conclusion, different from the existing works, our proposed HSTVAE
can explicitly model the temporal stochasticity variables and
the latent graph relationship variables into a unified graphical
framework, which can achieve better robustness to dynamicity
and achieve better anomaly detection performance.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
For the classical multivariate time series anomaly detection
problem, we define X ∈ RN ×w as the input of the multivariate
time series data, where N denotes the dimensions of a multivariate time series, usually referring to the number of sensors
within an entity, and w is the length of sliding time window.
Let xi ∈ Rw denote the time series data at any sequence i, and
xt ∈ RN denote the data at any timestamp t. In addition, some
notations are summarized in Table II.
Definition 1. Latent time series representation: To model
temporal stochasticity, we assume that the input data of time
series can be represented by a latent time series representation
z that follows a distribution, i.e., z ∼ Dz (φz ), where Dz is the
distribution that z follows, usually a Gaussian distribution, φz is
the parameter of this distribution.
Definition 2. Latent graph relationship variable: To model
the spatial stochasticity, we assume that the similarity relationship between sequences i and j can be represented by a latent
graph relationship variable ei,j that follows a distribution, i.e.,
ei,j ∼ De (φe ), where De is the distribution ei,j follows, usually
can be a multinomial distribution, φe is the parameter of this
distribution.
A semi-supervised model learns normal patterns on the
Dtrain containing only normal data, and determines whether
an anomaly occurred at time t on the Dtest . For classical
reconstruction or prediction based methods, when training, the

ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL

Fig. 2. Graphical model representations. The black dashed lines mean the
inference model, the black solid lines mean the generative model. In addition,
the blue solid arrow from latent representation zi to zj means there is an edge
from node i to node j if the latent graph relationships variable eij = 1. And the
blue dotted arrow from zj to zk means there is no edge from node j to node k
if ejk = 0.

goal is to minimize the following objective functions:
L = EX∼Dtrain [||F (X; θ, φz , φe ) − ỹ||22 ],

(1)

where θ is the model parameter, φz and φe are distribution parameter, F (·) represent the reconstruction or prediction network,
ỹ represents the reconstructed or predicted groundtruth at the
corresponding moment.
IV. MODEL ARCHITECTURE
A. Model Overview
In order to solve a common problem in the field of multivariate
time series anomaly detection that the temporal fluctuations and
relationship fluctuations can easily lead to misjudgment, we
propose an end-to-end hierarchical spatio-temporal variational
autoencoder framework called HSTVAE, which can simultaneously model the temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity
of multivariate time series. As shown in Fig. 3, the overall
framework consists of four modules. The spatial encoder uses
the graph learning policy to discover the latent graph relationships between sequences, while the temporal encoder applies
the multi-head self-attention mechanism and GAT network to
capture the latent time series representation that considers both
time dependence and neighbor information. The reconstruction
decoder uses the multi-head self-attention network to model the
temporal dependence in latent time series representations, and
realizes the reconstruction of the input sequence. The prediction decoder uses the encode-decoder network to make every
predicted timestamp in the decoder attend over all timestamps
in the latent time series representations of input sequence and
achieves accurate next-step prediction. In the back propagation process, the latent time series representation are updated
reversely from two views of reconstruction and forecasting
loss, which is helpful to learn more robust latent time series
representation. As for the relationship between the above four
modules, since different sequences might be highly correlated or
similar and considering the neighbor information is meaningful,

9139

we use the temporal encoder combining the graph relationship
learned from the spatial encoder to learn richer latent time series
representation zi for each time series xi . Then the reconstruction
decoder constructs the historical sequence and the forecasting
decoder predicts the future sequence according to the latent time
series representations zi and promote the learning of a more
robust latent time series representations in the back propagation
process.
It is worth noting that our model includes two different
types of latent random variables: the edge-based latent graph
relationships variable ei,j and sequence-based latent time series
representation zi . And the dependency of the two latent variables is shown in the Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, each node represents
a random variable, the node with shadow represents the observed data, and the arrow represents the dependency between
variables.
In the traditional VAE framework, the observation x is encoded as a latent variable z, and then the decoder reconstructs x
from the z distribution. However, we can’t compute the posterior
distribution p(z|x) analytically, thus the variational inference is
proposed. The variational inference approximate the p(z|x) using a variational distribution q(z|x; φ), whose parameters can be
learned through an encoder network. We want to make q(z|x; φ)
close to the posterior p(z|x) and use the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence to measure the closeness of the two distributions.
We can’t minimize the KL divergence exactly, so we achieve
this goal equivalently by maximizing ELBO. Actually, in many
works [6], [10], [21] about variational inference, the evidence
lower bound (ELBO) [37] function is the objective function
which needs to be optimized, defined as
ELBO = Eq(z|x) [log p(x | z)] − DKL [(q(z | x)p(z))], (2)
where the first term is the reconstruction loss and the second
term is the Kullback-Leibler divergence loss.
In our HSTVAE framework, the ELBO of the ith sequence
can be represented as
L (xi , φe , φz , θr , θf ) = Eqφz (zi |e:,i ,X) [log pθr (xi | zi , e:,i )]


+ Eqφz (zi |e:,i ,X) log pθf (yi | zi , e:,i )
− DKL [qφz (zi | e:,i , X) p (zi )]
− DKL [qφe (e:,i | X) p (e:,i )] .

(3)

Where the first term is the reconstruction loss which represents
the ability of the reconstruction decoder to reconstruct the original input, and the second term is the forecasting loss which represents the prediction accuracy of the forecasting decoder. And
the latter two terms represent the regularization terms that use the
KL divergence to control the variation distribution and the prior
distribution to be the same as possible. We use the variational
distribution qφe (e:,i | X) to approximate the posterior distribution p(e:,i | X) for which does not have an analytic form. We
assume qφe (e:,i | X) follows Bernoulli distribution and model
the qφe (e:,i | X) using the spatial encoder. Similarly, we assume
the variational distribution qφz (zi | e:,i , X) follows Gaussian
distribution and model the qφz (zi | e:,i , X) using the temporal

9140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. The framework of the proposed HSTVAE which consists of a spatial encoder, a temporal encoder, a reconstruction decoder and a forcasting decoder. The
four modules are related to each other through a latent time series representation and a latent graph relationships variable.

encoder. In the generative model, the pθr (xi | zi , e:,i ) is modeled by the reconstruction decoder and the pθf (yi | zi , e:,i ) is
modeled by the forecasting decoder. The detailed derivation of
(3) is shown as following.

q(Z, E | X) log p(X)dZdE

log p(X) =
Z,E



p(X, Z, E)
= Eq(Z,E|X) log
p(Z, E | X)


p(Z, E)p(X | Z, E)
≥ Eq(Z,E|X) log
q(Z, E|X)



p(Z|E)
q(Z|E, X)q(E|X) log
=
dZdE
q(Z|E, X)
Z,E



p(E)
q(Z|E, X)q(E|X) log
dZdE
+
q(E|X)
Z,E

q(Z|E, X)q(E|X)[log p(X|Z, E)]dZdE
+
Z,E



q(Z | E, X) log p(X | Z, E)dZ

=
Z


q(Z | E, X) log

+


Z

+

q(E | X) log
E

p(Z | E)
dZ
q(Z | E, X)

p(E)
dE
q(E | X)

= Eq(Z|E,X) [log p(X | Z, E)]
− DKL [q(Z | E, X)p(Z)]
− DKL [q(E | X)p(E)] = ELBO.

B. Spatial Encoder Network
To model the stochastic inter-sequences graph relationships of
multivariate time series, we propose the spatial encoder. Given
two time sequences xi and xj , we use a latent graph relationships
representation variable ei,j to represent the directed relationship
from sequences xi to xj and assume the qφe (ei,j | xi , xj ) follow
a Bernoulli distribution. We use the spatial encoder to produce
the parameter πi,j of the Bernoulli distribution. The details of
the variational distribution are shown as follows:
qφe (ei,j | xi , xj ) = Ber (πi,j (xi , xj )) .

(4)

The πi,j is the probability of existing edge from node i to node j.
We use the self-attention network as the spatial encoder, which
can capture the similarity between sequences. First, we use a
linear network to extract temporal feature gi ∈ Rdg from each
raw time series, that is gi = xi Wg , where Wg ∈ Rw×dg is the
learnable parameters. Then the extracted temporal feature gi are
mapped by learnable parameters matrices Wq and Wk to obtain
qi , ki in different subspaces
q i = g i Wq , k i = g i Wk .

(5)

Put the vector qi and kj into a weighted attention network to get
a vector. Then the vector passes through an MLP network to get
the probability variable πi,j whose value is between 0 to 1.
πi,j = M LP (Ws [qi , kj ]) ,

(6)

where Ws is the learnable parameters matrices.
Sampling of latent graph relationships: The Gumbel-Softmax
distribution [1], [23] can be adapted to obtain a continuous
approximation of Bernoulli random variables.
 

1
1
/τ
+ gi,j
exp log πi,j
 ,

ei,j =
(7)
v
v
/τ
log πi,j + gi,j
v∈{0,1} exp

ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL

1
0
0
1
where πi,j
= πi,j , πi,j
= 1 − πi,j , gi,j
, gi,j
are i.i.d samples
drawn from a standard Gumbel distribution by drawing u ∼
Uniform(0, 1) and computing g = − log(− log u). The temperatures τ controls the smoothness of Gumbel-Softmax distribution. When τ approaches 0, the probability of getting samples
ei,j that are 0 or 1 approaches 1.

C. Temporal Encoder Network
To model the stochastic temporal dependencies of multivariate time series, we propose the temporal encoder. We assume
the qφz (zi | e:,i , X) follows a Gaussian distribution. Given an
input time sequence xi , the temporal encoder can produce the
parameters μzi and σzi of the Gaussian distribution over the
latent time series representation zi . For the ith sequence, the
details of the encoding process and variational distribution are
shown as follows:
qφz (zi | e:,i , X) = N (μzi , σzi ) .

(8)

We utilize the multi-head self-attention mechanism and the
GAT network as the temporal encoder of each sequence, which
can capture both complex temporal dependencies and neighbor
information. First, we use an LSTM network to encode the
relative position information of time series and convert the
input value xti at every timestamp t of sequence i to the input
embeddings vectors of dimension d. Then we can get the input
of multi-head self-attention module hti , where hti ∈ Rd , and
hi ∈ Rw×d . For a sequence of token representations hi ∈ Rw×d ,
the self-attention function first projects them into queries Q ∈
Rw×dk , keys K ∈ Rw×dk and values V ∈ Rw×dv , M times with
different linear projections matrixs respectively. Then we apply
the scaled dot-product to get the weights
Attention(Q, K, V ) = Sof tmax

QK T
√
dk

V.

(9)

Multi-head attention [38] applies different mappings to learn
different representations and output the concatenated feature
M ultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat ( head1 , . . . head M ) W O ,
(10)
in which, M is the number of heads. The mth head of the ith
sequence is defined as


Q
K
V
,
(11)
headm = Attention hi Wm
, h i Wm
, h i Wm
Q
where the projections are parameter matrices Wm
∈ Rd×dk ,
K
d×dk
V
d×dv
O
hdv ×d
, Wm ∈ R
and W ∈ R
. We note the
Wm ∈ R
output of multi-head attention as Vei , which is the temporal
feature representations of sequence i. Then the temporal feature
representations of all sequences are sent to the GAT network
to aggregate neighbor information according the latent graph
relationships learned by the spatial encoder.
⎞
⎛

(12)
αj,i W Vej ⎠ ,
Vei = Relu ⎝αi,i W Vei +
j∈N (i)

where N (i) = {j|eji = 1}, W is a trainable weight parameter
matrix, and αj,i is attention coefficients computed as follow:
 

ξ(i, j) = LeakyRelu a Vei ⊕ Vej
(13)

αij =

exp(ξ(i, j))
.
ρ∈N (i)∪{i} exp(ξ(i, ρ))

9141

(14)

Finally, the updated temporal feature representations Vei is sent
to the linear network to get the parameters of Gaussian distribution. For the time window {t − w, t − w + 1, . . . , t − 1} of
sequence i,
 
(15)
[μzi , log σzi ] = Linear Vei .
Sampling of latent time series representation: We use the
reparameterization trick [13] to obtain the latent time series representation. For the time window {t − w, t − w + 1, . . . , t − 1}
of sequence i,
zi = μ z i + σ z i

ε, ε ∼ N (0, 1).

(16)

D. Reconstruction Decoder Network
To model the temporal dependence in latent time series
representations and realize the reconstruction of the input sequence, we propose the reconstruction decoder network. We
denote pθr (xi | zi , e:,i ) using the reconstruction decoder network, which can construct the historical time series xi based on
the latent time series representation zi . We utilize a multi-head
self-attention network as the reconstruction decoder, whose
input is the latent time series representation zi after linear
transformation. The output of the single-head self-attention
network is
Attn(zi WrQ , zi WrK , zi WrV )


T
zi WrQ · zi WrK
√
= Sof tmax
zi WrV ,
dk

(17)

where the WrQ ∈ Rd×dk , WrK ∈ Rd×dk , WrV ∈ Rd×dv are linear projection matrices. And Attn is an abbreviation for
Attention. Then we apply multi-head attention following the
(10) and (11) to get the concatenated multi-head output:
Vri = M ultiHead(zi WrQ , zi WrK , zi WrV ).

(18)

Finally, the reconstruction output {x̂t−w
, x̂t−w+1
, . . . , x̂t−1
i
i
i } of
sequence i can be obtained through the MLP network.
E. Forecasting Decoder Network
To learn more robust latent time series representation and
predict the value of future timestamps, we propose the forecasting decoder network. We denote the pθf (yi | zi , e:,i ) using the
forecasting decoder network, which can generate the future time
series yi based on the latent representation zi . The forecasting
decoder network is mainly composed of a multi-head selfattention network and an encoder-decoder attention network.
The input of the former is a token which is a random initialed vec
tor whose dimension is d and the output {yit , yit+1 , . . . yit+w −2 }
at the previous timestamp. They form an input matrix, de
noted as ui ∈ Rw ×d . The output of the single-head attention
network is
Attn(ui WfQ , ui WfK , ui WfV )

9142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024


= Sof tmax

ui WfQ · ui WfK
√
dk

T

ui WfV .

(19)

TABLE III
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF THE THREE REAL-WORLD DATASETS

Then we apply multi-head attention following the (10) and (11)
to get the concatenated multi-head output:
Vfi = M ultiHead(ui WfQ , ui WfK , ui WfV ),

(20)



where Vfi ∈ Rw ×d , and WfQ ∈ Rd×dk , WfK ∈ Rd×dk , WfV ∈
Rd×dv are linear projection matrices. In the encoder-decoder attention network, the queries come from the output of multi-head
self-attention decoder network, and the keys and values come
from the latent time series representation learned by the encoder,
which allows every timestamp in the decoder to attend over all
timestamps in the input sequence. The output of the single-head
encoder-decoder attention network can be represented as
Attn(Vfi WfQ , zi WfK , zi WfV )

T
Vfi WfQ · zi WfK
√
zi WfV .
= Sof tmax
dk

(21)

Then we apply multi-head attention following the (10) and (11)
to get the concatenated multi-head output:
Vfi = M ultiHead(Vfi WfQ , zi WfK , zi WfV ),

(22)



where Vfi ∈ Rw ×d , and WfQ ∈ Rd×dk , WfK ∈ Rd×dk , WfV ∈
Rd×dv are linear projection matrices.

Finally, the prediction output {yit , yit+1 , . . . , yit+w −1 } of sequence i can be obtained through the MLP network.
F. Objective Function and Training
According to the theory of VAE [13], we can train our model
by optimizing ELBO. The ELBO of the ith sequence has been
shown in (3). Considering all sequences, the optimization objective of HSTVAE can be represented as
L (X, φe , φz , θr , θf ) =

N


L (xi , φe , φz , θr , θf ) ,

(23)

i=1

where we denote the prior Gaussian distribution p(zi ) as N (0, 1)
and denote the prior Bernoulli distribution as Ber(b). The b
is a constant which controls the sparsity of the learned graph
and can be determined by experiment. Moreover, φe , φz , θr , θf
means the parameters of the spatial encoder network, temporal
encoder network, reconstruction decoder network and forecasting decoder network respectively, and we utilize the stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) algorithm to update them during the
training process.
G. Anomaly Detection
Based on the fact that anomalies often occur in a continuous period of time, we propose a history-future combined anomaly score mechanism. The reconstruction error at
timestamp t
= {t − w, t − w + 1, . . . , t − 1} of sequence i is
Errir (t) = (x̂ti − xti )2 and the forecasting error of sequence
i in t = {t, t + 1, . . . t + w − 1} is denoted as Errif (t). We

take the maximum reconstruction error and forecasting error
across all sensors at timestamp t as the reconstruction error and
forecasting error at timestamp t, and we note them as Errr (t)
, we
and Errf (t). Since the reconstruction output is x̂t−w:t−1
i
take the maximum reconstruction error in the history window
as the historical anomaly factor Ah (t) at current timestamp.

The output of multi-step forecasting decoder is yit:t+w −1 , and
we take the maximum prediction error in the future window
as the future anomaly factor Af (t). We weight the historical
anomaly factor Ah (t), the future anomaly factor Af (t), and the
forecasting error Ac (t) of current timestamp to get the anomaly
score A1 (t) at current timestamp. Moerover, since the sparsity of
the graph learned in normal pattern is within a certain range, but
each sequence has few related neighbors in attacked scenarios,
we take the average neighbor numbers of all sequences as
another anomaly score A2 (t) of anomaly detection. Specifically,
for the timestamp t, the anomaly score based on reconstruction
and forecasting error can be calculated by
A1 (t) = Ac (t) + γ · Ah (t) + η · Af (t).

(24)

Where γ and η are the hyper-parameters, which can be determined by grid search [1]. The anomaly score based on graph
sparsity can be calculated by
1 
Di ,
N i=1
N

A2 (t) =

(25)

where Di is the number of neighbors of the ith sequence, N
is total number of sequences. We use the grid search to find
the optimal threshold thr1 and thr2 . When A1 (t) > thr1 or
A2 (t) < thr2 , we assume an anomaly occurs at timestamp t
and the anomaly label at = 1.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Datasets Description
We conduct extensive experiments on three real-world public
MTS datasets: SWaT,2 WADI,3 SMD.4 Table III summarises the
statistics of the three datasets.
r SWaT The SWaT dataset is collected from a six-stage water
treatment testbed in May 2015. The data is collected from
51 sensors and actuators with the 1-second intervals within
11 days, in which the system was in normal operation for
the first week, and suffered a total of 41 physical attacks in
the following days.
2 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/secure-water-treatment-SWaT/
3 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/water-distribution-wadi/
4 https://github.com/smallcowbaby/OmniAnomaly

ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL

r WADI The WADI dataset is collected from a three stages
water distribution testbed. The data is produced from 123
sensors and actuators at 1-second intervals within 16 days,
of which 14 days are normal data, and the remaining days
are attacked 15 times in total.
r SMD The Server Machine Dataset contains metrics like
CPU load, network usage, memory usage, etc. The data is
collected within 5 weeks. And the dataset has 28 different
entities, where each entity has 38 metrics.
To improve the training and testing efficiency, the SWaT
and WADI data samples are downsampled at 10 s intervals.
Specifically, we retain the median of the 10 seconds data and use
the label with the highest frequency as the overall label, while
SMD uses the original data. In addition, we have normalized all
datasets and remove the meaningless sequences that are both 0 on
the training set and testing set after normalization. The training
set is normal data, while the testing set contains anomalies. We
randomly divide 20% of the data in the training set as validation
set for model selection. Especially, different entities need to be
trained and tested independently in the SMD dataset and we
report the mean value.
B. Experimental Setup
Baselines: We compare the performance of our proposed
method with thirteen popular anomaly detection methods:
r PCA [34]: The principal component analysis uses the
reconstruction error of the low dimensional projection as
anomaly score.
r KNN [29]: The K Nearest Neighbors calculates the average
distance between each sample point and its nearest K
samples to get the anomaly score.
r LSTM-VAE [11]: The LSTM-VAE takes LSTM as the
feedforward network of VAE to reconstruct time series.
r OmniAnomaly [10]: The OmniAnomaly is a stochastic
recurrent neural network which consider the time dependence between latent representations.
r MAD-GAN [19]: The MAD-GAN trains LSTM-RNNs on
the MTS data and then utilize both the discriminator and
the generator to detect anomalies.
r GRELEN [7]: The Graph Relational Learning Network
combines VAE with a graph dependence structure learning
strategy and consider the sum of all the sensors’ in/out
degree as the anomaly score.
r GDN [22]: The Graph Deviation Network uses a top-k
graph learning strategy to learn a graph of inter-sequence
relationships.
r GTA [1]: The GTA uses an improved transformer to learn
time dependencies and designs a connection learning policy to learn inter-sequence relationships.
r DVGCRN [6]: The Deep Variational Graph Convolutional
Recurrent Network combines the proposed EPN with
GCRN by a sharing embedding channel and considers both
forecasting and reconstruction losses.
r MTAD-GAT [21]: The MTAD-GAT is a framework based
on two GAT networks, which can separately learn time
dependence and inter-sequence relationship of the MTS

9143

data. And the forecasting error and the reconstruction
probability are combined to detect anomalies.
r LSTM-AD [35]: LSTM-AD uses stacked LSTM networks
to learn normal pattern and use predicted errors to evaluate
the likelihood of anomalies occurring at each moment.
r HealthESN [36]: HealthESN focuses on the issue of data
imbalance and designs a new method based on the classical
echo state network (ESN) and a threshold selection method
based on information theory, which can be more adaptive
to different anomaly detection tasks.
r Telemanom [8]: Telemanom applies LSTM to anomaly
detection and proposes a dynamic thresholding technique
that is independent of labels or incorrect parameter assumptions.
Metrics: We take the Precision, Recall, F1 score and ROCAUC as the evaluation metrics. Moreover, multiple evaluation
strategies have been proposed in previous work [10], [39], [40],
[41], and we adopt the point-adjust [10] to calculate the metrics.
If one point in the anomaly duration is detected, we assume the
specific anomalous segments have been detected.
Training Settings: We implement our proposed method using
Pytorch version 1.10.0 with CUDA 11.1 and conduct all experiments on four NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs. We set the
historical window length to 15 frames to predict the value of next
6 frames and construct the historical 15 frames. Our temporal
and spatial encoder network are 1 layer, while the reconstruction
and prediction decoder network are 2 layers. The dimension of
multi-head attention mechanism in all networks are set to 64 and
the number of heads is 8. In the temporal encoder, the dimension
of latent variable z is 3. In the spatial encoder, the parameter of
Bernoulli prior distribution of SWaT, WADI and SMD datasets
are 0.1, 0.2, 0.13 respectively. For our model and all baselines,
we use the validation set to help hyper-parameters selection and
conduct the grid search [7] on different parameter combination.
The model is trained using the Adam optimizer with learning
rate 0.001 for up to 50 epochs and early stopping strategy is
applied with patience of 5.
C. Performance and Analysis
In Tables IV and V, we study the anomaly detection performance in terms of precision, recall, F1-score and ROC-AUC on
our proposed HSTVAE method and other thirteen baselines on
datasets SWaT, WADI and SMD. Similar with the GRELEN [7],
GTA [1], OmniAnomaly [10], for our HSTVAE and all baselines, we apply a grid search on all possible anomaly thresholds
to search for the best F1-score in theory and report them. We run
HSTVAE and all baselines with 5 times and report the average
and standard deviation. Our proposed HSTVAE significantly
outperforms all other methods on three datasets especially in
terms of recall, F1 and ROC-AUC. In detail, we observe the
following phenomenons from the Tables IV and V:
r The F1 score and recall of HSTVAE outperform all baselines, and the performance of HSTVAE on precision and
recall is quite balanced. Especially, we achieve the best
F1-score as 0.9007 for SWaT, 0.8431 for WADI and 0.9206
for SMD. Compared to the suboptimal model, HSTVAE

9144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE IV
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES ON SWAT,WADI AND SMD USING PRECISION, RECALL AND F1 AS METRICS

TABLE V
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES ON SWAT,WADI AND
SMD USING ROC-AUC AS METRICS

can achieve 3.27%, 1.15%, 4.52% increase in terms of
the recall on three datasets respectively. In addition, our
HSTVAE achieved optimal results on ROC-AUC, indicating that our HSTVAE can achieve excellent positive
and negative sample differentiation ability without the
influence of threshold selection. Specifically, on the SWAT,
WADI and SMD datasets, the AUC of HSTVAE is 0.78%,
1.63%, 0.22% higher than that of the optimal baseline,
respectively.
r The deep learning-based methods (LSTM-VAE,MADGAN, GTA etc.) have better detection performance on
three datasets than the conventional approaches such as
PCA, KNN. This is because the former includes the recurrent mechanism or attention mechanism which are able
to model long-term temporal dependencies. Our HSTVAE
uses the attention mechanism for temporal dependencies
modeling, which is better than the RNN-based model.
Specifically, our F1 is 21.45 %, 116.07%, 22.29% higher
than LSTM-VAE on three datasets significantly.
r The methods that consider the graph relationship between
sequences, such as GDN, GRELEN, GTA and our HSTVAE can achieve better performance than the methods
that only consider temporal dependencies, which shows
the importance of modeling relationship among sequences.

Further, compared with the GDN considering only top-k
neighbors, the GRELEN, GTA and our HSTVAE retain all
potential neighbors, which can avoid the information loss
and achieve better performance. The F1 of our HSTVAE
achieves 8.66%, 28.01%, 3.37% improvement over GDN
on three datasets.
r It’s meaningful to model the temporal stochasticity and
spatial stochasticity of multivariate time series. The models
that do not consider temporal and spatial stochasticity, such
as LSTM-AD, HealthESN and Telemanom often achieve
high precision, but their recall and F1 are very low. In
addition, their AUC also performs worse on the WADI
dataset. The OmniAnomaly uses a stochastic recurrent
neural network to learn the robust temporal latent representations while the GRELEN employs a latent graph relationship variable to capture the inter-sensors dependence
with spatial stochasticity. Both of them have achieved good
performance on recall whose values are close to ours,
but the precisions of the OmniAnomaly and GRELEN on
WADI are 51.32% and 8.88% lower than ours because
another stochasticity is not considered.

D. Ablation Studies
To study the effectiveness of each component of our model,
we gradually exclude the modules to observe how the model
performance degrades on the three datasets. Table VI shows
the anomaly detection performance of all variants has declined
compared with HSTVAE.
r HST V AEw/o GAT : To study the benefit of learned graph,
which was learned from the spatial encoder and used
to aggregate neighbor information for the time series in
temporal encoder by the GAT module, we remove the GAT.
r HST V AEw/o recon. : To study the effect of reconstruction
decoder, we remove the reconstruction decoder and only
perform multi-step prediction.
r HST V AEw/o f ore. : To study the effect of forecasting
decoder, we remove the forecasting decoder and only use
the historical reconstruction error to calculate anomaly
score.

ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL

9145

TABLE VI
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF ABLATION STUDIES ON SWAT, WADI AND SMD USING PRECISION, RECALL, F1 AND ROC-AUC AS METRICS

Fig. 4. Visualization of spatial stochasticity. The adjacency matrixs are shown in Fig. 4(b)–(d) and several relevant sequences are shown in Fig. 4(a). In addition,
in order to observe the distribution of the number of neighbors of each sequence under normal and anomalous conditions, we make statistics in the Fig. 4(e)–(f).

r HST V AEw/o LST M : To study the impact of different
position encoding methods on model performance, we
replace LSTM relative position encoding with sine cosine
absolute position encoding.
Table VI shows the performance of the variants, from which
we can observe that the anomaly detection performance of all the
variants has declined compared with that of HSTVAE. In particular, the recall of HST V AEw/o GAT decreases significantly,
which demonstrates the importance of the graph learning for
aggregating proper neighbor information. The recall and AUC
of the HST V AEw/o recon. and HST V AEw/o f ore. both decrease obviously, which proves that the reconstruction decoder
and forcasting decoder all play an important role in modeling
stochasticity. After replacing LSTM relative position encoding
with sine cosine absolute position encoding, the precision, recall,
f1 and AUC of HST V AEw/o LST M all decreased, indicating
the necessity of modeling relative position information.
E. Interpretability
In order to show the spatial stochasticity of our model, we
visualize the adjacency matrix of the seq0 and the seq1 in three
special time periods of the SMD machine-1-1 dataset.
Spatial stochasticity: The spatial stochasticity is reflected in
the fact that the learned graph relationships between sequences
are dynamic with time changing. As shown in the Fig. 4(b)–
(d), seq0, 1, 23, 24, 25 are similar in region 1. In region 2,
seq0, 1, 23, 25, 31 are similar. However, in anomaly region 3,
there has been a significant change in the graph relationship,
where seq0, 6 are similar, while seq1, 23, 25 are similar.
Normal and anomaly: Comparing Fig. 4(e) and (f), we can
see that the average number of neighbors of the sequence in
normal mode is in the range of 4-6. However, when the anomaly

occurs, the number of neighbors is concentrated in the range
of 2-4, which is consistent with the phenomenon in Fig. 4(a).
From Fig. 4(a), in Region 1 and Region 2, there are 4 or 5
sequences that are similar to the seq0, while in Region 3,
because the seq0 fluctuates violently, its pattern is no longer
similar to other normal sequences, so its neighbors are reduced.
The phenomenon that the sequence has few neighbors when
anomalies occur shows that we can use the sparsity of the learned
graph to identify the anomaly.

F. Case Study
In order to show the importance of modeling temporal
stochasticity and spatial stochasticity in anomaly detection, we
visualize the anomaly scores and thresholds of our HSTVAE
and MAD-GAN, GRELEN, GDN. We perform case study on
the time period shown in Fig. 4(a), which includes temporal
fluctuations, relationship fluctuations and anomalies. As shown
in Fig. 5, in the normal time period on the left, our HSTVAE
achieves the most smoothest score, which reflects its high robustness. The MAD-GAN misjudged near t = 50, t = 200 and
t = 300 where fluctuation occurs, which may be because it only
considers temporal stochasticity and ignores spatial stochasticity. In addition, GRELEN considers spatial stochasticity and has
no misjudgment, but its robustness is not as good as HSTVAE,
manifested as the anomaly score of noises being close to the
threshold. As a deterministic methods, the GDN mistakenly
detected fluctuations as anomalies at t = 200, which also shows
the necessity of considering temporal and spatial stochasticity.
In the anomalous time period marked by the red rectangle, all
the methods have detected the anomaly, but our model can more
clearly separate anomalies and normal from a global perspective,

9146

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 5. Anomaly score and threshold of HSTVAE, MAD-GAN, GRELEN,
GDN when temporal fluctuation, relationship fluctuation and anomaly occur.
The black curve represents anomaly scores, and the red line represents the
threshold. The blue rectangular dotted line box indicates the area with fluctuation
but normal and correctly detected as normal. The areas of misjudgment are
circled with oval red solid line frame and the ground truth anomaly areas are
marked by red rectangular shadow.

√
Fig. 6. Noises and Anomalies. The ” ” and ”✗” in the elliptical boxes adjacent
to each region represent whether our model detects that region as an anomaly.

which reflects the good anomaly detection performance of our
model.
To further explore the anomaly detection performance of our
model in the presence of noise [9], [42], [43], especially extreme
noise, we visualize some common noises, extreme noises and
anomalies from our used real-world dataset SMD in Fig. 6. As
shown in the region (3-1) and region (3-2) of Fig. 6, the shapes
of the time series deviate from the historical pattern significantly and experience drastic fluctuations, thus being detected as
anomalies. From the region (1-1), (1-2), and (1-3) in Fig. 6, our
model shows strong robustness against ordinary noises, which
would not misjudge the points as anomalies. Finally, facing with
the extreme noises in region (2-1), our proposed HSTVAE also
classifies them as anomalies. For anomaly detection tasks, it can
be considered reasonable because we need to recognize as many
anomalies as possible while ensuring performance for better
maintenance decisions. This also reflects that our HSTVAE can
achieve the best recall comparing with other baselines.
G. Parameter Analysis
To investigate the influence of different hyper parameters that
effect the performance of our model, we conduct experiments
on following parameter variants. Especially, when analyzing

Fig. 7.

Hyper-parameter analysis on SWaT dataset.

a specific parameter, we fix the other three parameters as the
parameters reported in Section V-B.
r Window size: When evaluating the impact of window size
on model performance, we fix the dimensionality of latent
representation z to 3, the attention mechanism dimension
to 64, and the parameter of Bernoulli prior distribution
to 0.1. The length of historical window can affect the
time dependence modeling performance of the temporal
encoder and the graph relationship learning performance
of the spatial encoder. Fig. 7(a) shows that the recall, f1
and AUC increase with the increase of window size and
reach the peak at 15, and then decrease slightly. The result
confirms the long-term time dependence modeling ability
of the attention mechanism.
r The dimensionality of Z-space: When evaluating the impact of the dimensionality of latent representation z on
model performance, we fix the window size to 15, the
attention mechanism dimension to 64, and the parameter
of Bernoulli prior distribution to 0.1. The size of latent
representation z affects the representation ability of the
latent time series representation variables. When the value
is too small, the features of the input data cannot be learned,
and if the value is too large, some redundant information
may be retained. Fig. 7(b) shows that the performance
first increases and then decreases with the increase of the
dimensionality of latent representation z, and reaches the
optimal performance when it is 5.
r The dimension of attention network: When evaluating the
impact of the dimension of attention network on model
performance, we fix the window size to 15, the dimensionality of latent representation z to 3, and the parameter of
Bernoulli prior distribution to 0.1. Different dimensions
of attention network have various effect on the long-term
temporal dependency modeling capability of the temporal encoder. Fig. 7(c) shows that the performance of the
model becomes better with the increase of dimensions,

ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL

9147

TABLE VII
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF HSTVAE ON SWAT, WADI AND SMD USING DIFFERENT EVALUATION STRATEGIES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 8. Training and inference time of different approaches on SWaT, WADI and SMD datasets. The unit is seconds(s). For the convenience of drawing, we use
M1-M12 to represent ”LSTM-VAE, OmniAnomaly, MAD-GAN, GRELEN, GDN, GTA, DVGCRN, MTAD-GAT, LSTM-AD, HealthESN, Telemanom, HSTVAE”
in sequence.

and reaches the optimal value at 64, and then tends to
be stable. In addition, AUC only showed slight changes
with the increase of the dimension of attention network,
indicating the robustness of the model.
r The parameter of Bernoulli prior distribution: When evaluating the impact of the parameter of Bernoulli prior
distribution on model performance, we fix the window
size to 15, the dimensionality of latent representation z
to 3, and the dimension of attention network to 64. The
Bernoulli prior determines the sparsity of the learned graph.
Fig. 7(d) shows that when the prior probability is 0.1, the
model achieves the optimal performance. When this value
is larger or smaller, the performance will decline, which
means that richer latent representations can be learned by
combining appropriate neighbor information, while too
many neighbors will cause information redundancy and
even introduce error information.

H. Evaluation Strategy Analysis
In order to investigate the impact of different evaluation
strategies on anomaly detection results, we conduct experiments
with several common evaluation strategies [10], [39], [40], [41].
The point-wise and segment-wise methods [39] consider a time
point and a continuous anomalous period as an event to calculate
metrics, respectively. The range-based method [40] considers
the size and relative position of the overlap between the predicted

and actual anomaly set in each event. The affiliation metrics [41]
consider the temporal adjacency and events durations.
From Table VII, it can be seen that the point-adjust strategy [10] we adopted is most suitable for the three datasets in
this paper, and our model HSTVAE also achieves good results
when using the affiliation metrics.
I. Efficiency Analysis
To analyze the efficiency of our model, we visualize the
training and inference time of HSTVAE and baselines. As shown
in Fig. 8, the training and inference time of our HSTVAE
is at a moderate level to show the considerable operational
efficiency while achieving optimal performance. Overall, the reconstruction based methods such as OmniAnomaly, MAD-GAN
and GRELEN often require more training and inference time
than prediction based methods such as GDN, GTA, LSTM-AD
and HealthESN, which may be due to their complex network
structures designed to learn robust latent representations. In
addition, models that consider inter sequence relationships and
perform feature aggregation, such as GRELEN, may require
more training time.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an end-to-end hierarchical spatiotemporal variational autoencoder framework, which can address
the temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity within MTS
simultaneously. We modeled the relationship between sequences

9148

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

as a binary random variable, and automatically learned the
directed graph structure through the spatial encoder. And a GAT
network was applied to combine the graph with the temporal
encoder to embed the highly structured input time series into
latent time series representation that can capture both complex
temporal dependencies and neighbor information. Then the reconstruction decoder and forecasting decoder constructed the
historical sequence and predicted the future sequence according to the latent time series representation and achieved the
anomaly detection through a history-future combined anomaly
score mechanism. Extensive experiments on three real-world
datasets demonstrated that our method can achieve the best and
balanced performance compared with other multivariate time
series anomaly detection approaches. We also conducted visualization analysis and case studies to show the interpretability of
our framework. In the future work, we consider to adopt dynamic
threshold selection to make HSTVAE more suitable for online
real-time anomaly detection scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection
in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022.
[2] R. A. Leon, V. Vittal, and G. Manimaran, “Application of sensor network
for secure electric energy infrastructure,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 22,
no. 2, pp. 1021–1028, Apr. 2007.
[3] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
pp. 25–28.
[4] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT time-series
data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–6494,
Jul. 2020.
[5] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for
anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986.
[6] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep variational
graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2022, pp. 3621–3633.
[7] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[8] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[9] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly detection
in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
[10] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[11] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[12] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation
using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th
ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230.
[13] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,”
2013, arXiv:1312.6114.
[14] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
2018, pp. 187–196.
[15] W. Chen et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection for intricate KPIs via
adversarial training of VAE,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.,
2019, pp. 1891–1899.

[16] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection using
reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–18,
2015.
[17] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
“Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2020,
pp. 4322–4326.
[18] W. Li, W. Hu, T. Chen, N. Chen, and C. Feng, “StackVAE-G: An
efficient and interpretable model for time series anomaly detection,”
2021, arXiv:2105.08397.
[19] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial
networks,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Springer, 2019,
pp. 703–716.
[20] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and K. Veeramachaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2020,
pp. 33–43.
[21] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 841–850.
[22] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[23] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
Gumbel-Softmax,” 2016, arXiv:1611.01144.
[24] J. Paparrizos, Y. Kang, P. Boniol, R. S. Tsay, T. Palpanas, and M.
J. Franklin, “TSB-UAD: An end-to-end benchmark suite for univariate
time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 8,
pp. 1697–1711, 2022.
[25] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
series: A comprehensive evaluation,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, 2022.
[26] N. Görnitz, M. Kloft, K. Rieck, and U. Brefeld, “Toward supervised anomaly detection,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 235–262,
2013.
[27] M. A. Hearst, S. T. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, and B. Scholkopf, “Support
vector machines,” IEEE Intell. Syst. Appl., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 18–28,
Jul./Aug. 1998.
[28] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001.
[29] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
spaces,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discov., T. Elomaa,
H. Mannila, and H. Toivonen, Eds.Berlin, Heidelberg:Springer, 2002,
pp. 15–27.
[30] T. Yairi, Y. Kato, and K. Hori, “Fault detection by mining association
rules from house-keeping data,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Robot.
Autom. Space, Citeseer, 2001, pp. 475–480.
[31] M. Hahsler and M. Bolaños, “Clustering data streams based on shared
density between micro-clusters,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 28,
no. 6, pp. 1449–1461, Jun. 2016.
[32] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copulabased outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 1118–1123.
[33] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection
in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[34] W. Qiu, Y. Wu, G. Wang, S. X. Yang, J. Bai, and J. Li, “A novel
unsupervised anomaly detection based on robust principal component
classifier,” in Data Mining, Intrusion Detection, Information Assurance,
and Data Networks Security, vol. 6241, Bellingham, WA, USA: SPIE,
2006, pp. 260–268.
[35] P. Malhotra et al., “Long short term memory networks for anomaly
detection in time series,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw., 2015,
pp. 89–94.
[36] Q. Chen, A. Zhang, T. Huang, Q. He, and Y. Song, “Imbalanced datasetbased echo state networks for anomaly detection,” Neural Comput. Appl.,
vol. 32, pp. 3685–3694, 2020.
[37] D. M. Blei, A. Kucukelbir, and J. D. Mcauliffe, “Variational inference: A
review for statisticians,” J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., vol. 112, no. 518, pp. 859–
877, 2017.
[38] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[39] S. Sørbø and M. Ruocco, “Navigating the metric maze: A taxonomy of
evaluation metrics for anomaly detection in time series,” Data Mining
Knowl. Discov., vol. 38, pp. 1027–1068, 2024.

ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL

[40] N. Tatbul, T. J. Lee, S. Zdonik, M. Alam, and J. Gottschlich, “Precision
and recall for time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
pp. 1924–1934.
[41] A. Huet, J. M. Navarro, and D. Rossi, “Local evaluation of time series
anomaly detection algorithms,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 635–645.
[42] S. Park, M. S. Gil, H. Im, and Y. S. Moon, “Measurement noise recommendation for efficient Kalman filtering over a large amount of sensor data,”
Sensors, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1168–1186, 2019.
[43] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P. A. Manzagol, “Extracting and
composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in Proc. 25th
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Helsinki, Finland, 2008, pp. 1096–1103.

Xiao Zhang is now an assistant professor with the
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University. His research interests include data
mining, multi-task learning and federated learning.
He has published more than 20 papers in the prestigious refereed journals and conference proceedings,
such as IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
UBICOMP, ACM Multimedia, IJCAI, AAAI, ACM
CIKM, and IEEE ICDM.

Shuqing Xu is currently working toward the MD
degree with the School of Computer Science and
Technology, Shandong University. Her research interests include data mining and anomaly detection.

Huashan Chen received the BS and MS degrees from
Shandong University, and the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, respectively, and the PhD degree in computer science from
the University of Texas at San Antonio, in 2021. He is
currently a Young associate professor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. His research interests include cybersecurity
metrics, automated attack planning, and blockchain
security.

Zekai Chen received the PhD degree in computer
science from George Washington University, in 2021.
He is a senior research scientist with Amazon. His
research areas include foundational large language
model, multi-modal deep learning, multi-task learning, and recommendation. He has published several influential papers in top-tier conferences and
journals, including but not limited to AAAI, ACL,
ICDM, CIKM, WACV, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, IEEE
Transactions on Computers and others.

9149

Fuzhen Zhuang received the BE degree from the
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University,
Chongqing, China, in 2006, and the PhD degree in
computer science from the Institute of Computing
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China, in 2011. He is currently a full professor with
the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University. He has published more than 140 papers in
some prestigious refereed journals and conference
proceedings such as Nature Communications, IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
and Learning Systems, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data,
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Information Sciences,
Neural Networks, SIGKDD, IJCAI, AAAI, TheWebConf, SIGIR, ICDE, ACM
CIKM, ACM WSDM, SIAM SDM, and IEEE ICDM. His research interests
include transfer learning, machine learning, data mining, multitask learning,
knowledge graph, and recommendation systems. He is a senior member of the
CCF. He was a recipient of the Distinguished Dissertation Award of CAAI, in
2013.

Hui Xiong (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree in computer science from the University of
Minnesota. He is a chair professor, associate vice
president (Knowledge Transfer), and the Thrust of
Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China. And he
is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology Hong Kong SAR, China. His research
interests span artificial intelligence, data mining, and
mobile computing. He has served on numerous organization and program committees for conferences, including as program
co-chair for the Industrial and Government Track for the 18th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD),
Program co-chair for the IEEE 2013 International Conference on Data Mining
(ICDM), General co-chair for the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining (ICDM), and Program co-chair of the Research Track for the 2018 ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
He received several awards, such as the 2021 AAAI Best Paper Award and the
2011 IEEE ICDM Best Research Paper award. For his significant contributions
to data mining and mobile computing, he was elected as a Fellow of AAAS, in
2020.

Dongxiao Yu received the BS degree from the School
of Mathematics, Shandong University, in 2006, and
the PhD degree from the Department of Computer
Science, The University of Hong Kong, in 2014. He
became an associate professor with the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, in 2016. He is currently a professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University. His research interests include edge intelligence, distributed
computing and data mining.