3472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

RustGraph: Robust Anomaly Detection in Dynamic
Graphs by Jointly Learning Structural-Temporal
Dependency
Jianhao Guo , Siliang Tang , Member, IEEE, Juncheng Li , Kaihang Pan , and Lingfei Wu

Abstract—Dynamic graph-based data are ubiquitous in the real
world, such as social networks, finance systems, and traffic flow.
Fast and accurately detecting anomalies in these dynamic graphs is
of vital importance. However, despite promising results the current
anomaly detection methods have achieved, there are two major
limitations when coping with dynamic graphs. The first limitation
is that the topological structures and the temporal dynamics have
been modeled separately, resulting in less expressive features for
detection. The second limitation is that the models have been
trained by unreliable noisy labels generated by random negative
sampling, rendering it severely vulnerable to subtle perturbations.
To overcome the above limitations, we propose RustGraph, a robust anomaly detection framework by jointly learning structuraltemporal dependency in dynamic graphs. To this end, we design a
variational graph auto-encoder with informative prior that simultaneously encodes both graph structural and temporal information.
Then we introduce a fine-grained contrastive learning method to
learn better node representations by utilizing the temporal consistency between two snapshots. Furthermore, we formulate the
noisy label learning problem for anomaly detection in dynamic
graph, and then propose a robust anomaly detector to improve the
model performance by leveraging learned graph structure signal.
Our extensive experiments on six real-world datasets demonstrate
the proposed RustGraph method achieves state-of-the-art performance with an average of 3.64% improvement on AUC-ROC
metric compared with all baselines. The codes are available at
https://github.com/aubreygjh/RustGraph.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, dynamic graphs, learning
with noisy labels.

I. INTRODUCTION
YNAMIC graphs, where the topological and attributive information of graph data can vary over time, are a prevalent
and important data structure [1], [2]. Dynamic graphs widely
exist in real-life scenarios, such as social networks [3], [4],

D

Manuscript received 22 December 2022; revised 12 October 2023; accepted
26 October 2023. Date of publication 30 October 2023; date of current version
10 June 2024. This work was supported in part by the Zhejiang NSF under
Grant LR21F020004, in part by NSFC under Grant 62272411, in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2018AAA0101900, and in part by the Ant Group and Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies. Recommended for
acceptance by Muhammad Aamir Cheema. (Corresponding Author: Juncheng
Li.)
Jianhao Guo, Siliang Tang, Juncheng Li, and Kaihang Pan are with the Department of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
(e-mail: guojianhao@zju.edu.cn; siliang@zju.edu.cn; junchengli@zju.edu.cn;
pankaihang@zju.edu.cn).
Lingfei Wu is with the Content and Knowledge Graph Group, Pinterest, New
York, NY 10018 USA (e-mail: teddy.lfwu@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3328645

Fig. 1. Illustration that both structural and temporal information should be
considered jointly. The green edge in t3 tends to be normal because the structural
connection between the green nodes is getting closer from t1 to t3 . In contrast,
the red edge has a higher probability to be abnormal because the red nodes before
t3 are distant and have no structural connection.

financial systems [5], [6], IoT networks [7], and infrastructure
facility networks [8], etc. An essential task in these dynamic
graph scenarios is anomaly detection [9], which aims to identify
the deviated patterns such as sudden changes in subgraph structure or node attributes [10], [11], [12]. For example, rumors in
social networks may cause people to panic and run on public
resources in a short period of time, and the spread of rumors can
be regarded as an anomaly. Accurately detecting these anomalies
can help prevent such panic and save massive public resources,
which has become a research hot spot recently [13], [14], [15],
[16], [17].
Though essential and eager to be solved, recent studies for
anomaly detection in dynamic graphs mainly fall short in two
aspects. The first challenge lies in dynamic graph representation learning, where informative raw features are unavailable and the topological structures and the temporal
dynamics have been modeled separately without considering
the mutual relationship between the two modalities. From
the data perspective, due to the explosive of graph data scale
and rising labor costs, it is expensive and infeasible to construct large amounts of informative features in real-world graph
datasets. From the method perspective, previous dynamic graph
methods [14], [15] mostly combine the static graph representation learning methods (e.g. GCN) with recurrence networks
(e.g. GRU) by simply feeding the outputs of the former to
the latter, while deeper connections between the structural and
temporal information may left unexplored. Fig. 1 gives a simple
demonstration explaining why both information should be considered jointly. The green line in t3 appears to be a normal edge
because the structural connection between the green nodes is getting stronger over time, while the red line is likely to be abnormal

1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS

Fig. 2. Training curves between TADYY [16] and our RustGraph under 10%
injected label noise in UCI Message dataset. Note that the value of loss curve
only reflects the relative trend, and its value does not correspond exactly to the
y-axis.

as the red nodes are distant and have no structural connection
before t3 . Simply combining two individual networks may fail
to capture such patterns and result in performance degradation.
Second, most dynamic graph anomaly detection models
have been trained by unreliable noisy labels and are vulnerable to subtle perturbations. Since there are few anomalies in
real-world scenarios for anomaly detection in dynamic graphs,
and high-quality labeled data are hard and expensive to collect,
existing methods utilize negative sampling to generate pseudo
anomalies and use these pseudo labels to train the model. For
example, AddGraph [14] and StrGNN [15] generate anomalous edges by randomly replacing the endpoints of a given
normal edge, and TADDY [16] randomly selects edges that do
not appear at the current time as pseudo anomalies. However,
such random negative sampling strategies may introduce the
problem of noisy labels, where normal edges could be wrongly
assigned to the abnormal class, or vice versa. Fig. 2 compares
training curves of different models under 10% label noise, where
TADDY is the baseline of previous work, and RustGraph is our
proposed model. We can see that, as the training proceeds, the
loss of TADDY decreases, but the AUC-ROC value does not
increase, which shows that the model has overfitted the noise
data. This example validates that the existence of noisy labels
could largely deteriorate the model performance, which is more
severe in the anomaly detection task, where human annotation
is unavailable. Despite the significance of model robustness to
noisy labels in anomaly detection, it has been rarely discussed
in previous works.
To overcome these two obstacles, we propose RustGraph, a
RobUst framework with Structural-Temporal dependency for
anomaly detection in dynamic GRAPHs. To solve the first
limitation, we design a structural-temporal graph encoding
network, including a designed auto-encoder VST-GAE that simultaneously encodes both structural and temporal information
with an informative prior. On top of that, we introduce a temporal
consistent dynamic graph contrastive learning module named
TC-GCL that encourages the model to capture fine-grained
temporal dependencies. As for the second limitation, we are
the first to formulate the problem of noisy labels brought by
negative sampling in dynamic graph anomaly detection tasks.

3473

To solve the problem, we design a robust graph anomaly detector that utilizes graph structural information for better model
robustness and data reliability. For model robustness, we use the
reconstructed structural information from graph embeddings to
design a regularization term. For data reliability, we leverage the
above structural information to iteratively update graph labels
to get cleaner data.
In summary, we use the structural information learned in the
graph encoding part to help the model fight against noisy labels.
In turn, solving the noise problem can better help the learning
of graph embeddings, thus forming a closed loop of mutual
gain. The major contributions of our work can be summarized
as follows:
r We propose RustGraph, a robust self-supervised framework that jointly learns both structural and temporal knowledge for anomalous edge detection in dynamic graphs.
r We design a variational structural-temporal graph autoencoder, denoted as VST-GAE, which sufficiently combines the structural and temporal attributes in dynamic
graphs to learn graph representations for anomaly detection. Besides, we propose TC-GCL, a temporal consistent
dynamic graph contrastive learning module that fully exploits fine-grained temporal reliance between snapshots.
With above two modules combined, we obtain a powerful
dynamic graph encoder for better representations.
r To our best knowledge, we are the first to formulate the
problem of noisy labels in dynamic graph anomaly detection, and we present a robust anomaly detector that utilizes
graph structural information as strong regularization and
data cleansing signal.
r Extensive experiments on six real-world datasets reach
state-of-the-art performance with an average 3.64% performance gain and validate the effectiveness of our framework.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Anomaly Detection in Dynamic Graphs
Existing dynamic graph representation learning methods can
be divided into two categories [18], discrete-time dynamic
graphs (DTDG) and continuous-time dynamic graphs (CTDG).
DTDGs are represented as a sequence of snapshots taken
at different time intervals, denoted as G = {G 1 , . . ., G T }. On
the other hand, CTDGs are characterized as a collection of
events with associated timestamps. Each event is represented
as (ui .vi .ti ), where ui , vi are the endpoints of the event and ti is
the timestamp. In this work, we specifically focus on the setting
of DTDGs. This choice is motivated by the fact that there are
limited studies addressing the CTDG setting in the context of
dynamic graph anomaly detection. Furthermore, many state-ofthe-art techniques and publicly available datasets for this task
are based on the DTDG setting. However, we acknowledge the
potential importance of CTDGs and the possibility of exploring
them in future research endeavors.
As an essential task in dynamic graphs, anomaly detection has aroused extensive research interest recently [9], [19].
Early methods focused on traditional machine learning methods.

3474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

GOutlier [20] uses structural connectivity to score the outliers.
CM-Sketch [21] utilizes empirical anomaly metrics to detect
anomalous edges.
Recently, deep learning methods have become mainstream
for dynamic graph anomaly detection tasks and have achieved
ideal performance compared to the above traditional learning
methods. NetWalk [13] uses a random walk-based auto-encoder
to learn low-dimensional representations, then clusters these
node representations to detect anomalies. AddGraph [14] detects
anomalous edges end-to-end. It encodes graphs with GCN [22]
and aggregates short-term and long-term encoding with an
attention mechanism through a GRU network. StrGNN [15]
constructs h-hop enclosing subgraph stream of each edge and
leverages stacked GCN and GRU to capture structural and
temporal information. TADDY [16] uses substructure sampling to get graph embedding and uses transformer as the
encoder.
However, as we mentioned before, these methods mainly
fall short in two aspects. First, they encode the structural
and temporal information separately, which may neglect the
inter-dependencies between the two perspectives. And the node
representation learning methods could be further improved for
better anomaly detection results. Second, the problem of noisy
labels is largely overlooked. Given the fact that there do not
exist ground-truth anomalies in these datasets, the negative
sampling strategies they adopt may introduce a massive number
of low-quality labels. The work of this paper attempts to bridge
this gap in these aspects.
B. Graph Representation Learning
1) Graph Auto-Encoders: Auto-encoders (AEs) are neural
network architecture that maps the original information into a
low-dimensional hidden feature space through the encoder, then
uses the decoder to reconstruct the original information [23]. It
can be used as a feature extractor for representation learning.
Graph auto-encoder [24] extends the idea of AE to graph neural
networks [22], [25] that encodes the graph structural information
and attribute features of nodes. However, traditional AEs only
learn features based on the reconstruction error and lack the
ability to further regularize the learned feature distribution,
limiting their generalization ability. In contrast, the variational
graph auto-encoder (VGAE [24]) learns the probability distribution of the feature matrix, leading to improved performance
in various graph-related tasks. VGRNN [26] further extends
VGAE to dynamic graphs, which uses the information of previous timestamps to help approximate the current representation.
However, VGRNN approximates the prior distribution only
with limited information, which lacks the task-specific inductive
biases for anomaly detection. In this work, we propose a dynamic
variational graph auto-encoder that utilizes the eigenvectors of
the graph Laplacian [27] as a more informative prior specifically for graph anomaly detection. We implement this with
a Graph-GRU structure, which will be discussed in detail in
Section IV-A1.
2) Graph Contrastive Learning: In recent years, graph contrastive learning, which does not require large amounts of labeled
data and learns by maximizing mutual information of related

views [28], [29], has become a mainstream method for graph
representation learning. DGI [30] contrasts between patch representations and corresponding high-level summaries of graphs.
GraphCL [31] studies various graph augmentations for generating different views. GRACE [32] focuses on contrasting
different views at the node level. GCCAD [33] makes attempts
to leverage contrastive learning for graph anomaly detection,
while they mainly focus on the static graph.
Recently, more research has begun to focus on the field of
dynamic graphs. DDGCL [34] proposes a debiased GAN-type
loss by contrasting two nearby temporal views of the same node
identity. TCL [35] replaces the GNN encoder with a co-attention
Transformer to model inter-dependencies of the contrasting
views.
To model fine-grained temporal dependencies, we propose a
simple yet effective dynamic graph contrasting method based on
the temporal consistency between consecutive snapshots, which
will be elaborated in Section IV-A2.
C. Learning With Noisy Labels on Graphs
Noisy label learning aims to solve the problem of how a
learning algorithm can cope with incorrect training examples.
While there is a significant body of work on the problems of
noisy labels, most of them focused on the computer vision
area, which ranges from estimating noise transition matrix [36],
[37], regulating objective function [38], [39], [40], [41], [42],
reweighting [43], [44] or selecting clean samples [45], [46], and
so on. Compared to the prosperity of noisy label learning in
CV, only a few works discussed the problem of training robust
GNNs against label noise. This is mainly because graphs are
non-IID data, and noise could propagate between nodes via the
message passing mechanism of GNNs [47], which adds more
difficulty to this problem. In the limited literature, [48] constructs
a framework that identifies missing links and noisy links by
leveraging mutual influence of them. [49] uses the clustering
labels as regularization to punish overfitting to noisy labels.
UnionNET [50] performs sample reweighting according to the
class probability distributions. NRGNN [47] proposes to link the
unlabeled nodes with labeled ones and generate pseudo labels
to bring more clean label information. Though effective to some
extend, these methods either lack graph-specific information
guidance or introduce extra computational overhead to correct
the label noise.
Different from above methods, in Section IV-B we utilize the
structural representation learned in the VST-GAE encoder, as
the constraint of robust regularization and signal for smooth
label correction, yielding remarkable results with minuscule
overheads.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
This section gives the necessary preliminaries of anomalous
edge detection in dynamic graphs.
Given a discrete-time dynamic graph G = {G 1 , . . ., G T } with
a maximum timestamp of T , where G t = (V t , E t ) represents
a graph snapshot at timestamp t. V t and E t are the node set
and edge set at timestamp t, respectively. We use (At , Xt ) to
represent the topological and attributive information of graph G t .

GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS

3475

Fig. 3. Framework of RustGraph. The input dynamic graph series are encoded by our structural-temporal encoder (including VST-GAE and TC-GCL), then the
learned graph embeddings are used to score the edge anomaly probability. Beside that, we use structural regularization and label smoothing to prevent the model
from overfitting the noisy labels introduced by negative sampling.

At ∈ RNt ×Nt is the adjacency matrix, where Atij = 1 if there
exists an edge etij between node vit and vjt , otherwise 0, and
Xt ∈ RNt ×d is the node attribute matrix, where Nt = |V t | and
d is the feature dimension of nodes. Note that nodes and edges
can appear or disappear as time changes, the size and content of
(At , Xt ) also vary.
In this paper, we design an anomaly detection algorithm
f (·) → [0, 1] on the edges etij of the dynamic graph that can
detect anomalous events from both the structural and temporal
perspectives.
Our model is trained in a self-supervised fashion following
previous works [14], [15], [16]. Specifically, in the training
phase, the data are unlabeled and assumed to be all normal,
which is a natural phenomenon in real-world scenarios (In the
real world, most of the time the data are normal and anomalies
occur occasionally). We use these unlabeled data to train the
model. In the testing phase, we inject anomalous edges [13],
where each edge etij = (vit , vjt ) ∈ E t is associated with a label
t
∈ {0, 1}, with 0 corresponds to abnormal edges and 1 coryij
responds to normal edges, respectively. Then we evaluate the
performance of the trained model f (etij ).
IV. METHOD
In this section, we will introduce the design of RustGraph
from two perspectives. First is the structural-temporal graph encoder that consists of VST-GAE and TC-GCL module. Through
the encoder, the model will be able to learn the coupled
structural-temporal graph representations from the perspectives
of generative and contrastive learning; Second is the graph
anomaly detector, which is noise-robust owing to the design
of structure regularization and label smoothing. Fig. 3 gives an
overview of the framework.

Fig. 4. Process of VST-GAE. (a) Posterior inference as in (1)–(3);
(b) reconstruction as in (4); (c) prior estimation using informative prior as in
(5)–(7); (d) the Graph-GRU recurrence as in (8)–(12).

A. Structural-Temporal Graph Encoder
1) VST-GAE. Variational Structural-Temporal Graph AutoEncoder: In order to learn graph representations that capture the
coupled information from structural and temporal perspectives,
we propose a Variational Structural-Temporal Graph AutoEncoder, namely VST-GAE, by jointly reasoning over both
graph structural and temporal dependency information into one
unified framework for dynamic graph representation learning.
Fig. 4 gives a figurative illustration of the process in VST-GAE.
Initially, we focus on the static case, which applies variational
auto-encoders to individual graph snapshots. The latent variables, denoted as Z, are sampled from a probability distribution
that is regularized by the graph encoder. Subsequently, the
latent variables Z are used to reconstruct the original input.

3476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

For dynamic graphs, we can simply extend this approach by
incorporating a recursive network to capture temporal evolution. However, this strategy overlooks the inherent relationship
between the structural and temporal aspects, as the recurrence
network lacks explicit knowledge of the graph structure.
In VST-GAE, we address this limitation by integrating structural and temporal information in a more granular and explicit
manner. During the inference process, we introduce the hidden
state vector ht−1 , which represents the historical information
from previous timestamps (t − 1), and incorporate it into the
GNN encoder. This integration allows us to effectively leverage
both the structural and temporal characteristics of the dynamic
graph. Formally, for a given graph snapshot G t = (At , Xt ), we
infer the posterior distribution of the node embedding Zt using
the following equation:
Nt

 


q Zt |At , Xt , ht−1 =
q Zti |At , Xt , ht−1

(1)

i=1



Zti ∼ N μti,enc , diag((σ ti,enc )2 )
 t



μenc , σ tenc = GNN At , Xt ⊕ ht−1

(2)

(4)

where σ is the sigmoid function.
As forthe prior, instead of imposing a standard Gaussian
p(Z) = i N (zi | 0, I) to estimate prior like VGAE [24] did,
we use history information, that is, the features of previous steps
to model the prior distribution. First, in a time series, the state at
the current moment is affected by the previous timestamps, so we
introduce h as auxiliary information. Second, changes in graph
structure at adjacent timestamps are particularly significant in
the dynamic graph anomaly detection task, because sudden
and abrupt changes in graph structure are likely to herald the
occurrence of anomalies. We therefore hope to amplify this
information by directly introducing graph structure changes at
adjacent timestamps. The eigenvectors of graph Laplacian have
been proven to be an effective signal of graph structure and
geometric information [27]. In this regard, we calculate the
difference of the eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian between
current and previous steps, denoted as Δut = |ut − ut−1 |, and
use it as the parameters of the prior distribution. In detail, the
prior distribution is estimated by:
Nt
 



p Zt |ht−1 , Δut =
p Zti |ht−1 , Δut
i=1

(5)

(6)
(7)

where p() is the prior probability distribution, μtprior , σ tprior are
the prior means and standard deviations matrices.
Consider the hidden state vector ht , it is a function of previous
graph signals, including A≤t , X≤t , and Z≤t . Using a simple
recurrence function like LSTM or GRU to update it may neglect
the graph topological information. Therefore, we replace the
fully connected layers in the GRU with GNN encoders, namely
GraphGRU, so that the recurrence part can process graph data.
Specifically, the hidden state ht is updated by:
(8)
X = φx (Xt ) ⊕ φz (Zt )


t
(9)
zt = σ GNNxz (At , X ) + GNNhz (At , ht−1 )


t
rt = σ GNNxr (At , X ) + GNNhr (At , ht−1 )
(10)


t
h = tanh GNNxh (At , X ) + GNNhh (At , ht−1 ◦ rt )
t

(3)

where q() denotes posterior probability distribution, N () represents Gaussian distribution, μtenc , σ tenc are the matrices of
means and standard deviations, respectively. The encoder GNN
can be any message passing networks (we use GraphSAGE [25]
here), and ⊕ is the concatenation operator. The node embedding Zt ∈ RNt ×d is inferred by Gaussian distribution using the
reparameterization trick [51].
With the inferred latent variables Zt , the original At and Xt
are reconstructed by feeding Zt to a non-linear decoder. Here
we employ MLP as a decoder to reconstruct Xt , and a simple
inner-product decoder to reconstruct At :
 t = σ(Zt Zt  )
 t = MLP(Zt ), A
X



Zti ∼ N μti,prior , diag((σ ti,prior )2 )

 t
μprior , σ tprior = MLP(ht−1 ⊕ Δut )

(11)
ht = (1 − zt ) ◦ ht−1 + zt ◦ h

(12)

where φx and φz are project functions such as MLP that project
Xt and Zt into the similar hidden space, and ◦ is the Hadamard
product.
The overall loss function for VST-GAE module is derived by
the variational lower bound:
Lgen = Eq(Zt |At ,Xt ,ht−1 ) logp(At , Xt |Zt )
 

 
− KL q Zt |At , Xt , ht−1 p Zt |ht−1 , Δut
(13)
where the first term is the reconstruction loss, and the second
term is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the posterior
and prior distributions of Zt , which is used as a regularization
term that secures the probability distribution of Zt close to the
informative prior.
2) TC-GCL. Temporal Consistent Graph Contrastive Learning: Although the design of hidden state h in VST-GAE implicitly passes temporal information through the recurrence part,
such design only considers the sequence dependency of previous
snapshots, which may neglect more complicated reliance between neighboring snapshots from both directions. To preserve
semantic consistency between consecutive snapshots, we propose an augmentation-free graph contrasting objective, namely
Temporal Consistent Graph Contrastive Learning (TC-GCL),
which treats neighboring snapshots of an anchor timestamp t as
augmented views, and maximizes the mutual information of the
same node on different views.
Specifically, after we obtain the embedding matrix Zt for a
given timestamp t, the previous and next neighboring snapshots
of t are sampled as augmented views Zaug(t) = {Zt−1 , Zt+1 }.
For generality, we use Z∗ for one augmented view hereinafter. It
is worth noting that this method does not use any augmentations
such as edge perturbation, but still keeps the consistency of

GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS

semantics between different views and reduces computational
cost.
For any node i that appears on both Zt and Z∗ , the node representations of the same node identity i are selected as positive
pairs, i.e., (Zti , Z∗i ), and other nodes (Zti , Z∗j )|i=j are seen as
negative pairs. Then a node-level contrastive loss is applied to
distinguish the embeddings of the same node in these two views
from the other node embeddings. We formalize the similarity
metric as s(u, v) = cosine_similarity(g(u), g(v)), where g
is a non-linear projection for general representations [52]. With
above preliminaries, the augmentation-free contrasting objective at time t is written as:
Zaug(t) Zt ∩Z∗

Lcon = −
Z∗

i
t

log

∗

es(Zi ,Zi )/τ
t

∗

es(Zi ,Zi )/τ +

N
s(Zti ,Z∗k )/τ
k=1 1[k=i] e

(14)

where τ is the temperature parameter, 1 is an indication function
that equals to 1 iff k = i. Note that this formula only calculates
the common nodes that appear on both views, which means our
model can handle node adding or dropping, and edge adding or
dropping scenarios.
Combining VST-GAE and TC-GCL, the overall objective
function for dynamic graph representation learning is written
as:
Lenc = Lgen + Lcon

bring about the problem of noisy labels, not to mention in the
current unsupervised and unlabeled scenario, which will largely
reduce the confidence of the data and harm the robustness of the
model.
To prevent model from overfitting corrupted labels, one solution is to exploit high-level constraint as regularization. Aside
from label guidance, another high-level signal is graph structure,
which provides huge amounts of information of the graph. Also,
in the graph anomaly detection task, the change in structure
connectivity may indicate potential anomalies (e.g. a sudden
surge of connection from a inactivate node could infer malicious
activities). Based on such observations, we propose to utilize explicit structure information as regularization against the noises.
To simplify the network design and reduce computation cost,
we reuse the the embedding Zt encoded by the VST-GAE
module, which carries necessary information to reconstruct the
 t = σ(Zt Zt  ), as the reiteration in (4). The recongraph: A
 t reveals the existence probability
structed adjacency matrix A
t
between every nodes pair in the graph, a higher value at A
ij
means node i and j are more likely to be connected, and vice
 t can prevent
versa. On one hand, the regularization from A
the model from overfitting the noisy labels when the label is
corrupted. Formally, for edge etij , its anomaly score f (etij ) is
regulated by:

From the above structural-temporal graph encoder we can
obtain the features Zt ∈ RNt ×d at timestamp t, where each row
of Zt represents the feature of the corresponding node. For
edge etij ∈ E t , we use the mean value of its endpoints as the
representation: etij = (Zti + Ztj )/2. Then we can compute its
anomaly score by a learnable function:
(16)

where σ is the sigmoid activation function, W ∈ Rd and b ∈ R
are learnable weight matrix and bias.
Since there do not exist any ground-truth anomalies in the
training data, we cannot directly train the detector to distinguish
between normal and abnormal edges yet. Previous works use
negative sampling techniques to generate pseudo anomalous
edges, such as randomly selecting non-existing edges [16] or
randomly replacing each edge’s endpoint [14]. With generated
pseudo labels, the anomaly detection problem can be treated as
a binary classification task using binary cross-entropy loss:

(1 − yij )log(1 − f (etij )) + yij log(f (etij ))
Lbce = −
etij ∈E t

(17)
where yij is the given label of the edge etij .
However, even in the presence of ground-truth labels, the
introduction of negative sampling to generate pseudo labels will

 t − f (et )
A
ij
ij

Lreg =

(18)

etij ∈E t

(15)

B. Robust Anomaly Detector With Structure Regularization
and Label Smoothing

f (etij ) = σ(etij W + b)

3477

 t can also be leveraged as additional
On the other hand, A
signal for label correction to iteratively get more reliable labels,
which is done by an exponential moving average process:
t
Yt = Yt + (1 − )A

(19)

where  is decay rate in the range [0, 1].
It is worth noting that the model learns through noisy data by
utilizing the structural information from previous graph encoder,
which in turn improves the quality of graph embeddings with
more reliable data. In such a loop, the structural-temporal graph
encoder and the robust anomaly detector benefit from each other,
improving the overall performance on dynamic graph anomaly
detection task.
C. Training Procedure
Combining the structural-temporal information mining objective, the anomaly detection objective, and the noise-resistant
regularization objective, the final training objective can be formalized as:
L = αLenc + βLbce + γLreg

(20)

where α, β, and γ are hyperparameters that control the volume
of each component loss. Without bells and whistles, we set all
of them as 1 by default, and more experiments discussing the
influence of these hyperparameters are in Section V-E3. We also
summarize the overall training procedure in Algorithm 1.

3478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Algorithm 1: Algorithm of RustGraph.

TABLE I
STATISTICS OF SIX PUBLIC DYNAMIC GRAPH DATASETS

under noisy labels. Finally, there are some discussions about
hyperparameters sensitivity and graph properties.
A. Experiment Setup

D. Complexity Analysis
In this subsection we briefly analyze the time complexity of
the proposed RustGraph model. Note for simplicity, we assume
the input and output dimension of the network are both d. This
analysis is based on a dynamic graph series of length T , with an
average number of nodes n and edge e at each timestamp.
For a L-layer GraphSAGE model which samples uniformly
a fixed number k of 1-hop neighbors, the time complexity is
O(Ld2 k L ). For the MLP used in our method, we assume it has
one layer and the time complexity is O(nd2 ). For the GRU unit,
we use the conclusion from [53], which is O(T d2 ).
According to above analysis, for the VST-GAE module,
the posterior inference and prior estimation bring the complexity of O(Ld2 k L + nd2 ); the reconstruction process has
O(nd2 + n2 d); and the recurrence part has O(T d2 ). The overall complexity of VST-GAE is derived by adding these steps,
which is O((2n + Lk L + T )d2 + n2 d). We omit the constant
and Lk L + T term due to their relatively small value, then the
time complexity for VST-GAE is O(nd2 + n2 d). For TC-GCL
module, we assume each node at timestamp t has n contrasting
pairs, then the overall complexity for TC-GCL is O(n2 d). For
anomaly detector, the time complexity is O(e).
To sum up, the final time complexity of RustGraph is
O(n2 dT + nd2 T + eT ).
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to validate
the effectiveness of the proposed RustGraph framework. We will
first introduce the dataset used in the experiments, along with
the compared baseline methods and other necessary setups. Then
we will demonstrate the empirical results of RustGraph, and we
also conduct ablation studies to prove the effectiveness of the
model design. After that, we will discuss the model performance

1) Datasets: We evaluate the performance of RustGraph on
six public dynamic graph datasets. Some statistics are summarized in Table I, and below are the descriptions of these datasets.
UCI Messages [54] is the directed network that contains sent
messages between the users of an online community of students
from the University of California, Irvine. A node represents a
user. A directed edge represents a sent message. Digg [55] is
the reply network of the social news website Digg. Each node
in the network represents a website user, and each directed edge
denotes that a user replied to another user. Email-DNC [56] is
the directed network of emails in the 2016 Democratic National
Committee email leak. Nodes in the network correspond to
persons in the dataset. A directed edge in the dataset denotes
that someone has sent an email to another person. BitcoinAlpha [57] is a who-trusts-whom network of people who trade
using Bitcoin on a platform called Bitcoin Alpha. A node in the
network denotes a user from the platform, and an edge means
a user has rated another user. Bitcoin-OTC [58] is similar to
Bitcoin-Alpha, which is another who-trusts-whom network of
users on the platform Bitcoin OTC. AS-Topology [59] is the
network connections between some autonomous systems of the
Internet, where nodes represent autonomous systems and edges
represent their connections.
2) Baselines: We compare RustGraph with nine state-of-theart baseline methods described below.
Sedanspot [60] detects anomalies by using a holistic random walk-based scoring function to compare the connectivity
changes. CM-Sketch [21] utilizes Count-Min sketch for approximating empirical anomaly metrics to detect anomalous edges.
node2vec [61] combines depth-first traversal and breadth-first
traversal in random walk subgraph sampling and uses Skipgram for embedding learning. Spectral Clustering [62] learns
embedding by maximizing the similarity between nodes in the
neighborhood. DeepWalk [63] generates random walk-based
subgraphs and also uses Skip-gram to learn node embedding.
NetWalk [13] learns node embedding by random walking and
uses dynamic clustering of the embeddings to detect anomalies. AddGraph [14] leverages extended temporal GCN with
an attentional GRU to combine structural-temporal information, and proposes a Bernoulli distribution-based negative sampling strategy. StrGNN [15] extracts h-hop enclosing subgraphs
to generate embeddings for the incoming structural-temporal
model. TADDY [16] utilizes a substructure sampling strategy

GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS

3479

TABLE II
ANOMALY DETECTION RESULTS ARE REPORTED IN THE AUC-ROC SCORE

and complex node embedding methods to feed the transformer
model.
For the graph embedding methods [21], [60], [61], [62], [63],
the K-means clustering-based detector [13] is used for anomaly
detection. Other deep learning methods are trained end-to-end.
3) Experiment Details: Since there are no ground-truth
anomalies in the original dataset, we follow the similar preprocess method in previous works [13], [14], [16] by injecting
artificial anomalous edges. Node2vec [61] is used for generating
raw features. The first 50% snapshots are used as the training set,
and the rest are used as the testing set. For testing, we consider
three different anomaly injection proportions (1%, 5%, 10%).
We use GraphSAGE [25] as the GNN encoder in the Graph-GRU
unit. To handle dynamic nodes addition/removal for ease of implementation, we enforce the shape At ∈ RN ×N , Xt ∈ RN ×d
of all snapshots to be same, where N is the total number of nodes
that have appeared in the dynamic graph G. And we maintain a
mask vector mt ∈ RN to indicate the occurrence of each node
for current snapshot. This approach ensures that the input shapes
for different snapshots remain consistent, allowing the encoder
to handle node additions and removals appropriately.
4) Metric: In our experiment, we employ Area Under the
Curve of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUC-ROC) as
the performance metric, which ranges from 0 to 1, with a higher
value indicating higher quality of the proposed method.
5) Parameter Setting: For the node embedding dimension d,
we use 64 for AS-Topology, 512 for Email-DNC, and 128 for
the rest. The snapshot sizes are set to be the same as [16] for
a fair comparison, which is 1000 for UCI and BTC-OTC, 2000
for Email and BTC-Alpha, and 6000 for Digg and AS-Topology,

respectively. The layers of all GNN encoders used in the network
are 2 by default.
During the training phase, we train UCI, BTC-OTC, Email
for 200 epochs, and Digg, BTC-Alpha, AS-Topology for 400
epochs. The framework is optimized by Adam optimizer with the
learning rate of 0.001 for UCI, Email, AS-Topology, and 0.0005
for Digg, BTC-Alpha, and BTC-OTC. The hyperparameters
α, β, γ that control the loss component are set to 1 by default.
The weight decay rate  in (19) is set as 0.9.
B. Anomaly Detection Results
The results of dynamic graph edge anomaly detection on six
datasets are shown in Table II, from which we can see:
r Out of 18 comparison items, we have 16 significantly
better than and 2 on par with other baseline models,
achieving state-of-the-art results. Compared with the best
results of these baselines, our model achieves an average
performance increase of 3.64%. Especially on datasets
AS-Topology, UCI Message, and Email-DNC, the average performance gain is 8.12%, 5.63%, and 5.61%. The
results prove that RustGraph can significantly improve the
performance of dynamic graph anomaly detection under
various settings.
r Our method achieves an average increase of 3.07%,
3.99%, 3.87% when the anomaly ratio is 1%, 5%, 10%, respectively. Compared with other methods, the AUC values
of RustGraph under different anomaly proportions have no
obvious difference. It justifies that our method can maintain
stability and robustness regardless of the settings.

3480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

TABLE III
ABLATION STUDY RESULTS FOR RUSTGRAPH

r The end-to-end deep learning methods have comprehensively surpassed the graph embedding methods. We assume
this is because the deep learning methods simultaneously
consider the structural and temporal information, and a
bigger model also leads to better representation.

C. Ablation Study
To validate the effectiveness of each component in RustGraph,
we conducted ablation studies by masking different components.
Specifically, for the VST-GAE module, we first used the original
auto-encoder (AE) instead of the variational auto-encoder (VAE)
as the base model to study the necessity of the variational
regularization. Then, we replaced the informative prior with
a standard Gaussian distribution to assess the effectiveness of
the informative prior. Finally, we masked the loss function Lgen
while preserving the auto-encoder design. For the TC-GCL
module, we removed the entire contrasting function Lcon . We
will discuss the effect of the robust anomaly detection module
in the next subsection. The other hyperparameters and training
scheme were kept the same for a fair comparison. The results
of ablation experiments are listed in Table III, and we can draw
the conclusions:
r In all cases, removing either component leads to a notable
performance drop. Specifically, using the auto-encoder as
the base model results in invalid outcomes, where most
values are around 50% AUC-ROC. Removing informative
prior and Lgen leads to an average 0.74% and 1.85% drop in
AUC-ROC, respectively. And the drop for removing TCGCL is 1.45%. All the performance drops are large enough
to influence the overall anomaly detection reliability. This
observation indicates the necessity of each component in
RustGraph.
r As an extreme case, using AE as an encoder results in completely unusable results. This may be because AE cannot
provide regularization on the latent space and loses the
ability to model both structural and temporal information.
r Different modules have different importance among
datasets. For example, removing Lgen has less impact on the
UCI dataset compared to removing TC-GCL, while on the

Email-DNC dataset we find the exact opposite effect. This
finding supports the necessity of combining these modules,
which are complementary in different scenarios.
r In most cases (except using AE as encoder), even the incomplete RustGraph network still outperforms other baseline models, which again demonstrates the performance
advantage of our model on the dynamic graph anomaly
detection task.

D. Impact of Noisy Labels
In this part we will discuss how the noisy labels affect the
model performance and how the robust anomaly detector alleviate such influence. Given the fact that there is no open-source
graph dataset with noisy labels, we use random label-flipping to
manually inject noise to above datasets, and the noise ratio in
the training set varies from 0 to 0.5, with a step size of 0.05. We
compare the results of different methods to give a comprehensive
view. For TADDY [16], we use their public codes to re-run the
experiment. The results are shown in Fig. 5, and we can conclude
that:
r RustGraph is robust to noisy labels under various settings:
the blue curve remains stable as the noise ratio increases.
In comparison, the performance of TADDY (the red curve)
drops significantly with more noisy labels.
r It is the design of robust anomaly detector that empowers
RustGraph the ability to counter noisy labels. According
to the ablation study (the green curve), removing the
structural regularization and label smoothing will lead to
a notable performance drop, and as the noise ratio gets
higher, the performance drop becomes more severe.
r When the noise ratio reaches 50%, the binary anomaly
detection problem becomes intractable and the conventional methods have failed. But due to the existence of
label smoothing design in our method (Section IV-B), the
RustGraph model can obtain supervision signal other than
the given labels. So even under such a extreme case, the
performance can still maintain on a high level.

GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS

3481

Fig. 5. AUC-ROC curves under different noise ratios. Because there is no ground-truth noisy labels, we use random label-flipping to inject noisy labels to original
dataset. The ours* marker denotes the ablation study of RustGraph, where we remove the structural regularization and label smoothing. For results of TADDY, we
use their open-source code to run the experiment.

Fig. 6.

Sensitivity analysis results for embedding dimensions d on three datasets with three kinds of anomaly ratio.

Fig. 7.

Sensitivity analysis results for training ratios on three datasets in box plots. The diamond marks are outliers.

E. Sensitivity Analysis
We further analyze the influence of different hyperparameters
on the experimental results, including the dimension of node
embedding d, the training data ratio, the contribution of each
component loss, and the snapshot sizes. The experiments are
carried out on UCI Messages, Bitcoin-Alpha, and Bitcoin-OTC
with 10% anomaly ratio and other parameters are kept the
same.
1) Embedding Dimensions: In this experiment, we study the
influence of embedding dimension d. The value of d ranges
from {8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512}, and the results are shown in
Fig. 6. As we can see, the AUC-ROC generally increases as the
embedding dimension increases, and becomes optimal when d
reaches 128. The AUC-ROC curves even slightly drop when d
continually grows to 512. A possible explanation is that small
d may not capture all the semantic information, thus reducing

the learning ability; while too large d makes the model hard to
converge.
2) Training Ratios: To evaluate the effect of different training ratios, we conduct experiments with training ratios from
{20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%}, and the results are summarized
in Fig. 7. With the increase of training ratio, the AUC-ROC
on Bitcoin-Alpha significantly increases, and other two datasets
remain stable. We also discover that both variance and outliers
decrease slightly as the training ratio increases, suggesting that
sufficient data is beneficial for model training. Note that our
method still achieves state-of-the-art results even for a relatively
low training ratio (20%). This may be attributed to our structuraltemporal graph encoder, which can capture rich information
even with few training data.
3) Contribution of Each Component Loss: To further quantify the contribution of each component loss in (20), we set α, β,
and γ in the range of {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0} on UCI Messages.

3482

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Sensitivity analysis results for the volume of each component loss.
TABLE IV
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS RESULTS FOR SNAPSHOT SIZES ON THREE DATASETS

According to the first three subfigures in Fig. 8, the most sensitive
hyperparameter is α, which controls the component of Lenc .
With the growth of α the detection performance also grows,
this validates the importance of the structural-temporal graph
encoder. On the other hand, the performance is rather stable as
β and γ change. However, we can see that when the α is rather
low, using larger β or γ could still improve the performance
to some extend. From this experiment, we can conclude that
our RustGraph model is relatively insensitive to the choice of
hyperparameters, so we simply set all of them to 1 by default.
Furthermore, we also study the roles of Lgen and Lcon in (15)
using the same range of hyperparameters, as shown in the
last subfigure of Fig. 8. The performance increases with the
increase of the weight of Lgen and Lcon , which demonstrates
that the VST-GAE and TC-GCL module are helpful for anomaly
detection tasks.
4) Snapshot Sizes: We also investigate the impact of varying
snapshot sizes on the performance of anomaly detection, and the
results are summarized in Table IV. Overall, the performance of
both methods tends to increase and then decrease as snapshot
sizes grow. We speculate that when snapshot sizes are too small,
the number of nodes within an individual graph snapshot is
limited, leading to insufficient structural information. On the
other hand, overly large snapshot sizes result in fewer generated
graph snapshots, leading to inadequate temporal information.
These two extreme cases highlight the importance of making a
reasonable choice for the snapshot size, as it can significantly
impact the model’s performance. In addition, the choice of
snapshot size appears to have a more pronounced impact on
TADDY’s performance than RustGraph’s. On the other hand,
RustGraph remains robust and consistently performs well across
various snapshot sizes, demonstrating its robustness to different
temporal resolutions.
F. Graph Properties Analysis
In this section, we examine the time-variant graph properties
to understand the improvements demonstrated by RustGraph
compared to other baselines. We visualize the graph clustering

Fig. 9.

Evolution of four dynamic graph properties over time.

coefficient [64], density, transitivity, and number of connected
components as the graph evolves, as shown in Fig. 9.
The first three subplots in Fig. 9, the clustering coefficient,
density, and transitivity metrics, reflect the graph’s connectivity,
where larger values suggest a higher level of connectivity or information flow. Notably, Email-DNC exhibits a higher mean and
greater fluctuation compared to other datasets, indicating a richer
source of structural-temporal information. This may explain the
more substantial performance improvement of RustGraph on
this dataset.
The final subplot, connected components, reflects the number
of disconnected cliques in the dataset. It’s worth noting that
typical GNN-based methods tend to perform better on datasets
with fewer connected components because they make reliable
detections in a more unified and interconnected graph. This is
corroborated by the fact that the two most challenging datasets
(AS-Topology and Digg), as indicated by the curves, also exhibit the lowest average performance in Table II (calculated

GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS

by averaging the AUC results of all listed methods except
RustGraph). Interestingly, RustGraph still achieved considerable performance on these two challenging datasets. We speculate that this counterintuitive phenomenon could be because
the proposed encoder has a strong capability to capture local
structural information within connected components through
learning with reconstruction. Additionally, the robust anomaly
detector helps reduce noise caused by large number of connected
components. Therefore, given that other models struggle to
learn effective features on challenging datasets, RustGraph’s
performance remains robust.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we first analyze two major limitations of recent
studies for anomaly detection in dynamic graphs: the separately
modeling of structural and temporal information in dynamic
graph representation learning; and the vulnerable models trained
by unreliable noisy labels. To overcome these obstacles, we
propose RustGraph, a robust anomaly detection framework
that jointly learns structural-temporal dependency of dynamic
graphs, which is also a self-supervised framework that can
be trained end-to-end. Specifically, we leverage a graph-based
variational auto-encoder and a temporal consistent graph contrastive learning module to simultaneously encode structural
and temporal dependencies, and a robust anomaly detector that
secures the data reliability and model robustness. Our proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on six real-world
dynamic graph datasets. Despite the success of the model, there
are still areas for improvement. For example, in dynamic graphs,
the time interval between snapshots is an important parameter,
but the current works have rarely considered it, and we may
leave it as future work.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Wu, P. Cui, J. Pei, L. Zhao, and L. Song, “Graph neural networks,” in
Graph Neural Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 27–37.
[2] S. M. Kazemi, “Dynamic graph neural networks,” in Graph Neural
Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2022, pp. 323–349.
[3] T. Y. Berger-Wolf and J. Saia, “A framework for analysis of dynamic social
networks,” in Proc. 12th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2006, pp. 523–528.
[4] K. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Y. Rong, J. X. Yu, and J. Huang, “Finding critical users
in social communities via graph convolutions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 456–468, Jan. 2023.
[5] Y. Zheng et al., “Clustering social audiences in business information
networks,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 100, 2020, Art. no. 107126.
[6] M. Zhang, S. Wu, X. Yu, Q. Liu, and L. Wang, “Dynamic graph neural
networks for sequential recommendation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4741–4753, May 2022.
[7] A. F. Subahi and K. E. Bouazza, “An intelligent IoT-based system design
for controlling and monitoring greenhouse temperature,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 125 488–125 500, 2020.
[8] Z. Cheng et al., “Time2Graph+: Bridging time series and graph representation learning via multiple attentions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2078–2090, Feb. 2023.
[9] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with
deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct 8, 2021,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3118815.

3483

[10] W. Cheng, K. Zhang, H. Chen, G. Jiang, Z. Chen, and W. Wang,
“Ranking causal anomalies via temporal and dynamical analysis on vanishing correlations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 805–814,
doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939765.
[11] B. Dong et al., “Efficient discovery of abnormal event sequences in
enterprise security systems,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage.,
Singapore, 2017, pp. 707–715, doi: 10.1145/3132847.3132854.
[12] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos, and N.
F. Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: A survey,”
Wiley Interdiscipl. Rev.: Comput. Statist., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 223–247,
2015.
[13] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang,
“NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection in dynamic networks,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, London, U.K., 2018, pp. 2672–2681,
doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220024.
[14] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc.
28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Macao, China, 2019, pp. 4419–4425,
doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/614.
[15] L. Cai et al., “Structural temporal graph neural networks for anomaly
detection in dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2021, pp. 3747–3756.
[16] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Nov. 2, 2021,
doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3124061.
[17] Y. Yang, Y. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Dong, F. Wu, and Y. Zhuang, “Mining
fraudsters and fraudulent strategies in large-scale mobile social networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 169–179,
Jan. 2021.
[18] S. M. Kazemi et al., “Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A
survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 2648–2720, 2020.
[19] S. Wang and P. S. Yu, “Graph neural networks in anomaly detection,” in
Graph Neural Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 557–578.
[20] C. C. Aggarwal, Y. Zhao, and S. Y. Philip, “Outlier detection in graph
streams,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2011, pp. 399–409.
[21] S. Ranshous, S. Harenberg, K. Sharma, and N. F. Samatova, “A scalable
approach for outlier detection in edge streams using sketch-based approximations,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, Miami, Florida, USA,
2016, pp. 189–197, doi: 10.1137/1.9781611974348.22.
[22] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Toulon, France, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=SJU4ayYgl
[23] R. Liao, “Graph neural networks: Graph generation,” in Graph Neural
Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2022, pp. 225–250.
[24] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,”
2016, arXiv:1611.07308.
[25] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 1024–
1034. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/
hash/5dd9db5e033da9c6fb5ba83c7a7ebea9-Abstract.html
[26] E. Hajiramezanali, A. Hasanzadeh, K. R. Narayanan, N. Duffield, M. Zhou,
and X. Qian, “Variational graph recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. Annu.
Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2019, pp. 10 700–
10 710. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/
hash/a6b8deb7798e7532ade2a8934477d3ce-Abstract.html
[27] D. Kreuzer, D. Beaini, W. Hamilton, V. Létourneau, and P. Tossou, “Rethinking graph transformers with spectral attention,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 21618–21629.
[28] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
[29] Y. Wang, W. Jin, and T. Derr, “Graph neural networks: Self-supervised
learning,” in Graph Neural Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 391–420.
[30] P. Velickovic, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R.
D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=rklz9iAcKQ

3484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

[31] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive
learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, pp. 5812–5823.
[32] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph contrastive
representation learning,” 2020, arXiv: 2006.04131.
[33] B. Chen et al., “GCCAD: Graph contrastive learning for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8037–8051,
Aug. 2023.
[34] S. Tian, R. Wu, L. Shi, L. Zhu, and T. Xiong, “Self-supervised representation learning on dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2021, pp. 1814–1823.
[35] L. Wang et al., “TCL: Transformer-based dynamic graph modelling via
contrastive learning,” 2021, arXiv:2105.07944.
[36] S. Sukhbaatar, J. Bruna, M. Paluri, L. Bourdev, and R. Fergus, “Training
convolutional networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations Workshop, 2015.
[37] J. Goldberger and E. Ben-Reuven, “Training deep neural-networks using
a noise adaptation layer,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Toulon, France, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=H12GRgcxg
[38] T. Miyato, S. Ichi Maeda, M. Koyama, and S. Ishii, “Virtual adversarial
training: A regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 41, no. 8,
pp. 1979–1993, Aug. 2019.
[39] S. Reed, H. Lee, D. Anguelov, C. Szegedy, D. Erhan, and A. Rabinovich,
“Training deep neural networks on noisy labels with bootstrapping,” in
Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations Workshop, 2015. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6596
[40] J. Jin, Y. Li, and C. L. P. Chen, “Pattern classification with corrupted
labeling via robust broad learning system,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 4959–4971, Oct. 2022.
[41] J. Li et al., “Compositional temporal grounding with structured variational
cross-graph correspondence learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 3032–3041.
[42] J. Li et al., “Variational cross-graph reasoning and adaptive structured semantics learning for compositional temporal grounding,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 12601–12617,
Oct. 2023.
[43] T. Liu and D. Tao, “Classification with noisy labels by importance
reweighting,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 38, no. 3,
pp. 447–461, Mar. 2015.
[44] Y. Wang, A. Kucukelbir, and D. M. Blei, “Robust probabilistic modeling
with Bayesian data reweighting,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2017, pp. 3646–3655. [Online]. Available: http:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v70/wang17g.html
[45] L. Jiang et al., “MentorNet: Learning data-driven curriculum for very deep
neural networks on corrupted labels,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 2309–2318. [Online]. Available: http://
proceedings.mlr.press/v80/jiang18c.html
[46] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural
networks with extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Annu. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Montréal, Canada, 2018, pp. 8536–
8546. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/
hash/a19744e268754fb0148b017647355b7b-Abstract.html
[47] E. Dai, C. Aggarwal, and S. Wang, “NRGNN: Learning a label noise
resistant graph neural network on sparsely and noisily labeled graphs,” in
Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 227–236,
doi: 10.1145/3447548.3467364.
[48] J. Xu et al., “Robust network enhancement from flawed networks,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 3507–3520, Jul. 2022.
[49] M. Zhang, L. Hu, C. Shi, and X. Wang, “Adversarial label-flipping attack
and defense for graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data
Mining, 2020, pp. 791–800.
[50] Y. Li, J. Yin, and L. Chen, “Unified robust training for graph neural
networks against label noise,” in Proc. 25th Pacific-Asia Conf., 2021,
pp. 528–540, doi: 10.1007/978–3-030-75762-5_42.
[51] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Banff, AB, Canada, 2014. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114
[52] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [Online]. Available: http:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html

[53] M. Rotman and L. Wolf, “Shuffling recurrent neural networks,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 9428–9435.
[54] T. Opsahl and P. Panzarasa, “Clustering in weighted networks,” Social
Netw., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 155–163, 2009.
[55] M. De Choudhury, H. Sundaram, A. John, and D. D. Seligmann, “Social
synchrony: Predicting mimicry of user actions in online social media,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Eng., 2009, pp. 151–158.
[56] R. A. Rossi and N. K. Ahmed, “The network data repository with interactive graph analytics and visualization,” in Proc. 29th AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., Austin, Texas, USA, 2015, pp. 4292–4293. [Online]. Available:
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI15/paper/view/9553
[57] S. Kumar, F. Spezzano, V. Subrahmanian, and C. Faloutsos, “Edge weight
prediction in weighted signed networks,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf.
Data Mining, 2016, pp. 221–230.
[58] S. Kumar, B. Hooi, D. Makhija, M. Kumar, C. Faloutsos, and V. S.
Subrahmanian, “REV2: Fraudulent user prediction in rating platforms,”
in Proc. 11th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Marina Del Rey,
CA, USA, 2018, pp. 333–341, doi: 10.1145/3159652.3159729.
[59] B. Zhang, R. Liu, D. Massey, and L. Zhang, “Collecting the internet aslevel topology,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 35, no. 1,
pp. 53–61, 2005.
[60] D. Eswaran and C. Faloutsos, “SedanSpot: Detecting anomalies in edge
streams,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 953–958.
[61] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning
for networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 855–864,
doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939754.
[62] U. Von Luxburg, “A tutorial on spectral clustering,” Statist. Comput.,
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 395–416, 2007.
[63] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning of social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 701–710,
doi: 10.1145/2623330.2623732.
[64] J. Saramäki, M. Kivelä, J.-P. Onnela, K. Kaski, and J. Kertész, “Generalizations of the clustering coefficient to weighted complex networks,”
Phys. Rev. E, vol. 75, Feb. 2007, Art. no. 027105, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.75.027105.

Jianhao Guo received the BE degree from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, in 2020. He is currently
working toward the PhD degree in computer science
with Zhejiang University, under the supervision of
Prof. Siliang Tang. His research interests include
concentrates on graph learning and its applications.
He has published a paper focusing the problem of
graph contrastive learning in the top-tier conference
IJCAI as the first co-author.

Siliang Tang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
degree from the Nation University of Ireland,
Maynooth. He is currently a full professor with the
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University.
His research interests include natural language processing, cross-media analysis, and graph mining. So
far, he has published more than a hundred papers
in the top-tier scientific conferences/journals such as
AAAI, IJCAI, KDD, NIPS, ICML, ACL, EMNLP,
NAACL, SIGIR, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering (NLP and Graph mining);
ACM MM, CVPR, ICCV, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
(Multimodal Understanding, and Graph Neural Networks in Computer Vision);
IEEE VIS, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (Data
Visualization). He has been serving as an area chair/senior PC member or PC
member in conferences such as AAAI, IJCAI, NIPS, ICML, CVPR, ACL,
EMNLP, NAACL, and reviewers of journals such as IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, ACM Computing Surveys, Nature-Scientific
Reports, etc.

GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS

Juncheng Li received the BE degree from the Harbin
Institute of Technology, China, in 2019. He is currently working toward the PhD degree with Zhejiang University, advised by Prof. Yueting Zhuang
and Prof. Siliang Tang. His research interests include
vision-and-language, video understanding, embodied
intelligence, and graph mining. He has published
several papers in top-tier scientific conferences as the
first author, such as CVPR, ICCV, NeurIPS, ACM
Multimedia.
Kaihang Pan received the BE degree in software
engineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China, in 2018. He is currently working toward the
MS degree in computer science with Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. His research concentration
includes graph data mining and natural language
processing.

3485

Lingfei Wu received the PhD degree in computer
science from the College of William and Mary,
in 2016. He is an engineering manager with the
Content and Knowledge Graph Group at Pinterest,
where he focuses on building the next generation
Knowledge Graph to empower Pinterest recommendation/research systems. He has published more than
70 top-ranked conference and journal papers and is
a co-inventor of more than 30 filed US patents. He
was the recipients of the Best Paper Award and Best
Student Paper Award of several conferences such as
AAAI workshop on DLGMA’20, IEEE ICC’19 and KDD workshop on DLG’19.
His research has been featured in numerous media outlets, including NatureNews, YahooNews, Venturebeat, and TechTalks. He has co-organized more
than ten conferences and workshops including AAAI’21, IEEE BigData’19,
IEEE BigData’18 and is the founding co-chair for Workshops of Deep Learning
on Graphs (with KDD’20, AAAI’20, KDD’19, and IEEE BigData’19). He
has currently served as associate editor of ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data and International Journal of Intelligent Systems, and
regularly served as a SPC/PC member of the following major AI/ML/NLP
conferences including KDD, IJCAI, AAAI, NIPS, ICML, ICLR, and ACL.