IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

5004217

Scalable Industrial Visual Anomaly Detection With
Partial Semantics Aggregation Vision Transformer
Haiming Yao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Wei Luo , Student Member, IEEE,
Jianan Lou , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Wenyong Yu , Senior Member, IEEE,
Xiaotian Zhang , Zhenfeng Qiang , and Hui Shi , Member, IEEE
Abstract— In recent years, the field of industrial visual
anomaly detection (VAD) has attracted significant attention in
the context of advanced smart manufacturing systems. However,
several limitations remain unresolved in existing approaches.
While these methods can achieve satisfactory performance when
training separate models for different categories, their scalability
and performance suffer when faced with the challenge of simultaneous training for multiple categories. Reconstruction-based
methods generally suffer from the identical mapping problem.
To address these limitations, this study introduces the partial
semantic aggregation vision transformer (PSA-VT), a scalable
framework for industrial visual anomaly detection (VAD) that
enables simultaneous multicategory anomaly detection using
a single model. Our proposed PSA-VT framework adopts a
hybrid design strategy. First, a pretrained convolutional neural
network (CNN) is employed to extract multiscale discriminative
local representation. Subsequently, the PSA-VT is introduced
to perform representation reconstruction through long-range
global semantic aggregation. Finally, the anomalous properties
can be estimated by evaluating the reconstruction error of
the representations. We conducted extensive experiments using
the Mvtec AD industrial anomaly detection dataset, as well
as the semantic anomaly detection datasets. The experimental
results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance by capturing high-level semantics. Notably,
PSA-VT surpasses other methods for the one-model-15-category
anomaly detection tasks on the Mvtec AD dataset. Furthermore,
we applied incremental learning techniques to enable the rapid
deployment of PSA-VT in a real industrial scenario.
Index Terms— Anomaly localization, defect inspection, scalable visual anomaly detection (VAD), self-supervised learning,
unsupervised learning, vision transformer (ViT).

Manuscript received 26 August 2023; revised 29 October 2023;
accepted 2 December 2023. Date of publication 18 December 2023; date
of current version 2 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 52375494. The
Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Bardia Yousefi.
(Corresponding author: Wenyong Yu.)
Haiming Yao, Wei Luo, Jianan Lou, Xiaotian Zhang, and Zhenfeng
Qiang are with the State Key Laboratory of Precision Measurement
Technology and Instruments, Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: yhm22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
luow23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; ljn22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhangxt6@
foxmail.com; 18302973462@163.com).
Wenyong Yu is with the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing
Equipment and Technology, School of Mechanical Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
(e-mail: ywy@hust.edu.cn).
Hui Shi is with the School of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China (e-mail:
clove_shi@whut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2023.3343832

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

UTOMATIC visual anomaly detection (VAD) has garnered considerable attention and widespread implementation across various sectors in the smart industry, due to
its highly automated, nondestructive, and efficient detection
capabilities. VAD has found practical applications in a range of
industrial scenarios, including product quality inspection [1],
textured surface defect detection [2], [3], and smart power
systems [4], among others. The utilization of VAD offers
substantial improvements in both efficiency and accuracy
compared with traditional manual inspection methods.
Supervised learning-based methods and unsupervised
learning-based methods represent the two predominant
approaches in industrial VAD. Supervised methods, leveraging
annotated datasets consisting of numerous defective samples
and their corresponding labels, have demonstrated robust
detection performance [4], [5] across diverse scenarios. Nevertheless, the process of collecting and annotating a large number
of defect samples is often impractical and time consuming in
real-world industrial settings. Consequently, Wan et al. [1],
Yao et al. [2], and Yang et al. [3] have turned their attention
to unsupervised methods, which possess the advantage of
utilizing only normal nondefective samples without the need
for any annotations.
The field of unsupervised VAD commonly adopts a method
of learning the distribution of normal patterns through reconstruction. The underlying assumption is that only normal
samples are utilized during the model training, and the objective is to generate reconstructions that closely resemble the
input. During testing, both normal and abnormal samples will
result in reconstructions that resemble the normal distribution.
The discrepancy between the input and the reconstruction
is then employed as the criterion for anomaly detection.
This approach has been extensively studied in subsequent
research endeavors. However, prevalent reconstruction-based
VAD methods suffer from a significant limitation known
as “trivial solutions” or “identical mapping.” This refers to
instances where the model simply outputs a direct replica of
the input during the reconstruction process, without considering its semantics. As a consequence, even outlier samples
can obtain high-fidelity reconstructions, posing a challenge for
anomaly discrimination in reconstruction-based methods.
In practical VAD, the detection of anomalies across different
categories remains an underexplored area. This issue holds
significant relevance in real-world industrial environments,

1557-9662 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

as illustrated in Fig. 1. Traditional methods encounter challenges when multiple product types require simultaneous
detection, necessitating the utilization of independent model
parameters for each product category. Consequently, this leads
to substantial memory consumption for storage and inference
purposes. To tackle this problem, we propose a scalable model
that offers a comprehensive solution adaptable to inspections
of all product types through the use of a single set of unified
parameters. Unlike traditional methods that become increasingly impractical as the number of product types expands due
to the need for separate parameter storage for each category,
our proposed scalable approach requires the storage of only
one set of generic parameters. This characteristic allows for
scalability and versatility, regardless of the number of product
types involved.
The innovative multicategory anomaly detection approach
poses a greater challenge than the conventional single-category
method. The model is required to learn the normal distribution
of multiple categories and perform the reconstruction process
for each distinct category simultaneously, which may lead the
model to further favor “trivial solutions” without considering
semantic information. Moreover, the inference process requires
the model to detect multiple categories without explicit label
information or fine tuning, and thus, the model should not
exhibit any biases toward a specific category. Such biases may
result in the misclassification of samples from other categories
as anomalous, even if they are normal or anomalous. This
highlights the crucial importance of the model’s ability to
comprehend the global semantics of objects.
CNNs have been widely used and achieved impressive
performance in various vision tasks, including VAD. However,
their limited receptive field hinders them from comprehending global semantics, leading to reduced discriminability
between normal and defective patterns [6]. To address this
issue, the vision transformer (ViT) was proposed [7], which
uses the self-attention mechanism to model images from a
sequence perspective and capture global context. This promising methodology has the potential to address the inherent
shortcomings of CNNs in the context of VAD and has garnered
substantial attention in recent research endeavors.
Drawing from the preceding analysis, we have devised a
novel hybrid reconstruction framework called partial semantic
aggregation vision transformer (PSA-VT) to capitalize on
the strengths of both convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and ViTs, enabling a scalable approach to cross-category
VAD in industrial scenarios. In the PSA-VT framework,
CNNs are first employed to extract multiscale discriminative local representation, effectively transforming image
pixels into deep feature maps imbued with local semantics. Subsequently, the partial semantic aggregation paradigm
is introduced within ViT, incorporating auxiliary aggregation tokens to extract the global semantic context of
the original feature’s patch tokens. In this paradigm, the
reconstruction task transforms into a self-supervised semantic aggregation process. This study offers two primary
contributions.
1) We envisioned a challenging yet practical detection
framework for industrial applications: scalable multi-

Fig. 1.
Real-world industrial settings demand simultaneous testing of
numerous products. Conventionally, the inspection of captured image data
from diverse product lines involves the use of multiple models in memory-intensive methodologies. However, the proposed innovative generalizable model
provides a compelling alternative, requiring only a single model to effectively
detect multiple products simultaneously.

category anomaly detection. To achieve this objective,
we have proposed a novel hybrid VAD approach, called
the PSA-VT. The PSA-VT framework comprises two
key modules: a local feature representation module,
built upon a pretrained CNN and a global feature
reconstruction module, powered by the ViT within the
partial semantic aggregation paradigm. Specifically, the
feature extraction module extracts the feature maps with
local contexts as descriptors. On the other hand, the
feature reconstruction module utilizes a global context
aggregation paradigm to reconstruct abnormal features
into normal patterns.
2) To assess the efficacy of our proposed PSA-VT method,
a comprehensive evaluation is conducted on the widely
utilized MVTec AD dataset. The evaluation results
demonstrate that PSA-VT achieves SOTA performance
in terms of AUROC, with 96.4 for anomaly detection
and 96.9 for anomaly segmentation, in the context of
scalable multicategory anomaly detection (one-model15-category setting). To gain a deeper understanding
of the underlying mechanisms and factors influencing
performance, ablation experiments are performed along
with related analyses. Moreover, in order to ascertain
the practical applicability of our method in real-world
industrial scenarios, incremental learning techniques are
employed, and the effectiveness of our method is validated.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
offers a literature review that encompasses pertinent studies on
VAD, with particular emphasis on reconstruction-based and
ViT-based methods. Section III elaborates on the intricacies
of our proposed approach, the PSA-VT. Section IV presents
a thorough analysis of the experimental findings. Finally,
Section V summarizes the conclusion and provides a concise
summary of this article.

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Reconstruction-Based Anomaly Detection
The extensive research has been undertaken in the domain
of VAD, encompassing various methodologies. Notably,
embedding-based approaches [8], [9] have been explored,
which involve the modeling of normal feature distributions
in a latent space. These approaches utilize the dissimilarity
between instances and normal feature clusters as a discriminative metric. However, for the purpose of this study, our focus
is specifically directed toward reconstruction-based approaches
in VAD.
Deep autoencoders (AEs) are the most popular model in
reconstruction-based VAD methods. To address the limitations of standard AE, several extensions have been proposed
to enhance their capabilities in anomaly detection. For
instance, the memory mechanism was proposed in the MemAE
model [10] that explicitly stores the prototypical normality
patterns to restrict the high-fidelity anomaly reconstruction
issue encountered in vanilla AE. Similarly, the partition
memory technique proposed in [11] ensures the preservation of normal semantic integrity. In addition, the multilevel
image reconstruction (MLIR) model [12] generates multilevel
reconstruction outcomes with different retentions, while the
reconstruction by inpainting for anomaly detection (RIAD)
model [13], augmented with attention in [14], leverages image
inpainting techniques to improve the reconstruction process.
Similar concepts are also explored in [15], where predictive
regression is utilized within the local receptive field of CNNs
as an alternative to direct reconstruction. In addition, the
novel Draem method introduced in [16] introduces an extra
pseudo-anomaly and discriminative subnetwork to enhance
anomaly segmentation. While most existing methods focus
on the reconstruction difference at the pixel level, the deep
feature reconstruction (DFR) approach [17] employs feature
reconstruction difference. DFR leverages the local semantic
perception capability of the CNN network, enabling it to
extract multilevel features and perform feature-level reconstruction, thereby achieving more robust anomaly detection
performance. To address the issue of over generalization in
feature reconstruction, the dual-Siamese network [18] incorporates synthetic defects and introduces feature repair techniques
to enhance the stability of the reconstruction process. Moreover, approaches such as [1] and [6] employ feature mapping
and correspondence mechanisms to establish diverse normality
relations across different feature domains, thereby expanding
the applicability of reconstruction-based methods. However,
it is noteworthy that most existing methods, including the
aforementioned ones, are predominantly based on the CNN
model. The local semantic awareness of CNNs may limit the
effectiveness of reconstruction-based methods when dealing
with challenging defect types that exhibit global semantics. Moreover, the aforementioned approaches are developed
within the framework of separate training for each category
and do not investigate the one-model-multicategory scalability [19], which limits their applicability in scenarios, where
multiple categories of production need to be inspected simultaneously.

5004217

B. Transformer Model in Anomaly Detection
The ViT, a novel architecture in the field of computer vision,
has demonstrated remarkable efficacy across various visual
tasks [20]. However, its utilization in the VAD community,
which predominantly relies on CNN-based methods, has been
relatively limited. To address this gap, several models have
been proposed that incorporate ViTs into the VAD framework.
The inpainting transformer (InTra) was introduced in [21],
offering a solution for image reconstruction through training
a model to inpaint the missing patch by the surrounding
patches. In a similar vein, U-transformer [22] tackles feature
reconstruction by employing a transformer inspired by the
U-net structure. Furthermore, MSTUnet [23] adopts a strategy
that combines defect synthesis and image inpainting and
incorporates the Swim transformer to leverage its long-range
modeling capability for inpainting purposes.
This study presents a novel reconstruction method termed
PSA-VT. By leveraging the long-distance semantic dependency of the ViT, PSA-VT adopts a paradigm of partial
semantic aggregation to accomplish self-supervised feature
reconstruction. This approach overcomes the drawbacks of
identity mapping observed in existing reconstruction-based
methods, establishing a new paradigm for scalable multiclass
VAD.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY: PSA-VT
A. Theoretical Analysis and Motivation
In order to investigate the occurrence of the “identical mapping” phenomenon during the reconstruction process, we begin
with a theoretical inquiry into the reconstruction task, focusing
on the underlying mechanisms of various neural networks
like [19]. In the case of CNNs, the output Y is a function of
the input X , determined by a set of weight coefficients (W)
and a bias term (B) and can be represented by the following
equation:
Y = W · X + B.

(1)

To achieve the reconstruction of the input X as Y = X , a CNN
can assign the weight coefficient W as the identity matrix I
and the bias B as 0. However, this approach results in a “trivial
solution,” where the network fails to capture the input’s true
semantic nature. On the other hand, the mechanism underlying
the self-attention-based ViT can be summarized as follows:

T 
θv (X ) + X
(2)
Y = ξ θq (X ) · θk (X )
{z
}
|
A

where θ is the linear transformation, ξ is the soft-max function,
and A represents the attention matrix. In order to reconstruct
the input and achieve Y = X , the model may learn to set
θv and attention matrix to I. However, this also leads to the
“trivial solution,” where the attention mechanism of each token
is more focused on its own information, rendering the global
attention feature of the transformer model ineffective. As a
result, the global semantics of the object cannot be learned.
In addition, residual connections that may lead the information
leakage within the model can also be an important shortcut for
the reconstruction task.

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 2. (a) ViT [7] employs a class token to capture long-range semantic dependencies among the original image’s patch tokens for visual classification.
(b) Directly using the patch tokens for the reconstruction task with the vanilla transformer risks falling into the trivial solution of shortcut reconstruction.
(c) Our proposed PSA-VT introduces aggregation tokens to aggregate global semantic representations while preserving spatial information by aggregating the
information of position-disjoint patch tokens under the supervision of the reconstruction task.

To effectively tackle the challenges of multicategory
anomaly detection tasks and avoid the aforementioned trivial
solutions, it is crucial for a model to have a comprehensive grasp of object semantics. Drawing from the approach
adopted by ViT [7], which employs a class token for global
semantic aggregation in visual classification, we propose a
novel strategy that leverages auxiliary aggregation tokens.
As shown in Fig. 2(a), ViT introduces an additional class
token to accomplish visual classification tasks by aggregating
high-level global semantic information. However, as depicted
in Fig. 2(b), when employing the standard transformer model
for the reconstruction task, the “trivial solution” mentioned
earlier may occur, especially when attempting to match intricate multicategory distributions.
To address the above problems, we present a novel partial
semantics aggregation transformer with auxiliary aggregation
tokens that enables the model to extract high-level global
semantics while preserving spatial information for the reconstruction task. As shown in Fig. 2(c), our novel approach goes
beyond ViT [7] by generating representations with holistic
global semantics for all spatial locations in the self-supervised
learning paradigm. Specifically, we utilize a set of learnable
aggregation tokens that share the same shape as the original
patch tokens. This ensures that each position in the original
feature sequence has an aggregation token. The aggregation
tokens are divided into subsets that are associated with feature
patch tokens from disjoint positions, facilitating the learning
of long-range semantic dependencies during the reconstruction
task. As a result, our method can obtain position-dependent
global semantics for each position. In Section III-B we shall
elaborate on this approach in a comprehensive manner.

module. Initially, the input image undergoes conversion into a
multiscale discriminative local representation via a pretrained
CNN. Subsequently, the PSA-VT is employed to reconstruct
the extracted representation by leveraging global contextual
semantic aggregation.
In the proposed partial semantic aggregation paradigm,
we initially transform the feature representation into a
sequence of feature patch tokens. To facilitate the aggregation
process, we introduce an auxiliary aggregation label sequence
that shares the same shape as the feature patch token sequence.
The aggregation token sequence is partitioned randomly into
multiple disjoint subsets. Each subset is then combined with
a set of partial feature patch tokens whose positions do not
overlap, forming a new set of sequences. These sequences are
subsequently input to the transformer encoder.
The aggregation tokens within each sequence enable the
perception of information from feature patch tokens that
occupy nonintersecting positions. This allows for the aggregation of feature patch tokens through long-distance semantic
dependencies, resulting in the global semantics of the partial
feature patch tokens for each sequence being aggregated in
aggregation tokens after encoding. In the latent space, all
aggregation tokens from across all sequences are merged,
while the raw feature patch tokens are discarded. The resulting
a new combined sequence, which is then processed by the
decoder to reconstruct the original features.
In Sections III-C–III-G, we will provide detailed
explanations of each module of the PSA-VT method.

B. Overall Pipeline

To derive local discriminative semantic representations from
input images I ∈ R H ×W ×3 , we employ a process that involves
converting the raw pixel values into CNN deep feature maps.
Consistent with the previous research [17], we utilize a pretrained CNN that has been trained on visual recognition tasks
as our feature extractor. This allows us to leverage CNN’s
capability to extract intricate local structures, thereby obtaining

Fig. 3 illustrates the overarching architecture of our proposed PSA-VT. Serving as a hybrid framework, it combines
the strengths of both CNN and ViTs, thereby encompassing local and global semantic awareness. The framework
is primarily composed of two modules: the local feature
representation module and the global feature reconstruction

C. Local Feature Representation With Pretrained CNN

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

5004217

Fig. 3. (a) Overall pipeline of the proposed PSA-VT. First, the local feature representation module employs a pretrained CNN to extract multiscale
discriminative local representations for the input image. Subsequently, the global feature reconstruction module utilizes the partial semantic aggregation
paradigm, facilitated by a ViT, to accomplish representation reconstruction. (b) Typical computational process of self-attention in the basic ViT block,
as outlined in [7], is as follows. (c) Schematic illustrates the partial semantic aggregation paradigm.

local representations that possess discriminative local semantic
information.
Unsupervised VAD methods lack prior knowledge about
defects, including their sizes. To capture local structural representations across various scales, we employ a multiscale
feature extraction strategy. Specifically, different levels of
CNN possess feature maps with distinct receptive field sizes.
Hence, we selectively extract features from multiple CNN levels. To enable the fusion of these multiscale features, we first
adjust them to a consistent spatial size through interpolation.
Subsequently, we concatenate these features along the channel
dimension. This process yields the multiscale discriminative
local representation F ∈ RH×W×C .
By utilizing deep feature maps instead of low-level pixel
representations, we exploit the advantages of capturing receptive information with local semantics. F provides a more
locally discriminative representation of the input image, which
enhances our ability to reveal and detect anomalous patterns.
This approach allows us to leverage the power of the pretrained CNN’s learned features to improve the accuracy and
robustness of our anomaly detection framework.

Algorithm 1 Reconstruction by PSA
Input: Input feature F
Hyper-parameters: Patch size P; Subset number N
Result: Reconstructed feature F̃
1 Step1.Embed the F into sequence: X = E(F, P);
∗
2 Step2.Given the auxiliary aggregation sequence X ;
∗
3 Step3.Randomly divide X into N disjoint token
subsets:
N
∗
∗
∗
4 Xi , i = {1, . . . , N }| ∪i Xi = X
= D(X ∗ , N );
5 Step4.for i = 1, . . . , N do
6
Replace the corresponding tokens in X with Xi∗ :
8i = Xi∗ ∪ ∁X Xi∗ ;
7 end
8 Step5.Encode the 8 = {8i , i = {1, . . . , N }} with
Enc:Z8 = {Z 81 , Z 82 , . . . , Z 8 N } = Enc(8);
9 Step6.for i = 1, . . . , N do
10
Retain the aggregation tokens embedding in Z 8i :
Z X ∗ = Z X ∗ ∪ Z 8i (Xi∗ );
11 end
12 Step7.Decode the Z X ∗ with Dec: F̃ = Dec(Z X ∗ );
13 return F̃

D. Global Feature Reconstruction With PSA-VT
In order to address the requirement for global semantic
awareness in scalable multicategory VAD, we propose the
partial semantics aggregation paradigm driven by ViTs. This
paradigm aims to reconstruct the extracted representation F
from a global semantic perspective. The reconstruction process
employing partial semantic aggregation is succinctly outlined

in Algorithm 1, accompanied by a visual representation of
each sequential step illustrated in Fig. 4(a).
First, to facilitate the processing of the 2-D feature maps,
we initially reshape F ∈ RH×W×C along the spatial dimension. This reshaping operation transforms the feature maps
into a sequence of flattened 2-D patches, each having a size

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 4. (a) Working principle of the PSA-VT. Each step in Algorithm 1 is shown in this figure, respectively. (b) Schematic of the partial semantic aggregation
process, where auxiliary aggregation tokens in each subset establish long-distance semantic dependencies with its disjoint patch tokens. (c) Comparison of the
self-attention mechanism between the vanilla transformer and the proposed partial semantic aggregation transformer, the vanilla transformer has a tendency
to focus on its local information when performing the reconstruction task, while the partial semantics aggregation transformer establishes long-range global
semantic dependencies.

of P × P × C, which are then mapped into D dimensional
embeddings. This division strategy enables the construction of
a feature patch sequence X with a shape of (HW)/P 2 × D.
By employing this patch-level division approach, we ensure a
more efficient computational process.
In this article, we present a novel self-supervised approach
based on ViTs for the global reconstruction task of feature
patch token sequence X . As elaborated in Section III-A,
the direct utilization of feature patch token sequences for
self-reconstruction often leads to the “identical mapping problem.” To alleviate this challenge, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a),
we introduce an auxiliary aggregation token sequence denoted
by X ∗ to facilitate the reconstruction of the feature patch
token sequence X . To enable effective reconstruction of X ,
the auxiliary aggregation token sequence X ∗ is meticulously
designed to match the shape of the feature patch token
sequence X , ensuring that each feature patch token corresponds to a counterpart auxiliary aggregation token. To tackle
this reconstruction task, we introduce a novel technique termed
“partial semantic aggregation” for achieving self-supervised
global reconstruction of the feature patch token sequence.
The operational framework of partial semantic aggregation
is systematically illustrated in Fig. 4(a), delineating each step
of the process. To incorporate long-range semantic dependencies effectively, in step 3, we employ a random token
sequence division strategy for X ∗ , breaking it down into N
distinct subsets denoted by (X1 , X2∗ , . . . , X N∗ ), where each
subset consists of (1/N ) aggregation tokens. Conversely, for

X , a complementary partitioning approach is adopted. Specifically, this involves ensuring that the tokens within each subset
of X and the tokens within the corresponding subset of X ∗
exhibit a complementary positional distribution. Subsequently,
in step 4, we merge N corresponding subsets that were
partitioned from X ∗ and X , giving rise to the generation of
N new sequences

8 = 81 , 82 , . . . , 8 N |8i = Xi∗ ∪ ∁X Xi∗ , i = 1, . . . , N
(3)
where ∁X X i ∗ represents the feature patch tokens within each
sequence that do not overlap with the aggregation tokens from
the positioning perspective. Thus, for these N sequences, each
sequence 8i consists of aggregation tokens comprising (1/N )
of the total tokens, while the remaining (N − 1)/N proportion
is comprised of disjoint feature patch tokens.
In step 5, we feed this collection of sequences 8 into
the transformer encoder. This process yields a latent space
representation for each sequence within the set: Z8 =
{Z 81 , Z 82 , . . . , Z 8 N }. During the encoding phase, the transformer effectively aggregates partial semantic information
from the feature patch tokens into the aggregation tokens,
leveraging long-range semantic dependencies, as illustrated
in Fig. 4(b). The aggregation tokens within each sequence
capture global contextual normality information from their
respective nonoverlapping feature patch tokens. Moving to the
latent space in step 6, we eliminate the feature tokens within

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

each sequence, as they may potentially contain abnormal
information. Instead, we only extract the aggregation tokens
from each sequence and recombine them to form a complete
sequence, denoted by Z X ∗ . Subsequently, in step 7, we pass
Z X ∗ through the decoder to execute the reconstruction task
on the feature patch sequence. Finally, the resulting sequence
is remapped to the 2-D space, yielding the reconstructed
feature F̃.
Fig. 4(c) presents a comparison between traditional transformers and our proposed partial semantic aggregation
transformers. The conventional transformers exhibit a tendency for patch tokens to prioritize their own information,
and the presence of residual connections, as mentioned earlier, can lead to trivial solutions of “identical mapping,”
where the model simply duplicates the input data, neglecting semantic considerations. In contrast, our partial semantic
aggregation transformer leverages learnable auxiliary aggregation sequences that effectively capture the normality semantics
of the original signal. As depicted in the right-hand side of
Fig. 4(c), the aggregation tokens aggregate normality information from the disjoint original patch tokens during the encoding
stage, guaranteeing high-level semantic learning through longrange dependencies. As anomalous information is not included
in the aggregation process during training, it is effectively
filtered out. This mechanism successfully prevents the occurrence of trivial abnormal reconstruction phenomena. This
method can be understood as an implicit self-supervised task,
wherein the aggregation tokens leverage the global semantic
capture ability of the transformer to reconstruct feature patch
tokens. This reconstruction is achieved by considering the
feature patch tokens that are disjoint from the target position and incorporating the long-range semantics dependencies.
Consequently, it offers an efficient reconstruction-based VAD
approach that effectively avoids abnormal reconstruction.
E. Objective Function for Training
In the proposed framework, only the feature reconstruction module requires optimization. To accomplish this task,
we employ a loss function that considers both the distance and
direction within the high-dimensional feature space. Specifically, given the input representation F ∈ RH×W×C and
its corresponding reconstruction obtained through PSA-VT,
denoted by F̃ ∈ RH×W×C , the reconstruction error can be
measured as follows:

1
ℓ F, F̃ =
H(× W
!)


F · F̃
2
×
F − F̃ 2 + λ × 1 −
.
∥F∥ × F̃
(4)
The relative contributions of the two loss terms are balanced
by the hyperparameter λ, which is empirically set to 5.
F. Anomaly Detection for Inference
Given that PSA-VT only employs normal samples during
the training phase for optimization, its capability lies in

5004217

accurately reconstructing normal samples. However, abnormal
samples that deviate from the established normal semantics
tend to induce substantial reconstruction errors. Consequently,
the disparity between the extracted representation of an input
sample and its corresponding reconstruction can be leveraged
as a criterion for anomaly detection
!
F · F̃
2
(5)
A = F − F̃ 2 ⊗ 1 −
∥F∥ × F̃
where A ∈ RH×W is the anomaly score map and the ⊗
denotes the element-wise multiplication. For each position,
the channel-wise mean value is calculated and assigned as
the anomaly score. To match the spatial resolution of the
anomaly map with that of the input image, an interpolation
operation is employed. Furthermore, to suppress noise, the
final anomaly map undergoes a Gaussian filtering process.
Subsequently, we choose to utilize the standard deviation of
the anomaly score map as the image-level anomaly score since
the anomalous samples obviously have high reconstruction
errors.
G. Interpretability
In the industrial domain, the interpretability of deep learning
models, particularly with regard to black-box models, holds
significant importance. This is primarily due to the necessity
of model debugging during adaptation to new environments.
Blind debugging processes can lead to substantial resource
wastage in terms of both manpower and time. Fortunately, our
PSA-VT model stands out as a highly interpretable solution.
First and foremost, PSA-VT boasts a minimal number of
hyperparameters that require adjustment. When it comes to
training, the only hyperparameter in consideration is the loss
weight parameter λ, which exerts limited influence on the
model’s detection performance. Furthermore, PSA-VT’s training procedure negates the need for collecting defect samples
and eliminates the cumbersome labeling processes that often
accompany traditional training workflows. In contrast, the
PSA-VT training phase only calls for the collection of a
specified quantity of defect-free samples. Most importantly,
the interpretability of PSA-VT can be substantiated through
the direct visualization of its feature reconstruction results (see
Section IV-F4). Diverging from the abstract features generated by conventional classification-based methods, PSA-VT
adopts the reconstruction paradigm and effectively addresses
the shortcut learning problem in traditional approaches.
As a result, the feature reconstruction outcomes provided by
PSA-VT offer a direct and comprehensible means of validating
the model’s training progress, making it a useful tool for
practitioners.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL V ERIFICATION
A. Dataset Details
In this section, we undertake an evaluation of the PSA-VT’s
performance on various publicly available benchmarks to
ascertain its effectiveness. To be precise, we utilized three
industrial datasets: Mvtec AD [24], Mvtec 3D [25], and

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF E XPERIMENTAL I NDUSTRIAL AND S EMANTIC DATASETS

beanTech Anomaly Detection (BTAD) [26], as well as three
semantic datasets: MNIST [27], Fashion-MNIST [28], and
CIFAR-10 [29], for the purpose of this assessment. Table I
presents the concise summaries of the datasets utilized in our
investigation. In order to ensure a fair comparison, we adhered
to the dataset splits as originally outlined in the respective publications, thereby creating dedicated training and testing sets,
and no data augmentation was used. For more comprehensive
insights into the specifics of these datasets, we encourage
referring to the corresponding references.
The Mvtec AD [24] dataset has gained significant popularity
in the domain of unsupervised VAD. This dataset encompasses 15 categories, including ten object categories and five
texture categories, encompassing a total of 3629 defect-free
training images, as well as 1258 defective images featuring
various defects and 467 defect-free images for testing. Notably,
in order to verify the scalability of different methods in
a single-model-multicategory scenario, we adopt a strategy
of training all 15 categories simultaneously, deviating from
existing methods that train on individual categories separately.
Recently, Mvtec Software GmbH introduced the MVTec3D
[25] dataset, which serves as a fresh benchmark primarily
designed for the detection of geometric anomalies in 3-D
objects. This dataset encompasses both RGB images and
3-D scans. MVTec3D comprises ten distinct classes, all of
which pertain to object categories. It is worth noting that
in the context of identifying anomalies within MVTec3D,
we exclusively leverage RGB images as input data, without
incorporating 3-D scans, as our PSA-VT framework operates
seamlessly with RGB images.
The experimental evaluation also encompasses the utilization of the BTAD dataset [26], encompassing a comprehensive
set of 2830 images categorized across three distinct classes.
Analogous to the Mvtec AD dataset, the training subset within
each category exclusively comprises nondefective samples,
while the test subset encompasses a mixture of nondefective
and defective samples. We also assessed the model’s performance within a single-model-multicategory scenario in this
dataset.
Moreover, the present study extends the task of anomaly
detection to include semantic anomaly detection, which necessitates a comprehensive understanding of object semantics. For
this purpose, we employed the MNIST [27] dataset, fashionMNIST [28] dataset, and CIFAR-10 [29] datasets. These
datasets are semantically categorized into ten distinct subcategories. We employ a methodology akin to cross validation,

wherein, during the training phase, a single subclass is exclusively designated for normal instances, while the remaining
classes are considered as abnormal instances and are not
utilized for training. The model’s performance is subsequently
evaluated by calculating the mean across all ten subclasses.
B. Evaluation Criteria
For evaluating the performance of anomaly detection at both
the image level and pixel level, we follow the established
practice in previous studies. The area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUROC) is employed as the
primary quantitative evaluation metric, along with the average
precision (AP). In addition, we also employed the normalized
area under the per-region overlap curve (AUPRO) [30] with
a threshold of 0.3 to serve as a more refined indicator of
localization accuracy. Higher values for all metrics indicate
better performance in anomaly detection.
C. Implementation Setup
In the local feature representation module, we leverage
the existing knowledge of a pretrained CNN to extract local
descriptors. Specifically, we utilize the EfficientNet-b4 CNN
model as our default choice. To achieve multiscale feature
extraction, we extract feature maps from the first four convolution modules of the model. These intermediate feature maps
are initially resized to a consistent spatial size of 32 × 32 and
subsequently fused in the channel dimension. Consequently,
the input image I is transformed into a high-dimensional
tensor F ∈ R32×32×272 .
In the global feature reconstruction module, we employed
a transformer architecture similar to the masked AE (MAE)
[20]. To optimize computational efficiency, we reduced the
embedding dimension D to 240. In the context of the partial
semantic aggregation paradigm, we conducted embedding of
the obtained representations at the patch level, with a patch
size of P = 2. Furthermore, the default setting for the number
of subsets N in the partition is set to 4.
Regarding the architectural implementation of PSA-VT,
we have chosen to utilize the PyTorch 1.7.0 deep learning
framework. Specifically, for the implementation of the EfficientNet and MAE network structures, we have adopted existing publicly available implementations1,2 to ensure consistency
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/mae
2 https://github.com/lukemelas/EfficientNet-PyTorch

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

5004217

TABLE II
AUROC AND AP R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS IN MVT EC AD AT B OTH THE I MAGE L EVEL AND P IXEL L EVEL

and accuracy. Furthermore, the source code of PSA-VT is
openly accessible. Interested readers and researchers can
access the code at the following link.3
The representation module within the entire model does not
require training. However, we train the reconstruction module
for a total of 400 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a
batch size of 8 and a learning rate of 1e−4. Each image in
the dataset undergoes preprocessing steps, including resizing
it to 256 × 256 dimensions and normalization using the mean
and standard deviation derived from the ImageNet dataset. All
experiments are performed on a desktop computer with an
Intel Xeon4 Gold 6226R CPU operating at 2.90 GHz and two
NVIDIA A100 GPUs having 40 GB of memory.
D. Comparative Experiments
In this section, we undertake an extensive comparative
analysis of the PSA-VT model in contrast to existing methodologies. To commence, we assess the performance of PSA-VT
against SOTA models in the proposed scenario of multicategory scalability training using industrial datasets. Furthermore,
we delve into comparative experiments on semantic anomaly
datasets to validate the high-level semantic discrimination
capability of PSA-VT.
It is crucial to highlight that the performance results reported
for the compared methods in their original publications are
based on the conventional single-category training paradigm.
In order to ensure an equitable evaluation within the context
of scalable multicategory training techniques, we rigorously
conducted assessments by replicating the compared methods
using publicly accessible source code. To elaborate, during the
training phase, we trained a comprehensive model on a dataset
encompassing all categories within that dataset. It should also
be emphasized that no fine-tuning was employed during the
testing phase.
3 https://github.com/hmyao22/PSA
4 Registered trademark.

Fig. 5.
Comparison results of PSA-VT with the existing advanced
reconstruction-based methods on Mvtec AD dataset.

1) Mvtec AD Comparison Result: The PSA-VT model is
first compared with several SOTA methods on Mvtec AD
dataset under the multicategory scalability training scenario,
such as FastFlow [31] which utilizes normalizing flow, the
two-stage reconstruction-discrimination method Draem [16]
that employs simulated defects, Padim [9] that is based on
normal distribution modeling, Patchcore [8] that uses normal
sample memory, and the RD4AD [32] method based on inverse
knowledge distillation.
Table II presents the quantitative results of the experiments.
The proposed PSA-VT model achieves image-/pixel-level
AUROC scores of 96.4/96.9 and image-/pixel-level AP
scores of 98.6/50.9 across all 15 categories. Compared
with the suboptimal RD4AD method, PSA-VT improves the
image-/pixel-level AUROC by 0.3 and 1.1 and the image-/
pixel-level AP by 0.5 and 1.0, respectively, and significantly outperforms the other competing methods. PSA-VT
obtains the highest or second-highest combined accuracy in

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 6. Qualitative results of various methods for anomaly localization in the scalable running mode on the Mvtec AD dataset. Ground truth annotations are
indicated by yellow outlines.

ten categories out of all categories. Notably, PSA-VT shows
significant performance improvement for some of the most
challenging categories with complex semantics, such as transistor and cable classes.
Since our proposed method belongs to the reconstructionbased category, and to evaluate its performance, we compared
it with several SOTA methods within the same category. These
methods include RIAD [13], DFR [17], and multihierarchical bidirectional pretrained feature mapping (MB-PFM) [1],
which are CNN-based approaches. In addition, we considered
AnoViT [33], MSTUet [23], and U-transformer [22], which
are transformer-based approaches.
RIAD addresses image reconstruction by formulating it as
an inpainting problem, aiming to avoid reconstructing defects
in the process. DFR, on the other hand, goes beyond simple
image reconstruction and focuses on feature reconstruction.
Utilizing mappings between different pretrained feature
spaces, MB-FPM is a recent advanced model. AnoViT
employs a transformer encoder to capture global semantics
during image reconstruction. In the MSTUet framework, the
image inpainting model leverages the long-distance semantic
capture capability of the Swin transformer. Abnormal segmentation is accomplished by incorporating synthetic defects and
a CNN-based discriminant network. Finally, the U-transformer
adopts an U-shaped transformer architecture to facilitate
feature reconstruction.
As illustrated in Fig. 5, our method demonstrates superior performance compared with other reconstruction-based
approaches. Specifically, compared with the suboptimal
MB-PFM [1], we achieve a significant improvement of
6.3/2.6 in AUROC and 3.3/7.5 in AP.
Furthermore, the qualitative detection outcomes of several
samples are illustrated in Fig. 6. The results reveal that
DRAEM exhibits significant missed detections, while other
methods produce imprecise localization outcomes. In contrast,

our approach demonstrates the most precise and accurate
detection outcomes. We also provide quantitative comparison
results of the AUPRO [30] to the false-positive rate of 0.3 for
each method, which further highlights the superiority of our
proposed scheme in accurately localizing defects.
2) Mvtec 3-D Comparison Result: Table III provides a
detailed breakdown of pixel-level AUPRO results, focusing
on category-by-category comparisons between PSA-VT and
several other methods, including baseline methods such as
GAN, AE, and VM [25], as well as the recent SOTA methods
3-D ST [34]/2-D ST [30]. It is noteworthy that while 2-D
ST and PSA-VT utilize 2-D RGB information, the other
methods rely on 3-D information derived from voxels, depth
maps, or point clouds. The results showcase the performance of PSA-VT under individual single-category training
[PSA-VT(I)] and scalable multicategory training settings
[PSA-VT(S)], highlighting its SOTA capabilities, surpassing
both the baselines and the recent SOTA method ST. Some
qualitative results are displayed in Fig. 7.
Several key observations can be gleaned from the experimental results. First, despite exclusively utilizing RGB pixel
information, PSA-VT outperforms other methods that rely on
stereo information, such as the suboptimal method 3-D ST.
This finding underscores the effectiveness of using RGB information alone for detecting stereo geometric defects, primarily
because geometric anomalies often manifest as alterations
in RGB values. While the combination of depth and RGB
information from various modalities can enhance localization
performance, it is important to note that stereo vision sensors
incur additional costs. PSA-VT’s ability to achieve superior
results solely with RGB pixel information underscores its
cost-effectiveness and versatility.
Furthermore, PSA-VT exhibits comparable performance
in both the individual single-category training paradigm
[PSA-VT (I)] and the scalable multicategory training

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

5004217

TABLE III
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON OF AUPRO FOR VARIOUS M ETHODS ON THE M VTEC 3-D DATASET

Fig. 7.

Qualitative results of PSA-VT for anomaly localization on the Mvtec 3-D dataset.

TABLE IV
C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR THE BTAD DATASET

TABLE V
C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR THE H IGH -L EVEL S EMANTIC
A NOMALY D ETECTION TASK

Fig. 8. Qualitative anomaly localization results of PSA-VT on BTAD dataset.
From top to bottom: abnormal samples, anomaly score maps, and ground
truths.

paradigm [PSA-VT (S)]. This highlights its robust
generalization capabilities, as it accurately detects product
anomalies across all ten categories using a common model
weight.
3) BTAD Comparison Result: Table IV lists a qualitative
comparison of PSA-VT with several existing SOTA methods

Fig. 9. Antinoise robustness test results of PSA-VT. Qualitative detection
results of PSA-VT for various noise samples (top). RAW: original image, GN:
Gaussian noise, RB: random brightness, RC: random contrast, and BL: blur.
Quantitative results of PSA-VT on the Mvtec AD dataset with/without noise
(bottom).

PatchSVDD [35], DFR [17], Padim [9], Draem [16], MSFD
[36], CFLOW [37], and PMAD [38] in terms of anomaly
detection and localization for the BTAD dataset. We present

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

TABLE VI
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF M ODEL ROBUSTNESS IN THE S CALABLE M ODE , RUNNING E FFICIENCY, AND M EMORY C ONSUMPTION

results for both single-class training and multiclass training
scenarios. In both cases, PSA-VT demonstrates the optimal
performance in image-level anomaly detection and pixel-level
anomaly localization. In comparison to the most recent PMAD
(AAAI2023) method, PSA-VT exhibits notable improvements
in image pixel-level AURPO. Specifically, we achieve a gain
of +1.9/0.2 and +1.5/0.3 in the two respective training modes,
underscoring the effectiveness of our approach. Fig. 8 provides
illustrative examples of anomaly localization performed by
PSA-VT on the BTAD dataset.
4) Semantic Anomaly Comparison Result: Our PSA-VT
approach introduces auxiliary aggregation tokens to transform
the low-level reconstruction task into a high-level regression task, which is particularly significant for semantic-level
anomaly detection. In this section, we present an evaluation of
the performance of PSA-VT on semantic anomaly detection.
To this end, we compare the results obtained by PSA-VT with
those obtained by some SOTA methods for semantic anomaly
detection, such as GANomaly [39], LSA [40], ARAE [41],
and ARNet [42], as well as Padim [9], a method designed for
industrial defect detection.
The results of the comparison are presented in Table V.
It is observed that while Padim shows promising outcomes in
low-level tasks such as industrial anomaly detection, it suffers from significant performance degradation in high-level
semantic anomaly detection tasks. This suggests that Padim
is only effective in detecting anomalies with local structural
damage and is unable to handle semantic anomalies. Compared
with the other methods for semantic anomaly detection, our
approach ranks second, with suboptimal performance compared with ARNet. However, according to the original research
paper of ARNet [42], the method only achieved 83.9 AUROC
for industrial anomaly detection tasks, which is much lower
than the outcomes achieved in this study.
E. Model Robustness and Efficiency Assessment
In this section, we aim to assess the robustness and efficiency of the model on several fronts. First, we will evaluate
the model’s robustness against noise. Second, we will explore
the model’s scalability robustness, particularly when transitioning from single-class anomaly detection to the multiclass

anomaly detection scenario as proposed. Finally, we will
conduct an assessment of the computational complexity of the
model.
1) Robustness Evaluation Against Noise: In this experimental investigation, we examined the influence of noise
introduction on the data on the performance of PSA-VT.
Specifically, we applied random data augmentation techniques
using the Albumentations library [43] to process image samples. These augmentation techniques included the introduction
of Gaussian noise, random alterations in brightness and contrast, as well as blurring. The resulting images with added
noise were then used for testing purposes.
The top section of Fig. 9 visually illustrates the qualitative
impact of several typical noise types on the detection outcomes
achieved by the PSA-VT method, while the bottom section
provides quantitative metrics for evaluation. Our findings indicate that the presence of noise in the sample images does not
significantly compromise the overall performance of PSA-VT.
This observation underscores the robustness of our approach
to handling noisy data.
2) Robustness Evaluation of Model Scalability: In order
to address the challenges faced by traditional VAD methods
in real industrial scenarios, we propose a novel approach
in this study: the scalable operating mode. Traditional VAD
methods often encounter memory issues as they require storing
model parameters separately for each category. In contrast, the
scalable VAD method only requires a single set of parameters
for different types, making it more suitable for high-efficiency
requirements in industrial environments.
However, the scalable operating mode places high demands
on the robustness of model scalability, as it requires the model
to learn normal distributions of multiple types simultaneously,
which presents a greater challenge. In order to thoroughly evaluate the models, we conducted evaluations under two distinct
modes of operation: the “Individual” mode, which aligns with
the traditional approach of employing one model per category,
and the “Scalable” mode, which represents a novel strategy of
utilizing a single model for multiple categories.
The experimental results, as presented in Table VI, indicate
the performance of our proposed PSA-VT method under
both the traditional “Individual” mode and the more challeng-

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

ing “Scalable” mode. In the traditional “Individual” mode,
PSA-VT achieves competitive results compared with SOTA
models, such as FastFlow, Draem, and Patchcore, although it
does not surpass them. However, when the existing methods
are switched to the “Scalable” mode, significant performance
drops are observed in both image-level and pixel-level detection accuracy for the compared models. For instance, the
SOTA model FastFlow experiences a drop of 12.3 and 6.7,
and Patchcore experiences a drop of 13.8 and 3.0. This
performance degradation can be attributed to the fact that these
methods primarily focus on extracting local information while
neglecting global semantics. The performance degradation of
RD4AD, which incorporates a bottleneck structure to capture
global semantics, is mitigated to some extent.
In contrast, our PSA-VT method exhibits minimal performance degradation when transitioning to the more demanding
“Scalable” mode. This impressive attribute can be attributed
to the effective capture of high-level global semantics by
our method, underscoring its robust scalability and superior
proficiency in addressing complex VAD challenges across
multiple categories. Exploring an even more rigorous scenario,
we conducted training on all categories encompassed by the
three datasets (Mvtec AD, Mvtec 3-D, and BTAD) under
examination utilizing a single model. Notably, we observed
that the model’s detection accuracy remained relatively unaffected, providing further evidence of the robust generalization
capabilities of our approach.
3) Efficiency and Consumption Evaluation: In addition to
performance evaluation, assessing model efficiency and memory consumption are crucial. In this regard, we will conduct
evaluations from the above two perspectives. For efficiency,
we will utilize floating point operations per second (FLOPs)
and frames/s (FPS) as metrics to quantify computational
efficiency. As for memory consumption, we will employ the
number of parameters as a metric to gauge model complexity.
The comparison results are presented in Table VI, showcasing the efficiency and memory consumption analysis.
In terms of efficiency, it is observed that PSA-VT, utilizing the transformer model, exhibits a lower inference speed
compared with CNN-based methods, such as FastFlow and
Dream. However, the model still achieves a commendable
13.7 FPS, which meets the requirements for real-world industrial deployment. Concerning memory consumption, PSA-VT
demonstrates a lightweight architecture, employing merely
14.59M parameters and 10.17G FLOPs. This makes it the most
resource-efficient model among the compared methods. While
other competing approaches employ more complex model
structures, their performance experiences a more substantial
decline when encountered with above mentioned scalable running mode. Notably, despite its lightweight design, PSA-VT
maintains high levels of generalization robustness, due to its
capacity to extract global high-level semantics.
F. Ablation Studies
1) Influence of the Feature Representation: In this framework, we leverage the inherent local semantic capture ability
of CNNs and introduce a local feature representation module
aimed at converting image pixels into feature representations.

5004217

Fig. 10. Impact of feature representation on image-/pixel-level detection
performance.

Fig. 11. Ablation experiments of the effect of hyperparameter subset number
N and patch size P on model performance and computational efficiency.
(a) Effect of N . (b) Impact of P.

In this section, we shall examine the efficacy of this approach
by conducting a comparative analysis between image pixels
and feature tensors. Furthermore, the performance variations
across different types of CNN architectures will also be
explored.
The findings are illustrated in Fig. 10, which provides
insights into the comparative performance of the reconstruction methods based on feature representations as opposed
to image pixels. Notably, the feature-based reconstruction
methods consistently outperform the pixel-based counterparts,
primarily due to their ability to capture more discriminative
local semantics while retaining fewer details. These characteristics enhance the discriminability of defects and reduce
the complexity associated with the reconstruction process.
Furthermore, the study reveals that different CNN architectures
exhibit varying capabilities in representing local semantics.
Shallow network architectures tend to demonstrate limited
representation abilities, while deeper networks often exhibit
a bias toward classification tasks. Notably, when considering
the PSA-VT method, EfficientNet-b4 emerges as the optimal choice, primarily due to its exceptional capability in
identifying structural damages within defects.
2) Sensitivity of the Subset Number: As outlined in
Section III-D, the implementation of a partial semantic aggregation mechanism necessitates the separation of the auxiliary
aggregation sequence X ∗ into N distinct subsets. Each subset
is then aggregated with the semantics of nonintersecting feature patch tokens. The choice of N has a direct impact on both
the detection performance and efficiency of the mechanism.
The findings from the ablation experiments regarding the
N value are presented in Fig. 11(a). In terms of detection
performance, both the image-level and pixel-level AUROC
exhibit a trend of initially increasing and then decreasing with

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

the variation of N . This observation can be attributed to the
fact that when N is too small, there is a reduced proportion
of original feature patch tokens in (3), resulting in insufficient
availability of original feature information. Conversely, when
N is excessively large, the proportion of aggregation tokens
in (3) decreases, impeding the complete aggregation of feature
patch token information. Regarding computational efficiency,
it shows an increasing trend as N increases. Consequently,
a default value of N = 4 has been selected based on these
observations.
3) Effect of the Patch Size: In contrast to existing
approaches [7], which typically employ direct element-byelement embedding projection on the CNN feature map, our
proposed method adopts a patch-level embedding strategy
on the feature map to cater to the more computationally
efficient requirements in industrial scenarios. In this section,
we investigate the impact of this strategy on the detection
performance and efficiency.
The experimental results, depicted in Fig. 11(b), demonstrate the effects of varying the value of P, which represents
the level of fine grainedness in the embedding process. As P
increases, it indicates a gradual decrease in the granularity
of the embedding, resulting in a reduction in the length of
the generated embedding sequence. Consequently, both the
detection accuracy and computational complexity exhibit a
corresponding decrease. Generally, a finer-grained embedding
method has the potential to enhance accuracy, but at the cost
of increased computational complexity.
Observations reveal that when P = 2, the detection accuracy is slightly lower compared to P = 1, while offering a
more noticeable computational complexity advantage. As a
result, we have selected a default setting of P = 2 for our
approach.
4) Effect of the Feature Reconstruction: The primary contribution of this study lies in the introduction of a novel partial
semantic aggregation mechanism, which aims to enhance
the feature reconstruction process and address the inherent challenge of trivial anomaly reconstruction in existing
reconstruction-based VAD methods. To assess the efficacy
of this mechanism, we conducted a series of experiments
as a demonstration. In particular, we utilized the vanilla
transformer model without the partial semantic aggregation
paradigm as the baseline model and then evaluated the
enhancements achieved by incorporating the partial semantic
aggregation paradigm.
Initially, we will visualize the outcomes of the refactoring process. Since PSA-VT employs a feature reconstruction
strategy, direct observation is not straightforward. To provide
a more intuitive representation, we introduce a convolutional
decoder tasked with transforming the reconstructed features
into pixel values. The results are depicted in the top section
of Fig. 12. It can be observed that in the case of the Mvtec AD
dataset, the baseline model utilizes the “identical mapping” of
the duplicated input, leading to the reconstruction of abnormal
patterns. This is not conducive to the reconstruction-based
VAD method. In contrast, our proposed method successfully
restores abnormal defects to their normal patterns. This is
evident even in challenging scenarios, such as samples with

Fig. 12. Effect of feature reconstruction. (a) Original defective samples,
(b) reconstruction results using the vanilla transformer, and (c) reconstruction
results using PSA-VT (top). The models are trained on digit “2” for the
MNIST sample. Quantitative results comparing the vanilla transformer and
PSA-VT (bottom).

missing transistors, where our method is capable of generating
normal patterns.
The quantitative performance improvements resulting from
this enhancement are depicted in the top part of Fig. 12.
The introduction of the partial semantic aggregation mechanism has yielded significant enhancements to the baseline
model. Specifically, the industrial VAD task on the Mvtec AD
dataset, it has led to improvements of 12.0 and 6.8 in imagelevel/pixel-level AUROC detection performance, as well as
6.2 and 20.5 in image-level and pixel-level AP detection
performance, respectively, when compared with the baseline.
In the case of high-level semantic VAD tasks, the incorporation
of the partial semantic aggregation paradigm has resulted in
an increase of nearly or exceeding 10 in AUROC detection
performance at the image level across the three datasets:
MNIST, fashion MNIST, and CIFAR. These findings effectively validate the efficacy of the partial semantic aggregation
mechanism in enhancing the reconstruction process.
5) Attention Visualization: This section presents a detailed
analysis of the PSA-VT model’s attention matrix through
visualization. Fig. 13 shows the comparison of the attention matrix of the PSA-VT model with that of a vanilla
transformer. The comparison reveals two essential characteristics of the PSA-VT attention matrix. First, the attention
matrix of the vanilla transformer shows a strong inclination
toward a position-based attention pattern [44], as evidenced
by its large diagonal elements. This pattern implies that query
tokens primarily focus on themselves and their immediate
surroundings. Conversely, the PSA-VT attention matrix has
relatively small diagonal elements, indicating that each token

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

5004217

Fig. 13.
Attention matrix visualization results. The vanilla transformer
model has a higher tendency toward the relative position-based attention
pattern [44], while the PSA-VT model displays a stronger inclination toward
the content-based attention pattern [44]. This suggests that PSA-VT has a
better capability to extract high-level semantics related to objects. Partial
enlargements are provided for ease of observation. The attention matrix is
obtained by averaging all layers and heads of the encoder.
Fig. 15. (a) Detection results of different types of defects by the PSA-VT.
(b) Quantitative comparison of the different training approaches.

To elaborate, we define two models—old and new—using the
model trained on the Mvtec AD dataset as the foundation.
Subsequently, the new model is trained on the BC-AD dataset
with a new reconstruction task, while mimicking the reconstruction behavior of the old model on the Mvtec AD dataset
to prevent catastrophic forgetting. As a result, the new model
is fine tuned using the distillation loss and reconstruction loss
˜M , F˜M  + (1 − ∂) · ℓ F˜B , F B 
L = ∂ · ℓ FN
(6)
|
{z O } |
{z N N }
Fig. 14. AOI equipment for bottle cap defect inspection (left). (a) Overall
equipment. (b) Inspection module. (c) Delivery module. Samples of normal
and defective bottle caps (right).

has a wider semantic reach and can establish long-range
semantic connections with other tokens. This feature allows
our method to avoid trivial reconstruction shortcuts caused by
a narrow self-attention. Second, the attention matrix displays a
content-based attention pattern resembling vertical bars [44],
implying that certain key tokens have high attention values
for all query tokens. This property suggests that PSA-VT can
extract high-level semantics for objects.
G. Practical Application
Fig. 14 presents the implementation of PSA-VT in our
automatic optical inspection (AOI) equipment for bottle cap
anomaly detection (BC-AD), which further validates the
effectiveness of our model.
1) Fast Adaptation With Incremental Learning: It is noteworthy that the generalized ability of the proposed model,
a crucial attribute for practical industrial applications, has been
demonstrated in this application. Specifically, the proposed
model leverages the model trained on the Mvtec AD dataset as
the base model and adopts incremental learning [45] for fine
tuning when a new type of sample is introduced for inspection.
This approach not only saves time and computational resources
but also demonstrates the versatility and adaptability of the
proposed model in addressing real industrial scenarios.
Drawing inspiration from [45], we have adopted an incremental learning approach based on knowledge distillation.

Distillation

Reconstruction

˜M and F˜M represent the reconstructed features of the
where FN
O
old and new models for random exemplars in the Mvtec AD
B
B
dataset, while F˜N
, FN
denote the extracted and reconstructed
features of the new model for new samples in the BC-AD
dataset. The weight hyperparameter is represented as ∂.
Fig. 15(a) depicts the inspection outcomes that demonstrate
the high accuracy of the proposed approach in detecting all
types of BS-AD defects. Fig. 15(b) presents the quantitative
performance comparison among different training methods.
The results indicate that fine-tuning strategies exhibit a faster
convergence rate compared to the retraining method. Furthermore, direct fine tuning on the BC-AD dataset would cause
catastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge from
the Mvtec AD dataset. However, the incremental learning
method can prevent this issue while ensuring performance on
both datasets.
2) High-Throughput Inference With Efficient Deployment:
In real industrial applications, with the aim of harnessing the full potential of inference efficiency, we undertook
additional optimization of the PSA-VT model utilizing the
TensorRT [46] SDK. As a result, the model’s execution
speed significantly improved, achieving a commendable rate
of approximately 30 FPS. This level of performance aptly
satisfies the requirements for high-speed detection within
industrial settings.
V. C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
In this study, we propose a novel hybrid framework called
PSA-VT for scalable multicategory industrial VAD tasks.

5004217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

PSA-VT consists of two key modules: a local feature representation module based on CNN and a global feature
reconstruction module based on ViT. The primary contribution
of this article lies in the introduction of a partial semantic aggregation paradigm within the reconstruction module,
which significantly enhances the global semantic acquisition
capability during the reconstruction process and addresses the
limitations of conventional reconstruction-based methods that
often suffer from the identical mapping problem.
We have conducted comprehensive evaluations of PSA-VT
on multiple widely used benchmarks, including industrial
and semantic VAD. The results demonstrate that PSA-VT
achieves superior performance across various metrics, particularly in challenging scenarios involving scalable multicategory
detection tasks. Furthermore, we have conducted thorough
ablation experiments to shed light on the inner workings
of the proposed framework. Moreover, we have successfully demonstrated the practical applicability of PSA-VT by
achieving rapid adaptation to real-world deployments through
incremental learning in real industrial settings.
While the partial semantic aggregation process, being a
multisubset parallel operation, does have a certain impact
on computational efficiency, we recognize the importance
of addressing this issue and mitigating it using deployment
tools. In future research, we aim to develop more efficient
solutions by improving the intrinsic attention mechanism of
the ViT, thereby further enhancing the overall efficiency of
the framework.
R EFERENCES
[1] Q. Wan, L. Gao, X. Li, and L. Wen, “Unsupervised image anomaly
detection and segmentation based on pretrained feature mapping,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2330–2339, Mar. 2023.
[2] H. Yao, W. Yu, and X. Wang, “A feature memory rearrangement network
for visual inspection of textured surface defects toward edge intelligent
manufacturing,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2616–
2635, Oct. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2022.3204368.
[3] H. Yang, Q. Zhou, K. Song, and Z. Yin, “An anomaly feature-editingbased adversarial network for texture defect visual inspection,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 2220–2230, Mar. 2021.
[4] X. Tao, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Liu, H. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Detection
of power line insulator defects using aerial images analyzed with
convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. Syst.,
vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1486–1498, Apr. 2020.
[5] H. Dong, K. Song, Y. He, J. Xu, Y. Yan, and Q. Meng, “PGANet: Pyramid feature fusion and global context attention network for
automated surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16,
no. 12, pp. 7448–7458, Dec. 2020.
[6] J. Yang, Y. Shi, and Z. Qi, “Learning deep feature correspondence for
unsupervised anomaly detection and segmentation,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 132, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 108874.
[7] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[8] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
“Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 14298–14308.
[9] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489.
[10] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[11] P. Xing and Z. Li, “Visual anomaly detection via partition memory bank module and error estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3596–3607, Aug. 2023, doi:
10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3237562.

[12] Y. Yan, D. Wang, G. Zhou, and Q. Chen, “Unsupervised anomaly
segmentation via multilevel image reconstruction and adaptive attentionlevel transition,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[13] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 107706.
[14] A. de Nardin, P. Mishra, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti, “Bringing
attention to image anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal.
Process., Lecce, Italy, May 2022, pp. 115–126. 0
[15] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13566–13576.
[16] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discriminatively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
pp. 8330–8339.
[17] Y. Shi, J. Yang, and Z. Qi, “Unsupervised anomaly segmentation
via deep feature reconstruction,” Neurocomputing, vol. 424, pp. 9–22,
Feb. 2021.
[18] X. Tao, D. Zhang, W. Ma, Z. Hou, Z. Lu, and C. Adak, “Unsupervised
anomaly detection for surface defects with dual-siamese network,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7707–7717, Nov. 2022.
[19] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
[20] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988.
[21] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal. Process. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2022, pp. 394–406.
[22] L. Chen, Z. You, N. Zhang, J. Xi, and X. Le, “UTRAD: Anomaly
detection and localization with U-Transformer,” Neural Netw., vol. 147,
pp. 53–62, Mar. 2022.
[23] J. Jiang et al., “Masked Swin transformer UNet for industrial anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 2200–2209,
Feb. 2023.
[24] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[25] P. Bergmann, X. Jin, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The MVTec 3D-AD
dataset for unsupervised 3D anomaly detection and localization,” 2021,
arXiv:2112.09045.
[26] P. Mishra, R. Verk, D. Fornasier, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti,
“VT-ADL: A vision transformer network for image anomaly detection
and localization,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. (ISIE),
Jun. 2021, pp. 01–06.
[27] Y. LeCun. (1998). MNIST Database of Handwritten Digits. [Online].
Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
[28] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-MNIST: A novel
image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” 2017,
arXiv:1708.07747.
[29] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Tech. Rep. TR-2009, 2009.
[30] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191.
[31] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
[32] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
[33] Y. Lee and P. Kang, “AnoViT: Unsupervised anomaly detection and
localization with vision transformer-based encoder–decoder,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 46717–46724, 2022.
[34] P. Bergmann and D. Sattlegger, “Anomaly detection in 3D point clouds
using deep geometric descriptors,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf.
Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 2612–2622.
[35] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly
detection and segmentation,” in Proc. Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2020.
[36] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 14902–
14912.

YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT

[37] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.,
2022, pp. 98–107.
[38] X. Yao, C. Zhang, R. Li, J. Sun, and Z. Liu, “One-for-all: Proposal
masked cross-class anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4792–4800.
[39] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Ganomaly: Semisupervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. Asian
Conf. Comput. Vis., Perth, WA, Australia, Dec. 2018, pp. 622–637.
[40] D. Abati, A. Porrello, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara, “Latent space
autoregression for novelty detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 481–490.
[41] M. Salehi et al., “ARAE: Adversarially robust training of autoencoders
improves novelty detection,” Neural Netw., vol. 144, pp. 726–736,
Dec. 2021.
[42] F. Ye, C. Huang, J. Cao, M. Li, Y. Zhang, and C. Lu, “Attribute
restoration framework for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 24, pp. 116–127, 2022.
[43] A. Buslaev, V. I. Iglovikov, E. Khvedchenya, A. Parinov, M. Druzhinin,
and A. A. Kalinin, “Albumentations: Fast and flexible image augmentations,” Information, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 125, Feb. 2020.
[44] K. Kim et al., “Rethinking the self-attention in vision transformers,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops
(CVPRW), Jun. 2021, pp. 3065–3069.
[45] Y. Wu et al., “Large scale incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 374–382.
[46] O. Shafi, C. Rai, R. Sen, and G. Ananthanarayanan, “Demystifying
TensorRT: Characterizing neural network inference engine on Nvidia
edge devices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Workload Characterization
(IISWC), Nov. 2021, pp. 226–237.

Haiming Yao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree (Hons.) from the School
of Mechanical Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the Department of Precision
Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
His research interests include visual anomaly
detection, deep learning, visual understanding, and
artificial intelligence for science.
Mr. Yao serves as a reviewer for several journals,
such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS and L EARNING
S YSTEMS and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING.

Wei Luo (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from the School of Mechanical Science and
Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2023. He is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of
Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China.
His research interests include deep learning,
anomaly detection, and machine vision.

5004217

Jianan Lou (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.Eng. degree in navigation engineering
and the B.Ec. degree in economics from Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China, in 2022. He is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of
Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China.
His research mainly focuses on multisensor fusion.

Wenyong Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in
1999 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Mechanical Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research interests include machine vision,
intelligent control, and image processing.

Xiaotian Zhang received the B.S. degree from
Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2019. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University,
Beijing.
His main research interests include anomaly detection, generative adversarial networks, and edge
computing.

Zhenfeng Qiang received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from the Shaanxi University
of Science and Technology, Xi’an, China, in 2017,
and the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from
Jilin University (JLU), Changchun, China, in 2020.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China.
His research interests include system development
of non-dispersive infrared (NIDR) sensors, artificial
intelligence, and biomechanics.

Hui Shi (Member, IEEE) received the master’s
degree from the Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2002. She is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School
of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Wuhan
University of Technology, Wuhan.
Her research interests include machine vision,
machine learning, and intelligent systems.