IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

1223

Self-Supervised Learning and Multisource
Heterogeneous Information Fusion Based Quality
Anomaly Detection for Heavy-Plate Shape
Datong Li , Jun Lu, Tongkang Zhang, and Jinliang Ding , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Plate shape quality anomaly detection suffers from
the problems of less labeled and multisource heterogeneous
(MSH) data due to the complex production process with
multi-process and multi-equipment. To address these problems,
this paper proposes a self-supervised learning framework based
on MSH contrastive learning (MSH-CL). In the proposed framework, an encoder is designed to extract the MSH information,
which contains an MSH feature extract network (MSH-FEN)
and an MSH feature fusion network (MSH-FFN). In MSH-FEN,
a two-pathway CNN network is employed to extract the MSH
feature. Then, a cross-MSH (CMSH) data fusion strategy based
on the attention mechanism is designed to characterize the relationship between the MSH data in the MSH-FFN. The learning
process consists of two phases, namely the self-supervised feature
learning phase based on the contrastive learning (CL) and the
supervised fine-tuning phase. The former phase is responsible
for training the encoder with massive unlabeled data. Then,
a classifier followed by the encoder is built with less labeled data
in the supervised fine-tuning phase, which is applied to plate
shape quality anomaly detection. Finally, the experiments are
carried out on the real-world data set collected from a heavy-plate
production process. The experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness and superiority of the proposed approach.
Note to Practitioners—This paper focuses on the problem of
shape quality anomaly detection for the heavy-plate production
process, which is crucial to steel-making. However, the most
quality-relevant data-driven modeling approaches suffer from the
problem of requiring massive labeled data. In addition, the data
generated in the practice heavy-plate production process have the
characteristics of multisource heterogeneous (MSH). Motivated
by the challenge of the less labeled and MSH data modeling, this
paper proposed a self-supervised feature learning approach to
learn a feature encoder to model the MSH data. Then, fine-tuning
is used to obtain the model to detect the plate shape quality. In the
feature encoder, a cross-MSH (CMSH) data fusion strategy is
proposed. Finally, the effectiveness of the proposed approach is
Manuscript received 27 November 2022; revised 28 February 2023;
accepted 25 March 2023. Date of publication 17 April 2023; date of current
version 9 April 2024. This article was recommended for publication by
Associate Editor X. Dai and Editor P. Zhou upon evaluation of the reviewers’
comments. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3304700, in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61988101 and
Grant 62203100, and in part by the Central Government Guides Local Science and Technology Development Funds under Grant 2022JH6/100100055.
(Corresponding authors: Jinliang Ding; Jun Lu.)
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for
Process Industries, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China (e-mail:
dtongl@163.com; junluchn@hotmail.com; tkzhang@stumail.neu.edu.cn; jlding@mail.neu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2023.3265649.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TASE.2023.3265649

demonstrated by comparing it with other advanced algorithms.
The proposed approach can be extended to other heavy-plate
quality anomaly detection problems with less labeled and MSH
data.
Index Terms— Heavy-plate, plate shape, multisource heterogeneous data, information fusion, self-supervised learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

H

EAVY-PLATE has been widely applied in ships, chemicals, buildings, etc. In the past few decades, studies
on the issues of the heavy-plate production process have
received extensive attention, such as feedback control [1],
operation optimization [2], and production scheduling [3],
[4]. Recently, researchers have attached the importance of the
problem of heavy-plate quality anomaly detection because of
the strict requirements of the contract. Generally, the quality of
heavy-plate includes five major indicators, namely shape, size,
performance, surface, and internal quality. Among them, the
plate shape is one of the most important and complex quality
indicators and is closely related to the production process.
Currently, the plate shape quality is determined by manually
evaluating the final quality control (FQC) image obtained from
a shape meter at the end of the production process, resulting in
an unavoidable time delay. Therefore, detecting the plate shape
quality conveniently and accurately is of great significance to
heavy-plate production.
The plate shape quality is difficult to detect, because the
production process consists of multi-equipment, and has the
characteristics of small batch and multi-variety. Therefore, it is
hard to establish an accurate mechanism model. In modern
industries, a large amount of data has been collected from the
actual production process, and the quality of products generally can be reflected by process variables. The data-driven
methods are more flexible than mechanism models [5]. Therefore, these methods have been widely used to address the
issues in the industrial field, such as fault diagnosis [6], [7],
process monitoring [8] and soft sensor [9], [10], which are
also available for quality prediction [11], [12], [13], [14].
For example, Lu and Ding [15] proposed a novel stochastic
configuration network with iterative learning using privileged
information for the plate shape quality detection based on the
process data.
The aforementioned methods depend decisively on massive
labeled data, which require extensive manual annotation. How-

1545-5955 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

ever, it is always difficult to obtain the labels of heavy-plate
quality, since only a part of the plates will be detected by
the shape meter. Thus, the production process data present the
less labeled characteristic. In addition, the multi-equipment
involved in the heavy-plate production process leads to the
diverse data sources. Moreover, the size of the steel plates
will change with the slabs, and the sampling frequency and
the running speed of roller also vary with different production
processes. As a result, the data structures collected from the
actual production process of steel plates exhibit multisource
heterogeneous (MSH) characteristic. Therefore, the above
imperfect attributes of the process data pose the following
challenges for detecting the heavy-plate quality:
1) Less labeled data. Most data-driven methods for industrial process modeling require a lot of labeled data,
which is often hard to acquire. Therefore, an intricate
problem is how to use the massive unlabeled process
data to assist in building a data-driven model to detect
the heavy-plate shape.
2) MSH process data. It is challenging to extract the
features of the data with MSH characteristic. Thus,
another difficult task is designing an effective feature
extraction and fusion approach for MSH data.
Recently, many researchers have paid attention to the above
challenges. For example, Bao et al. [16] proposed a co-training
partial least squares (PLS) for developing semi-supervised
soft sensors. Two PLS models are trained on two sufficient
and redundant views using the iterative learning procedure
for augmenting the training set, respectively. On this basis,
two new regressors are constructed for soft sensing. However, when the labeled data is insufficient, the correctness
of the labels obtained by such an iterative method cannot
be guaranteed, which will degrade the performance of the
learner model. With the development of pre-training trick and
transfer learning, the fine-tuning strategy is another candidate
for solving the problem of less labeled data. For example,
Yuan et al. [17] presented a stacked autoencoder based quality
prediction model with fine-tuning strategy. However, they did
not consider the MSH problem in real-world industrial data.
Because in the pre-training stage, the encoder must be trained
by calculating the reconstruction error between the decoded
and original data. Thus, it is difficult to establish an encoder
to model MSH data. More detailed methods of modeling the
less labeled industrial process data can be found in [18].
The MSH process data is present in many modern industries,
which also received much concerns [19], [20], [21], [22],
[23]. To model the MSH data, for example, the heterogeneous data are transformed into linguistic 2-tuples, but the
high-dimensional data obtained in the sensor is not taken
into account [24]. Yuan et al. [20] develop a comprehensive
decision-making framework with multi-source heterogeneous
data for selecting the most appropriate distributed energy
system composition schemes. Pan and Zhang [21] present
a predictive method to accurately estimate building energy
consumption by learning MSH data collected from buildings.
Furthermore, Bu et al. [25] constructed a method for operating
performance assessment based on MSH data, the multi-source

data features are extracted by different models. Besides,
Zhou et al. [26] use the deep learning method to extract the
features of multisource information and directly concatenate
the features of different branches as the final representation.
However, they did not consider the correlation between MSH
data.
Contrastive learning (CL) has become a popular
self-supervised representation learning framework in
recent years and achieved outstanding performance in
multiple computer vision tasks [27], [28], [29], [30]. In the
CL framework, a feature encoder is learned using data
augmentation and contrastive loss to obtain the latent codes
of the samples. Then, the encoder is used in downstream
tasks. The contrastive loss expects to repulse negative sample
pairs while attracting the positive pairs. In [28], a sample CL
framework, named SimCLR, is proposed, which combines
the multiple data augmentation methods and a nonlinear
projector to obtain the feature representation. The above
studies indicate that such a CL learning paradigm can obtain
more reasonable feature representations. It is essential to
design corresponding data augmentation according to the
characteristics of the actual problem, which will influence
the model preferences [29]. In recent studies, the CL has
been used to deal with industrial data modeling issues. For
example, contrastive loss is used as a regularization term to
train a soft sensing model [31]. As far as we know, CL is not
adopted to solve both the problems of less labeled and MSH
data for industrial data-driven modeling.
To this end, this paper proposes a novel multisource
heterogeneous contrastive learning (MSH-CL) framework,
which is a typical self-supervised representation learning
paradigm, to detect the abnormal quality of heavy-plate
shape. The contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
1) The MSH-CL framework is designed to handle the
issues of less labeled and MSH data by incorporating
CL learning, and multiple components are developed.
2) An MSH feature encoder (MSHFE) that consists of
an MSH feature extract network (MSH-FEN) and an
MSH feature fusion network (MSH-FFN) is developed
to extract the MSH information.
3) In the MSH-FEN, a two-pathway network is developed
to extract the feature of MSH data. After that, in the
MSH-FFN, an attention mechanism based cross-MSH
(CMSH) data fusion strategy is presented to characterize
the relationship between the MSH data.
4) The effectiveness of the proposed approach is verified
on the real-world data collected from the heavy-plate
production process.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. First, the process of heavy-plate production is described in Section II. Then,
the framework of quality anomaly detection for heavy-plate
shape is presented in Section III. In Section IV, the experimental results are presented and discussed. Finally, the conclusion
is given in Section V.

LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 1.

1225

The primary production process of heavy-plate.

II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
The shape quality is highly relevant to the heavy-plate
production process [32]. In this section, the primary process
of heavy-plate production is first briefly described. Then, the
relationship between the process and the plate shape, and the
characteristics of the production process data are introduced.
A. Description of Heavy-Plate Production Process
The production of heavy-plate is relatively complicated,
which includes multiple processes. A practical production
process of heavy-plate in Eastern China is shown in Fig. 1,
which mainly consists of reheating, rolling, cooling and hot
leveling process.
The reheating process contains preheating section, heating
section I, heating section II and soaking section in the heating
furnace. The steel slab enters the heating furnace and is
first heated to the target rolling temperature in the reheating
process. The following process behind the reheating process
is the rolling process, which contains a rough mill and a finish
mill, and processes the heated slab through the three stages of
forming, widening and finishing rolling. It is rolled repeatedly
to produce a steel plate that meets the required size and shape.
Subsequently, the cooling process follows the rolling process,
which contains an accelerated cooling device that can reduce
the temperature of the plate rapidly and accurately. The steel
plate is sent into the cooling process, and the plate temperature
is dropped rapidly to satisfy the designed finish cooling temperature and the requirements of low-temperature toughness,
strength, and welding performance. The hot leveling process
that contains a hot roller leveler is set behind the cooling
process, and the cooled plate is straightened to a certain extent
in this process. Therefore, the shape quality of the heavy-plate
is mainly related to the processes mentioned above.
B. Description of the Heavy-Plate Shape Quality and Data
Characteristics
The shape quality of a heavy-plate can be defined by
the flatness, rectangularity and plate crown. Without loss of
generality, the abnormal shape quality is essentially caused
by the uneven distribution of the internal stress of the steel
plate. The significant factors influencing the shape in the
production process are the temperature and the rolling force,
such as the uniformity of the temperature of the slab, the
uneven internal stress caused by the rolling mill, the plate
temperature uniformity before and after cooling, and so on.

Fig. 2. The common shape quality of the heavy-plate. (a) The schematic
diagram of plate shape qualities. (1) The normal shape quality. (2) The
abnormal shape quality of the wave. (3) and (4) present the abnormal quality
of the warpage. (b) A real-world case of the abnormal heavy-plate shape.

Fig. 3.
The schematic diagram of the MSH data collected from the
heavy-plate production process. (a) The real number data. (b) The one-dimensional data. (c) The two-dimensional data. (d) The three-dimensional data.

The common qualities of the heavy-plate shape are shown in
Fig. 2. However, acquiring labels of heavy-plate shape quality
is commonly expensive, which is one of the challenging
problems.
The essential to building a heavy-plate shape quality
anomaly detection model is to establish the corresponding relationship between the process variables and the final plate shape
quality. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze the production
process and process variables of the heavy-plate and select
appropriate process variables.

1226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Since heavy-plate production involves multiple processes
and equipments, the data structure is various and complicated, which presents the MSH characteristic. On the
one hand, the data structures of intra-sample x can be
simply divided into four categories: the real number data
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , one-dimensional data y1 , y2 , . . . , ya , twodimensional data z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z b , and three-dimensional data
v1 , v2 , . . . , vc , as shown in Fig. 3. For example, the statistics
of the temperature of plate surface, roller table, environment,
and other indicators are the real number data; the temperature
of start cooling, finish cooling, and other indicators acquired
by sensors are the one-dimensional data; the temperature of
finish cooling, heating furnace and other indicators acquired
by sensors are shown as the two-dimensional data; the rolling
force, roll bending force, torque and other indicators are
present as the three-dimensional data. Thus, the real number
data is commonly the key process variable, and the difference
in the data dimension is caused by the different types of
sensors and the manufacturing process. On the other hand,
the data length of inter-samples is also different due to the
distinct plate lengths and rolling speeds. Therefore, another
considerable challenge is how to deal with the MSH process
data.
Meanwhile, by analyzing the influence of each process on
the plate shape quality and the data characteristics of the
relevant variables, the process variables related to the plate
shape are screened out. Then, the corresponding anomaly
detection model of the plate shape quality can be built using
the process data.

1) Data Cleaning: The process data collected from
real-world industries should be cleaned first due to the complex production environment, and the sample containing the
null value will be eliminated.
2) Data Preprocessing: After data cleaning, the MSH data
examples should be preprocessed before modeling. As the
analysis in Section II-B, the MSH data in heavy-plate
production can be divided into two parts. First, the
real number variables x1 , x2 , . . . , xn are set as a vector
x 1d = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ], where x 1d ∈ R1×n , n is the number
of variables. The linear interpolation is employed as the
preprocessing approach to deal with the remaining variables
y1 , y2 , . . . , ya , z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z b , v1 , v2 , . . . , vc . The examples
of preprocessed data after interpolation are shown in
Fig. 5. The y1 , y2 , . . . , ya are preprocessed to y1′ , y2′ , . . . , ya′ ,
where is the 1×m vector, m is the data length after
preprocessing. The z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z b , v1 , v2 , . . . , vc are flattened
and then linearly interpolated to a 1×m vector, where the
data after preprocessing are z 1′ , z 2′ , . . . , z b′ , v1′ , v2′ , . . . , vc′ .
Then,
y1′ , y2′ , . . . , ya′ , z 1′ , z 2′ , . . . , z b′ , v1′ , v2′ , . . . , vc′
are
concatenated
as
a
matrix
X 2d
=
[y1′ , y2′ , . . . , ya′ , z 1′ , z 2′ , . . . , z b′ , v1′ , v2′ , . . . , vc′ ]⊤ ,
where
X 2d ∈ Rv×m , v = a + b + c is the number of variables.
The preprocessing approach adopted in this paper makes
the MSH data convenient to deal with and extract the feature.
Meanwhile, an MSH data example x is divided into two parts,
x 1d and X 2d , which can maintain the MSH characteristics of
the original data to a certain extent.
B. Multisource Heterogeneous Contrastive Learning

III. M ETHODOLOGY
The overall structure of the proposed MSH-CL based selfsupervised representation learning approach for the shape
quality anomaly detection of heavy-plate is described in
Fig. 4. First, the data is collected from the heavy-plate
production process and the shape quality-relevant variables are
selected. Then, the selected data are cleaned and preprocessed
before training process. After that, the proposed MSH-CL is
adopted to build the quality anomaly detection model for the
heavy-plate shape. It contains two learning phases, namely the
CL phase and the fine-tuning phase, and one quality anomaly
detection phase. The CL phase aims to learn an MSHFE with
massive unlabeled data. Then, the trained MSHFE is used to
build the detection model with the less labeled data in the
fine-tuning phase. Finally, the trained model is implemented
to detect the shape quality. This section mainly introduces
the data cleaning and preprocessing method, the MSH-CL
framework that includes an MSH-FEN and an MSH-FFN, and
the implementation process for quality anomaly detection of
plate shape.
A. Multisource Heterogeneous Data Cleaning and
Preprocessing
The process data collected from the real-world heavy-plate
production environment have the characteristic of MSH. Thus,
the data should be cleaned and preprocessed first.

The schematic diagram of the MSH-CL framework is shown
in the right part of Fig. 4. In order to detect shape quality
with less labeled data, the proposed approach consists of two
learning phases: CL and fine-tuning, and a detecting phase:
quality anomaly detection.
1) CL Phase: This phase is proposed to train a feature
encoder f θ (·) with massive unlabeled data to latent code the
MSH data. Fig. 6 shows the detailed architecture of CL in this
paper, which is a Siamese network with shared weights θ. The
two branches are identical, and each branch is comprised of an
MSHFE f θ (·) and a nonlinear projector unit gθ (·). The added
projector gθ (·) is a multilayer perceptron (MLP), which can
improve the feature representation performance of the encoder
f θ (·) [28].
The data augmentation Aug(·) is critical in CL and will
affect the discriminative ability of quality features mined
from process data. A sample x is augmented to produce two
difference views xv1 , xv2 , which create similarity relations for
the contrastive loss and define invariants that the model should
learn. Furthermore, data augmentation for CL should not
change the semantic information of the sample x. However, the
augmentation methods for process data usually add Gaussian
noise to the raw data, which may significantly affect the
data distribution. Thus, data augmentation methods should be
appropriately designed for CL (See Section IV-D1).
In the training phase of CL, firstly, a minibatch of N
data examples is randomly sampled and augmented pair-wise,

LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 4.

1227

The structure of the MSH-CL for quality anomaly detection.

Fig. 6.

The schematic diagram of pre-training phase in MSH-CL.

measure the similarity between each sample by the dot product
of ℓ2 normalized u and v. The typical contrastive loss function,
named InfoNCE loss, is defined as follows:
Fig. 5. The examples of MSH data after linear interpolation. The left column
is the original data and the right column is the data after linear interpolation.

LInfoNCE =
which results in 2N data examples. The two views xv1 , xv2 of
the same data example are treated as a positive example pair,
and the remaining 2(N − 1) samples within the minibatch are
viewed as negative examples. The negative examples in CL
aim at preventing model collapse during the training process.
Subsequently, the augmented minibatch is coded by the
feature encoder f θ (·) to produce the latent code h, and then
the nonlinear projector gθ (·) is used to map h to feature z,
which can be formalized as follow:
h = f θ (x)
z = gθ (h).

(1)
(2)

Then, z is used to calculate the contrastive loss. z i and z i+
are the positive pair of the ith example. The negative
 example
features within the minibatch are denoted as z i− = z j | j ̸= i .
The cosine similarity sim(u, v) = u ⊤ v/∥u∥∥v∥ is adopted to

N
X

− log

i=1

sim pos
sim pos + sim neg

sim pos = exp(sim(z i , z i+ )/τ )
X
sim neg =
exp(sim(z i , z j )/τ )

(3)

z j ∈z i−

where τ denotes the temperature hyper-parameter. The
InfoNCE loss can maximize the similarities between each
positive pair and simultaneously minimize that between negative pairs. The weights θ of each branch are updated by the
optimizer and backpropagation of the contrastive loss LInfoNCE .
Therefore, the encoder f θ (·) and latent code h can be obtained
by minimizing the loss using unlabeled data.
2) Fine-Tuning Phase: The trained encoder f θ (·) in the CL
phase is taken out and follows a fully connected network
as the classifier f c (·) to establish the plate shape anomaly
detection model. Subsequently, the model is fine-tuned by the
less labeled data to realize the capacity of quality anomaly

1228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Pt
detection. The cross entropy (CE) loss LCE = − i=1
pi log qi
is used in this training phase, where t denotes the total number
of classes, pi and qi denote the ture label and predicted
probability output of i-th class, respectively.
3) Quality Anomaly Detection Phase: Finally, the trained
model is deployed to detect the plate shape quality.
C. Multisource Heterogeneous Information Feature Encoder
In this part, the encoder f θ (·) is designed to draw the MSH
information, which consists of two parts: the MSH feature
extract network and the MSH feature fusion network.
1) MSH Feature Extract Network: The MSH data include
multiple dimensions. Therefore, the two pathways feature
extract network is proposed, which is formed by a 1D path
and a 2D path to deal with the x 1d and X 2d , respectively.
The convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are employed
in this part as the feature extract network. The deep residual
networks (ResNets) are an advanced CNNs architecture and
have been used as the backbone to extract image features in
various computer vision tasks [33]. ResNets contain two kinds
of block, i.e., the residual building block and the bottleneck
building block, and can be extended to different depths. Thus,
the ResNet is a preferred candidate because of its flexibility
and capability
The 1D convolution is used in the 1D path to acquire the
feature of x 1d . Thus, a 1D vision of ResNet is used as the
encoder f 1d (·). The naive ResNets are directly used as the
encoder f 2d (·) in the 2D path to extract the feature of X 2d .
The two pathways of MSH-FEN can formulized as follow:
h 1d = f 1d (x 1d )
h 2d = f 2d (X 2d ).

(4)
(5)

where h 1d and h 2d denote the feature of x 1d and X 2d ,
respectively. Then, h 1d and h 2d are used to obtain the latent
code of the MSH data.
2) MSH Feature Fusion Network: In this part, a fusion
network is designed to combine the two pathways network
in the MSH-FEN.
The common fusion strategies to obtain the latent code h of
an MSH data sample x are to add or concatenate the feature
of each data structure directly. Such fusion approaches have
often ignored the inner correlation between MSH data and
cannot find out a better feature representation. Thus, the fusion
strategy of MSH data should take advantage of the correlation
between h 1d and h 2d .
The attention mechanism is an effective method in deep
learning and is widely used in various tasks of computer
vision and natural language processing. It is presented to
capture the most relevant parts of visual or textual inputs
like a human being [34], [35]. The attention mechanism
improves the model performance by focusing on the valuable
parts. Therefore, inspired by the superiority of the attention
mechanism, an attention-based feature fusion network is
proposed to bridge the feature h 1d and h 2d of MSH data.
Based on the attention mechanism, the cross-MSH (CMSH)
data interaction approach is introduced in MSH-FFN to construct a high-level representation of the MSH data sample

x and improve the quality of latent code h. The CMSH
consists of two attention modules, i.e., the low dimensional
information-guided attention (LIGA) module and the high
dimensional information-guided attention (HIGA) module,
which are shown in Fig. 7. In these two modules, the underlying relationship between different data structures is captured
to enhance the feature representation h 1d and h 2d , respectively.
In the LIGA, the information of h 1d is utilized to enhance
the feature representation h 2d . First, for h 1d and h 2d , the
corresponding query Q 1d , key K 2d and value V2d can be
generated by
Q 1d = W Q 1d h 1d , K 2d = W K 2d h 2d , V2d = WV2d h 2d

(6)

where W Q 1d , W K 2d and WV2d are matrices with appropriate
dimensions. Thereafter, Q 1d and K 2d are used to calculate
the attention map SLIGA of LIGA as
⊤
SLIGA = so f tmax(Q 1d K 2d
).

(7)

′
Finally, the output V2d
of LIGA is the weighted sum with
the value V2d as
′
V2d
= SLIGA V2d .

(8)

Contrast to LIGA, h 1d is enhanced by h 2d in the HIGA,
of which query Q 2d , key K 1d and value V1d can be formulated
as
Q 2d = W Q 2d h 2d , K 1d = W K 1d h 1d , V1d = WV1d h 1d

(9)

where W(·) denotes the weight matrix of (·) as in (6). Similarly,
′
the attention map SHIGA and the output V1d
of HIGA are
⊤
SHIGA = so f tmax(Q 2d K 1d
)
′
V1d = SHIGA V1d .

(10)
(11)

Then, in order to better develop the CMSH, three strategies
are proposed to integrate the LIGA and HIGA for constructing
the MSH-FFN, namely parallel, first HIGA then LIGA, and
first LIGA then HIGA. The CMSH is shown in Fig. 8. Different
strategies can make the CMSH adapt to diversified tasks.
D. Implementation Process for Quality Anomaly Detection
The MSH-CL for quality anomaly detection can be summarized in the following four steps:
1) The collected process data is cleaned and preprocessed.
Then, the data is divided into labeled data and unlabeled
data.
2) In the training phase of CL, the unlabeled data is used to
train the MSHFE f θ (·). First, the unlabeled data is generated in different views through data augmentation. Then,
the generated data is input into the Siamese network, and
the InfoNCE loss is selected as the cost function. Finally,
f θ (·) is trained by utilizing an optimizer to update the
weight θ via backpropagation. The CL phase is shown
in Algorithm 1.
3) In the fine-tuning phase, the trained MSHFE f θ (·) is
taken out and followed by a classifier f c (·), and then
the model is fine-tuned by the labeled data.

LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 7.

The schematic diagram of LIGA and HIGA. (a) LIGA. (b) HIGA.

Fig. 8.

The schematic diagram of CMSH fusion strategy. (a) Parallel. (b) First HIGA then LIGA. (c) First LIGA then HIGA.

1229

Algorithm 1 The Training Procedures of CL Phase
Input: Unlabeled data set Xu , number of iterations
epochs.
Output: The trained MSHFE f θ (·).
1 Initialize parameters θ of MSHFE f θ (·) and nonlinear
projector gθ (·);
2 for e = 1 to epochs do
3
Obtain mini-batch x by sampling from the
unlabeled data set Xu ;
4
Get two views of x by data augmentation method
Aug(·);
5
Obtain the latent code h by (1);
6
Obtain the projected feature z by (2);
7
Calculate contrastive loss LInfoNCE by (3);
8
Update model parameters θ by back-propagating
LInfoNCE ;
9 end

Fig. 9.

The flow chart of MSH-CL based quality anomaly detection.

4) When the production of a new heavy-plate is finished,
the obtained model is used to detect the shape quality
of this plate.
The flow chart of MSH-CL-based quality anomaly detection
can be seen in Fig. 9.
IV. E XPERIMENTS ON ACTUAL P RODUCTION DATA
In this section, experiments are carried out to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed MSH-CL. The experimental dataset, evaluation metrics, parameters setting, ablation
experiments, and the comparisons of experimental results are

presented in detail. All experiments are conducted on a server
with an NVIDIA Tesla V100 Graphics Card and PyTorch.
A. Experimental Dataset
In this part, the real-world heavy-plate production process
data set is utilized in the experiments. The data examples are
collected from a real-world heavy-plate production line located
in Eastern China. As shown in Table I, the data set contains
the normal plate shape and four kinds of anomaly, including
bend, horizon wave, left wave, and right wave.
As the analysis of heavy-plate production process in
Section II-B, the 281 shape quality relevant variables are
selected. Then, as mentioned in Section III-A, the collected
data examples are cleaned and preprocessed first, as shown

1230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE II
T HE R ESULTS OF MSH-CL W ITH D IFFERENT DATA AUGMENTATION
M ETHODS

Fig. 10. The schematic diagram of MSH data after cleaning and preprocessing. (a) x 1d ∈ R1×245 . (b) X 2d ∈ R36×36 .
TABLE I
DATA S ET OF H EAVY-P LATE S HAPE C OLLECTED F ROM T HE R EAL -W ORLD
P RODUCTION P ROCESS

The 1D version of ResNet-18 and the naive ResNet-18 is
adopted in MSH-FEN as the two pathways backbone to extract
the feature of x 1d and X 2d .
D. Ablation Experiments

in Fig. 10, a data example is turned into two parts, namely a
vector x 1d ∈ R1×245 and a matrix X 2d ∈ R36×36 .
Finally, the collected data is divided into the CL training set,
the fine-tuning set and the testing set according to the ratio of
0.6, 0.2, and 0.2.
B. Evaluation Metric
The evaluation metric, i.e., accuracy, is adopted to illustrate
the performance of the proposed approach. Accuracy is the
rate of correct classification. The definition of accuracy is
formulated as
TP +TN
Accuracy =
,
(12)
T P + FP + T N + FN
where TP denotes that both the truth value and predicted value
are positive, FP denotes that the truth value is negative but
the predicted value is positive, TN denotes that both the truth
value and predicted value are negative, FN denotes that the
truth value is positive but the predicted value is negative.
C. Parameter Settings
In the training phase of CL, the Adam optimizer is applied
with 50 epochs. The batchsize is set to 512. The learning rate
and weight decay are set to 1e − 4 and 1e − 4, respectively.
The temperature hyper-parameter τ is set to 0.5 as mentioned
in [28]. In the fine-tune training phase, the SGD optimizer is
applied for 50 epochs. The batchsize is set to 128. The learning
rate and weight decay are set to 1e−3 and 1e−4, respectively.

In this subsection, the effectiveness of the proposed components in MSH-CL is verified and discussed in detail.
1) Selection of the Data Augmentation Method: The data
augmentation method is designed to generate two views of
the same data sample, which should guarantee that it has similar semantic information. Therefore, four data augmentation
methods are designed, and then explored to determine which
one is appropriate for this task. The four methods are presented
as follows:
• Method A. Adding a certain proportion α of Gaussian
noise to the preprocessed data.
• Method B. Performing a certain probability β of dropout
on the preprocessed data.
• Method C. Adding a certain proportion of Gaussian noise
processed by a certain probability of dropout to the data.
• Method D. Adding a certain proportion of Gaussian noise
to the data and then performing a certain probability
dropout.
In this ablation investigation, the other components proposed in MSH-CL are set to the same to eliminate the distraction of other factors for the experimental result. The CMSH in
MSH-FFN adopts the parallel strategy (See Fig. 8(a)) to fuse
the h 1d and h 2d to obtain the latent code h. The results of
different augmentation methods with different α and β values
are reported in Table II.
As shown in Table II, the data augmentation has significantly influenced the anomaly detection accuracy on the
heavy-plate shape. Method C has achieved the best result
with α = 0.01 and β = 0.3. Thus, Method C is adopted
as the augmentation method in the subsequent experiments to
generate different views of the process data.
2) Effects of Proposed CMSH Feature Fusion Approach:
The ablation experiment of the MSH data information fusion
strategy in MSH-FFN is conducted in this part. As shown in
Section III-C2, the proposed CMSH has three various fusion

LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 11.

1231

The results of MSH-CL with different information fusion strategy.

strategies to satisfy the requirement of different application
scenarios. In this part, the experiment is first introduced to
compare the performance of different CMSH strategies in
MSH-FFN. Then, to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed fusion approach, it is also compared with the ordinary
fusion approach, which concatenates the features of MSH-FEN
directly.
As shown in Table III and Fig. 11, the parallel strategy of
CMSH has achieved outstanding accuracy in the shape quality
anomaly detection task. Meanwhile, the three fusion strategies
of CMSH present better performance than the directly concatenating features method. The results verified that the CMSH
could improve the capability of the model. Thus, the parallel
strategy is adopted in MSH-FFN as the fusion approach for
the quality anomaly detection task.

Fig. 12. The results of MSH-CL with the different scale of fine-tuning data
set.

E. Analysis of Experimental Results
This subsection first explores the effects of different
fine-tuning set scales on the performance of MSH-CL. Then,
compared with other methods, the superiority and effectiveness
of MSH-CL are verified and discussed in detail.
1) Effects of Different Fine-Tuning Set Scales: In this part,
the performance of the proposed MSH-CL with different scale
sets utilized in fine-tuning phase is explored. The number of
labeled data examples used in this phase may significantly
influence the anomaly detection accuracy for heavy-plate
shapes. Therefore, the different proportion data examples of
the fine-tuning train data set are used to fine-tune the model
separately. The results are summarized in Fig. 12. It can be
observed that as the number of labeled data examples reduces,
the total anomaly detection accuracy decreases at the same
time. Also, when the proportion dropped from 10% to 5%, the
accuracy decreased sharply because the minority class samples
in the fine-tuning phase were rare. However, the MSH-CL
can still maintain a higher anomaly detection accuracy with
extremely few labeled data for the heavy-plate shape.
2) Comparisons Between MSH-CL and Other Semi- or SelfSupervised Methods: In this part, the proposed approach is
compared with other semi- or self-supervised methods that
are commonly used to solve the less labeled data issue.
As mentioned in [16], the co-training strategy with multiple
machine learning methods is selected as the baseline models,
such as Adaboost, Decision Tree, and support vector machine
(SVM). Meanwhile, the Autoencoder and Denoising Autoencoder, which are the typical self-supervised learning methods,
will also be included. The preprocessed data is flattened as
one-dimensional because these methods cannot directly deal
with the MSH data. The results are given in Table IV and

Fig. 13.
The accuracy of MSH-CL and other semi- or self-supervised
methods with the different scales of fine-tuning set.

Fig. 13. One can see that the proposed MSH-CL can achieve
better anomaly detection accuracy than others, and the total
accuracy is improved by 12.60%, 6.16%, 5.05%, 6.93% and
6.05% compared with the co-training AdaBoost, co-training
Decision Tree, co-training SVM, Autoencoder, and Denoising
Autoencoder, respectively. At the same time, it can be seen
that the detection accuracy of Autoencoder and Denoising
autoencoder for abnormal quality classes with a small number
of samples is insufficient. In particular, it is unable to detect the
right wave of heavy-plate shape, which is with few samples.
For further comparison, the model performance on fine-tuning
set with different scales of 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% are also
reported in Table IV. It can be seen that the MSH-CL also
achieved better results on the labeled data sets with different
scales than other methods. In particular, while the proportion
of labeled samples reduces, the detection accuracy of the
right wave and horizon wave of co-training AdaBoost, cotraining SVM, Autoencoder and Denoising autoencoder also
decreases.
3) Comparisons Between MSH-CL and Other Supervised
Methods: In this part, the experiment is conducted where
the quality anomaly detection model is trained using the
labeled data examples, which demonstrates the merit of CL
pre-training with the massive unlabeled data. Thus, the pro-

1232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

TABLE III
T HE R ESULTS OF MSH-CL W ITH D IFFERENT F USION S TRATEGY

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF MSH-CL W ITH OTHER S EMI - OR S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING M ETHODS BASED ON
H EAVY-P LATE P RODUCTION DATA S ET

TABLE V
T HE R ESULTS OF S UPERVISED L EARNING M ETHODS BASED ON H EAVY-P LATE P RODUCTION DATA S ET

posed MSH-CL is compared with a number of supervised
algorithms, such as AdaBoost, Decision Tree and SVM.
The high-dimensional data also need to be expanded into
one-dimensional since these algorithms cannot directly handle
the MSH data. The train set of these algorithms is identical
to the fine-tuning set used in the second phase of MSH-CL.
In this part, the MSH-CL is also compared with its supervised
counterpart, which trains the MSHFE in a supervised learning
manner. The parameters of the supervised learning counterpart
are set the same as in the second phase of MSH-CL. As shown
in Table IV, Table V and Fig. 14, the results of MSH-CL are
better than its supervised learning counterpart with the same
number of the labeled data. Meanwhile, compared with other
supervised algorithms, the MSH-CL can also achieve better
performance.

Fig. 14. The accuracy of MSH-CL counterpart and other supervised methods.

V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, the MSH-CL is proposed for quality anomaly
detection of the heavy-plate shape, and the CL framework
is developed to solve the problem of less labeled data in
real-world manufacturing process. Meanwhile, to deal with the

LI et al.: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING AND MSH INFORMATION FUSION BASED QUALITY ANOMALY DETECTION

MSH data, a two pathways network to extract data features
is designed, and an attention-based feature fusion approach
named CMSH is proposed to take advantage of the inner
correlation of MSH data. On the one hand, the CL phase
can utilize the massive unlabeled data to pretrain the MSHFE
to get a feature encoder. On the other hand, the CMSH
in MSH-FFN can improve the feature fusion performance
by utilizing the inner correlation. The ablation experiments
and comparative experiments are conducted on the dataset
which collected from the real-world heavy-plate production
process. The experimental results indicate that the MSH-CL
can improve the performance of plate shape anomaly detection
with the less labeled and MSH data.
In future works, the proposed approach will be extended
to other quality-relevant detection problems present in the
heavy-plate production process. Meanwhile, more practical factors, such as different kinds of steel slabs, and
some limitations of the proposed approach will also be
considered.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. Schausberger, A. Steinboeck, and A. Kugi, “Feedback control of the
contour shape in heavy-plate hot rolling,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 842–856, May 2018.
[2] L. Chen, X. Wang, and L. Tang, “Operation optimization in hotrolling production process,” Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., vol. 53, no. 28,
pp. 11393–11410, Jun. 2014.
[3] Q. Chen, Q. Pan, B. Zhang, J. Ding, and J. Li, “Effective hot
rolling batch scheduling algorithms in compact strip production,”
IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1933–1951,
Oct. 2019.
[4] L. Tang and X. Wang, “A two-phase heuristic for the production
scheduling of heavy plates in steel industry,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst.
Technol., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 104–117, Jan. 2010.
[5] Z. Ge, “Review on data-driven modeling and monitoring for plantwide industrial processes,” Chemometrics Intell. Lab. Syst., vol. 171,
pp. 16–25, Dec. 2017.
[6] M. Zhao, S. Zhong, X. Fu, B. Tang, and M. Pecht, “Deep residual
shrinkage networks for fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 4681–4690, Jul. 2020.
[7] W. Yu and C. Zhao, “Broad convolutional neural network based
industrial process fault diagnosis with incremental learning capability,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 5081–5091,
Jun. 2020.
[8] Q. Jiang and X. Yan, “Learning deep correlated representations for
nonlinear process monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15,
no. 12, pp. 6200–6209, Dec. 2019.
[9] Q. Q. Sun and Z. Q. Ge, “A survey on deep learning for data-driven
soft sensors,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 5853–5866,
Sep. 2021.
[10] L. Feng, C. Zhao, and Y. Sun, “Dual attention-based encoder–decoder:
A customized sequence-to-sequence learning for soft sensor development,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 8,
pp. 3306–3317, Aug. 2021.
[11] L. Ren, Z. Meng, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and L. T. Yang, “A datadriven approach of product quality prediction for complex production
systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 6457–6465,
Sep. 2021.
[12] W. Yu and C. Zhao, “Concurrent analytics of temporal information and local correlation for meticulous quality prediction of
industrial processes,” J. Process Control, vol. 107, pp. 47–57,
Nov. 2021.
[13] Y. Bai, J. Xie, D. Wang, W. Zhang, and C. Li, “A manufacturing quality
prediction model based on AdaBoost-LSTM with rough knowledge,”
Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 155, May 2021, Art. no. 107227.
[14] C. Zhao, “A quality-relevant sequential phase partition approach for
regression modeling and quality prediction analysis in manufacturing
processes,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 983–991,
Oct. 2014.

1233

[15] J. Lu and J. Ding, “A novel stochastic configuration network with
iterative learning using privileged information and its application,” Inf.
Sci., vol. 613, pp. 953–965, Oct. 2022.
[16] B. Liang, X. Yuan, and Z. Ge, “Co-training partial least squares model
for semi-supervised soft sensor development,” Chemometrics Intell. Lab.
Syst., vol. 147, pp. 75–85, Oct. 2015.
[17] X. Yuan, C. Ou, Y. Wang, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “A novel semisupervised pre-training strategy for deep networks and its application
for quality variable prediction in industrial processes,” Chem. Eng. Sci.,
vol. 217, May 2020, Art. no. 115509.
[18] Z. Ge, “Semi-supervised data modeling and analytics in the process
industry: Current research status and challenges,” IFAC J. Syst. Control,
vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1933–1951, Jun. 2021.
[19] J. Yuan et al., “Sustainable development evaluation on wind
power compressed air energy storage projects based on multisource heterogeneous data,” Renew. Energy, vol. 169, pp. 1175–1189,
May 2021.
[20] J. Yuan, X. Luo, Y. Li, X. Hu, W. Chen, and Y. Zhang,
“Multi criteria decision-making for distributed energy system based
on multi-source heterogeneous data,” Energy, vol. 239, Jan. 2022,
Art. no. 122250.
[21] Y. Pan and L. Zhang, “Data-driven estimation of building energy consumption with multi-source heterogeneous data,” Appl. Energy, vol. 268,
Jun. 2020, Art. no. 114965.
[22] Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. Li, and Q. Chen, “An online detection method for
capacitor voltage transformer with excessive measurement error based
on multi-source heterogeneous data fusion,” Measurement, vol. 187,
Jan. 2022, Art. no. 110262.
[23] P. Zhang et al., “Multi-source information fusion based on
rough set theory: A review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 68, pp. 85–117,
Apr. 2021.
[24] Q. Xiao, M. Shan, X. Xiao, and C. Rao, “Evaluation model of
industrial operation quality under multi-source heterogeneous data
information,” Int. J. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 522–547,
Jan. 2020.
[25] K. Bu, Y. Liu, and F. Wang, “Operating performance assessment
based on multi-source heterogeneous information with deep learning
for smelting process of electro-fused magnesium furnace,” ISA Trans.,
vol. 128, pp. 357–371, Sep. 2022.
[26] P. Zhou, B. Gao, S. Wang, and T. Chai, “Identification of abnormal
conditions for fused magnesium melting process based on deep learning
and multisource information fusion,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 69,
no. 3, pp. 3017–3026, Mar. 2022.
[27] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum
contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 9729–9738.
[28] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2020,
pp. 1597–1607.
[29] A. Jaiswal, A. R. Babu, M. Z. Zadeh, D. Banerjee, and F. Makedon,
“A survey on contrastive self-supervised learning,” 2020,
arXiv:2011.00362.
[30] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2021, pp. 1597–1607.
[31] S. Chang, C. Zhao, and K. Li, “Consistent-contrastive network with temporality-awareness for robust-to-anomaly industrial
soft sensor,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–12,
2022.
[32] M. Laugwitz, M. Jochum, T. Scheffer, and J. Lohmar, “Towards
hot levelling strategies for steel heavy plates: Analysis of
flatness evolution in accelerated cooling, hot levelling, and
final air cooling via thermo-mechanical FE modelling,” Int.
J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 120, nos. 3–4, pp. 2469–2488,
Feb. 2022.
[33] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[34] A. Vaswani et al., “Attenion is all you need,” in Proc. 31st
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), Dec. 2017,
pp. 6000–6010.
[35] X. Wang, R. B. Girshick, A. Gupta, and K. He, “Non-local neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2018, pp. 7794–7803.

1234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Datong Li received the M.S. degree from the Anhui
University of Science and Technology, Huainan,
China, in 2019. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the State Key Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for Process Industries, Northeastern
University, Shenyang, China.
His research interests include data analytics, deep
learning, anomaly detection, and their applications
in complex industrial processes.

Jun Lu received the B.S. degree from the Shenyang
University of Technology, Shenyang, China, in 2012,
and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in control theory and
control engineering from Northeastern University,
Shenyang, in 2014 and 2021, respectively.
He is currently a Lecturer with the State Key Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for Process Industries, Northeastern University. His current research
interests include neural networks, robust modeling
techniques, Bayesian learning, ensemble learning,
and applications in complex industrial processes.

Tongkang Zhang received the B.S. degree in
automation and the M.S. degree in control theory
and control engineering from Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, in 2015 and 2017, respectively, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree in control theory and control engineering with the State Key Laboratory of Synthetical
Automation for Process Industries.
His research interests include data visualization,
visual analytics, process monitoring, fault diagnosis, and their applications in complex industrial
processes.

Jinliang Ding (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in control theory and control engineering from Northeastern University, Shenyang, China,
in 2012.
He is currently a Professor with the State Key
Laboratory of Synthetical Automation for Process
Industry, Northeastern University. He has authored
or coauthored more than 100 refereed journal articles
and refereed papers at international conferences.
He is also the inventor or co-inventor of over
20 patents. His current research interests include
modeling, plant-wide control and optimization for the complex industrial
systems, machine learning, industrial artificial intelligence, and computational
Intelligence and application.
Dr. Ding was a recipient of the Young Scholars Science and Technology
Award of China in 2016, the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young
Scholars in 2015, the National Technological Invention Award in 2013, and
the three First-Prize of Science and Technology Award of the Ministry of
Education in 2006, 2012, and 2018, respectively. One of his paper published
on Control Engineering Practice was selected for the Best Paper Award
from 2011 to 2013. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS —II: E XPRESS B RIEFS.