IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

5535317

SMCNet: Sparse-Inspired Masked Convolutional
Network for Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection
Zhaoyue Wu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Mercedes E. Paoletti , Senior Member, IEEE,
Hongjun Su , Senior Member, IEEE, Pan Zheng , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Zhong Zhang,
Juan M. Haut , Senior Member, IEEE, and Antonio Plaza , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection, which aims to
search and localize potential targets, is a research area with extensive application prospects and profound implications. In recent
years, the emergence of unsupervised and self-supervised deep
learning for image reconstruction has provided inspiring solutions for hyperspectral anomaly detection. However, due to
sensor-induced and environmental effects, the full-image detection networks inevitably reconstruct anomalies along with the
background. Existing detectors indirectly mitigate anomaly
reconstruction by imposing constraints on hidden features or
loss functions, but they provide unsatisfactory performance in
large target detection scenarios. This work straightforwardly
addresses this issue from the input source, i.e., introducing
the concept of masked autoencoders (MAEs) into fully convolutional networks and further developing a sparse-inspired
masked convolutional network (SMCNet) consisting of three
mutually supportive components: 1) a hierarchical encoder; 2)
a sparse projection layer; and 3) a hierarchical decoder. The
encoder employs an adaptive potential anomaly masking strategy,
leveraging sparse convolution for extracting multidimensional
features of the remaining background. Meanwhile, a sparseguided projection layer is created by discarding the positional
embedding technique to populate the uncoded region and guide
the background recovery without introducing anomalies. Finally,
the decoder couples the hierarchical structure and a hybrid
attention mechanism (local–middle–global and spatial–spectral)
to refine the background during image recovery, whereas anomalies in the residual map are highlighted. Extensive experiments
using ten typical competitors on six different types of datasets
validate the effectiveness and generalization ability of the newly
proposed SMCNet method.
Received 4 June 2024; revised 7 August 2024 and 17 September 2024;
accepted 7 October 2024. Date of publication 9 October 2024; date of
current version 21 October 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 42122008 and
Grant 42371327; in part by the Consejería de Economía, Ciencia y Agenda
Digital of the Junta de Extremadura and the European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF) of the European Union, under Grant GR21040; in part by the
ERDF of the European Union Interreg V-A Espana-Portugal (POCTEP)
2021–2027 Program under Grant 0206_RAT_EOS_PC_6_E; and in part
by China Scholarship Council under Grant 202106710022. (Corresponding
author: Hongjun Su.)
Zhaoyue Wu, Mercedes E. Paoletti, Juan M. Haut, and Antonio Plaza
are with the Hyperspectral Computing Laboratory, Department of Technology of Computers and Communications, University of Extremadura,
10003 Caceres, Spain (e-mail: zhaoyue_wu@163.com; mpaoletti@unex.es;
juanmariohaut@unex.es; aplaza@unex.es).
Hongjun Su is with the College of Geography and Remote Sensing, Hohai
University, Nanjing 211100, China (e-mail: hjsu@hhu.edu.cn).
Pan Zheng is with the School of Earth Sciences and Engineering, Hohai
University, Nanjing 211100, China (e-mail: zhengpan1013@163.com).
Zhong Zhang is with the School of Public Administration, China University
of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zhangzhong@cug.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3477256

Index Terms— Deep learning, hybrid attention mechanism,
hyperspectral anomaly detection, masked convolutional network,
sparse representation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

H

YPERSPECTRAL imaging, as a technology capable of
providing continuous spectral and fine-grained spatial
information about ground objects, has become one of the
most significant data sources for contemporary Earth observation [1], [2], [3]. Hyperspectral anomaly detection, which
focuses on identifying regions within an image that exhibit
different physical and chemical properties compared to the
dominant features, is a fundamental and promising research
topic [4], [5]. With the absence of prior knowledge, the
main goal of hyperspectral anomaly detection is to explore
and pinpoint potential targets while removing other extraneous backgrounds [6], [7]. This technique plays a crucial
role in border security, resource surveying, precision agriculture, disaster relief, environmental surveillance, and other
applications [8].
In this context, hyperspectral anomaly detection is basically
a form of “no reference detection,” confronting various challenges and complexities [9], [10]. Primarily, the processing
and analysis of high-dimensional data require powerful computational capabilities [11]. Moreover, spectral mixing, noise,
and changes in environmental conditions increase the difficulty of identifying anomalous pixels. Therefore, designing
efficient approaches for addressing these problems has become
a challenge [12], [13]. Briefly, hyperspectral anomaly detection
methods can be categorized into traditional and deep learning
methods. Further, from the perspective of problem-solving
ideas, they can be subdivided into three categories: statisticsbased, feature mining-based, and image reconstruction-based.
A. Insight Into Traditional Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection
Traditional methods for hyperspectral anomaly detection
were dominant until 2018, giving rise to a plethora of algorithms based on statistical theory, sparse representation, and
tensor decomposition. The Reed–Xiaoli (RX) algorithm is a
milestone work that benefited from statistical theory, assuming
that background pixels follow a simple multivariate Gaussian
distribution while anomalous pixels deviate from it [14].
Several examples have demonstrated that RX can achieve

1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5535317

desirable results with simple backgrounds rather than with
complex ones [5], [24]. In general, RX performs unsatisfactorily for anomaly detection in complex urban areas and better
in natural scenes. Subsequently, corresponding improvements
have been developed, such as localized RX (LRX) [15],
Gaussian mixture modeling [16], and nonlinear mapping [17],
[18]. With the development of compressive sensing theories,
the collaborative representation derived from sparse representation theory was applied to hyperspectral anomaly detection,
opening up a new research avenue and attracting considerable attention. In the collaborative representation detector
(CRD), each pixel under test (PUT) is linearly reconstructed
(approximately) from the surrounding background pixels, and
the reconstruction residual is the anomaly degree of the
PUT [19]. In this case, the surrounding background pixels
are sampled by a dual window. Under ideal conditions, where
all samples belong to the background, anomalous targets
can be easily detected. However, in practical applications,
anomalous targets are complex and diverse, making it difficult
to obtain pure background samples through a simple dualwindow strategy. Hence, statistical distributions [20], principal
components analysis (PCA) [21], and density clustering are
combined with the dual window [22] to mitigate anomalous contamination. Moreover, a recent work comprehensively
improved the CRD by adopting a relaxed implementation
from both model optimization and dictionary construction perspectives, significantly enhancing anomaly detection
performance [23].
Unlike the aforementioned methods, anomaly detectors
based on tensor decomposition split the original image into
a low-rank background tensor and a sparse anomaly tensor,
taking into account the inherent spatial and spectral structures
of hyperspectral images. Depending on the formation mode
of the background tensor or the anomaly tensor, two methods
can be applied, i.e., direct and indirect decomposition. Direct
decomposition imposes regularization constraints directly on
the background and anomaly tensor. Examples include the
robust PCA (RPCA), tensor RPCA [24], and prior-based
tensor approximation (PTA) [25], [26], [27], [28]. In contrast, indirect decomposition performs image reconstruction
through a background or anomaly dictionary and imposes
regularization constraints on the corresponding representation
coefficient tensor. Examples include the low-rank and sparse
representation [29], graph and total variation regularized lowrank representation [30], generalized shrinkage mappings for
hyperspectral anomaly detection [31], and tensor low-rank and
sparse representation [32]. Besides, leveraging the powerful
learning capacity of deep learning to boost the solution provided by the alternating direction method of multipliers has
emerged as a new trend [33], [34]. Conclusively, most of
the traditional hyperspectral anomaly detection methods are
based on statistics and image reconstruction strategies, where
the breakthrough difficulty lies in how to design a reasonable
mathematical model as well as to construct a suitable dictionary. Further, these methods only utilize shallow features
to perform downstream tasks and have not yet explored deep
features, which are crucial for anomaly detection in complex
scenes.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

B. Deep Learning and Hyperspectral Processing: Exploring
New Horizons in Anomaly Detection
Since the breakthrough achievement of AlexNet in 2012,
a deep convolutional neural network (CNN), the research
fervor surrounding deep learning has extended to a variety
of applications. Initial CNN-based anomaly detection methods
were implemented by transfer learning due to the lack of
training samples [35], which severely limited the scalability
of existing methods. Until recent years, deep learning methods
have been widely applied to hyperspectral anomaly detection
tasks due to the progressive development of unsupervised and
self-supervised deep learning techniques, including autoencoders (AEs) and generative adversarial networks (GANs).
Regarding the former, AE-based hyperspectral anomaly detection approaches endeavor to compress the input image into
a low-dimensional latent space through an encoder and then
reconstruct the background from the latent space using a
decoder [8]. Ideally, the latent space is formed by background vectors, in which case the decoder reconstructs the
background satisfactorily and the reconstructed residuals are
used to determine anomalies. To this end, several strategies
have been explored. For instance, an adaptive-weight loss
function has been designed to weaken the reconstruction of
anomalies in an autonomous hyperspectral anomaly detection
(Auto-AD) network based on fully convolutional AEs [36].
Graph regularization has also been imposed on the latent
space to mitigate anomalous contamination [37]. No referencespot and no reference-block sampling strategies have been
devised to build pure background samples [38], [39], [40].
A background-guided pattern has also been developed to
facilitate background reconstruction [41]. Two decoders have
been adopted to separate low-rank background and sparse
anomalies [42].
On the other hand, GAN-based hyperspectral anomaly
detection methods train the generator to produce fake samples
that adhere to the background distribution and gradually complete the image reconstruction process until the discriminator
cannot distinguish between fake-synthetic and true samples.
How to motivate the generator to produce background and
ignore anomalies is critical to the success of such methods. Until now, background distribution assumptions [43],
background sample searching [44], [45], the initial separation between background and anomalies [46], [47], and
regularization constraints [48] have been extensively studied to minimize anomaly reconstruction to some extent.
Moreover, the Transformer has been introduced into hyperspectral anomaly detection to benefit from the success of
the attention mechanism, which mines both local and global
features for hyperspectral anomaly detection tasks [49], [50],
[51]. Numerous studies have indicated that these methods
perform excellently for pixel-level anomaly detection, relying on the powerful computational and feature extraction
capabilities of deep learning [52], [53], [54]. However, the
overfitting problem inevitably arises when detecting large
anomalies. The underlying reasons are mainly two: on the
one hand, anomaly detection is an unsupervised task, and
large-target detection scenes lead to the fact that the network training focuses on image reconstruction rather than on

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

anomaly detection. On the other hand, the network design
lacks physical significance and reliability, blending information about different anomalies during the image reconstruction
process.
C. Current Challenges and Weaknesses
Currently, in addition to classical statistical methods, most
of the mainstream anomaly detection methods are carried out
using the idea of image reconstruction. In this context, how to
successfully detect anomalies while completely reconstructing
the background is a challenging objective. Existing hyperspectral anomaly detection networks generally employ background
guidance [41], [44], regularization constraints [37], [48], and
statistical distribution assumptions [43] to suppress the reconstruction of anomalies. However, in real-world applications,
due to the limitations of sensor devices and the effects
of varying illumination, complex and diverse backgrounds
and anomalies do not exhibit highly distinctive spectral and
spatial differences. Specifically, sensor resolution makes the
edges of anomalies and backgrounds unclear, while changes
in illumination conditions cause spectral variability. In turn,
sparse backgrounds behave consistently with anomalies in
a spatial sense. At this point, anomaly detection becomes
extremely difficult when feeding the hyperspectral anomaly
detection network with the entire image and thus eliminating
the negative impact of potential anomaly contamination on
background reconstruction is essential.
Recently, the masked autoencoder (MAE) has demonstrated
its ability to reconstruct complete images using a high proportion of missing data [55], providing a new avenue for
hyperspectral anomaly detection network design schemes. The
question is whether a small amount of background is indeed
sufficient to learn an effective representation of the complete
image, thus eliminating anomalies while reconstructing the
background. In this respect, two fundamental issues naturally
arise.
1) Since anomalous targets come in different shapes, sizes,
and distributions, how to construct a valid mask to cover
potential anomalies?
2) Although the covering probability of the random mask
in MAE is extremely high (around 75%), the model sees
almost the entire image over multiple training sessions.
However, the masks of potential anomalies are fixed. How
to ensure a high-quality reconstruction of the background
in this case?
With these two concerns in mind, in this work, the core
idea of MAE is introduced into fully convolutional networks,
developing a new sparse-inspired masked convolutional network (SMCNet) for hyperspectral anomaly detection. The
novel SMCNet primarily consists of three intersupporting
components: 1) a hierarchical encoder; 2) a sparse projection
layer; and 3) a hierarchical decoder. With an adaptive potential
anomaly masking strategy, the encoder extracts multidimensional features of the remaining background with the help of
sparse convolution. Rather than the commonly used positional
embedding strategy, a novel sparse-inspired projection layer
is built to populate the unencoded regions for complete image

5535317

recovery. In the decoder, a hybrid attention mechanism (local–
middle–global and spatial–spectral) is designed to refine the
background during image recovery. Different from other fully
convolutional network-based hyperspectral anomaly detection
methods, the design of the proposed SMCNet removes the
negative impact of potential anomalies on the background
reconstruction from the root, providing a simpler and more
effective solution.
The main innovative contributions of this work can be
summarized as follows.
1) Inspired by MAE, a new SMCNet is designed for
hyperspectral anomaly detection, dedicated to learning
an efficient representation of the complete background
reconstruction from a small amount of background samples, which not only achieves an accurate reconstruction
of the background but also highlights the salience of the
anomalies.
2) To support the proposed framework, a potential anomaly
masking strategy based on adaptive segmentation is
designed. Meanwhile, a matching sparse convolution is
employed in the encoder to guarantee accurate extraction
of background features while reducing computational
complexity.
3) To boost background reconstruction, a sparse-inspired
projection layer and a hybrid attention mechanism are
developed. The former delicately exploits background
features to fill holes in the encoded map, while the latter
refines the background through multiscale (local–middle–
global) and multidimensional (spatial–spectral) feature
mining.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II describes some related work. Section III provides a detailed introduction of the newly proposed SMCNet.
Section IV introduces the experimental setup and gives an
in-depth analysis of the obtained anomaly detection results.
Section V concludes this article with some remarks.
II. R ELATED W ORK
The proposed SMCNet method involves the principal concepts of two techniques, i.e., fully convolutional anomaly
detection and MAE.
A. Fully Convolutional Anomaly Detection
The fully convolutional anomaly detection method is an AEbased method, which is mainly classified into two categories
according to the specific implementation process. The former
is the noise-to-image reconstruction process [36], i.e., the input
is uniform noise N with the same size as the image Y, and
the noise map is gradually approximated to the original map
by encoder and decoder operations, i.e.,
(
Z = fen (N; W, b)

(1)
Ŷ = fde Z; Ŵ, b̂
where Z and Ŷ are the latent space feature and the reconstructed image, respectively. W and b are the hyperparameters
of the encoder fen , and Ŵ and b̂ are the hyperparameters of

5535317

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

III. M ETHODOLOGY
Considering the particularities of hyperspectral anomaly
detection, a new SMCNet is developed to efficiently reconstruct the background and detect anomalies. This section
provides further details on the problem statement, network
deployment, and loss function.
A. Problem Statement
Fig. 1. Graphical illustration of the MAE. The gray patches of the input
are the masked regions, which retain the position information. The encoder
operates on the visible patches to obtain hidden features, i.e., green patches.
Then, the hidden features and the mask tokens (gray patches) are fed into the
decoder to reconstruct the image (blue patches).

the decoder fde . The reconstruction residual map between Y
and Ŷ is obtained to determine anomalies by the l2 -norm or
the Mahalanobis distance.
The latter is the image-to-image reconstruction process,
which differs from the first one because the encoder input
is the original image, as shown in the following equation.
The reconstruction is accomplished by feature squeezing and
expansion operations, i.e.,
Z = fen (Y; W, b).

(2)

Nevertheless, the crucial problem to be solved is the same
for both parts, i.e., how to avoid anomaly reconstruction.
Low-rank embedding [56], no reference sampling [57], loss
guidance [58], and positive sample generation [59] provide
limited mitigation of anomaly reconstruction, requiring the
exploration of more immediate and productive methods to
remove such anomalous contamination.
B. Masked Autoencoder
MAE is a scalable learning framework in computer vision
with excellent performance in self-supervised and unsupervised tasks [55]. The basic idea is that images contain a
massive amount of redundant information and the original
image can be reconstructed based on small portions of the
image. As illustrated in Fig. 1, MAE has two main designs,
i.e., an asymmetric coding structure (based on the transformer
framework) and a high percentage of mask rate. Specifically,
a high percentage of masking operations are executed on the
image (e.g., 75%), and the encoder operates only on a subset
of the visible patches. Meanwhile, a lightweight decoder is
deployed to reconstruct the original image from the latent
representations and mask tokens.
Typically, after the MAE training is accomplished, the
decoder is simply replaced to migrate to various downstream tasks, such as classification, target detection, and video
tracking. Given the success of MAE, its combination with
CNNs has recently been investigated, giving rise to network
architectures such as CovMAE [60], ConvNeXt V2 [61],
and Spark [62], which provide strategies for self-supervised
learning with CNNs. To the best of authors’ knowledge,
there are no network architectures using MAEs for anomaly
detection purposes.

The goal of fully convolutional-based hyperspectral
anomaly detection is to reconstruct the background and detect
anomalies by residuals. Inspired by MAE, our goal is to
mask out potential anomalies and rely on a small amount
of background samples to reconstruct the image. Let Y ∈
R H ×W ×B be the hyperspectral image, where H, W, and B
are the height, width, and the number of bands, respectively.
The above idea, then, can be concretely translated into the
following four formulas:
 ∗
Y = Mask(Y)



 Z∗ = f (Y∗
en
unmasked ; W, b)
(3)
∗
∗

)
Z
=
Z
+
f
(Y

masked


Ŷ = f de (Z; Ŵb̂)
corresponding to the four operations of masking, encoding,
embedding, and decoding, respectively. Here, masked Y is
Y∗ , composed by Y∗unmasked and Y∗masked , which corresponds
to the green and gray areas in Fig. 1. Accordingly, Z∗ is
the hidden space feature of Y∗unmasked . Before decoding, the
function f embeds the masked region (combined with Z∗ )
into Z. Although this implementation has been formulated and
specified, the following issues need to be considered at each
stage for hyperspectral anomaly detection purposes.
1) Masking: In the proposed method, anomalies in the
hyperspectral image are expected to be covered, and thus,
the traditional random masking strategy is not applicable.
Besides, the shape, size, and distribution of the anomalous
targets are diverse and unknown. Therefore, a question
arises: how to mask the anomalies accurately?
2) Encoding: After masking the hyperspectral image, the
encoder is desired to operate on unmasked regions for
background feature extraction. However, the input to the
fully CNN is a regular image, which will inevitably waste
computation and affect accuracy if the mask portion is
filled with zeros and regular convolution is performed.
Therefore, a question arises: how to extract background
features efficiently?
3) Embedding: To avoid introducing anomalous information
in the encoder, the masking strategy occludes part of
the background. If conventional positional embedding is
used to populate the mask region for the decoder, the
background false alarm in the mask region will most
probably be caused. Hence, it is necessary to contemplate
embedding methods favoring background recovery.
4) Decoding: In any framework associated with MAE,
despite the high percentage of masking strategies
employed, the network tends to sense the full image
information as the number of training sessions increases.

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5535317

Fig. 2. Architecture of the newly proposed SMCNet, which works to reconstruct the background of the image so that anomalies can be detected by the
residual map. First, the input image Y is gathered sparsely using superpixel segmentation and (4)–(6) to retain reliable background information. Then, the
masked image Y∗ is fed into a Unet framework, as shown in Fig. 4, in which the encoding stage is implemented by employing sparse convolution of the
ME library to extract hierarchical features of backgrounds E1 , E2 , E3 , and E4 . Before decoding, a projection strategy is devised to complement the masked
region of the hidden feature map E4 to generate D4 . During the decoding stage, D4 , regular 2-D CNN, and skip connections are used to obtain the decoding
feature maps D1 , D2 , and D3 , in which D1 is the preliminary background reconstruction map with low feature dimensions. After that, a background refinement
module composed of two feature extraction layers and a hybrid attention mechanism is deployed, as shown in Fig. 5, to recover the background Ŷ completely.

However, the masking strategy is static in the proposed
approach, which undoubtedly poses a challenge to the
global background reconstruction. As a result, it is vital
to ascertain how to refine the background at the decoding
stage.
B. Network Deployment
With the above considerations in mind, the proposed
SMCNet is deployed using the following parts: 1) adaptive
segmentation-based masking; 2) hierarchical sparse convolutional AE; 3) sparse-inspired projection layer; and 4) hybrid
attention mechanism for background refinement. The overall
network architecture is shown in Fig. 2.
1) Adaptive Segmentation-Based Masking: The masking
strategy intended for the hyperspectral anomaly detection task
consists of two stages: 1) to adaptively segment the image
into compact regions with similar features and 2) to identify
potential anomalous regions and mask them out. Among
the adaptive segmentation algorithms, superpixel segmentation
exhibits superior flexibility and applicability in image processing as a preprocessing procedure. Therefore, in this section,
a superpixel segmentation method (simple linear iterative
clustering) is employed to segment the hyperspectral image
Y into s1 , s2 , . . . , sn compact regions, where n is the number
of superpixels.
For hyperspectral images containing anomalies, after segmentation, the number of background superpixels is dominant
and highly correlated. Furthermore, the number of superpixels
containing anomalies is small and sparsely-distributed. Before
masking, the following two cases regarding the size of anoma-

Fig. 3. (a) Regular CNN and (b) sparse CNN for a “holey hyperspectral
image” with “empty parts.” The mask regions of the sparse CNN are filled
as blank areas, while the mask regions in the regular CNN are filled as
gray areas to indicate the zero padding. The regular CNN will change the
feature distribution, i.e., the black dashed regions in (a), with the increasing
of convolutional layers, while the sparse CNN will keep the original feature
distribution.

lies are considered: (case 1) the size of the anomaly is far
smaller than the superpixel and occupies a small portion of
it and (case 2) the size of the anomaly is greater than or
equal to the superpixel, occupying the entire superpixel or even
contaminating neighboring superpixels. Regarding the former
case, since the spectral distribution of the anomaly is significantly different from that of the surrounding backgrounds,
the spectral standard deviation of all pixels of a superpixel
in case 1 is intuitively larger than that of the background
superpixel, while the spectral mean within the superpixel in
case 2 is intuitively far from that of the background superpixel.
Depending on this, an anomalous superpixel can be masked
out as follows:

5535317

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Structure of the Unet framework by using sparse and regular convolution.

(

M(where(si )) = 1, case 1 or case 2
M(where(si )) = 0, otherwise

(4)

where


n

 case 1, std(si ) ∈ top n2 sortdescend (std(s j ) j=1 )
n

1X
mean(s j ) ≥ std mean(s j )nj=1
case
2,
mean(s
)
−

i

n j=1
(5)
and M is the mask tensor with the same size as Y. Here, the
locations in M equal to 1 denote the masked region, and the
masked image Y∗ can be obtained as follows:
Y∗ = Y ◦ (1 − M)

(6)

where ◦ is the Hadamard product, and 1 is the tensor where
all elements are 1 with the same size to M. In this case, the
pixels with zeros of Y∗ are the masked regions and others are
the unmasked regions. Fig. 2 depicts the specific operation of
masking, where the blank parts are the obscured areas.
2) Hierarchical Sparse Convolutional AE: Notwithstanding
its ability to handle irregular inputs (with variable lengths), the
original MAE is not suitable for irregularly shaped superpixels,
leaving the fully convolutional structure as a natural alternative. In addition, hierarchical structures have been recognized
as fundamental and necessary in computer vision tasks, allowing the network to handle objects with different sizes by
extracting scale-invariant features, especially for target detection purposes. Exploiting this idea, a hierarchical structure is
introduced into the fully convolutional encoder and decoder to
extract multiscale background features.
Nevertheless, as discussed in Section III-A, popular convolution methods such as regular convolution, dilated convolution, and deformable convolution do not adapt to a “holey
image” structure. Fortunately, a 3-D “holey hyperspectral
image” is extremely similar to a sparse point cloud in 3-D
tasks, where well-established sparse convolutions such as the
Minkowski engine (ME) framework [63] have been developed
for mining features of visible data. Inspired by this, the
standard convolution in the encoder is replaced by a sparse
convolution in ME as well as the corresponding normalization
and activation layers. As shown in Fig. 3, the input of the

regular CNN is the “holey hyperspectral image” with zero
padding to keep the regular input in size. The input of the
sparse CNN is only the unmasked regions of the “holey
hyperspectral image,” which is irregular in size. In this case,
the regular CNN with zero padding not only interferes with the
distribution of feature values but also extracts all the features
covered by the convolution kernel, resulting in an inflated
feature map. Sparse convolution, on the other hand, skips the
masked regions in the hole feature map and focuses on the
unmasked regions, thus preserving the background distribution
and ratio in the input image with an efficient computation. The
entire sparse MAE is structured using a hierarchical layout,
as shown in Fig. 4, where the encoder is implemented using
the sparse convolution of the ME library, and the decoder
is implemented using regular convolution. Specifically, the
encoder consists of a shallow feature extraction layer E1 and
three downsampling feature extraction layers Ei , i ∈ {2, 3, 4}
(
E1 = E1 (Y∗ ),
if i = 1
(7)
Ei = Ei (Ei−1 ), if i ∈ {2, 3, 4}.
After (7), the spatial resolutions of the encoded features E1 ,
E2 , E3 , and E4 are H × W, (H/2) × (W/2), (H/4) × (W/4),
and (H/8) × (W/8), and the corresponding feature dimensions
are 8, 16, 32, and 64, respectively.
In the decoder, except for the upsampling hierarchy (symmetric to the encoder), like the Unet [64], skip connections
are inserted between the encoder and the decoder, transmitting
the background feature information extracted by the encoder
directly to the decoder
(
Di = P(Ei ),
if i = 4
(8)
Di = Di+1 (Di+1 + Ei+1 ), if i ∈ {3, 2, 1}
where P is a projection layer for filling in holes in sparse
features as specified in Section III-B3 and Di is the decoder
layer with regular convolution for handling dense feature
maps. Similar to the encoder, the spatial resolutions of the
decoded features D4 , D3 , D2 , and D1 are (H/8) × (W/8),
(H/4) × (W/4), (H/2) × (W/2), and H × W, respectively.
It is noteworthy that the final output of the decoder is D1 ,
with a spatial size of H × W and a feature dimension of
8. The background refinement module in Section III-B4 will
further restore D1 to the size of the input image to complete
the reconstruction, i.e., Ŷ.

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5535317

Fig. 5. Background refinement framework with local–middle–global hybrid attention. (a) and (b) Simple examples of generating patches for middle and
global attentions, respectively.

3) Sparse-Inspired Projection Layer: Between the encoder
of sparse convolution and the decoder of dense convolution,
the projection layer is set up to tackle the mask region to
generate dense features. In previous MAE-inspired networks,
positional embedding is conventionally used to fill in the
holes in the sparse feature maps as a straightforward and
convenient method. Moreover, most of these networks are
solely trained by the random masking strategy to extract
desirable features for various downstream tasks, but not to
reconstruct the image. In contrast, the proposed SMCNet:
1) dedicates itself to image reconstruction and focuses on
the background rather than anomalies; 2) designs a masking
strategy for the hyperspectral anomaly detection task, i.e.,
covering potential anomalies as much as possible; and 3)
employs a static masking strategy rather than a dynamic one,
resulting in invariable input features. This implies that the
projection layer and the decoder are crucial for the anomaly
detection performance, supporting both the downstream and
the reconstruction tasks.
Given the complexity of the application scenario, the
masked regions inevitably cover up some background pixels
while obscuring potential anomalies. Therefore, at the projection layer, a differential approach to the background and
anomalies of the masked region is necessary instead of using
positional embedding, which is prone to cause false alarms.
Because the similarity between natural objects is higher than
that between natural and artificial objects, a sparse-inspired
projection layer is designed motivated by the traditional
representation learning-based hyperspectral anomaly detection
method. Hence, the effective representation of the background
extracted by the encoder can be considered as a dictionary,
while the background of the masked region can be approximated by this dictionary. At the same time, the background
underlying the anomalous location is approximated without
introducing anomalous information. In our implementation,

a linear layer is adopted to finish the projection of E4 to
D4 . Let E′4 be the 2-D unfolding of E4 with the size of
64 × n m and D′4 is the 2-D unfolding of D4 with the size
of 64 × ((H/8) × (W/8)), where n m is the number of feature
vectors after masking, that is,

(9)
D′4 = linear E′4 ; Wp
where Wp is the projection matrix with the size of n m ×
((H/8) × (W/8)). Through (9), the masked region will be
embedded with background information, which encourages
the recovery of the background as well as the identification
of anomalies, which is optimally applicable to hyperspectral
anomaly detection tasks.
However, despite the fact that the downsampling and masking strategies filter out effective background features, this
magnitude is still sizable and completely outperforms the
overcomplete dictionary. According to the golden cornerstone
in sparse representation, a small number of bases can achieve
a compact and efficient representation of the data and promote
model robustness. Besides, research has shown that complex
neural network structures not only bring in numerous parameters to optimize but are also prone to over-fitting, whereas
model pruning can effectively improve the inference speed
and the generalization ability of the model. Therefore, in the
projection layer, we adopt a sparse-inspired regularization to
constrain the projection matrix as follows:

D′4 = linear E′4 ; Wp s.t min Wp l
(10)
where l can be the Frobenius norm or the l1 -norm of a matrix.
During the code implementation, the fully connected layer
is employed to complete the projection from E′4 to D′4 , and
Wp is the corresponding weight matrix. Subtly, the projection
layer can be understood as a representation process in a
sparse representation model, where E′4 can be considered as a
dictionary extracted from the background and D′4 is a linear

5535317

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

combination of the features in E′4 with the corresponding
representation coefficient Wp . To this end, the regularization
constraint to Wp will make the representation stable and
reliable, and D′4 only contains the background information.
4) Hybrid Attention Mechanism for Background Refinement: With respect to the popular transformer mechanism,
fully convolutional networks ignore spatial and channel
interactions, which are valuable for further background reconstruction in hyperspectral anomaly detection. An interesting
improvement is a hybrid design using a transformer and
convolutional layers, either explicitly or implicitly [65], [66].
To this end, we combine convolutional layers and hybrid
attention mechanisms in the decoding phase to refine the
background features to generate Ŷ from D1
Ŷ = BR(D1 )

(11)

where BR is the background refinement module. As shown in
Fig. 5, the designed background refinement module includes
two feature extractors, a local convolution block, a middle
attention block, and a global attention block, which endows
the network with full-scale (local/middle/global scale) feature
extraction capability to mine richer information for background refinement with higher information entropy. Among
them, the feature extraction layer is composed of a 3 × 3 convolution kernel and an enhanced channel attention module.
Local convolution is implemented by the lightweight MBConv
module [67], while middle attention and global attention are
implemented in a subtle way.
As shown in Fig. 5, middle attention works to compute
attention scores between pixels within a patch, while global
attention works to compute attention scores between pixels
located at the same position within all patches. Although
the attention domains of middle and global attentions are
completely different, they are realized under the same window
size. Specifically, for H × W feature maps with the window
size of P × P, middle attention divides the image into
(H/P) × (W/P) nonoverlapping patches with a spatial size
of P × P. In the global attention module (without any extra
parameters), the image is divided into P × P nonoverlapping
patches with a spatial size of (H/P)×(W/P). In other words,
the window size in middle attention is the spatial size of
the patch to be divided, while the window size in global
attention is the number of patches to be divided in the row
and column. Even though the sizes of their input features are
scaled to C × ((H/P) × (W/P)) × (P × P) in the attention
map computation, the implied meanings are quite different,
leading to different levels of attention. Take the image with
a size of 8 × 8 and a window size of 4 × 4 as an example,
as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). In the middle attention module,
the image is divided into four patches with a spatial size
of 4 × 4, and the attention maps between pixels in a patch
are computed. In the global attention module, the image is
divided into 16 patches with a spatial size of 2 × 2, and thus,
the attention maps between pixels at the same position in all
the patches are computed. In brief, both can be realized by
splitting the input features into nonoverlapping patches under
the same parameters, which are only arranged differently in the

transformer computation, i.e., leading to two scales of attention
modules.
Meanwhile, to enhance channel and spatial interactions and
transmit spatial and channel information in a tight mode,
a spatial-channel attention module is constructed for middle
attention and global attention, simultaneously, thus mining
the comprehensive spatial and channel information. As shown
in Fig. 6, on the spatial interaction, the input feature Fin ∈
R H W ×C is first linearly projected three times to obtain the
query, key, and value metrics Qs ∈ R H W ×C , Ks ∈ R H W ×C , and
Vs ∈ R H W ×C , respectively. Then, the dot product of Qs and
Ks is computed and normalized to obtain a spatial attention
map of size H W × H W . Finally, the spatial interaction results
are obtained by weighted summation of the spatial attention
map and Vs as follows:
(
Qs = Lq (Fin ), Ks = Lk (Fin ), Vs = Lv (Fin )
(12)
Ys = As (Qs , Ks , Vs ) = SoftMax(Qs KTs ) · Vs
where Lq , Lk , and Lv are the linear projection operations, As
is the spatial attention operation, and Ys is the corresponding
output. On the channel interaction, Qc ∈ RC×H W , Kc ∈
RC×H W , and Vc ∈ RC×H W can be derived from two alternative
means for subsequent channel attention computation, one is a
a linear projection onto FFN(Ys ) and the other is a direct
rotation of Qs , Ks , and Vs to obtain the transpositions. Here,
the first strategy is adopted. As shown in Fig. 6, the size of
the channel attention map is C × C and the size of Yc is
C × H W . The spatial-channel interaction Ysc can be obtained
by counter-rotating Yc and adding it to the spatial interaction
result as follows:

Ŷs = FFN(Ys )




Qc = Lq (Ŷs ), Kc = Lk (Ŷs ), Vc = Lv (Ŷs )
(13)
T

Y
c = Ac (Qc , Kc , Vc ) = SoftMax(Qc Kc ) · Vc



Ysc = R−1 (Yc ) + Ŷs
where R−1 is the inverse rotation, Ac is the spectral attention
operation, and FFN is a feed-forward network, as shown in
Fig. 5. Briefly, we compute the attention maps corresponding
to the spatial and channel orientations through sequential
matrix operations and rotation matrix operations, in which
spectral–spatial information integration is elegantly achieved.
C. Loss Function
In existing methods, the mean square error or the l1 -norm
between Y and Ŷ is commonly taken as a loss function to
guide the network training. From a physical meaning perspective, anomalies are sparse and noise is uniformly distributed in
images, so the l1 -norm is more suitable for anomaly detection
tasks
L = Y − Ŷ 1 .

(14)

Moreover, inspired by the idea of sparsity, in the projection
layer, we impose sparse constraints on the weight parameters
of the projection layer; thus, the loss function can be finally
expressed as
L = Y − Ŷ 1 + λ W p F

(15)

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 6.

5535317

Graphical illustration of spatial-channel attention.

where λ is a tradeoff parameter. After the training of the
network, the anomaly map can be computed as follows:
rX

2
E = Y − Ŷ :,i =
Y − Ŷ j,i .
(16)
2

j

The detailed pseudo-code of SMCNet is summarized in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Code of SMCNet
Input:
Hyperspectral dataset: Y
Parameters: λ
Initialization: lr = 1e − 2, wd = 1e − 6
1: Sparse gathering by superpixel segmentation and Eqs. (46) to obtain Y∗
2: for each epoch do
3:
Extract encoded hierarchical feature maps E1 , E2 , E3 ,
and E4 by Eq. (7)
4:
Complement the masked region of E4 to generate D4
by Eq. (10)
5:
Recover hierarchical feature maps D3 , D2 , and D1 by
Eq. (8)
6:
Refine background by Eq. (11)
7:
Train the network by minimizing Eq. (15)
8: end for
9: Save the SMCNet model with the optimal parameters
10: Run 3-6 with the above optimal parameters to obtain Ŷ
11: Compute the anomaly map E by Eq. (16)
Output:
Anomaly map matrix: E

IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
In this section, comprehensive experiments are conducted
on six hyperspectral anomaly detection datasets using ten
comparison methods to evaluate the performance of the proposed SMCNet. The details of the datasets, evaluation criteria,
comparison methods and parameter setting, ablation study, and
anomaly detection performances are as follows.

A. Datasets
Hyperspectral anomaly detection performance is closely
linked to the characterization of the dataset. For this reason,
six different types of data are selected in this study, including
subpixel anomalies, small anomalies, and planar anomalies.
Furthermore, these datasets involve both small and large
scenes. A brief summary of the selected datasets is shown
in Table I, and the details are given as follows.
1) HYDICE Urban: The first selected dataset was taken by
the Hyperspectral Digital Imagery Collection Experiment
(HYDICE) sensor over an urban area in August 1995, and
it contains a total of 80 × 100 pixels with 175 effective
spectral bands. The spatial resolution is 1.56 m and the
spectral resolution is 10 nm, where the anomalous target
roofs and automobiles are presented at the subpixel and
pixel level.
2) ABU-B4: The second selected dataset was taken by
the Reflective Optics Spectrographic Imaging System
(ROSIS) sensor with a spatial resolution of 1.3 m over the
city center of Pavia, comprising a total of 150×150 pixels
and 102 effective spectral bands. As shown in the figure
of Table I, the selected subimage is from the ABU dataset
in [68], in which the background mainly consists of a
river, a bridge, vegetation, and bare ground, where the
vehicles on the bridges are regarded as small anomalous
targets.
3) San Diego I and II: The third and fourth selected
datasets come from two different subimages of the same
hyperspectral image. They were collected by the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
sensor with a spatial resolution of 3.5 m over the San
Diego airport in CA, USA, and both images consist of
100 × 100 pixels with 186 effective spectral bands. The
anomalous targets in both images are three airplanes, but
the difference is that the airplanes in San Diego I are
smaller than those in San Diego II.
4) Gulfport: The fifth selected dataset was taken by the
AVIRIS sensor on July 7, 2010, over the airport in
Gulfport, MS, USA. It contains 100 × 100 pixels and
191 effective spectral bands, and has a spatial resolution

5535317

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

TABLE I
B RIEF S UMMARY OF THE S ELECTED DATASETS . H ERE , “ SPA” R EFERS TO THE S PATIAL R ESOLUTION AND “ SPE ” R EFERS TO THE S PECTRAL R ESOLUTION

of 3.4 m. The anomalous targets are similar to those in
the San Diego scenes, with three airplanes, one large and
two small airplanes [68].
5) CRi: The sixth selected dataset was taken by the Nuance
Cri sensor, with a spectral resolution of 10 nm and
46 effective spectral bands. Unlike the first five datasets,
this image is larger and contains 400 × 400 image pixels.
Relatively speaking, this image has a simple ground
object composition with only grass and ten anomalous
target rocks.

the detector’s performance is superior to that of a random
guess, and the closer the AUC is to 1, the better the detector’s
performance.
The box plot is a visualization tool for showing the data
distribution. In anomaly detection, the background and anomalies in the anomaly map are usually plotted as two boxes
to observe their distributions; the larger the interval between
the background box and the anomaly box, the higher the
separation between the anomalies and the background, and the
shorter the background box indicates a better reconstruction of
the background.

B. Evaluation Criteria
Besides the anomaly detection maps, we employed the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, the area under
the curve (AUC), and the box plot to assess the anomaly
detection performance of all the considered methods.
The ROC curve is a common tool for evaluating the performance of a target detection model, which draws the detector’s
performance at different thresholds with the true positive rate
(TPR) as the vertical coordinate and the false positive rate
(FPR) as the horizontal coordinate. In other words, the TPR
represents the proportion of correctly detected anomalies to
all anomalous samples, while the FPR denotes the ratio of
the number of background samples incorrectly detected as
anomalies to the number of all background samples, computed
as follows:
TP
FP
, FPR =
(17)
TPR =
TN
FN
where TP denotes the number of detected anomalous samples, TN denotes the total number of anomalous samples,
FP denotes the number of background samples detected as
anomalies, and FN denotes the total number of background
samples.
The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, which is used
to quantitatively evaluate the performance of the detector. The
value of AUC ranges from 0 to 1, where 0.5 means a random
detector, i.e., the performance of the model is comparable to
that of a random guess. An AUC greater than 0.5 means that

C. Comparison Methods and Parameter Setting
Ten competitors, including deep and nondeep methods,
are considered to validate the effectiveness of the proposed
network. The details are as follows.
1) Nondeep Competitors: RX [14] is the most fundamental and representative benchmark algorithm for hyperspectral
anomaly detection (without any parameters). Kernel isolated
forest detector (KIFD) [69], which performs anomaly detection
by constructing isolated forests, is an emerging statistic-based
hyperspectral anomaly detection method, and its experimental
parameters are set as indicated by the authors. CRD [19] is
a classical hyperspectral anomaly detection method based on
representation learning. In the experiments, the dual window
size for CRD ranges from {(15, 13), (15, 11), (15, 9), (15,
7), (15, 5), (15, 3)} and λ is fixed to 1e-6. PTA [25] is
a hyperspectral anomaly detection method based on tensor
decomposition; the parameters µ, α, β, and τ are set in the
range of {1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-2, 1e-1, 1e0, 1e1, 1e2, 1e3, 1e4} and
the rank is set below 20.
2) Deep Competitors: Robust graph AE detector (RGAE)
[37] and guided AE detector (GAED) [70] are AE-based deep
learning methods, where the former uses graph regularization
to constrain hidden features to weaken the representation of
anomalies, and the latter uses spectral similarity constraints to
guide the generation of hidden features. In the experiments,
the regularization tradeoff parameter of RGAE is set in the

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5535317

TABLE II
O PTIMAL PARAMETERS S ETTING OF THE C ONSIDERED M ETHODS FOR S IX DATASETS

TABLE III
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE R EGULARIZATION T ERM FOR THE S IX
C ONSIDERED DATASETS . I–VI A RE HYDICE U RBAN , ABU-B4, S AN
D IEGO I, S AN D IEGO II, G ULFPORT, AND CR I , R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE IV
C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS OF A BLATION E XPERIMENTS ON THE M ASKING
S TRATEGY FOR THE S IX C ONSIDERED DATASETS

Fig. 7.

Sensitivity analysis of SMCNet to parameter λ.

range of {1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-2, 1e-1}. Auto-AD [36] is the most
representative fully convolutional anomaly detection network,
which achieves anomaly detection by recovering the hyperspectral image from the random noise map. PDBSNet [40] and
BockNet [39] are two excellent works based on no referencespot net, dedicated to suppressing anomalous recovery through
local masking strategies. In the experiments, the factor-train
and factor-test of PDBSNet are set in the range of {1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6}, the window size of BockNet is set in the range of {1, 3,
5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15}, and the learning rate (lr) for both PDBSNet
and BockNet is set in {1e-6, 1e-5, 1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-2, 1e-1}. The
gated transformer for hyperspectral anomaly detection (GTHAD) [49] is the latest work that introduces the transformer
into anomaly detection, enabling differential reconstruction
of backgrounds and anomalies through a gating device. The
parameters of GAED, Auto-AD, and GT-HAD are set to the
values recommended by the authors. The optimal parameters
for the considered methods are listed in Table II, except for
RX, Auto-AD, and GT-HAD without tuning parameters.
3) Proposed SMCNet: In the proposed SMCNet, the tradeoff parameter λ of sparse-inspired term is set in the range {1e2,

1e1, 1e0, 1e-1, 1e-2, 1e-3, 1e-4, 1e-5, 1e-6, 0}. Parametric
analysis experiments are performed on all datasets using
SMCNet, as shown in Fig. 7. It can be observed that, for
the CRi data, the accuracy of SMCNet shows an increasing
and then decreasing trend with the decrease of λ, reaching its
maximum value at λ = 1e − 4.
For the San Diego I data, the accuracy of SMCNet showed
a slow decreasing trend with the decrease of λ and then
remained stable. For the other datasets, the accuracy of
SMCNet exhibits small fluctuations with the decrease of λ.
In the experimental results presented in this article, λ is set
to 1 for San Diego I and II and Gulfport data, and λ is set to
1e − 4 for HYDICE Urban, ABU-B4, and CRi data.
In further analysis, the setting of λ may be related to
the background’s complexity and the background’s similarity
to the anomaly in the image. The CRi data, despite the
simplicity of the background, have a high similarity between
the background and the target, resulting in a SMCNet performance that is sensitive to λ. In practical applications, λ can

5535317

take the empirical value of 1 for the scenes with complex
background and 1e − 4 for the scenes with simple background
or high similarity between the background and anomaly. Note
that the case λ = 0 is also considered and the AUCs of
SMCNet with/without the regularization constraint are listed in
Table III, which indicates the effectiveness of regularization.
In addition, during the optimization, the Adam optimizer is
adopted, with a learning rate of 1e-2 and a weight decay of
1e-6. The number of training epochs is up to 500 (dataset VI)
or 1000 (others).
Regarding the hardware and software environment, for
fairness, all nondeep learning methods are implemented in the
MATLAB 2016b platform on a laptop equipped with Intel
Core i7 CPU and 8-GB RAM, and deep learning methods are
implemented in the PyTorch framework on a laptop equipped
with Intel Core i7 CPU, 32-GB RAM, and NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 3070 GPUs.
D. Ablation Experiment
Three indispensable components determine the experimental
performance of our newly designed SMCNet: 1) the adaptive
masking strategy; 2) the sparse-inspired projection layer; and
3) the hybrid attention for the background refinement module.
This section will discuss the performance and impact of these
three components in detail via ablation experiments.
1) Adaptive Masking Strategy and Sparse-Inspired Projection Layer: Inspired by MAE in self-supervised deep learning,
we consider adopting a masking strategy to cover potential
anomalies, eliminating the possibility of anomaly contamination from the source. However, the generalized random
masking strategy neglects the specificity of anomaly detection
applications. Thus, we further design an adaptive masking
strategy as well as a matching sparse-inspired projection
layer. To verify its effectiveness, we devise four experimental
schemes for all datasets using SMCNet as follows and compute the corresponding AUCs as shown in Table IV.
1) Without Mask: The input is the original hyperspectral
image Y. Accordingly, the hierarchical coding phase uses
regular 2-D convolution instead of sparse convolution,
and the projection layer is removed. The remaining
network architecture is the same as that of SMCNet.
2) Random Mask: The original hyperspectral image is partitioned into nonoverlapping 5×5 patches. Then, following
MAE’s behavior, these patches are randomly masked in
each epoch using a 75% masking rate. In addition, the
projection layer is modified to positional embedding, and
the remaining network architecture is the same as that of
the proposed SMCNet.
3) Without proj: The sparse-inspired projection layer in
SMCNet is replaced with positional embedding.
By comparing SMCNet without mask, SMCNet with random mask, and SMCNet in Table IV, it can be observed that
the masking strategy is significantly effective for large-target
detection scenarios (San Diego I, San Diego II, and Gulfport),
where the adaptive mask outperforms the random mask. This
is consistent with our intuitive reasoning that large targets are
more likely to negatively affect background reconstruction,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

while a random masking strategy can weaken the possibility of
anomaly contamination (adaptive masking can fundamentally
address the problem). However, for HYDICE Urban, ABUB4, and CRi data, the random masking strategy is detrimental.
There are two main reasons. One is that, in the HYDICE Urban
and ABU-B4 datasets, the interference of pixel-level anomalies
on the background reconstruction is tiny, and random masking
will lose more valuable background information. The other is
that, in the CRi dataset, due to the high similarity between
the background and anomalies, random masking weakens both
anomalies and the background simultaneously. In comparison, the adaptive masking strategy can implement masks
according to different anomaly detection scenarios, which has
better generalization ability and competitiveness. Moreover,
the comparison results between SMCNet without projection
and SMCNet dramatically demonstrate the importance of the
sparse-inspired projection layer for SMCNet, especially for
large-target anomaly detection scenarios.
2) Hybrid Attention for Background Refinement: Our
SMCNet is designed with hybrid attention in the decoder,
refining the background reconstruction by extracting the delicate spatial and spectral features of the hyperspectral image.
To validate the effectiveness of this module, we designed four
groups of comparative experiments using SMCNet for the considered datasets as follows and calculated the corresponding
AUCs (see Fig. 8).
1) Spectral (spe) and Spatial (spa) Attention: The former
retains spectral attention both in the middle and global
attention modules, while the latter retains spatial attention
both in the middle and global attention modules, and the
local attention module remains the same.
2) Local, Middle, and Global: Only one scale of attention module is employed in SMCNet, i.e., local attention
module, middle attention module, or global attention
module.
3) Mix 1, Mix 2, and Mix 3: Hybrid attention with two
scales, where mix 1 is the combination of the local and
the middle attention, mix 2 is the combination of local
and global attention, and mix 3 is the combination of the
middle and the global attention.
4) All: The full SMCNet.
As shown in Fig. 8, in the first group of comparison
experiments, it can be observed that spatial attention is more
important than spectral attention for the HYDICE Urban,
Gulfport, and CRi datasets, while spectral attention is slightly
more important than spatial attention for the San Diego I
and II and ABU-B4 datasets. In the second and third groups
of comparison experiments, it can be observed that, for different anomaly detection scenarios, different scaled attention
modules contribute to background reconstruction in different degrees. Relatively speaking, for datasets with complex
backgrounds (HYDICE Urban, ABU-B4, San Diego I and II,
and CRi), the spatial and spectral features extracted by the
middle and global attention modules are more conducive to
background reconstruction. Therefore, in practical unknown
and complex application scenarios, the multiscale spatial and
spectral features not only improve the anomaly detection
accuracy but also enhance the generalization ability.

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

5535317

Fig. 8. Comparative results of ablation experiments on hybrid attention for the six considered datasets. (a) HYDICE Urban. (b) ABU-B4. (c) San Diego I.
(d) San Diego II. (e) Gulfport. (f) CRi.

Fig. 9. Anomaly maps produced by the considered detectors on six datasets. From top to bottom: (a) HYDICE Urban; (b) ABU-B4; (c) San Diego I; (d) San
Diego II; (e) Gulfport; and (f) CRi.

E. Anomaly Detection Results
In Sections IV-E1–IV-E4, the anomaly detection results
obtained by the ten aforementioned detectors on the six
considered datasets are discussed. First, the anomaly detection
results of each detector are displayed in Fig. 9, and the box
plots are shown in Fig. 10 for qualitative analysis. Then, the
ROC curves are plotted in Fig. 11, and the corresponding AUC
values are tabulated in Table V for quantitative evaluation,

where the best and second best values are highlighted in
bold and underlined formats, respectively. Along with this,
a comprehensive analysis was carried out according to the
results of each evaluation indicator.
1) Anomaly Maps: From a visual perspective, classical
methods such as RX and CRD largely fail to highlight
the accurate location of large anomalies, as shown in
Fig. 9(c)–(f). This is particularly noticeable in the San Diego I

5535317

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 10. Box plots of the considered detectors on six datasets: (a) HYDICE Urban; (b) ABU-B4; (c) San Diego I; (d) San Diego II; (e) Gulfport; and (f) CRi.
TABLE V
AUC AND P ROCESSING T IME ( S ) OF THE C ONSIDERED M ETHODS W HEN P ROCESSING THE S IX C ONSIDERED DATASETS

and CRi datasets. In contrast, the detection of small anomalies
(HYDICE Urban and ABU-B4) all proceed normally, albeit
with varying degrees of background interference. As advanced
versions, the latest representatives of traditional methods
(KIFD and PTA) provide superior detection of anomalies,
both for large and small targets, but with slightly inferior background suppression (with KIFD exhibiting lower
antinoise performance). The primary reason is that both methods implement anomaly detection with decomposition-based
ideas, focusing on the prominence of anomalies and ignoring
background suppression. In comparison, deep learning-driven
anomaly detection methods (RGAE, GAED, PDBSNet, BockNet, GT-HAD, and SMCNet) not only emphasize the exact
locations of anomalies but also suppress the background
better, except for the Auto-AD. In this regard, Auto-AD is
equipped with a fully convolutional structure and specializes

in capturing anomalies in small-target anomaly detection scenarios (HYDICE Urban and ABU-B4); thus, it is unable to
perform properly in large-target anomaly detection scenarios,
as shown in Fig. 9(c)–(f), in which anomaly detection maps
are full of noise. The anomaly maps of GT-HAD (motivated by
the transformer) are severely patchy, which mainly arises from
the fact that the method operates on nonoverlapping patches
without edge processing. AE-driven RGAE and GAED work
properly for most of the datasets, but the limited spatial
information restricts the performance of these methods with
large targets and complex scenes, which is especially obvious
in HYDICE Urban, San Diego I, and Gulfport scenes. It is
noteworthy to highlight that the anomaly maps of PDBSNet,
BockNet, and SMCNet are similar, especially in HYDICE
Urban, ABU-B4, and San Diego II datasets. This is mainly
because they both use a masking strategy to suppress anomaly

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 11.
(f) CRi.

5535317

ROC curves for the considered detectors on six datasets. (a) HYDICE Urban; (b) ABU-B4; (c) San Diego I; (d) San Diego II; (e) Gulfport; and

recovery, the only difference is that the PDBSNet and BockNet
use a local masking strategy, while the proposed SMCNet
uses a global masking strategy. And the effect of the two
shielding strategies is significantly different for the scenarios
containing small backgrounds, as shown in Fig. 9(c), (e),
and (f). PDBSNet and BockNet with local masking strategy
can suppress background better, but at the same time weaken
the anomalies. While SMCNet with global masking strategy
can highlight the anomalies better, but is accompanied by
a certain degree of false alarms. This is because the global
masking strategy can easily mask small backgrounds although
the background refinement module can alleviate this problem,
whereas the local masking strategy has difficulty in suppressing backgrounds and highlighting anomalies at the same time
due to the fixed-size parameters. In contrast, it can be seen that
the proposed SMCNet is capable of accurately highlighting
the locations of anomalies under the constraints of sparse
convolution and sparse mapping.
2) Separation of Background and Anomalies: In the box
plot, we focus on the degree of separation between background and anomalies and on the suppression degree of the
background, where a method achieving both properties is
considered to be optimal. From a holistic perspective, the
performance of each competitor in different datasets varies
significantly, which is mostly attributed to the fact that the
degree of background suppression is closely related to the
complexity of the background, while the separation degree of
the background and the anomalies is linked to their similarity.
As shown in Fig. 10, for the ABU-B4 and CRi data, most
of the competitors can suppress the background satisfactorily
due to the simplicity of the background. For the San Diego I

and CRi data, all of the competitors are not able to distinguish
the anomalies from the background accurately due to the high
similarity between the background and the anomalies. In contrast, all the competitors work normally in the HYDICE Urban,
ABU-B4, San Diego, and Gulfport datasets. In particular, for
all considered datasets, KIFD and PTA invariably highlight
anomalies and separate out the background despite their weak
background suppression performance, which is compatible
with the visualization of anomaly maps. Moreover, as shown
in Fig. 10(b), (d), and (e), deep learning methods (RGAE,
GAED, PDBSNet, BockNet, GT-HAD, and SMCNet) tend to
accurately separate the anomalies from the background and
suppress the background more effectively when compared to
traditional methods. It is remarkable that these two aspects
of the novel SMCNet method’s performance are impressive
among all competitors.
3) Anomaly Detection Accuracy: To emphasize the differences in the quantitative performance of each competitor, the
ROC curves for each dataset appropriately scaled are provided
in Fig. 11. As it can be seen, the proposed SMCNet is
remarkably competitive in Gulfport and CRi datasets, consistently leading the other contenders in detection rate as the
false alarm rate grows. For the other datasets, the SMCNet
method performs similarly to several excellent competitors, but
still outperforms them by a narrow margin, as seen from the
AUCs listed in Table V. Moreover, it can be observed that the
traditional method CRD, as well as the deep learning methods
PDBSNet and BockNet, is more competitive than the other
methods although the novel SMCNet method is still better.
In terms of generalization performance over the considered
datasets, the performance ranking of each competitor can be

5535317

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

established as SMCNet > PDBSNet > BockNet > CRD
> GAED > GT-HAD > KIFD > PTA > RGAE > RX
> Auto-AD, where the proposed SMCNet is significantly
outperforming the other competitors.
4) Summary: From our qualitative and quantitative analyses, it can be concluded that CRD exhibits better anomaly
detection capacity than other traditional methods. In contrast,
the deep learning-driven methods achieve a superior background suppression effect, which cannot be separated from the
support of their feature mining ability and powerful learning
capability. Remarkably, the performance of fully convolutional Auto-AD varies significantly for small- and large-target
anomaly detection scenarios, mainly because the anomalous
features are not eliminated in the background reconstruction
process, which is critical for large-target detection purposes.
To solve this shortcoming, the designed SMCNet employs an
adaptive masking strategy and a matched sparse fully convolutional network to mine the background features, and then
reconstructs the image for superior anomaly identification;
meanwhile, the background refinement module enhances the
effective representation of the background, thus suppressing it
and making the proposed SMCNet method very competitive
among fully convolutional anomaly detection networks.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, a new SMCNet is developed for hyperspectral
anomaly detection. It consists of three mutually supportive
parts: 1) a hierarchical encoder; 2) a sparse projection layer;
and 3) a hierarchical decoder. Among them, the encoder
extracts pure and effective background features by an adaptive
anomaly masking strategy and sparse convolution. The
sparse-inspired projection layer suppresses anomalies while
promoting background representation by utilizing background
features to fill the uncoded region. In the decoder, the designed
hybrid attention mechanisms (local–middle–global and
spatial–spectral) extract multiscale and multidimensional features to further refine the background. The design of SMCNet
radically eliminates the negative impact of potential anomalies
on the background reconstruction. Extensive experiments on
six datasets show that SMCNet outperforms other state-of-theart methods. Nonetheless, SMCNet still has an unsolved problem that the number of parameters in the projection layer computed by linear rises sharply with the increase of data scale,
which is a potential issue for future large-scale applications.
Although sparse excitation can alleviate this problem to some
extent, it is not the most immediate and optimal solution. In the
future, this concern will be addressed by improving the projection layer computation using dynamic weight deactivation.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y. Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson,
“Deep learning for hyperspectral image classification: An overview,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 6690–6709,
Sep. 2019.
[2] J. M. Bioucas-Dias, A. Plaza, G. Camps-Valls, P. Scheunders,
N. Nasrabadi, and J. Chanussot, “Hyperspectral remote sensing data
analysis and future challenges,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 6–36, Jun. 2013.
[3] D. Hong et al., “SpectralGPT: Spectral remote sensing foundation
model,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8,
pp. 5227–5244, Aug. 2024.

[4] S. Matteoli, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A tutorial overview of anomaly
detection in hyperspectral images,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag.,
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 5–28, Jul. 2010.
[5] B. Du, R. Zhao, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A spectral–spatial based local
summation anomaly detection method for hyperspectral images,” Signal
Process., vol. 124, pp. 115–131, Jul. 2016.
[6] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
[7] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Beyond background feature
extraction: An anomaly detection algorithm inspired by slowly varying
signal analysis,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
pp. 1757–1774, Mar. 2016.
[8] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection:
A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90,
Mar. 2022.
[9] Y. Xu, L. Zhang, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
based on machine learning: An overview,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 3351–3364, 2022.
[10] C.-I. Chang and S.-S. Chiang, “Anomaly detection and classification
for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 40,
no. 6, pp. 1314–1325, Jun. 2002.
[11] X. Tao, M. E. Paoletti, Z. Wu, J. M. Haut, P. Ren, and A. Plaza,
“An abundance-guided attention network for hyperspectral unmixing,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5505414.
[12] R. Zhao, B. Du, L. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “A robust background
regression based score estimation algorithm for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 122, pp. 126–144,
Dec. 2016.
[13] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via
a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017.
[14] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
[15] H. Kwon, S. Z. Der, and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Adaptive anomaly detection
using subspace separation for hyperspectral imagery,” Opt. Eng., vol. 42,
no. 11, pp. 3342–3351, 2003.
[16] D. W. J. Stein, S. G. Beaven, L. E. Hoff, E. M. Winter, A. P. Schaum,
and A. D. Stocker, “Anomaly detection from hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 58–69, Jan. 2002.
[17] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
[18] A. Banerjee, P. Burlina, and C. Diehl, “A support vector method
for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 2282–2291, Aug. 2006.
[19] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
[20] M. Vafadar and H. Ghassemian, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral
imagery using modified collaborative representation,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 577–581, Apr. 2018.
[21] H. Su, Z. Wu, Q. Du, and P. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using
collaborative representation with outlier removal,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 5029–5038,
Dec. 2018.
[22] S. Feng, S. Tang, C. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “A hyperspectral anomaly
detection method based on low-rank and sparse decomposition with
density peak guided collaborative representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–13, 2021.
[23] Z. Wu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with relaxed collaborative representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5533417.
[24] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Chanussot, and Z. Wei, “Joint reconstruction and
anomaly detection from compressive hyperspectral images using Mahalanobis distance-regularized tensor RPCA,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2919–2930, May 2018.
[25] L. Li, W. Li, Y. Qu, C. Zhao, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Prior-based
tensor approximation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1037–1050,
Mar. 2022.
[26] S. Sun, J. Liu, X. Chen, W. Li, and H. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with tensor average rank and piecewise smoothness constraints,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11,
pp. 8679–8692, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3152252.

WU et al.: SPARSE-INSPIRED MASKED CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORK FOR HYPERSPECTRAL ANOMALY DETECTION

[27] S. Sun, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, and W. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on adaptive low-rank transformed tensor,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 9787–9799, 2024, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3236641.
[28] W. Shang et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via sparsity of core
tensor under gradient domain,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5517816.
[29] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in
hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000,
Apr. 2016.
[30] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Graph and total variation regularized lowrank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 391–406, Jan. 2020.
[31] L. Ren, L. Gao, M. Wang, X. Sun, and J. Chanussot, “HADGSM:
A unified nonconvex framework for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5503415.
[32] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023.
[33] Y. Li, K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, X. Zhang, and Q. Du, “A model-driven
deep mixture network for robust hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5522916.
[34] C. Li, B. Zhang, D. Hong, J. Yao, and J. Chanussot, “LRR-Net: An interpretable deep unfolding network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5513412.
[35] W. Li, G. Wu, and Q. Du, “Transferred deep learning for anomaly
detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 597–601, May 2017.
[36] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5503314.
[37] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314.
[38] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
“BS3LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504218.
[39] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
“BockNet: Blind-block reconstruction network with a guard window for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531916.
[40] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. J. Plaza,
“PDBSNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot reconstruction network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511914.
[41] Z. Wu et al., “Background-guided deformable convolutional autoencoder
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531816.
[42] S. Lin, M. Zhang, X. Cheng, L. Shi, P. Gamba, and H. Wang,
“Dynamic low-rank and sparse priors constrained deep autoencoders for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73,
pp. 1–18, 2024.
[43] T. Jiang, Y. Li, W. Xie, and Q. Du, “Discriminative reconstruction
constrained generative adversarial network for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7,
pp. 4666–4679, Jul. 2020.
[44] W. Xie, B. Liu, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Autoencoder and adversariallearning-based semisupervised background estimation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 8,
pp. 5416–5427, Aug. 2020.
[45] K. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, G. He, and Q. Du, “Semisupervised
spectral learning with generative adversarial network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7,
pp. 5224–5236, Jul. 2020.
[46] J. Zhong, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Characterization of
background-anomaly separability with generative adversarial network
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 6017–6028, Jul. 2021.
[47] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022.

5535317

[48] W. Xie, X. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Lei, J. Li, and Q. Du, “Weakly
supervised low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 3889–3900,
Aug. 2021.
[49] J. Lian, L. Wang, H. Sun, and H. Huang, “GT-HAD: Gated transformer
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., early access, Feb. 12, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3355166.
[50] Z. Wu and B. Wang, “Transformer-based autoencoder framework for
nonlinear hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5508015.
[51] Z. Wang, D. Ma, G. Yue, B. Li, R. Cong, and Z. Wu, “Self-supervised
hyperspectral anomaly detection based on finite spatialwise attention,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5502918.
[52] D. Ma, M. Chen, Y. Yang, B. Li, M. Li, and Y. Gao,
“Coarse-to-fine multiview anomaly coupling network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
2024, Art. no. 5507715.
[53] M. E. Paoletti, S. Moreno-Álvarez, Y. Xue, J. M. Haut, and A. Plaza,
“AAtt-CNN: Automatic attention-based convolutional neural networks
for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511118.
[54] M. E. Paoletti, J. M. Haut, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Deep learning
classifiers for hyperspectral imaging: A review,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 158, pp. 279–317, Dec. 2019.
[55] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[56] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Deep low-rank prior for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5527017.
[57] L. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Li, C. Wu, M. Xu, and M. Shao, “Eliminating
spatial correlations of anomaly: Corner-visible network for unsupervised
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5529114.
[58] W. Liu et al., “UADNet: A joint unmixing and anomaly detection
network based on deep clustering for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5511419.
[59] J. Wang, J. Sun, Y. Xia, and Y. Zhang, “Dynamic negative sampling
autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 9829–9841, 2022.
[60] P. Gao, T. Ma, H. Li, Z. Lin, J. Dai, and Y. Qiao, “ConvMAE: Masked
convolution meets masked autoencoders,” 2022, arXiv:2205.03892.
[61] S. Woo et al., “ConvNeXt v2: Co-designing and scaling ConvNets with
masked autoencoders,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 16133–16142.
[62] K. Tian, Y. Jiang, Q. Diao, C. Lin, L. Wang, and Z. Yuan, “Designing
BERT for convolutional networks: Sparse and hierarchical masked
modeling,” 2023, arXiv:2301.03580.
[63] C. Choy, J. Gwak, and S. Savarese, “4D spatio-temporal ConvNets:
Minkowski convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 3075–3084.
[64] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[65] Z. Tu et al., “MaxViT: Multi-axis vision transformer,” in Proc. 17th Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 459–479.
[66] H. Wang, X. Chen, B. Ni, Y. Liu, and J. Liu, “Omni aggregation networks for lightweight image super-resolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 22378–22387.
[67] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
“MobileNetV2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 4510–4520.
[68] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with attribute and edge-preserving filters,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5600–5611,
Oct. 2017.
[69] S. Li, K. Zhang, P. Duan, and X. Kang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with kernel isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 319–329, Jan. 2020.
[70] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818.