IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

2263

TMANomaly: Time-Series Mutual Adversarial
Networks for Industrial Anomaly Detection
Lianming Zhang , Wenji Bai , Xiaowei Xie , Liying Chen , and Pingping Dong

Abstract—Large-scale sewage treatment plants are one
of the typical Industrial Internet of Things systems, where
the presence of a large number of sensors generates massive dynamic time series data, and such multivariate time
series data are usually time-dependent and random. Therefore, there is a certain risk when fitting the potential anomalies of real-world data, which will bring great challenges to
anomaly detection. In this article, we propose a time-series
mutual adversarial network (TMAN), a novel reconstruction
model for anomaly detection on multivariate time series. It
is based on the idea of adversarial learning and consists
of two identical subnetworks. During the training process,
two subnetworks can independently complete the learning
of the time distribution of normal samples of industrial
time series data for mutual adversarial. In the process of
detecting, we obtain the residual values of TMAN reconstructed for different time series samples to discriminate
anomalies. We combine TMAN and anomaly determination
mechanisms to build a new industrial time series anomaly
detection framework named TMANomaly. In addition, we
select the dataset features with a grey correlation algorithm
to achieve very high performance with a small number
of features. Experimental results show that our proposed
TMANomaly outperforms five popular anomaly detection
methods and effectively improves the accuracy of industrial
multivariate time series anomaly detection.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, generative adversarial
networks (GANs), mutlivariate time series, mutual adversarial networks.

I. INTRODUCTION
ITH the vigorous development of the Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT), many industrial systems and data
centers have installed a large number of sensors to get a large
amount of monitoring data. For such systems with a large
number of interconnected sensors, as in water treatment plants,
power grids, etc., not only are they under pressure to handle

W

Manuscript received 2 January 2023; revised 20 May 2023; accepted
13 June 2023. Date of publication 27 June 2023; date of current version
19 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 2022JJ30398,
Grant 2022JJ40277, and Grant 2021JJ30455 and in part by the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan Provincial Education Department under
Grant 22A0056 and Grant 22B0102. Paper no. TII-23-0015. (Corresponding author: Pingping Dong.)
The authors are with the College of Information Science and
Engineering, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China
(e-mail: zlm@hunnu.edu.cn; oreoB1024@hunnu.edu.cn; xiexiaowei@
hunnu.edu.cn; lychen@hunnu.edu.cn; ppdong@hunnu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3288226.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3288226

huge amounts of high-dimensional and complex data on a daily
basis, but they also have to bear some risk [1]. It has become
particularly important to secure the critical infrastructure of such
IIoT systems against attacks. However, with the large increase
in data dimensions, it is difficult for monitors to immediately
detect anomalies, which leads to an increased need for automated
anomaly detection methods.
Therefore, anomaly detection of industrial time series data is
gradually becoming a hot issue in the field of IIoT. Anomalies
generally refer to values or behaviors that do not conform to
the expected pattern. Anomaly detection is the identification of
anomalies, that is, the detection of anomalous samples that differ
significantly from other observations [2]. Anomaly detection is
usually an unsupervised machine learning task due to the lack of
inherently labeled data. Most existing unsupervised methods are
mostly based on linear approaches [3], and there is less modeling
of nonlinear time series data.
In recent years, with the development of deep learning technology, time series anomaly detection methods have made improvements. In general, existing methods can be roughly divided
into two categories: forecasting-based methods [4], [5], where
researchers usually predict future normal conditions based on
historical data, then calculate the residuals between the actual and predicted data, and determine anomalies based on
the relative magnitude of the residuals. Reconstruction-based
methods [6], [7], [8], as [7], are classical reconstruction-based
anomaly detection methods, which determine the presence of
anomalies by autoencoder (AE) reconstruction errors. Such
methods aim to learn the low-dimensional feature representation
space of a sample and be able to better reconstruct a particular
data sample on that space. Reconstruction methods in anomaly
detection usually minimize reconstruction errors by forcing the
feature representation to learn the significant laws of the data.
Anomalous samples are difficult to reconstruct anomalies from
the resulting laws and therefore have large reconstruction errors.
With the further optimization and iteration of the deep learning model framework, Goodfellow et al. [9] proposed the generative adversarial network (GAN), which was originally used to
generate image data by gaming the generator and discriminator
against each other to learn the features of the training image
to generate samples similar to the training image. GAN is
one of the most promising deep learning models today and is
widely used in different fields. The application of GAN in the
direction of anomaly detection [10], [11]. These works have
proved that GAN has good performance in the detection of point
anomalies, but there are still few works on GAN applied to

1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

multidimensional and dynamic time series. Moreover, these
methods do not explain clearly the highly nonlinear time dependence and complex interactions between variables, nor do they
efficiently extract temporal information from industrial time
series data, and they still have room for improvement. Also, as
labeling data in an automated industrial production environment
requires a degree of labor cost, it is significant how a small
amount of data are used to improve model performance.
To address the abovementioned challenges, we propose a new
multivariate time series anomaly detection strategy framework
named TMANomaly, and model the complex multivariate correlations between large-scale sensor data streams to achieve
effective extraction of industrial time series data information
and subsequently complete the anomaly detection of IIoT data.
In TMANomaly, we use a time series mutual adversarial network
(TMAN) to detect anomalies based on reconstructing industrial
time series. TMAN extracts industrial time series information
by constructing two identical subnetworks composed of long
short-term memory (LSTM). Furthermore, unlike the traditional
GAN method with fixed subnetwork role, the roles of the two
subnetworks of TMAN can be swapped with each other as
each other’s reconstructors or discriminators, which allows the
subnetworks to obtain better learning capability and thus obtain
better anomaly detection performance than that of the traditional
GAN-based methods.
In this article, we use TMAN to learn the distribution of industrial high-dimensional dynamic time series data while detecting
anomalies based on reconstruction and recognition losses. The
main contributions of this article are as follows.
1) We propose a novel mutual adversarial multivariate
time series anomaly detection strategy framework named
TMANomaly, which can model complex multivariate
correlations between multidimensional industrial time
series data streams.
2) In TMANomaly, we propose a TMAN, which consists
of two identical subnetworks that can exchange roles
as reconstructors or discriminators, performing mutual
adversarial training to obtain better reconstructive capabilities than traditional methods.
3) Through performance evaluations of the proposed
TMANomaly, this work shows that the scheme can successfully perform reliable and robust learning to process
IIoT time series data and perform anomaly detection.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section II,
we give the related review on anomaly detection. Section III
describes our proposed TMANomaly framework and anomaly
evaluation function. Section IV describes SWaT, WADI, and
experimental setup, and evaluates the detection performance of
TMANomaly. Finally, Section V concludes this article.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Time Series Anomaly Detection
Time series anomaly detection is generally divided into
univariate time series anomaly detection and multivariate
time series anomaly detection. Univariate detection methods
consider just a single time dependent variable, while multivariate

detection methods are able to deal with multiple time dependent
variables simultaneously. Nowadays, most research involves
univariate models, and in the traditional anomaly detection
framework, anomaly detection is divided into an estimation
phase, where a specific method is used to predict the value of
a time-stamped variable, and then this value is compared to a
threshold value to detect anomalies. Such as the autoregressive
integrated moving average (ARIMA) model [12] was to capture the linear relationship between future and historical values
to model the time series for its anomaly detection. However,
ARIMA was only for the processing of univariate and relatively
smooth time series data and cannot handle complex time series
data.
As deep learning has developed, various neural networks have
been applied to time series anomaly detection. DeepAnT [13]
used a convolutional neural network to model time series prediction to improve prediction performance for periodic and
seasonal time series, and defines anomalies for their detection
using the square root of the error between the predicted and
true values. LSTM networks are also widely used for timeseries-based anomaly detection, such as the LSTM-VAE [14]
used LSTM networks to reconstruct industrial time series data
in a reconstructed manner by fusing signals and reconstructing
their expected distributions for anomaly detection. However,
these methods often fail to perform well when faced with the
processing of high-dimensional and complex dynamic industrial
time series data, which indicates that their work in IIoT has
certain defects.
In the IIoT environment, most of the inputs are multivariate
time series with some correlation, and these IIoT data need to
be continuously processed for statistical analysis and anomaly
detection. For multivariate time series, many studies begin to
learn the correlation between multiple variables to enhance the
performance of anomaly detection methods. Hundman et al. [5]
used a dynamic unsupervised method to detect anomalies in
telemetry data returned by spacecraft, the method predicts only
one step backwards and only one dimension, while collecting the
errors at each step to form an error vector and doing exponential
smoothing of the error vector to obtain a threshold value based on
the smoothed data. Wu et al. [4] used LSTM networks to detect
anomalies in industrial data by getting prediction errors from
Gaussian Bayesian models. These abovementioned methods are
able to accomplish the detection of anomalies in industrial data,
but there is still need for improvement in terms of performance,
such as [5] has failed to solve the correlation, dependency
problems inherent in telemetry.
B. Anomaly Detection in GAN
As an unsupervised learning algorithm, GAN has a good
performance in anomaly detection. Schlegl et al. [15] proposed AnoGAN, which was the first attempt to use GAN for
anomaly detection. AnoGAN used DCGAN to unsupervisedly
learn to train distributions from normal samples. The test samples was then feed in and the loss function is defined for
multiple backpropagation iterations to obtain mapping results
from the image to the potential space using residual losses.

ZHANG et al.: TMANOMALY: TIME-SERIES MUTUAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

However, it also suffers from a time efficiency assessment.
Therefore, f-AnoGAN [16] was proposed based on AnoGAN,
which was optimized to improve the performance of anomaly
detection by learning the representation of training data through
WGAN [17]. Zenati et al. [18] proposed a bidirectional GANbased adversarial learning anomaly detection method, also used
reconstruction loss error to determine whether data samples are
anomalous, and the method adds potential space to the image
space based on AnoGAN, allowing the network to update faster.
GANomaly [19] modified the GAN network structure and loss
function to constrain the potential space. These methods are
all anomaly detection for point anomalies, but are deficient for
temporal anomaly detection and cannot effectively learn the
distribution of temporal data.
C. Time Series Anomaly Detection in GAN
In recent years, researchers have been trying to combine GAN
with multivariate time series and anomaly detection to achieve
a crossover of multistream. At the earliest, Li et al. [8] proposed
MAD-GAN, which is the first attempt of GAN for time series
anomaly detection. In the training module, detection module,
the underlying framework of GAN consists of LSTM-RNN
to achieve capturing the temporal correlation of time series
distribution for the determination of anomalies.
After this, many studies have been done based on [8], such
as FID-GAN [20], TAnoGAN [21], TadGAN [22], and they
were all unsupervised anomaly detection methods based on
GAN. The data are modeled as multivariate time series, and
LSTM-RNN is used as a generator and discriminator to capture
the correlation of the time series for anomaly score determination
in a reconstructed manner. The difference is that FID-GAN was
combined with fog computing to train encoders that accelerate
the reconstruction loss computation to make it better, TAnoGAN
used a different structure to achieve processing of smaller
datasets, and TadGAN does not use the original loss function.
Yoon et al. [23] proposed TimeGAN, combines unsupervised
GAN algorithms with regression principles for joint training to
generate time series that retain time dynamics. Kong et al. [11]
proposed an AMBi-GAN based on bidirectional LSTM and
attention mechanism, which uses a bidirectional LSTM network
with attention mechanism as its generator and discriminator for
anomaly detection by reconstruction loss and generation loss
reconstruction error.
All these methods have good performance in time series
anomaly detection. However, the performance of the discriminator and generator of traditional GAN is difficult to balance
during training, which leads to the GAN remaining difficult to
train. In training reconstructed neural networks using traditional
adversarial training methods, the imbalance of the subnetworks
may cause the model to enter a local optimum solution, which
results in the combination of GAN and LSTM subnetworks
not working optimally. Especially, when the input is highdimensional, dynamic and complex IIoT data, these methods are
more difficult to handle the extraction of temporal information,
limiting the performance of the model. Although existing works
have utilized adversarial training to enhance the reconstruction

2265

capability of the decoder in GAN-based frameworks for anomaly
detection, these methods typically do not impose any constraints
on the distribution of the encoded latent variables used to generate reconstructed samples. Consequently, the resulting models
lack the ability to generate new samples that conform to the
distribution of the training data, and the reconstruction loss often
dominates the overall loss function. Furthermore, the end-to-end
adversarial training strategy employed in these models may not
be optimal for fitting the underlying data distribution, as it does
not explicitly account for the distributional properties of the data.
Therefore, we propose a TMAN with two identical subnetworks that can balance the performance of the subnetworks.
Each subnetwork can act as a reconstruction subnetwork and a
discriminator subnetwork. The subnetworks can swap their roles
during training, which can alleviate the problem of underperformance due to imbalanced subnetworks in traditional adversarial
learning. We apply TMAN to the proposed time series anomaly
detection framework TMANonaly.
III. PROPOSED TMANOMALY
A. Problem Definition
In this work, we focus on multivariate time series anomaly
detection. Due to the effect of the high imbalance in industrial
time series data, our training data are derived from true normal
samples (without anomalies) for S sensors with brakes and
anomaly detection is performed by reconstructing the error on
test data with anomalous data. The time granularity of these
data is Ttrain . We define the values of these datasets as Dtrain =
(1)
(T )
(t)
[Dtrain , . . . , Dtraintrain ], where Dtrain ∈ Rs denotes the timing data
at a timestamp of Ttrain , and S represents the quantity value of
different sensors, i.e., the feature number. The test data come
from same S sensors with a time scale of Ttest . The test data
(1)
(T )
(t)
are represented as Dtest = [Dtest , . . . , Dtesttest ], where Dtest ∈ Rs ,
and it has a specific window size w.
Our goal is to detect anomalies in industrial time series data,
so given a multivariate sequence of consecutive w time steps, our
output is based on a reconstructed output vector, i.e., ŷ ∈ Rn ,
(t) ∈ {0, 1}, which indicates the presence or absence of
where y
anomalies at timestamp t. That is, we obtain the final anomaly
result by selecting different thresholds for the anomaly scores at
each timestamp returned.
For better understanding, we also provide some basic related
concepts as follows.
1) GAN: The original GAN is based on the ideas of game
theory and is an unsupervised approach. It uses a generator G
and a discriminator D for adversarial training. The generator G
is used to generate fake data, i.e., it receives an input of a random
vector z, which follows a particular distribution Pz (z), such as
a Gaussian distribution, and subsequently outputs a generated
sample to the discriminator, which classifies it in this way and
ends when it reaches convergence, and its optimization objective
function can be expressed as
min max V (DG) = Ex∼pdt (x) [log D(x)]
G

D

+ Ez∼pz (z) [log(1 − D(G(z))).

(1)

2266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

timestamp t we set the active window in such a way that it is
neighbor-fetching and does not overlap, so we define the input
model as follows:


(2)
x(t) = x(t−w) , x(t−w+1) , . . . , x(t−1)

Fig. 1.

Overview of the framework of TMANomaly.

2) LSTM: LSTM is a special form of RNN that can solve

the gradient vanishing problem that RNNs may face, and is a
widely used method in various fields. It consists of input gate Ft ,
forgetting gate It and output gate Ot as well as the storage unit
S̄t to protect and control the information. In a traditional LSTM
network, the input gate is used to update the information and
additionally to pass the hidden information from the previous
layer to the tanh function, the output gate is used to determine
the value of the next hidden state, and the forgetting gate is
used to control how many input values the cell state has after
moment t.
B. TMANomaly Framework
The proposed TMANomaly framework consists of data preprocessing, reconstruction network, and anomaly determination
mechanism, as shown in Fig. 1. First, the original dataset is
preprocessed and normal samples are extracted as training data,
after which the training data are modeled using the reconstruction network. Then, the test data are input into the reconstruction
network and the reconstruction loss of the samples is obtained
after reconstruction. Finally, anomalies are determined from
reconstruction losses by the anomaly determination mechanism.
1) TMAN: In IIoT environments, data from sensors and
brakes often interact with each other, and each sensor can be
treated as a specific feature whose anomalies are then predicted
by training on the features. We design TMAN to enable two
identical subnetworks capable of automatically learning distributions of multivariate time-series data to fight each other, thus
allowing both to reach equilibrium.
The proposed TMAN is an anomaly detection method based
on reconstruction, i.e., the industrial multivariate time series data
are captured by a subnetwork TRecAE consisting of an LSTM,
and TMAN then outputs a new reconstruction sequence based on
the variability of the sequence from the input sequence at each
step length to obtain the reconstruction error, after which the
anomaly or normality of the step length data in the sequence is
determined. Fig. 2 further details the overall model architecture.
As shown in Fig. 2, first, TRecAE is given the input data
s
. In order to obtain the distribution of the multivarix(t) ∈ Dtrain
ate time series data, our subnetwork consists of an LSTM, so at

where, w is the active window size.
The LSTM network is used to allow both subnetworks to learn
the distribution of multivariate time series. From the abovementioned explanatory note on the LSTM model, it is clear that after
the LSTM receives the input x(t) , the output ω at timestamp
t is obtained through the processing of the input gate Ft , the
forgetting gate It and the output gate Ot and the storage unit S̄t .
The process is formulated as follows:


(3)
ω = h x(t) ; κe
where, h(∗) represents the encoding function of the LSTM
network (Ft , It , Ot, , S̄t ) and κe represents the different sets of
parameters.
To allow TRecAE to perform adversarial training while obtaining our reconstruction error, we plugged in a fully connected
layer after the LSTM, which received the output value ω from
the LSTM processing and fed it to two other fully connected
(FC) layers, which is mapped and then fed into the other two

(t)
FC layers to obtain our reconstruction error xi . The process is
expressed as follows:


(t)

xi

= T rec1 (ω) .

(4)

Likewise, the other two FC layers receive w and are able to

output our discriminant score c (t) , the process is formulated as
follows:


c (t) = T rec2 (ω) .

(5)

Equations (2)–(5) previously form the entire TRecAE subnetwork. Similar to (1), our reconstruction network is constructed
with TRecAE1 to obtain the reconstructed input. In the classic
GAN, there is also a discriminant network to discriminate the
data input by the generator, so we set TRecAE2 as the discriminant network.
Throughout the training process, the reconstruction network
and the discriminator network play a max-minimization game,
i.e., the GR1 reconstruction network and the DR2 discriminator
network fight each other’s game, one discriminates and the
other generates reconstruction data, and stops after reaching
maximum balance. First, we train the discriminative network
DR2 , set the loss function to cross-entropy loss function, and
finally obtain the loss LtD as shown in the following:
LtD =

m


1 
(t)
log DR2 xi
m i




(t)
+ log 1 − DR2 GR1 xi

(6)
(t)

where, m is the sample size of minibatch training data xi , and
(t)
GR1 (xi ) denotes the reconstructed data obtained.
After updating the parameters, we keep the network parameter
values fixed and train the reconstructed network GR1 . At this

ZHANG et al.: TMANOMALY: TIME-SERIES MUTUAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 2.

2267

Outline of TMAN.

stage, we still use the cross-entropy loss function, which also
gives us the loss value Ltg for this part of the training
LtG =

m



1  
(t)
log 1 − DR2 GR1 xi
.
m i

(7)

After training these two subnetworks, the reconstructed network
can obtain reconstruction capability, but it is still some distance
away from the goal we aim to achieve. Our proposed TMAN,
which uses the TRecAE as the reconstruction model, takes the
input real multivariate time series data x(t) as input instead of
the random vector z. Usually, we discriminate the reconstruction data x(t) based on the input data x(t) . However, in the
abovementioned training process, we only considered the aspect
that the output is real/fake, and did not consider other details,
which made our model not achieve the best results in anomaly
detection, so we use x(t) and x(t) feature matching loss Ltrec
and LtG for joint training GR1 reconstructs the network. Ltrec is
defined as follows:
m

2
1   (t)
(t)
t
xi − GR1 xi
Lrec =
.
(8)
m i
Finally, we use the weights shown in (9) and Lttotal to set the total
loss for backpropagation to update GR1
Lttotal = β1 Ltrec + β2 LtG

(9)

where, β1 , β2 are the two loss weighting parameters, respectively.
The abovementioned process of performing one iteration for
two subnetworks is only a part of the whole adversarial learning
process. In the whole adversarial learning process, there may
be an imbalance situation where the discriminator is weak and
the generator is strong, and how to balance the two has been
the direction of many scholars’ efforts. We choose the mutual
adversarial approach to alleviate this imbalance. As shown in
Fig. 2, TRecAE is designed to have a reconstruction output,
and a discriminative category output. In the training process,
two TRecAEs can form a mutual adversarial model, and both
subnetworks can act as each other’s reconstruction network or
discriminative network, as shown in Fig. 3. If there is unbalance,
the roles of our two subnetworks are switched so that the whole

Fig. 3. Training process of TMAN. (a) Model architecture: TRecAE1 as
the reconstruction network, TRecAE2 as the discriminant network. (b)
Model architecture: TRecAE2 as the reconstruction network, TRecAE1
as the discriminant network.

model gets not just a local optimum, but a better reconstruction
capability.
2) Mechanism for Determining Abnormal Scores: During
the testing process, in order to obtain the anomaly scores for
each time scale, we have obtained two subnetworks that can
reconstruct the data independently through time series mutual
adversarial training. During the testing process, we use the reconstructed output of TRecAE for anomaly detection. Therefore,
we compose the reconstructed outputs of the two subnetworks
as the final output xj , as shown in the following:
xj = αTRecAE1 (xj ) + (1 − α)TRecAE2 (xj )

(10)

2268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Algorithm 1: TMANomaly.
Input: training set, test set.
Output: The anomaly sample xj .
1: for each epoch do
2:
Initialization: Set TRecAE1 as G, TRecAE2 as D.
3:
for minibatch data from training set do
(t)
4:
Sampling {xi }m
i=1 from minibatch data.
5:
Get the reconstruction sample from G:
(t)
(t)
xi = G(xi ).
6:
Use (6) to update discriminator D.
7:
Use (9) to update reconstructor G.
8:
Swap the roles of TRecAE1 and TRecAE2 .
9:
Execute Lines 5 − 7 again.
10:
end for
11: end for
(t)
12: Sampling {xj }nj=1 from test set.
13: Get the final output xj of TMAN by (10).
14: Calculate the anomaly scores A(xj ) by (11).
15: for j = 1, 2, . . ., n do
16:
if sj > threshold then
17:
xj is abnormal sample.
18:
end if
19: end for
20: return xj
where, α ⊆ [0, 1], is the weight parameter that regulates the contribution of the outputs of the two reconstructed self-encoders
to the final output data, and xj is the data at a certain timestamp
t in the Dtest .
Then, similar to the loss objective, we calculate the residual
value between xj and xj using the loss function L1 and calculate
the deviation level score as the anomaly score for the data at
timestamp t. A(xj ) is defined as follows:
A(xj ) = |xj − xj |.

(11)

Finally, we use the obtained anomaly scores normalized to get
the final output vector ŷ, and if ŷ exceeds a fixed threshold, we
mark the timestamp t as an anomaly.
The entire training and detection process of TMANomaly is
shown in Algorithm 1.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Datasets and Preprocessing
To evaluate our proposed TMANomaly, we chose two different datasets to train and detect industrial time series anomalies,
including SWaT, WADI. Prior to the experiments, we preprocessed the datasets.
1) SWaT: SWaT [24], from the Water Treatment Testbed
coordinated by the Singapore Public Utilities Board, is a realworld sensor dataset from a water treatment physical testbed
system that records real anomalies, which integrates digital,
physical in order to serve as a control and monitoring system, and
many large-scale plants have applications for such systems. The

Fig. 4.

Grey correlation degree of sensors on WADI.

dataset was run for 11 days (seven days in normal operation and
four consecutive days in attack) and collected all values obtained
from 51 sensors and actuators, labeling the data according to
normal and abnormal behavior.
2) WADI: WADI [25] is also a safe water treatment dataset,
but it is an extension of the SWAT dataset, which consists
of three processes—water treatment, storage, and distribution
network—to form a complete, realistic water treatment process.
The dataset was run continuously for 16 days (14 days in normal
operation and two days under attack) and data from 123 sensors
and actuators were collected.
3) Data Preprocessing: During data preprocessing, we
transform each record’s label by replacing it with a [0,1] numeric
label, while having some features encoded using one-hot and
mapping other numeric features between [0,1] by using normalization.
B. Feature Selection
Feature selection is a key part of the machine learning task.
Feature selection allows selecting features that are important
to the model and can reduce the dimensionality of the training
data and speed up the training of the model, while also reducing model complexity and avoiding overfitting. Grey relation
analysis (GRA) [26] is a multifactor statistical analysis method
for feature extraction of interacting factors in a system. In this
article, features are selected for SWaT and WADI, which are
derived from real-world water treatment plants and feature correlated and interacting sensor and brake values. Therefore, the
GRA algorithm is chosen for feature selection of our industrial
time series dataset to select the features with the highest impact
on the whole system, in order to achieve optimal experimental
results with a small set of features. For SWaT, we apply the GRA
algorithm to obtain its 30 features with the highest correlation,
as shown in Fig. 4. These 30 features were chosen as the new
features for the dataset. For WADI, after the same process, we
obtain 35 features with the highest correlation, as shown in
Fig. 5. We chose 36 features as the new features for the dataset.
A summary table of statistical information from our processing
of the two datasets in Table I.

ZHANG et al.: TMANOMALY: TIME-SERIES MUTUAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

2269

TABLE II
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON SWAT AND WADI

Fig. 5.

Grey correlation degree of sensors on SWaT.
TABLE I
STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF DATASETS: SWAT AND WADI

C. Baseline
To evaluate the performance of TMANomaly, we compare the
performance of it with that of five different anomaly detection
methods as follows.
1) LSTM-VAE [14]: It replaces feedforward networks with
self-encoders using LSTM, while using anomaly scores
to obtain reconstruction errors.
2) MAD-GAN [8]: Anomaly scores are calculated based
on a reconstruction approach using GAN networks and
the temporal correlation of the time series distribution is
captured using LSTM-RNN.
3) THOC [27]: It is a model for anomaly detection with oneclass model of time series, using an expansive recurrent
neural network to capture temporal dynamics.
4) GDN [28]: It is proposed that aims to learn relationships
between sensors in the form of graphs, and then recognize
and interpret the deviations of the learned patterns.
5) GTA [29]: It is a combinable microconnectivity learning
strategy combined with information propagation convolution that automatically learns the graph structure of
relationships between sensors.
D. Indicators and Experimental Settings
1) Evaluation Indicators: We use precision (Prec), recall
(Rec), and F1-scores (F1) to evaluate the performance of
TP
TP
, Rec = TP+FN
,
TMANomaly and baseline model. Prec = TP+FP
2×Precision×Recall
F 1 = Precision+Recall , and TP, TN, FP, FN are the numbers of
true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives.
Given that datasets are extremely unbalanced, we chose these unbalanced indicators so that we could rationalize their selection.

2) Experimental Settings: We perform all experiments on
a computer equipped with an 11th Gen Intel (R) Core (TM)
i7-11800H and 16 G RAM. The development framework was
Pytorch 1.7 with CUDA 11.6, and an NVIDIA GTX3060 GPU
was used for training acceleration, where the learning rate was
set to 0.000005, the batch size was set to 64, and the loss
value of the network, such as β1 = 50, β2 = 1. The neural
network parameters were initialized in training and testing using
a random seed 777. We trained the model for up to 1000 periods,
while setting the sliding window size w to 30 for both WADI
and SWaT.

E. Performance Evaluation
We obtain the best Prec scores (labeled*), F-1 (labeled**),
and Rec scores (labeled***), and show this and compare all
baselines separately across the board. The results are shown in
Table II.
In Figs. 6 and 7, TMANomaly largely outperforms the
baseline on both SWaT and WADI, and both have high Prec
of 99.75% and 95.60%, respectively. In terms of F-1 scores,
TMANomaly outperforms the best baseline by 14.28% on
WADI and is on par with the best baseline (GTA) on SWaT. For
recall, TMAN is on par with the best baseline on WADI, while
on SWaT the recall is only 0.05% worse than the best baseline.
WADI is more unbalanced than SWaT. For Prec, TMANomaly
also performs well on SWaT, while TMANomaly performs
well for recall, F-1 scores and achieves a balanced effect while

2270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE IV
RESULTS OF ABLATION FEATURE SELECTING EXPERIMENTS
ON WADI AND SWAT

Fig. 6.

Performance of the models on WADI.

Fig. 7.

Performance of the models on SWaT.

original features of the dataset intact, and then perform anomaly
detection, Also, we compare our proposed TMAN as a baseline
model. The results are shown in Table IV.
From the abovementioned ablation experiments, we note the
following observations.
1) There is a gap between TMAN and time-series methods
that do not use mutual adversarial networks, which plays
an important role in our mutual adversarial network timeseries modeling in dealing with high-dimensional timeseries anomaly detection.
2) The feature selection method allows us to optimize the
performance of TMANomaly, and with fewer features
than other baseline methods, we can effectively reduce
the cost of manually labeling data.
These findings show that each component of TMANomaly is
important and makes the framework play an important role in
time series anomaly detection.
V. CONCLUSION

TABLE III
RESULTS OF ABLATION MUTUAL ADVERSARIAL EXPERIMENTS
ON WADI AND SWAT

ensuring very high accuracy, which is important in practical
applications and can represent a strong effectiveness even in
unbalanced and high-dimensional attack scenarios.
F. Ablation Experiment
In order to evaluate the necessity of our proposed
TMANomaly, we will perform ablation experiments on
TMANomaly.
1) Ablation of Mutual Adversarial Training: In TMAN, we
use two TRecAEs to perform mutual adversaries to reach
the final balance. To evaluate the necessity of these components,
we will exclude them. We remove the adversarial component of
the mutual adversarial and change the original two TRecAEs
into a single TRecAE. Also, we compare our proposed TMAN
(i.e., the case of using two TRecAEs) as a baseline model. The
results are shown in Table III.
2) Ablation of Selecting Features: In TMANomaly, we perform feature selection. To evaluate it, we perform ablation
experiments on SWaT and WADI for the feature selection part
as well. We remove the feature selection part, leaving all the

In this article, we propose TMANomaly, a mutual adversarial network-based anomaly detection framework for industrial
time series, which uses LSTM as a subnetwork in the mutual adversarial network to learn the distribution correlation
of time series data, and the subnetwork can independently
obtain reconstruction errors to compute reconstruction losses
for anomaly determination of industrial time series. We also
apply the GRA algorithm to the feature selection of SWaT and
WADI, which can capture the anomalies of industrial time series
with fewer features. Experiments on two IIoT datasets, such
as WADI, SWaT, show that TMANomaly outperforms other
advanced studies in terms of accuracy, F-1 score, and recall rate.
Next, we plan to optimize the model structure of the proposed
TMANomaly to further improve the performance of industrial
anomaly detection.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Zhang, Z. Dong, W. Kong, and K. Meng, “A composite anomaly
detection system for data-driven power plant condition monitoring,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 4390–4402, Jul. 2020.
[2] M. Ahmed, A. N. Mahmood, and M. R. Islam, “A survey of anomaly
detection techniques infinancial domain,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 55, pp. 278–288, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2015.01.001.
[3] S. Li and J. Wen, “A model-based fault detection and diagnostic methodology based on PCA method and wavelet transform,” Energy Buildings,
vol. 68, pp. 63–71, Jan. 2014.
[4] D. Wu, Z. Jiang, X. Xie, X. Wei, W. Yu, and R. Li, “LSTM learning
with Bayesian and Gaussian processing for anomaly detection in industrial
IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 5244–5253, Aug. 2020.
[5] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom,
“Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
London, U.K., 2018, pp. 387–395.

ZHANG et al.: TMANOMALY: TIME-SERIES MUTUAL ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS FOR INDUSTRIAL ANOMALY DETECTION

[6] L. Zhang, X. Xie, K. Xiao, W. Bai, K. Liu, and P. Dong, “MANomaly:
Mutual adversarial networks for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” Inf.
Sci., vol. 611, pp. 65–80, Sep. 2022.
[7] C. C. Aggarwal, “An introduction to outlier analysis,” in Outlier Analysis.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2013, pp. 1–34.
[8] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S. K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial
networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Munich, Germany, 2019,
pp. 703–716.
[9] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun. ACM.,
vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, Oct. 2020.
[10] Z. Xiong, Z. Cai, Q. Han, A. Alrawais, and W. Li, “ADGAN: Protect your
location privacy in camera data of auto-driving vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 6200–6210, Sep. 2021.
[11] F. Kong, J. Li, B. Jiang, H. Wang, and H. Song, “Integrated generative
model for industrial anomaly detection via bidirectional LSTM and attention mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 541–550,
Jan. 2023.
[12] G. P. Zhang, “Time series forecasting using a hybrid ARIMA and neural
network model,” Neurocomputing, vol. 50. pp. 159–175, Jan. 2003.
[13] M. Munir, S. A. Siddiqui, A. Dengel, and S. Ahmed, “DeepAnT: A deep
learning approach for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 1991–2005, 2019.
[14] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[15] T. Schlegl, P. Seebock, and S. M. Waldstein, “Unsupervised anomaly
detection with generative adversarial networks to guide marker discovery,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Med. Imag., Boone, NC, USA, 2017,
pp. 146–157.
[16] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidt-Erfurth,
“f-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44, May 2019.
[17] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 214–223.
[18] H. Zenati, M. Romain, C. S. Foo, B. Lecouat, and V. R. Chandrasekhar,
“Adversarially learned anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data
Mining, Singapore, 2018, pp. 727–736.
[19] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly: Semisupervise anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. Asian Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 622–637.
[20] P. Freitas de Araujo-Filho, G. Kaddoum, D. R. Campelo, A. G. Santos,
D. Macêdo, and C. Zanchettin, “Intrusion detection for cyber-physical
systems using generative adversarial networks in fog environment,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6247–6256, Apr. 2021.
[21] M. A. Bashar and R. Nayak, “TAnoGAN: Time series anomaly detection
with generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput.
Intell., 2020, pp. 1778–1785.
[22] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and K. Veeramachaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. BigData, 2020, pp. 33–43.
[23] J. Yoon, D. Jarrett, and M. Van der Schaar, “Time-series generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2019, pp. 5508–5518.
[24] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop
Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36.
[25] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in
Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017, pp. 25–28.
[26] L. Y. Zhai, L. P. Khoo, and Z. W. Zhong, “Design concept evaluation in
product development using rough sets and grey relation analysis,” Expert
Syst. Appl., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 7072–7079, Apr. 2009.
[27] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 13016–13026.
[28] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[29] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection
in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun.
2022.

2271

Lianming Zhang received the B.S. in physical
education and M.S. degree in curriculum and
instruction in physics from Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China, in 1997 and 2000,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
applied technology from Central South University, Changsha, China, in 2006.
He is currently a Professor with Hunan Normal University. His research interests include Internet of Things, intelligent network, edge computing, and machine learning.

Wenji Bai received the B.S. degree in computer science and technology from the College of Big Data and Intelligent Engineering, Yangtze Normal University, Chongqing,
China, in 2020. She is currently working toward the M.S. degree in computer science
and technology with the College of Information
Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.
Her research interests include anomaly detection and deep learning.

Xiaowei Xie received the B.S. degree in resource surveying engineering from the College
of Information and Computer, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan, China, in 2020 and
the M.S. degree in computer science and technology from Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China, in 2023. He is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in computer science
and technology with the College of Information
Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China.
His research interests include anomaly detection and deep learning.
Liying Chen received the B.S. degree in information and computing sciences from the College of Information, Shanghai Ocean University,
Shanghai, China, in 2022. She is currently working toward the M.S. degree in computer science
and technology with the College of Information
Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.
Her research interests include datacenter
transport, network performance analysis, and
protocol optimization and protocol design in
RDMA.
Pingping Dong received the B.S. in communication engineering, M.S. in information and
communication engineering, and Ph.D. degree
in computer technology from the School of Information Science and Engineering, Central South
University, Changsha, China, in 2008, 2011, and
2015, respectively.
She is currently an Associate Professor with
the College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University, Changsha,
China. Her research interests include protocol
optimization and protocol design in wide area networks and wireless
local area networks.