IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

2497

Transforms-Based Bayesian Tensor Completion
Method for Network Traffic Measurement
Data Recovery
Zecan Yang , Student Member, IEEE, Laurence T. Yang , Fellow, IEEE, Lingzhi Yi , Member, IEEE,
Xianjun Deng , Senior Member, IEEE, Chenlu Zhu , and Yiheng Ruan

Abstract—Network traffic measurement is regarded as the
bedrock of next-generation network systems. Its purpose is to
monitor the network traffic and provide data support for traffic engineering. For this reason, monitoring traffic data from a
network-wide perspective is particularly important. However, the
proliferation of network services has led to the explosive growth
of network traffic, which has brought significant challenges to the
measure of network-wide traffic. Therefore, how to infer networkwide traffic from partial traffic data is extremely important. In this
article, a transforms-based Bayesian tensor completion (TBTC)
method is proposed to infer network traffic data. First, the heterogeneous network traffic data with missing entries are organized into
observation tensors according to temporal dimensions and other
attributes. Second, the sparse hierarchical prior is used to induce
lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors, which makes the tubal rank
of the observation tensor can be estimated. Further, a variational
Bayesian inference method is developed for model learning, and an

Manuscript received 26 October 2022; revised 9 January 2023; accepted 5
February 2023. Date of publication 6 March 2023; date of current version 30
April 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program
of China under Grant 2022YFE0138600, in part by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities, under Grant HUST: 2022JYCXJJ020, in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61901210,
and 62272182, in part by the Artificial Intelligence and Intelligent Transportation
Joint Technical Center of HUST and in part by the Hubei Chutian Intelligent
Transportation Company, LTD through Project Intelligent Tunnel Integrated
Monitoring and Management System. Recommended for acceptance by Dr.
Haipeng Dai. (Corresponding author: Lingzhi Yi.)
Zecan Yang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
zecanyang@gmail.com).
Laurence T. Yang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, also
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the Department
of Computer Science, St. Francis Xavier University, Antigonish, NS B2G 2W5,
Canada (e-mail: ltyang@ieee.org).
Lingzhi Yi is with the School of Information and Safety Engineering, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan, Hubei 430073, China (e-mail:
lzyi@zuel.edu.cn).
Xianjun Deng is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
dengxj615@hust.edu.cn).
Chenlu Zhu is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the
Hubei Chutian Expressway Digital Technology Company LTD, Wuhan 430050,
China (e-mail: zhu_cl@hust.edu.cn).
Yiheng Ruan is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the
Hubei Chutian Smart Communication Company LTD, Wuhan 430050, China
(e-mail: ruanyiheng@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2023.3253163

efficient updating method is presented. Finally, two cases of the linear transforms-based tensor completion model are implemented in
the experiments. Experimental results on two real-world network
traffic datasets validate that the proposed method can efficiently
and accurately recover network traffic data.
Index Terms—Network traffic measurement, tensor completion,
sparse Bayesian learning, variational Bayesian inference.

I. INTRODUCTION
S THE bedrock of the next-generation network system,
traffic measurement has received increasing attention [1],
[2]. It measures the traffic data from the physical layer to
the application layer from the network-wide perspective and
provides a data foundation for network anomaly monitoring,
load balancing, intrusion detection, traffic engineering, etc. For
this reason, it is particularly important to measure traffic data
from a network-wide perspective [3].
In recent years, with the rapid development of the 5 G network,
Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, the demand for mobile devices and network services
has grown rapidly [4], [5], [6], [7]. At the same time, network
traffic data is also showing explosive growth, which brings huge
challenges to network-wide traffic measurement. However, the
measurement of large network traffic needs a huge overhead [3].
Therefore, how to infer network-wide traffic data from part of
the network data has become the focus of the next-generation
network systems.
Some studies have shown that end-to-end network measurement data such as traffic, delay and other network information
have hidden spatial and temporal correlations [8]. This drives
some research on network measurement traffic data inference
based on Spatio-temporal correlations [9], [10]. At the same
time, these methods can infer other network traffic data by using
a few randomly monitoring network traffic data. Therefore,
inferring the network-wide traffic data from part of the network
traffic data can be considered a missing data recovery task [3].
In addition, some studies have focused on network load balancing [11], confident coverage [12], [13], and communication
optimization [14], [15], [16], etc, which usually require complete
network traffic data. However, the traffic data is often missing
and corrupted during the collection due to various factors such as
network transmission interruption, network attacks, and signal

A

2327-4697 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

coverage problems. It seriously affects the monitoring and acquisition of network-wide traffic data. To improve the quality of
traffic measurement data and better support the next-generation
network systems, recovery of missing traffic data has become
one of the great challenges in network science and engineering.
Recently, a class of matrix completion methods was proposed for missing traffic measurement data recovery [10], [17].
However, matrix-based completion methods for traffic data
recovery destroy the original structure and correlation. As a
multi-dimensional data representation tool, tensor has great
advantages to represent multi-dimension and heterogeneous data
in network systems [18], [19]. Tensor completion, as one of
the important branches of tensor analysis, aims to fill in the
missing entries of the observed data and can be regarded as a
multi-dimensional data recovery task. Therefore, the recovery
of missing network traffic measurement data based on tensor
completion has received extensive attention [3], [9]. In [20],
an outliner-robust tensor completion method is proposed to
recover network traffic data concurrently with network anomaly
detection. For highly skewed with heavy tails traffic data, Xie,
et al. [21] proposed an expectile tensor completion method to
recover missing data. However, these tensor completion methods suffer from low efficiency or low accuracy. To address all
challenges above under a unified framework, in this work, a
transforms-based Bayesian tensor completion method is proposed to recover missing network traffic measurement data. The
main contributions of this article are summarized as follows:
r Heterogeneous traffic measurement data with missing entries are represented by observation tensors according
to temporal dimensional and other attributes, which effectively preserves the data structure and correlation. A
Bayesian tensor completion method is proposed to recover missing network traffic data. The observation tensor
is decomposed into two small factor tensors by linear
transforms-based T-SVD. By sparse hierarchical prior and
Bayesian inference, the factor tensors obtain lateral slices
sparsity, which makes the tubal rank of the observation
tensor can be estimated during the tensor completion.
r By diagonalization of the block matrix, an efficient variational Bayesian inference algorithm is presented in the
arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain, which effectively reduces the algorithm complexity and improves the
missing traffic measurement data recovery efficiency.
r Our proposed Bayesian tensor completion model can be
extended to arbitrary invertible linear transforms and is not
limited to a specific linear transform. In the experiment, we
implement two cases of linear transforms-based (including Cosine-transforms and Random Orthogonal Matrix
(ROM) transforms) Bayesian tensor completion method.
This article is structured as follows. Section II presents background and related work. Some notations and basic definitions
are introduced in Section III. In Section IV, the details of our
proposed model including the probabilistic model, priors, approximate Bayesian inference, and an efficient updating method
in arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain are presented.
The experiments on the performance of our model under different linear transforms are discussed in Section V. Finally, this
article is summarized in Section VI.

Fig. 1.

Illustration of different tensor representations of network traffic data.

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we will briefly introduce some relevant background information, including tensor and representing traffic
data as tensors. In addition, we also introduce some related works
of tensor completion for network traffic data recovery.
A. Tensor and Representing Traffic Data as Tensor
Tensor (multidimensional arrays) [22], as an effective tool for
multi-dimensional and heterogeneous data representation and
calculation, is widely applied in the real world. For example, a
hyperspectral image can be regarded as a third-order tensor by
its channels, width, and height; a color video can be viewed as a
fourth-order tensor indexed by width × height × channels ×
f rames; the time-varying urban traffic data can also be represented as a tensor indexed by road-ID, time interval and day;
manufacturing process data can be represented as a third-order
tensor based on product ID, process parameters and timestamp.
Similarly, tensors are also applied in network traffic engineering.
For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the time-varying network traffic
data can be represented as a third-order tensor indexed by origin,
destination, and times interval; the network anomaly data can be
viewed as a third-order tensor by its OD (Origin and Destination
pair), time interval and days.
B. Related Work
In this subsection, we review the related work on matrix completion, tensor completion, and their application in the recovery
of missing network traffic data. In addition, we also briefly
identify the differences between our work and existing work.
Traffic data at a certain time can be naturally represented
as a matrix according to its source ID and destination ID.
Therefore, matrix completion is often used to recover missing
traffic data. A matrix completion-based method for estimating
missing network latency data for personal devices is proposed
in [17]. Based on correlations Spatio-temporal of internet traffic
data, a compressive sensing-based missing data recovery method
for traffic matrix is proposed in [10]. A fast network monitoring
data matrix completion method for acceleration on GPU is
proposed in [23]. With the subspace-based matrix completion,
a low-cost online network traffic measurement data prediction
method is proposed by Jin, et al. [24]. However, for the traffic
data with time series, the matrix-based data representation makes
the matrix dimension imbalanced, which is not enough to capture

YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY

the correlations inside the traffic data, and also reduces the
performance of the algorithm.
Tensor completion, as one of the important tasks in tensor
analysis, has received a lot of attention and has also been applied
in many different fields such as internet traffic data recovery [18], network anomaly detection [20], Spatio-temporal data
imputation [25], and visual data inpainting [26], etc. For traffic
data recovery, a novel sequential tensor completion method
is proposed to improve computing efficiency and capture
the temporal correlation of traffic data [27]. Considering the
Spatio-temporal correlation of traffic data, a low-rank tensor
factorization-based tensor completion method is proposed to
estimate the missing traffic data [9]. A tripartite graph aided
tensor completion method is proposed for sparse network measurement data recovery [28]. However, based on CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) [22] decomposition, these methods
have the problem that the rank is difficult to estimate. Recently, a
class of tensor completion methods based on Bayesian learning
with automatic rank estimation has also received some attention. In [29], a hierarchical full Bayesian probabilistic model is
proposed for tensor completion based on the CP factorization.
Similarly, a Bayesian Gaussian CP tensor decomposition approach for the missing traffic data recovery method is proposed
in [25]. However, the model inference method based on Gibbs
sampling makes the model converge slowly and is hard to be
applied to large datasets.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to combine
Bayesian learning and tensor completion to recover missing network traffic data, which effectively mines the hidden structural
information inside the traffic data and improve accuracy. For the
efficiency of the algorithm, a method for posterior estimation in
arbitrary invertible linear transformation domain is developed,
which reduces the time overhead of the model. Furthermore,
with the benefit of sparse Bayesian learning, our model can
effectively estimate the rank of traffic data tensors.

TABLE I
NOTATIONS

B. Basic Definitions
This subsection introduces some basic definitions. For a tensor
X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , the bvec-operation is forming a n1 n3 × n2
matrix by the frontal slices of tensor X , leading to


bvec(X ) = X (1) ; X (2) ; · · · ; X (n3 ) ∈ Rn1 n3 ×n2 .
Definition III.1: (Face-wise product [30]) The face-wise
product of tensors A ∈ Rn1 ×r×n3 and B ∈ Rr×n2 ×n3 can be
denoted by X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 = A  B, i.e.,
X (i) = A(i) B (i) , i = 1, . . . , n3 .

A. Notations
In this article, we denote the fields of real numbers as R.
The lowercase, uppercase, and calligraphic letters (x, X, X ) are
denoted by vectors, matrices, and tensors, respectively. Xijk ,
x(ij) denotes the (i, j, k)th entry and (i, j)th tube fibers of tensor
X . X † , X̂ , and X̃ denote the tensor transport, cosine transform,
and arbitrary invertible linear transforms of tensor X along with
the third order.  and ◦ denote the Face-wise product [30]
and Hadamard product. The expectation of latent variables is
denoted by E(·). The operation diag(X) denotes a vector for
the main diagonal of matrix X. The identity matrix and identity
tensor are denoted as I, I, respectively. The notations used in
this article are summarized in Table I.

(1)

Definition III.2: (Block diagonal matrix) Given a thirdorder tensor X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , we define its block diagonal matrix as
⎡ (1)
⎤
X̂
⎢
⎥
X̂ (2)
⎢
⎥
X̂ = bdiag(X̂ ) = ⎢
⎥,
..
⎣
⎦
.

III. NOTATIONS AND PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we summarize the commonly used notations
and briefly introduce some basic definitions and tensor operations in this article.

2499

X̂ (n3 )
where X̂ ∈ Rn1 n3 ×n2 n3 , bdiag-operation maps X̂ to X̂.
Definition III.3: ( Mat -operation) If a tensor X ∈
Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , we will use mat(X ) to denote the following block
Toeplitz-plus-Hankel matrix, which is
⎡ (1)
⎤
X
X (2)
···
X (n3 )
⎢ X (2)
X (1)
· · · X (n3 −1) ⎥
⎢
⎥
mat(X ) = ⎢ .
⎥
.
..
..
..
⎣ ..
⎦
.
.
X (n3 ) X (n3 −1) · · ·

X (1)

Block Toeplitz

⎡

X

(2)

⎢ ..
⎢ .
+⎢
⎢
⎣X (n3 )
0

···
·
··
0

X

(n3 )

⎤
X (n3 )
0
⎥
·
··
X (n3 ) ⎥
⎥
.. ⎥,
·
. ⎦
··
···

Block Hankel

X (2)

2500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

upshift matrix1 . Therefore, we can get a more concise calculation
method as D = W −1 diag(Cn (I + Z)v).
Definition III.5: (Cosine-transform) Given a vector v ∈ Rn ,
we can define a linear transformation Φ as

Algorithm 1: Ten-Operation.

Φ(v) = W −1 Cn (I + Z)v.

(4)

In this article, the Φ is defined as the cosine-transform. In
addition, this transform is not a direct DCT, but based on DCT.
The Φ is an invertible linear transformation, and the inverse
operation can be described as
where the X (k) is the kth frontal faces of X , 0 denotes the
zero matrices whose size is n1 × n2 . It is worth noting that
the mat-operation is invertible, the inverse operation denoted
by ten(·). Algorithm 1 presents the specific implementation of
ten-operation [30].
C. Cosine Transform Product
This subsection introduces Discrete Cosine Transformation
(DCT) and cosine transform product, which plays an important
role in our proposed model. The discrete cosine transformation
on a vector v ∈ Rn can be defined by
n

v̄ = Cn v ∈ R ,

(2)

where Cn is the discrete cosine transform matrix, whose size is
n × n and entries are as follow



(i − 1)(2j − 1)π
2 − δi1
cos
(Cn )ij =
, 1 < i, j < n,
n
2n
where δi1 is the Kronecker delta.
Definition III.4: (Cosine transform product [30]) Cosine
transform product is similar to T-product in [31], which is
operation between two third-order tensors. Let A ∈ Rm×r×h
and B ∈ Rr×n×h , cosine transform product can be defined as
X = A ∗c B = ten (mat(A) mat (B)) ∈ Rm×n×h .

(3)

The cosine transform product in the original domain is present
in above. As we know, T-product can be calculated efficiently
without explicitly forming the block matrices by fast Fourier
transform. Whether exist a similar transformation that can make
the cosine transform product more efficient and concise?
For a vector v ∈ Rn , we define th-operation (Toeplitz-plusHankel matrix) similar to mat-operation as
⎤
⎡
⎤ ⎡v · · ·
vn
0
2
v1
v2 · · ·
vn
⎢ ..
⎥
·
·
⎢ v2
v1 · · · vn−1 ⎥
. ··
··
vn ⎥
⎢
⎥ ⎢
⎢
⎥.
th(v) = ⎢ .
..
.. ⎥+⎢
..
⎥
⎣ ..
.
.
. ⎦ ⎣vn 0 ··· vv ... ⎦
v1
vn vn−1 · · ·
0 vn · · · v2
Toeplitz matrix

Hankel matrix

It is known that Cn th(v)Cn−1 = D from [32], where D
is a diagonal matrix, which can be computed from the
DCT of the first column of th(v). More specifically, D =
W −1 diag(Cn (th(v)e1 )), where W = diag(Cne1 ), e1 is the basis vector. By the definition of the Toeplitz-plus-Hankel matrix,
we can find that th(v)e1 = (I + Z)v, where Z is the circulant

Φ−1 (v) = (I + Z)−1 (Cn−1 (W v)).

(5)

For simplicity, we denote v̂ = Φ(v). Similarly, for a tensor X ,
linear transformation Φ can be described as
X̂ = Φ(X ) = Φ(x(ij) ) = W −1 Cn (I + Z) vec(x(ij) ).

(6)

According to the above description, we can obtain the concise and efficient form of cosine transform product by a linear
transformation Φ, which is
X = A ∗c B = Φ−1 (Φ(A)  Φ(B)).

(7)

For cosine transform product, from the transform domain, we
can obtain more brief representation as follow
X̂ (k) = Â(k) B̂ (k) ; k = 1, . . . , n3 . ,

(8)

where X̂ denotes block diagonal matrix [33]. It is known that
Cn th(v)Cn−1 = diag(Φ(v)), then, we have


(Cn3 ⊗ In1 ) mat(X ) Cn−1
(9)
⊗ In2 = X̂.
3
IV. TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION
ALGORITHM
In this section, a transforms-based Bayesian tensor completion algorithm is proposed as follows. First, the probabilistic
model and priors based on the cosine transform product are
presented. Second, a method is developed for estimating factor
tensors based on Bayesian inference. Third, through the tensortensor product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms theory,
our proposed model can be naturally generalized to arbitrary invertible linear transforms. Finally, an efficient updating method
in arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain is developed.
In addition, Fig. 2 shows the main process in our proposed
model for tensor completion, including tensor arbitrary invertible linear transforms for incomplete tensor, tensor low-tubalrank model for tensor factorization, variational Bayesian inference for model learning to induce the lateral slices sparsity of
factor tensors, and tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible
linear transforms.
A. Probabilistic Model and Priors
In this article, the tensor completion problem is considered in
a probabilistic framework, all unknown observed data and quantities are treated as random variables and their joint distributions
are specified. Let X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 be an incomplete third-order
1 In Matlab, Z = diag(ones(n − 1, 1), 1).

YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY

2501

which is given by
minimize X ∗
subject to YΩ = X ◦ O.

(12)

To optimize the problem in (12), the Bayesian theory is used
as follows. Since a low-tubal-rank estimate of tensor X is sought,
we should achieve lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors A
and B. In order to fit sparsity-inducing prior distribution, we
associate each tube of factor tensors A and B with Gaussian
priors of λ, which can be described as follows
p(A|λ) =

n1 
R




N a(ir) |0, λ−1
r In3 ,

(13)



N b(jr) |0, λ−1
r In3 ,

(14)

i=1 r=1

p(B|λ) =

n2 
R

j=1 r=1

where a(ir) and b(jr) denote the (i, r)th and (j, r)th tube of factor
tensors A and B, In3 denotes the identity matrix. In addition,
to fit the probabilistic model, we use the Gamma hyperprior to
describe λ, as follow
p(λ) =
Fig. 2. Graphical illustration of the main process of our proposed model for
tensor completion. (1) arbitrary invertible linear transforms for incomplete tensor
X ; (2) low-tubal-rank model for tensor factorization; (3) lateral slices sparsity
of factor tensors induced by variational Bayesian inference; (4) tensor-tensor
product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms.

tensor. Xijk is observed entry if (i, j, k) ∈ Ω, where Ω denotes
a set of indices. The O is a binary tensor that indicates which
entries of X are observed.
1) Optimization Model: Based on the low-tubal-rank
model [33], our proposed tensor completion model can be
described as
†

X = A ∗c B ,

(10)

where factor tensors A ∈ Rn1 ×R×n3 , B ∈ Rn2 ×R×n3 and ∗c
denotes the cosine transform product. The incomplete low-rank
tensor recovering, which aims to exactly recover a low-rank
tensor from incomplete observation, can be taken as solving the
affine rank minimization problem. Its mathematical model can
be written as
minimize rank(X )
subject to YΩ = X ◦ O,

(11)

where the X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 is an unknown low-rank tensor, ◦
denotes the tensor Hadamard product and YΩ is the observed
tensor. However, minimizing the rank of a tensor is an NP-hard
problem [34], and no-know polynomial-time algorithms exist.
To overcome this difficulty, an approximate Tensor Nuclear
Norm (TNN) [35] based method is commonly used to solve,

R




Gamma λr |aλ0 , bλ0 ,

(15)

r=1

where ∀r ∈ [1, R], the λr follows an independent Gamma distriβα
bution, Gamma(x|α, β) = Γ(α)
xα−1 e−βx , x > 0 denotes the
 ∞ α−1 −x
Gamma distribution, Γ(α) = 0 x
e dx is the Gamma
function. Then, the expectation of the latent variable x can be
α
described as E[x] = .
β
2) Noise and Observation Models: Noise is inevitable during
data acquisition, to better meet the demand of recovering missing
data in practical applications and improve the robustness of the
model, the observation model is generated according to
YΩ = PΩ (X + N ),

(16)

where YΩ is the observation tensor with noise, N is the noise
term.
According to the above description, the white Gaussian noise
is incorporated into the observation model, then, we can obtain
conditional distribution for each tube of the observed tensor YΩ ,
which is

 
−−→ −→
p(YΩ |A, B, τ ) =
N y (ij) |Ai:: ∗c Bj:: † , τ −1 In3 . (17)
ij

To complete the fully Bayesian treatment in our proposed
model, the noise entries are assumed to be i.i.d random variables
obeying Gaussian distribution, where precision is τ and mean is
zero. Further, we place a conjugate prior over the noise precision
as
p(τ ) = Gamma (τ |cτ , dτ ).

(18)

Finally, the probabilistic graphical model of Bayesian tensor
completion is shown in Fig. 3. According to the model described
above, the joint distribution of p(YΩ , S) can be written as follow
p(YΩ , S) = p(YΩ |A, B, τ )p(A|λ)p(B|λ)p(λ)p(τ ),

(19)

2502

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

divergence is equal to zero, which implies that ln p(YΩ ) is equal
to L(q).
For tractable inference under variational Bayesian framework
and based on mean-field approximation, it is assumed that all of
the latent variables in q(S) can be factorized as
q(S) = q(A)q(B)q(λ)q(τ ).

Fig. 3.

It means that all of the latent variables in S are independent,
therefore, we can update each latent variable by keeping others
fixed. The posterior of each latent variable approximation q(Si )
can be obtained as follow

Graphical illustration of our proposed tensor completion model.

where S = {A, B, λ, τ } is the collection of all of the unknown
hyper-parameters and latent variables in our proposed Bayesian
model.
Through the analysis above, the aim of our proposed model is
to estimate the full posterior distribution of S from the observed
data YΩ , which can be described as follow
p (S|YΩ ) = 

p (S, YΩ )
.
p (S, YΩ ) dS

(24)

(20)

Therefore, missing entries can be predicted based on the
posterior distribution of S, which is





p Y\Ω |YΩ = p Y\Ω |S p (S|YΩ ) dS,
(21)
where Y\Ω denotes the predictive missing entries from incomplete observed tensor YΩ .

ln q (Si ) = ES\Si [ln p(YΩ , S)] + const ,

(25)

where the Si denotes the ith latent variable in S. The expectation
ES\Si [·] denotes the variational distribution of all latent variables
in set S expect Si . Since all distributions in our model given
above belong to the conjugate exponential family, it is easy to
find a posterior approximation for each latent variable.
1) Inference for Factor Tensors A and B: From the probabilistic graph model shown in Fig. 3 and observation modeling
join distribution in (19), we can find the inference of the factor
tensor A can be performed by receiving the messages from
observed data and its co-parents, including hyper-parameter τ ,
and factor tensor B. By applying the (25), and combining the
prior in (13) and observation model in (17), the posterior of
q(A) can be found as a Gaussian distribution as
q(A) =

n1



→
A
,
N −
ai:: | E [−
a→
i:: ] , Σ

(26)

i=1

B. Model Learning Via Bayesian Inference
Actually, the marginalizing of all variables of p(Y\Ω ) can’t
be computed directly. Therefore, the inference joint distribution
in (19) by Bayesian theory is intractable. For this problem, the
maximum a posteriori (MAP), variational Bayesian inference,
and other approximate estimation methods are used to solve
frequently.
In this subsection, a deterministic approximate inference
method for the probabilistic tensor completion model learning
is developed under the variational Bayesian inference framework. Therefore, our objective is to find a distribution q(S) to
approximate the posterior distribution p(S|YΩ ) by minimizing
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, which can be described
as

q(S)
dS
KL (q(S)p (S|YΩ )) = q(S) ln
p (S|YΩ )
= ln p (YΩ ) − L(q),

(22)

where ln p(YΩ ) represents our model evidence, q(S) is probability density function, and L(q) represents the lower bound of
ln p(YΩ ), which is defined by

p (YΩ , S)
dS.
(23)
L(q) = q(S) ln
q(S)
Since the model evidence ln p(YΩ ) is a constant, minimizing
the KL divergence is equal to maximizing the lower bound of
L(q), the maximum of the lower bound occurs when the KL

whose posterior parameters are given by
E [−
a→] = E [τ ] ΣA mat (E [B])† −
y→,
i::





i::



ΣA = E [τ ] E mat(B)† mat(B) + E [Γ]

−1

.

(27)
(28)

Similar to the inference of factor tensor A, by combining the
prior in (14) and observation model in (17), the posterior q(B)
can be obtained as
n2

−→
−→

(29)
N bj:: | E bj:: , ΣB ,
q(B) =
j=1

with mean and covariance as
−→
E bj:: = E [τ ] ΣB mat (E [A])† −
y→
:j: ,

(30)




−1
,
ΣB = E [τ ] E mat(A)† mat(A) + E [Γ]

(31)

where E[Γ] = mat(diag(E[λ1 ], E[λ2 ], . . . , E[λR ])).
2) Inference for Hyper-Parameters λ: Similarly to the above,
the inference of λ can be performed by incorporating messages
from its hyperprior and receiving messages from factor tensors
A and B. By applying (25), the posterior of λr follows an
independent Gamma distribution, which can be described as
q(λ) =

R




Gamma λr | aλr , bλr ,

r=1

the expectation of λ can be obtained by E[λ] =

aλr
.
bλr

(32)

YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY

Algorithm 2: Bayesian Tensor Completion Model Under
∗c .

2503

completion model under arbitrary invertible linear transforms,
the following introduces some basic definitions of tensor computation in arbitrary invertible linear transforms.
Definition IV.1: (Tensor invertible linear transform) Consider an arbitrary invertible linear transform L : Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 →
Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 , then tensor invertible linear transform can be defined as
X̃ = L(X ) = X ×3 L,

(34)

where ×3 is the model-3 product [22], and L ∈ Rn3 ×n3 is an
arbitrary invertible matrix. Obviously, we can easily get the
inverse transform of L, which is
L−1 (X ) = X ×3 L−1 ,

3) Inference for Noise Precision τ : Similarly to inference
λ, the noise precision τ can be performed by incorporating the
information from its hyperprior and receiving messages from
the observed data. By applying (25), the posterior of noise τ
obeys a Gamma distribution, which can be described as
q(τ ) = Gamma(τ |cτ , dτ ),

(33)

cτ
the expectation of τ can be obtained by E(τ ) = τ .
d
The Bayesian tensor completion model under ∗c can be summarized as follows: First, estimate the factor tensors A and B
by (26) and (29), whose covariance is updated by (28) and (31),
and mean is updated via (27) and (30). Second, the posterior
distribution of hyper-parameters λ is updated via (32). Finally,
the posterior distribution of noise precision τ is updated via (33),
until convergence. For clearly, the Bayesian tensor completion
model under ∗c is summarized in algorithm 2.
C. Arbitrary Invertible Linear Transforms-Based Bayesian
Tensor Completion Model
The cosine transform product is introduced in Definition
III.4, as well as the t-product, which can replace the complex
block-structured matrix operation in the origin domain with a
specific invertible linear transform. In practical applications,
the algorithm implementation of t-product and cosine transform
product can be performed by matrix product in the transform
domain through linear transforms for each tube fibers. Is it
possible to define a tensor-tensor product that is not limited to
a specific linear transform? If so, can our proposed Bayesian
tensor completion model also not be limited to the tensor-tensor
product under a specific linear transform?
In this subsection, for these questions, through the definition
of tensor-tensor product with an arbitrary invertible linear transform presented in [30], our proposed Bayesian tensor completion
model is also extended to arbitrary invertible linear transforms.
To better illustrate the extension of our proposed Bayesian tensor

(35)

where L−1 is inverse of matrix L.
Suppose L = Fn3 , where Fn3 is a discrete Fourier transform
matrix whose size is n3 × n3 . Given tensor A ∈ Rn1 ×r×n3 and
B ∈ Rr×n2 ×n3 , t-product [31] between them can be denoted
as X = A∗F B, which can also be written as L(X ) = L(A) 
L(B) in frequency domain. If L is an arbitrary invertible linear
matrix, tensor-tensor products with arbitrary invertible linear
transforms [30] can be denoted as X = A∗L B.
Definition IV.2: (Identity tensor) Suppose L is an arbitrary
invertible linear transform in (34), the tensor I ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3
is an identity tensor, if I satisfies all frontal slices of L(I) are
identity matrices.
Definition IV.3: (Orthogonal tensor [31]) Suppose a tensor
Q ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 and L is an arbitrary invertible linear transform
in (34). If Q satisfies Q† ∗ Q = Q ∗L Q† = I, Q is defined as
an orthogonal tensor.
Definition 4.4: (Tensor transport) L is an arbitrary invertible linear transform in (34), the tensor transpose of X ∈
Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 under L can be denoted as X † ∈ Rn2 ×n1 ×n3 , which
satisfies L(X † )(k) = L(X (k) )† , k = 1, . . . , n3 .
Definition IV.5: (Tensor Singular Value Decomposition (TSVD) [31]) Suppose L is an arbitrary invertible linear transform
in (34), tensor X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 can be factorized as
X = U ∗L Σ ∗L V † ,

(36)

where U ∈ Rn1 ×n1 ×n3 and V ∈ Rn2 ×n2 ×n3 are orthogonal tensors, Σ ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 is the f-diagonal tensor.
Based on the above definition, our model can be naturally
generalized to arbitrary invertible linear transforms. The lowtubal-rank model with arbitrary invertible linear transforms can
be described as
X = A ∗L B † ,

(37)

where A ∈ Rn1 ×R×n3 , B ∈ Rn2 ×R×n3 , and ∗L denotes the
tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms.
At model initialization, the factor tensors can be set as A0 =
1/2
1/2
U0 ∗L Σ0 , and B0 = V0 ∗L Σ0 , in arbitrary invertible linear
1/2
1/2
transforms domain Ã0 = Ũ0 ∗ Σ̃0 , and B̃0 = Ṽ0 ∗ Σ̃0 .

2504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

D. Efficient Updating Method in Arbitrary Invertible Linear
Transforms Domain

Algorithm 3: Transforms-Based Bayesian Tensor Completion (TBTC).

Although the algorithm of the Bayesian tensor completion
model under ∗c has been given in Subsection IV-B, it is still
too time-consuming. In this subsection, an efficient updating
method for Bayesian tensor completion in arbitrary invertible
linear transforms domain is developed.
From (27), we group all the horizontal slices of factor tensor
A together in cosine transform domain can be obtained by
bvec(E[Ã]† ) = M · bvec(E[A]† )
= M · E[−
a→, . . . , −
a−→]
i::

m::

A

= E[τ ] · M · Σ̃ · opt(E[B])† · bvec(Y † ), (38)
where the M = Cn3 ⊗ IR , M −1 is inverse of M , opt(·) means
mat(·) operation, with the (9), the block Toeplitz-plus-Hankel
matrix mat(E[B])† and covariance ΣA can be block diagonalized.
Similarly, for an arbitrary invertible linear transform L, M =
L ⊗ IR . Therefore, we can infer the distribution of factor tensor
A in arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain efficiently.
The mean and covariance of kth frontal slice of factor tensor A
in arbitrary linear transforms domain is updated by follows

 (k)


(39)
E Ã(k) = E [τ ] X̃ (k) O E B̃ (k) Σ̃A ,
Σ̃A

(k)



−1


= E [τ ] E B̃ (k)† B̃ (k) + E Γ(k)
,
r

(40)

where X O = X ◦ O + Y ◦ (E − O), and the Y denotes recovery tensor.
Similarly, for inferring the distribution of factor tensor B, the
kth frontal slice expectation of E[B] and covariance matrix in
arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain can be updated by
follows




(k)
(41)
E B̃ (k) = E [τ ] X̃ (k) O E Ã(k) Σ̃B ,
Σ̃B

(k)


=



−1

E [τ ] E Ã(k)† Ã(k) + E Γ(k)
,
r

(k)
E[Γr ] = diag(E[λk1 ], E[λk2 ], . . . , E[λkR ]),
(k)
n2 ×R

(42)
(k)

where
E[Ã ] ∈
, which denote the kth frontal
Rn1 ×R and E[B̃ ] ∈ R
slice of E[Ã] and E[B̃] respectively. The expectations of
E[B̃ (k)† B̃ (k) ] and E[Ã(k)† Ã(k) ] can be written as follows


 


(k)
E B̃ (k)† B̃ (k) = E B̃ (k)† E B̃ (k) + n2 n3 Σ̃B , (43)



 

(k)
E Ã(k)† Ã(k) = E Ã(k)† E Ã(k) + n1 n3 Σ̃A . (44)
Based on the above analysis, for Bayesian tensor completion
under ∗c , we replace (27) and (30) with (39) and (41), which
can avoid directly calculating covariance matrices in the original
domain, and turn to fast updating in cosine transforms domain.
With this, the (39)–(44) are not only limited to the Bayesian
tensor completion model under cosine transform, but also are
applicable to the Bayesian tensor completion model with arbitrary invertible linear transforms.

With the (32), we can obtain the posterior parameters in
arbitrary invertible linear transforms domain as
n1 + n2
+ aλ0 ,
2



 
1
bλr =
diag E B̃ (i)† B̃ (i) + E Ã(i)† Ã(i) + bλ0 . (45)
2n3

aλr =

With (33), the posterior parameters cτ and dτ can be updated by
1
Oijk + cτ0 ,
cτ =
2
ijk

 
→
→† 
−
1
2
 (ij) −
τ
d =
E x
− A i:: ∗ B j::  + dτ0 ,
(46)
2 ij

→
−
→
−
where ij E[x(ij) − A i:: ∗ B †j:: 2 ] is the error measurement
of our model.
In summary, based on the algorithm updated by (39)–(46), and
the low-tubal-rank model proposed in (37), the Bayesian tensor
completion model can be generalized to arbitrary invertible
linear transforms domain, not only limited in cosine transforms
domain. Algorithm 3 shows the details of TBTC model.
E. Rank Estimation and Parameters Initialization
Based on (32) and (45), the expectation of λr is
given by E(λr ) = aλr /bλr , which depends on E[B̃ (i)† B̃ (i) ]
and E[Ã(i)† Ã(i) ]. While the algorithm iterating, smaller
diag(E[B̃ (i)† B̃ (i) ] + E[Ã(i)† Ã(i) ]) will lead to a larger E(λr ),
which induces lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors A and B.
With the lateral slices sparsity of factor tensors, it naturally leads
to low-tubal-rank of completion tensor. However, in practical
application, the main diagonal of Σ is hardly equal to zero, but

YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY

2505

TABLE II
RECOVERY RESULTS OF TBTC-COSINE AND TBTC-ROM ON THE SYNTHETIC DATA

very close to zero. This yield tubal rank is not suitable for our
Bayesian tensor completion model. To address this problem,
truncated T-SVD is used in our model. By applying truncated TSVD, some values in Σ those are close to zero can be set to zero,
which ensures that the low-tubal-rank model can perform better.
In order to achieve better performance for our proposed model
while avoiding getting stuck in a local optimum, it is essential to
choose the appropriate initialization parameters. In our model,
the top-level hyper-parameters aλ0 , bλ0 , cτ0 , dτ0 are set to 10−5 with
model precision E[τ ] = cτ0 /dτ0 = 1 and E[λ] = diag(I).

Fig. 4. Illustration of PlanetLab network latency data and Abilene network
traffic data as third-order tensors.

V. EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, to evaluate our proposed model for the missing
network-wide traffic measurement data completion, we conduct
experiments on synthetic data and two real-world networkwide traffic measurement datasets and compare them with
other state-of-the-art matrix/tensor completion models, including FBCP [29], BGCP [25], TCTF [26], TMac [36], FGSR [37],
and FNN [37]. In particular, the TMac has two versions, TMacDec and TMac-Inc, the former uses the decreased rank to obtain
the optimal rank, while the latter uses the increased rank. FGSR
and FNN are matrix-based methods, which cannot deal with
tensor-based data. Therefore, in the experimental part, for FGSR
and FNN, we flatten the tensors into matrices according to the
third dimension.
Moreover, in our proposed model, we consider two cases of
linear transforms: (1) Cosine-transform (Cosine), which is based
on the linear transform proposed in Definition III.5; (2) Random
Orthogonal Matrix transform (ROM), the transform matrix L is
a random orthogonal matrix gotten by QR decomposition. In
our experiments, the Successful Recovery Rate (SRR), Mean
the Absolute Error (MAE) [27], Root Relative Squared Error
(RRSE) [38], and computation time are used as performance
metrics, which are defined as follows


1, Ŷijk − Yijk < θ
ηijk
;
where ηijk =
SRR =
n1 × n2 × n3
0, otherwise

Fig. 5.

Illustration of fiber missing scenario.


MAE =

Ŷijk − Yijk

n1 × n2 × n3

;

RRSE =

Ŷ − Y2
,
Y2

where θ = 0.05.
Our proposed algorithm is implemented in Matlab. All experiments are performed on PC with Intel-Core i5-10600KF CPU
and 48 GB RAM, and the operating system is Win10.
A. Synthetic Data
In this subsection, we assess performance of our proposed
model on synthetic datasets. The ground-truth low-rank tensor
X ∈ Rn1 ×n2 ×n3 is generated by two small size factor tensors
A ∈ Rn1 ×R×n3 and B ∈ Rn2 ×R×n3 . In addition, A and B obey

2506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

Fig. 6. Performance comparison of our model and other models on PlanetLab dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. The top row is the performance
of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the random missing scenario, while the bottom row is the performance of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the fiber missing scenario.

80% than missing rate with 60%. By analyzing the experimental
process, it can be found that under the same circumstances, the
result of rank estimation with the missing rate 60% is worse than
that with the missing rate 80%, which is the main reason for the
poor effect.
Notice that our algorithm can recover most of the data even
when the missing rate is 80%. In addition, by comparing the
with or without of noise, it can be found that by adding noise
σε2 = 1E − 02, our algorithm is affected extremely weakly. This
shows that our proposed algorithm has strong robustness.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the computation time of our model and other models on
the PlanetLab dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. (a) Random
missing scenario. (b) Fiber missing scenario.

Uniform distribution, and low-rank components are constructed
by A ∗ B † . To better reflect the robustness of our model, some
noise is added to observed data, the observed tensor is given
by Y = X ◦ O + ε, where ε ∼ N (0, σε2 ) with noise parameter σε2 = 10−2 . The missing entries obey the Uniform distribution, which is marked by binary tensor O. The synthetic
datasets includes tensors whose sizes are 100 × 100 × 10 and
200 × 200 × 20, and we generate different incomplete tensors
with missing rate ρ = [20%, 40%, 60%, 80%].
Table II shows the recovery result of our model (Cosine
and ROM based) on the synthetic datasets. It can be seen that
the ROM-based model performs better than the Cosine-based
model performance on incomplete tensors which have different
sizes with or without noise. For the Cosine-based method, the
recovery performance is better when the data missing rate is

B. Real Network Traffic Measurement Data
1) Datasets Description: We conduct experiments on two
real-world network traffic measurement datasets, including a
network latency trace dataset (PlanetLab [17]) and network
traffic dataset (Abilene2 ).
The PlanetLab dataset consist of round trip times (RTTs)
between 490 nodes in the PlanetLab network over 18-time
slices, which can be represented as a third-order tensor according
to origin-ID, destination-ID, and time-interval. Specifically, as
shown in Fig. 4(a), its size is 490 × 490 × 18.
The Abilene network traffic data consists of 12 nodes traffic
matrices, with the measured every fifth minute over 168 days,
which can be represented as a third-order tensor with a size of
144 × 288 × 168. The details are shown in Fig. 4(b).

2 http://abilene.internet2.edu/observatory/datacollections.html

YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY

2507

Fig. 8. Performance comparison of our model and other models on Abilene dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. The top row is the performance
of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the random missing scenario, while the bottom row is the performance of SRR, MAE, and RRSE in the fiber missing scenario.

Fig. 9. Comparison of the computation time of our model and other models
on the Abilene dataset with missing rates ranging from 10% to 50%. (a) Fiber
missing scenario. (b) Fiber missing scenario.

2) Random Missing V.s. Fiber Missing: In Section V-A,
our proposed model uses random missing for synthetic data.
However, in practical applications for recovery of missing
network-wide traffic measurement data, data missing can be
the result of faults in network communications. Therefore, the
missing data in network-wide traffic measurement data is often
continuous over time. Considering the above situation, two kinds
of data-missing scenarios (random missing and fiber missing)
are applied in this subsection. For random missing, ρ% of the
data entries are missed while missing entries obeying normal
distribution. For fiber missing, we represent the network traffic
data as a third-order tensor, and then ρ% fibers are missed
randomly in the time interval dimension. The details about fiber
missing are shown in Fig. 5. In fact, under the same missing
ratio, compared with the random missing scenario, the fiber

missing will miss more information, and it will be more difficult
to recover.
3) Experiments on PlanetLab Dataset: We evaluate our proposed model and other matrices/tensor-based completion models on the PlanetLab network latency trace dataset. Fig. 6 shows
the performance of our model and other models under different
missing rate. It is clearly shown that our model (ROM-based)
obtain the highest performance with the least MAE and RRSE.
Fig. 6(a) and (d) compare the successful recovery performance
with different missing rates under random missing and fiber
missing scenarios. Obviously, our proposed ROM-based transforms model achieves the best results on the evaluation index of
SRR.
Fig. 7 shows the computation time of all algorithms under
the missing rate from 10% to 50%. Although the algorithm
TCTF consumes the least computation time, its performance
on network traffic data recovery is ordinary. From a comprehensive point of view, compared with other algorithms, our model
(ROM-transform based) has achieved the best performance.
4) Experiments on Abilene Dataset: To better evaluate the
recovery performance of our proposed model on the missing
network-wide traffic measurement data, we also conduct experiments on the Abilene dataset. Fig. 8 shows the performance
of our model and other models under different missing rate
scenarios. Obviously, our proposed algorithm outperforms other
algorithms in terms of SRR, MAE, and RRSE.
Fig. 9 shows the computation time of all algorithms under
the missing rate from 10% to 50% in Abilene dataset. It clearly
shows the superiority of our algorithm and TCTF in terms of

2508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

computation time. However, the performance of the TCTF in
recovering missing network traffic data is much lower than our
algorithm. Therefore, our model exhibits efficient and accurate
performance on the task of missing Abilene network traffic data
recovery.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Inferring network-wide traffic data from partial network traffic plays an important role in next-generation network systems.
At the same time, missing network traffic measurement data is
inevitable in network systems. In this article, a transforms-based
Bayesian tensor completion method is proposed to recover
missing network-wide traffic measurement data. Experiments on
synthetic data and two real-world network traffic datasets show
that our proposed model outperforms other matrix/tensor-based
methods, which can effectively improve network traffic data
quality and provide network traffic data assurance for network
monitoring, traffic analysis and intrusion detection.
Since the tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible linear
transforms and tubal rank are defined on a third-order tensor,
we only consider recovery 3D data in this article. With the
tensor-tensor product with arbitrary invertible linear transforms
and tubal rank defining in high-order space, the TBTC can
naturally recover high-order data. In addition, the tensor-tensor
product and tensor tubal rank depend on given invertible linear transforms, and the different types of data and tasks may
depend on appropriate linear transforms. Therefore, it is also
an interesting work to explore different linear transforms for
different network traffic data analysis tasks, such as network
traffic anomaly monitoring, attack detection, etc.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Huang et al., “An efficient k-persistent spread estimator for traffic
measurement in high-speed networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 1463–1476, Aug. 2020.
[2] H. Huang et al., “Spread estimation with non-duplicate sampling in highspeed networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2073–2086,
Oct. 2021.
[3] K. Xie et al., “Accurate recovery of missing network measurement data
with localized tensor completion,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 27, no. 6,
pp. 2222–2235, Dec. 2019.
[4] S. He, K. Shi, C. Liu, B. Guo, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “Collaborative sensing
in Internet of Things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1435–1474, thirdquarter 2022.
[5] W. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Duan, T. Liu, X. Tong, and Z. Cai, “A triple real-time
trajectory privacy protection mechanism based on edge computing and
blockchain in mobile crowdsourcing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early
access, Jun. 28, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2022.3187047.
[6] X. Deng, B. Wang, W. Liu, and L. T. Yang, “Sensor scheduling for multimodal confident information coverage in sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 902–913, Mar. 2015.
[7] S. He, J. Chen, F. Jiang, D. K. Yau, G. Xing, and Y. Sun, “Energy provisioning in wireless rechargeable sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1931–1942, Oct. 2012.
[8] K. Xie et al., “Sequential and adaptive sampling for matrix completion
in network monitoring systems,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.,
2015, pp. 2443–2451.
[9] H. Zhou, D. Zhang, K. Xie, and Y. Chen, “Spatio-temporal tensor completion for imputing missing internet traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int.
Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–7.
[10] M. Roughan, Y. Zhang, W. Willinger, and L. Qiu, “Spatio-temporal
compressive sensing and internet traffic matrices (extended version),”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 662–676, Jun. 2012.

[11] M. Adil et al., “Enhanced-AODV: A robust three phase priority-based
traffic load balancing scheme for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 14426–14437, Aug. 2022.
[12] Y. Xia et al., “AI-driven and MEC-empowered confident information
coverage hole recovery in 6G-enabled IoT,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
early access, Feb. 28, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2022.3154760.
[13] X. Deng, Y. Jiang, L. T. Yang, M. Lin, L. Yi, and M. Wang, “Data fusion
based coverage optimization in heterogeneous sensor networks: A survey,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 52, pp. 90–105, 2019.
[14] X. Wang et al., “The joint optimization of online traffic matrix measurement and traffic engineering for software-defined networks,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 234–247, Feb. 2020.
[15] H. Dai, K. Sun, A. X. Liu, L. Zhang, J. Zheng, and G. Chen,
“Charging task scheduling for directional wireless charger networks,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 3163–3180,
Nov. 2021.
[16] H. Dai, X. Wang, A. X. Liu, H. Ma, G. Chen, and W. Dou, “Wireless charger
placement for directional charging,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26,
no. 4, pp. 1865–1878, Aug. 2018.
[17] R. Zhu, B. Liu, D. Niu, Z. Li, and H. V. Zhao, “Network latency estimation
for personal devices: A matrix completion approach,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 724–737, Apr. 2017.
[18] W. Sun, J. Tao, Y. Xu, Y. Gao, and Z. Wang, “Network latency estimation:
A tensor-based weighted singular value thresholding method,” in Proc.
IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. 7th Int. Conf.
Data Sci. Syst.; 19th Int. Conf. Smart City; 7th Int. Conf. Dependability
Sensor Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl., 2021, pp. 431–438.
[19] B. Agbo, H. Al-Aqrabi, R. Hill, and T. Alsboui, “Missing data imputation
in the Internet of Things sensor networks,” Future Internet, vol. 14, no. 5,
2022, Art. no. 143.
[20] Q. Wang, L. Chen, Q. Wang, H. Zhu, and X. Wang, “Anomalyaware network traffic estimation via outlier-robust tensor completion,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2677–2689,
Dec. 2020.
[21] K. Xie, S. Li, X. Wang, G. Xie, and Y. Ouyang, “Expectile tensor completion to recover skewed network monitoring data,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
[22] T. G. Kolda and B. W. Bader, “Tensor decompositions and applications,”
SIAM Rev., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 455–500, 2009.
[23] K. Xie, Y. Chen, X. Wang, G. Xie, J. Cao, and J. Wen, “Accurate
and fast recovery of network monitoring data: A GPU accelerated matrix completion,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 958–971,
Jun. 2020.
[24] K. Jin et al., “Low cost online network traffic measurement with subspacebased matrix completion,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 53–67, Jan./Feb. 2023.
[25] X. Chen, Z. He, and L. Sun, “A Bayesian tensor decomposition approach
for spatiotemporal traffic data imputation,” Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg.
Technol., vol. 98, pp. 73–84, 2019.
[26] P. Zhou, C. Lu, Z. Lin, and C. Zhang, “Tensor factorization for lowrank tensor completion,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 3,
pp. 1152–1163, Mar. 2018.
[27] K. Xie et al., “Accurate recovery of internet traffic data: A sequential
tensor completion approach,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 2,
pp. 793–806, Feb. 2018.
[28] X. Li et al., “Tripartite graph aided tensor completion for sparse network measurement,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 34, no. 1,
pp. 48–62, Jan. 2023.
[29] Q. Zhao, L. Zhang, and A. Cichocki, “Bayesian CP factorization of incomplete tensors with automatic rank determination,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1751–1763, Sep. 2015.
[30] E. Kernfeld, M. Kilmer, and S. Aeron, “Tensor–tensor products with
invertible linear transforms,” Linear Algebra Appl., vol. 485, pp. 545–570,
2015.
[31] M. E. Kilmer and C. D. Martin, “Factorization strategies for thirdorder tensors,” Linear Algebra Appl., vol. 435, no. 3, pp. 641–658,
2011.
[32] M. K. Ng, R. H. Chan, and W.-C. Tang, “A fast algorithm for deblurring
models with neumann boundary conditions,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 851–866, 1999.
[33] Y. Zhou and Y.-M. Cheung, “Bayesian low-tubal-rank robust tensor factorization with multi-rank determination,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 62–76, Jan. 2021.
[34] C. J. Hillar and L.-H. Lim, “Most tensor problems are NP-hard,” J. ACM,
vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1–39, 2013.

YANG et al.: TRANSFORMS-BASED BAYESIAN TENSOR COMPLETION METHOD FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC MEASUREMENT DATA RECOVERY

[35] C. Lu, J. Feng, Y. Chen, W. Liu, Z. Lin, and S. Yan, “Tensor robust principal component analysis with a new tensor nuclear norm,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 925–938,
Apr. 2020.
[36] Y. Xu, R. Hao, W. Yin, and Z. Su, “Parallel matrix factorization for lowrank tensor completion,” Inverse Problems Imag., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 601–
624, 2015.
[37] J. Fan, L. Ding, Y. Chen, and M. Udell, “Factor group-sparse regularization
for efficient low-rank matrix recovery,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2019, pp. 5104–5114.
[38] Q. Zhao, G. Zhou, L. Zhang, A. Cichocki, and S.-I. Amari, “Bayesian
robust tensor factorization for incomplete multiway data,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 736–748, Apr. 2016.

Zecan Yang (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. degree in computer science and technology from
the College of Computer and Information Sciences,
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou,
China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the
Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China. His research interests
include tensor analysis, Big Data, and machine learning.

Laurence T. Yang (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.E.
degree in computer science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from the University of Victoria, Victoria, BC,
Canada. He is currently a Professor with the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, the
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, and the Department of Computer Science, St. Francis Xavier
University, Antigonish, NS, Canada. His research
interests include parallel and distributed computing, embedded and ubiquitous
computing, Big Data. Dr. Yang is a Fellow of Canadian Academy Engineering
and Engineering Institute of Canada.

Lingzhi Yi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees in civil engineering from the University
of South China, Hengyang, China, in 2005 and 2008,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in safety science
and engineering from the University of South China,
in 2018. She is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Information and Safety Engineering,
Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan,
China. Her research interests include IoT and CPSSbased environmental safety smart monitoring and
bridge structural healthy intelligent monitoring.

2509

Xianjun Deng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2014.
He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology. He has authored or coauthored more than 50 technical papers in international
top journals and conferences. His research interests
include security and reliability, coverage optimization, parallel and distributed computing in wireless
sensor networks (WSNs) and Internet of Things (IoT). He was the recipient of
the IEEE TCSC Award.

Chenlu Zhu received the B.S. degree in computer
science and technology from the Beijing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, and
the M.S. degree from Tsinghua University, Beijing,
China. He is currently working toward the Ph.D degree with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China. He is currently the General Manager
of Hubei Chutian Expressway Digital Technology
Company LTD, China. His research interests include smart city, Big Data, intelligent transportation,
and IoT.

Yiheng Ruan received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from the China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China, and the M.S. degree from the
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan. He
is currently the General Manager of Hubei Chutian
Smart Communication Company LTD, China. His
research interests include Big Data and intelligent
transportation.