IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

21709

Vehicular Social Dynamic Anomaly Detection With
Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregator Enabled VAE
Zehao Hu , Yuwei He , Yuqi Shen , Minho Jo , Senior Member, IEEE, Mario Collotta , Member, IEEE,
Guojiang Shen , and Xiangjie Kong , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Vehicle driving behavior analysis and detection
tasks have become an indispensable part of intelligent transportation systems. Accurate pattern recognition of potential anomalies
during the movement of entities is crucial for improving transportation efficiency. Current methods typically analyze vehicle
trajectories independently without considering potential interactions among vehicles. To address this limitation, some studies
have integrated graph attention mechanisms to capture the
influence of neighboring vehicles during the aggregation process.
However, Graph Attention Networks (GATs) are constrained
by the univariate nature of attention heads and coefficients,
thus lacking flexibility. In this work, we not only consider the
social dynamics among neighboring vehicles but also delve into
the limitations of GAT models. We propose a Vehicular Social
Dynamics Anomaly Detection (VSD-AD) model based on the
Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregator (MMA) enabled Variational
AutoEncoder (VAE) architecture to maximize the learning of
relational embeddings among neighbors in a highway vehicle network. Furthermore, we apply Node Feature Quantisation (NFQ)
to the encoder output to mitigate the complexity of neighbor
relationships. Our model is flexible and customizable for different
highway scenarios, suitable for large-scale highway vehicle video
data. To validate real-world applicability, we further assess its
performance on both the simulated dataset and real-world traffic
dataset, where our model outperforms other mainstream methods
in terms of detection performance.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, variational autoencoder,
graph aggregation, intelligent transportation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

H

IGHLY autonomous smart traffic management system,
as a key component of smart cities, plays a crucial role in addressing urban challenges like traffic flow
prediction and accident prevention. With the expansion of
urban areas and populations [1], [2] [3], issues such as
Manuscript received 21 May 2024; revised 1 August 2024; accepted
2 September 2024. Date of publication 25 September 2024; date of current
version 27 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the “Pioneer”
and “Leading Goose” Research and Development Program of Zhejiang under
Grant 2024C01214 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62072409 and Grant 62073295. The Associate
Editor for this article was F. Xia. (Corresponding authors: Xiangjie Kong;
Minho Jo.)
Zehao Hu, Yuwei He, Yuqi Shen, Guojiang Shen, and Xiangjie Kong are
with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of
Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail: 211122120078@zjut.edu.cn;
211122120044@zjut.edu.cn; yuqishen51@gmail.com; gjshen1975@zjut.
edu.cn; xjkong@ieee.org).
Minho Jo is with the Department of Computer Convergence Software, Korea
University, Sejong City 30019, South Korea (e-mail: minhojo@korea.ac.kr).
Mario Collotta is with the Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, Kore
University of Enna, 94100 Enna, Italy (e-mail: mario.collotta@unikore.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3457569

traffic congestion and accidents have become more prominent,
impacting people’s time and safety [4], [5] [6]. Leveraging
IoT technologies, such as sensor networks with Road-Side
Units (RSUs) and On-Board Units (OBUs), researchers aim
to extract valuable insights from data to enhance traffic
management systems. Detecting traffic anomalies in a timely
manner is essential for efficient traffic management [7], [8]
[9], [10], considering the impact of drivers’ decisions on
traffic dynamics. The challenge for human operators lies in
processing vast amounts of data and the lack of a standardized
approach to anomaly detection.
In our work, the task is to detect anomalous scenarios in
vehicular social dynamics from data collected by highway
video surveillance in the sensor network. Vehicle trajectory/behavior anomaly detection tasks can be divided into
two major categories based on the data type processed. The
first category [11], [12] [13], [14] is devoted to preprocess
trajectories extracted from video surveillance systems, then
using unsupervised or weakly supervised learning to cluster
them into anomalies like sudden braking, severe collision
accidents, etc. The second category focuses on spatiotemporal
sequences generated from GPS, IoT devices, and motion
sensors using methods such as reinforcement learning [15]
and deep learning [16], [17] or euclidean space inference [18],
with each method concentrating on the operational behavior
of individual vehicles.
While the works above have achieved significant results,
they have not considered the social dynamics of relationships,
as shown in Figure 1, within vehicles and the transmission
of messages between drivers. For instance, the brake lights
of a car ahead, even if at a considerable distance, can signal
the following drivers, who may respond by decelerating. The
double flash signals of overtaking warning and alert can
prompt the following car to accelerate and prepare to overtake,
while the deceleration of the ego-vehicle to give way should
not be considered an anomalous behavior. As another example,
if vehicles within a driver’s forward vision begin to slow
down or even stop, the ego-vehicle would naturally decelerate
and stop until the road condition becomes positive. In this
scenario, the ego-vehicle should not be considered anomalous,
but rather the focus should be on the vehicles at the front of the
queue. Here, we give a definition of vehicular social dynamic
anomalies: in a normally functioning vehicular social network
system [19], vehicles form an implied interaction with each
other, and if the movement of a vehicle or a number of vehicles
negatively affects the normal functioning of the whole system,
these vehicles are social dynamic anomalies vehicles.

1558-0016 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

21710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 1. Example for graph of vehicular social dynamics. Vehicles serve
as nodes, and edges are formed when certain conditions are met such as
vehicles being too close to each other or engaging in information exchange.
Unreasonable lane-changing behavior by vehicles is considered abnormal, and
vehicles are flagged as suspected anomalies after completing a lane change.

Some work has noticed this deficiency. Reference [20]
captured the interactions between vehicles through the RGAT
scheme, but the attention mechanism in GAT is not deep
enough and lacks the flexibility of a user-defined model.
It can only assign attention coefficients to neighboring vehicles
through predefined attention heads. Considering the driving
habit differences among drivers from different countries and
regions, it is difficult to explore patterns in different data
through these methods alone. However, these works have also
inspired our approach, as traditional single-vehicle methods
are no longer sufficient to accommodate the increasingly
complex vehicular social dynamics.
To capture the social nature between vehicles, structuring them into a network-like formation is highly beneficial
for vehicle interactions. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
are powerful tools for dealing with complex relational network structures, and they encompass various specific models
such as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs), Graph
Attention Networks (GATs), and Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs). These networks, combined with RNNs, can
simultaneously process dynamic temporal graphs. However,
in designing the network, we still face challenges such as:
• Incomplete neighbor relationship. The interaction
between drivers and the positional relationships between
vehicles often have a significant impact on the driving
patterns of vehicles. Therefore, there is still considerable
potential for deep exploration of the neighbor relationships between vehicles.
• Fixed identification patterns. Due to the varied data
distributions across different datasets corresponding to
traffic regulations and driving habits in various countries
and regions, relying solely on fixed patterns to identify
abnormal driving behavior is often inadequate.
• Inaccurate detection targets. Many existing approaches
have a vague definition of trajectory graphs, leading to
coarse detection targets in models. This can result in
the loss of some anomalies and ultimately reduce the
detection accuracy of the model.
Addressing the challenges outlined above, we propose
a data-driven, customizable method for Vehicular Social
Dynamic Anomaly Detection (VSD-AD), realized through
recurrent multi-mask autoencoders. This method maintains
the combination of RNN and graph convolution models to

extract spatiotemporal features of dynamic graphs. It replaces
the graph attention mechanism with a more flexible graph
multi-mask aggregator to deeply consider the social influence
of neighboring vehicles on ego vehicles. To prevent the
decoder from being confused by complex encodings from the
encoder, inspired by the VQ-VAE model [21], we propose
a graph feature quantisation operation to ensure a smooth
transition of encoder output representations. In terms of the
time dimension, fine-grained sampling is replaced by coarse
sampling, enabling the model to detect behavioral anomalies
over a longer period. Each sampling period undergoes detailed
sampling, i.e., the snapshot of that moment, followed by
constructing graphs of vehicles and their neighboring relationships. Furthermore, to facilitate unsupervised learning,
we reconstructed the probability distribution of trajectories in
the decoder part, highlighting anomalous temporal sequences
with lower reconstruction probability.
Fortunately, the proposed model is capable of detecting
anomalies in the social dynamics of highway vehicles over
extended distances and durations. To validate our model’s
effectiveness, our data is sourced from large-scale simulation
trajectory data generated by the microscopic traffic simulator
from [20] and the real-world HighD dataset [22]. Compared
with existing state-of-the-art methods, our model is the only
one that is customizable and capable of detecting both individual vehicle anomalies and overall scene anomalies within a
specific period. Moreover, our method performs robustly with
both simulated and real-world data.
The major contributions of this study include:
• We propose a Vehicular Social Dynamic Anomaly
Detection (VSD-AD) model based on the Recurrent
Multi-Mask Aggregator (MMA) enabled Variational
AutoEncoder (VAE) architecture. It captures the social
dynamics between highway vehicle neighbors more
deeply and offers a degree of customizability.
• We propose a graph vector quantisation technique
—Node Feature Quantisaton (NFQ) to ensure that the
node representations of vehicle relationship graphs aggregated by the encoder are smoothly processed by the
decoder.
• We conduct extensive experiments on both simulated and
real-world datasets, demonstrating the superior ability of
our proposed model to detect anomalous driving behaviors in large-scale highway traffic surveillance systems.
Observations on a dataset generated by traffic simulation
software demonstrate the model’s sensitivity to the social
dynamics of vehicles.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Trajectory Modeling
Since trajectory data possess spatiotemporal characteristics,
most research on trajectory modeling primarily focuses on
learning the spatial features of past trajectories of vehicles, pedestrians, or aerial vehicles and predicting their
future movements. An overview of recent years’ works in
this field can be comprehensively found in [23]. In [24],
a grid-based spatial encoder and a relative temporal encoder
are combined to extract trajectory features. These features

HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE

21711

are then fused with static embeddings (representing static
information such as traffic flow and weather) through an
attention mechanism. Reference [25] employs network representation learning to achieve accurate vehicle trajectory
clustering. Similarly focusing on automobiles, [26] develops three prediction models with distinct architectures: a
Transformer-based model (TS-Transformer), a Generative
Adversarial Network-based model (TS-GAN), and a Conditional Variational Autoencoder-based model (TS-CVAE).
These models demonstrate that traffic state-based models consistently predict future trajectories more accurately than vanilla
models, with the TS-Transformer producing state-of-the-art
results. Yan et al. [27] proposes an unsupervised method for
traffic VAD based on future object localization. In the field of
aircraft, the learning model of [28] adopts an encoder-decoder
architecture with a hybrid core of LSTM and GAN. Li et al.
[29] proposes the traffic trajectory prediction algorithm based
on the convolutional attention network (TraGCAN) to predict
the trajectories of heterogeneous traffic agents in dense traffic.
They construct the spatial relationship of traffic agents as a
graph structure and introduce a graph convolutional network
to extract spatial interactions. Reference [30] utilizes Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) to design modules for capturing sub-trajectory anomalies in both attribute space and
structural space within the generation and contrastive learning
modules.
Our work involves capturing all trajectory points within
a fixed area in a snapshot manner and recording vehicle
information for each point, including position, velocity, and
acceleration. We have designed an encoder-decoder framework
to learn the spatiotemporal relationships among vehicles in
these snapshots, with the aim of modeling these spatiotemporal
relationships in trajectories.

attention-based graph convolutional network. Wang et al. [45]
proposed a method integrating reinforcement learning with
spatial knowledge graphs to predict human mobility patterns.
Notably, [46] focuses on improving the generalizability of
graph anomaly detection models via data augmentation. There
are also numerous methods targeting subgraphs, such as
the Anomalous Subgraph Autoencoder (AS-GAE) proposed
by [47] to extract anomalous subgraphs. Reference [48] performs intra-view node-subgraph contrastive learning to enrich
the anomaly information. Reference [49] starts from injective
node augmentation and tries to enrich node representations
via multi-scale contrastive training. As the most relevant work,
[20] differs from our adoption of MMA. Their proposed model
utilizes a GAT to extract vehicle neighborhood relationships.
However, due to insufficient depth in capturing spatiotemporal relationships with the GAT and GRU combination, the
model lacks expressive power. This is the primary challenge
addressed by our proposed method in this study. Additionally,
we introduce node quantization to further fine-tune the model.
Inspired by anomaly detection in graphs, we model each
snapshot as a graph, where vehicles are nodes and the
adjacency relationships between vehicles are edges. Thus,
we transform the problem of detecting anomalies in vehicle
trajectories into a graph node anomaly detection problem.

B. Graph Anomaly Detection
In this paper, we focus on modeling the relationships
between vehicles and their neighbors on a highway scene
as a graph structure, with the fundamental task being graph
anomaly detection. Relevant reviews can be found in [31]
and [32], both of which are classic works on using deep
learning methods to solve graph anomaly detection problems.
The definition of anomalies varies, but common criteria for
judgment include extreme traffic events and accidents [33],
driving behaviors [34], [35], and autonomous vehicle driving
conditions [36]. Researchers have developed a plethora of
graph-based methods for these detection scenarios. In the article [37], Deng proposes a spatiotemporal graph convolutional
adversarial network (STGAN). Other approaches include using
GNN methods for multivariate time-series anomaly detection [38], [39], and generative and contrastive self-supervised
learning methods [40]. Tu et al. [41] introduced Deep outdatEd
fAct detectioN (DEAN), which employs a Relations-to-Nodes
(R2N) graph, a contrastive approach designed to unveil
implicit outdated information. CenGCN [42] posits that the
information transmitted from other nodes to the core node
through the propagation mechanism is unequal, a concept
that bears resemblance to the Graph Attention Network
(GAT) [43]. Chen et al. [44] combines sequence and graphstructured data, achieving sequence reconstruction through an

The input to the model consists of an observation set
O = {o1 , o2 , . . . , o|W | } over a time window W on the
highway. For each time step t within W, the observation
ot = {xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtN } is noted, where N = |ot | represents
the number of vehicles in the current observation. Here,
xti denotes the features of the vehicle numbered i at time
step t. The vehicle features xti = (xti , yti , lti , vti , ati ) include
the longitudinal position xti , lateral position yti , driving lane
ID lti , longitudinal speed vti , and longitudinal acceleration
ati . Furthermore, to reduce feature complexity and training
difficulty, we opt not to include vertical vehicle velocity
and acceleration as features in training. This decision stems
from the observation that in highway datasets, the majority
of vehicles exhibit predominantly horizontal velocities and
accelerations, with minimal values in the vertical direction.
Even during turns, the deviations in the vertical direction are
minimal. In the rare event of abrupt maneuvers, such as sharp
turns, the model can effectively capture and learn from the
significant decreases in horizontal velocity and acceleration
values.
Given the vehicle features xti for all t in W, our primary
objective is to detect vehicles exhibiting anomalous social
behaviors over a certain period W on the highway section.
Additionally, we will segment the highway section into shorter
stretches of length δs , referred to as scenes, and perform
anomaly detection for all vehicles on stretch S during W.

III. M ETHOD
In this section, we introduce the proposed VSD-AD model
which consists of three parts, namely Encoder module,
Decoder module, and NFQ module. The overview of VSD-AD
can refer to Figure 2.
A. Problem Formulation

21712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 2. The overview of VSD-AD model which consists of three modules: Encoder, Decoder, and Node Feature Quantisation. Firstly, within a time window,
the snapshot of road vehicles composing the graph is mined for neighbor relationships using Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregators. Then, the output of the
encoder is quantized by the Node Feature Quantization module. Finally, reconstruction is performed by a decoder with a structure identical to that of the
encoder.

drivers primarily focus on the few vehicles closest to them, and
the most significant impact on a current vehicle is undoubtedly
from its neighboring vehicles.

Fig. 3. The Multi-Mask Aggregator within the GRU module will learn
masks for each vehicle node feature using MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron)
and aggregate them onto ego vehicle nodes through various aggregators.

The criterion for scene anomaly detection involves identifying
anomalous vehicles within each segment, as elaborated in
Section III-G.
B. Graph Construction
We first construct a spatiotemporal dynamic graph representing the vehicular social dynamics, denoted as G(W) =
{(V1 , E1 ), (V2 , E2 ), . . . , (VT , ET )} for time t in W =
{1, 2, . . . , T }. The node set Vt represents all vehicles observed
on the highway at ot and their features xti = (xti , yti , lti , vti , ati ).
From the formulation, it is evident that for different time steps
t in W, the number of vehicles N = |Vt | is fixed, but the
number of vehicles at a single time step |ot | can vary, similar
ij
to the count in a snapshot. For et in Et , we define its existence
based on the condition that, centered on the current ego vehicle
j
xti , vehicle xt is within δx feet horizontally and less than δl
lanes vertically. This approach is justified as, in real scenarios,

C. Encoder
In this subsection, we introduce how Recurrent Multi-Mask
Aggregators [50] are used to compress and encode trajectory
time series data.
Specifically, we employ the RNN variant GRU [51], known
for its proficiency with sequential data tasks. Compared to
the traditional LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory network),
GRU’s structure is simpler. It merges the forget and input
gates into a single “update gate” and omits the output gate.
This simplified structure results in fewer parameters for the
GRU, making it more computationally efficient. We replace the
matrix multiplication in the GRU’s update gate z t , reset gate
rt , and candidate state H̃t with graph convolution operations,
denoted as ∗M , to capture the social dynamics among vehicle
graphs. This approach effectively leverages the strengths of
GRU in handling temporal dependencies while adapting its
architecture to better represent the complex social dynamics
present in vehicular graphs:
zt = σ (Wx z ∗M Xt + Whz ∗M Ht−1 + bz ),
rt = σ (Wxr ∗M Xt + Whr ∗M Ht−1 + br ),
H̃t = tanh(Wxh ∗M Xt + Whh ∗M (rt ⊙ Ht−1 + bh ),
Ht = zt ⊙ Ht−1 + (1 − zt ) ⊙ H̃t .
∈ R N ×dh

(1)

where Ht
represents the hidden state, while z t ∈
R N ×dh and rt ∈ R N ×dh correspond to the update gate and
reset gate, respectively, each with a dimension of dh . The
weights Wx z , Whz , Wxr , Whr , Wxh , Whh and biases bz , br , bh
are learnable parameters. The activation function σ is the
sigmoid function, and ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication.
The input X t ∈ R N ×d f at time step t to the GRU comes

HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE

from the raw observation ot , where d f is the node feature
dimension. This dimensionality is derived from the spatial
coordinates, speed, and acceleration (xt , yt , vt , at ) ∈ R N ×4 ,
concatenated with lane embeddings h lt ∈ R N ×dl . It is important to note that h lt represents the mapping of discrete lane
IDs to their corresponding embedding vectors with dimension
dl , making the input feature dimension d f = 4 + dl .
For the graph convolution operation ∗M , unlike the RGAT
method based on Graph Attention Network (GAT) [43] used
in [20] to capture dynamic interactions between neighboring
vehicles, we adopt RMMA [50] based on Multi-mask aggregators. This approach draws similarities with GAT and MPNN
but offers some theoretical and practical advantages [50].
As illustrated in Figure 3, the graph convolution operation
∗M X t for the vehicle feature set input X t primarily consists
of four processes:
a. Mask Generation. The purpose of this step is to learn
unique values between node neighbors, forming a mask. The
Multi-Mask Aggregators (MMA) deploy a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) between each node pair x i , x j and selectively
extract node features ei j . This operation can be likened to creating weights for multiplying aggregated neighboring features,
similar to the messages passed in Message Passing Neural
Networks (MPNN) and the attention coefficients in Graph
Attention Networks (GAT). However, while GAT typically
yields a single attention coefficient, the mask in MMA can
learn a relationship vector for each pair of neighbors. For each
node pair x i , x j , the learned mask is represented as:
j

j

ij

j

ij

m t = M L P(||xti , xt , et ) = σ (Wm (||xti , xt , et ))

(2)

j
where m t

represents the mask for vehicle j at time step t,
σ is the activation function and Wm is a learnable matrix.
The symbol || denotes column-wise concatenation. Since
j ij
xti , xt , et ∈ Rd f , the result of the concatenation belongs to
R3×d f , and Wm ∈ R3×α . The dimensionality of the result of
j ij
multiplying the concatenated xti , xt , et with Wm is in Rd f ×α ,
j
which ultimately determines the dimension of m t . Here, α
represents the hyperparameter for the number of hidden units.
b. Neighbor Aggregation. Unlike most graph convolution
methods that use only one type of aggregator, such as a
mean aggregator, to combine neighbor information, MultiMask Aggregators (MMA) allow users to choose one or
multiple masked aggregators based on the data distribution
and their specific needs. This flexibility enables a focus on
the social dynamics of vehicle interactions from multiple
perspectives. There are three types of aggregators available,
namely masked max, min, and mean aggregators:
j

j

j

maxt = max j∈N ei i (xt ◦ m t ),

(3)

j
j
j
min t = min j∈N ei i (xt ◦ m t ),
t

(4)

t

j

mean t =

1
|N ei ti |

X

j

j

xt ◦ m t ,

(5)

j∈N ei ti

where Neiit denotes the set of neighbor IDs for vehicle i at
time step t. Each aggregator performs a Hadamard product
with the neighbor features and the masks generated in step a).
The difference lies in the operations of min and max, which
select the smallest or largest vector from the result vectors for

21713

aggregation. This allows the network to learn to ignore certain
“undesired” nodes when propagating information. The mean
aggregator, on the other hand, integrates information from
all neighbor vectors, where ◦ denotes the Hadamard product
operation.
c. Message Vector Scaling. Further, enhances expressiveness
by utilizing degree scalers to amplify and attenuate signals
based on the nodes’ degrees. The general expression for degree
scalers S(·) is:


log (d + 1) ω
, d > 0, −1 < ω < 1, (6)
S(d, ω) =
ϕ
in this context, ω represents the amplification factor, where d
is the node degree, and ϕ is the average degree of the training
set. In our work, we set ω = {−1, 0, 1}, corresponding to
signal attenuation, no change, and amplification, respectively.
d. Assimilation. Finally, it is necessary to integrate the
results of all aggregators and scalers. If ⊗ denotes the tensor
product, then the universal aggregation function ⊕mask for
MMA can be expressed as:

 

I
Masked Max
⊕mask =  S(D, α = 1)  ⊗  Masked Min  . (7)
S(D, α = −1)
Masked Mean
At this point, for each time step t, all vehicles xti in
the observation set ot have received information from their
neighbors. Information that cannot influence the ego vehicle
will be ‘discarded’, while neighbor information that truly
alters driving behavior will be strengthened. In comparison
to works with predefined edge weights, it is evident that
MMA exhibits stronger interpretability and possesses more
learnable parameters to determine the social dynamics among
neighbors than GAT. Moreover, the multi-aggregator feature
of MMA provides it with a certain degree of flexibility and
customization. For instance, operators can choose or combine
multiple min aggregators as needed.
D. Node Feature Quantisation
Inspired by Vector Quantized-Variational AutoEncoder
(VQ-VAE) [21], which has proven effectiveness in vector
quantisation when the posterior and prior distributions are
categorical, the VQ operation has been shown to improve
the overall network performance by drawing an embedding
table from these distributions and using it as input to the
Decoder network. In this subsection, we will provide a detailed
explanation of our proposed Node Feature Quantisation (NFQ)
mechanism.
The input to NFQ is the hidden state of the Encoder’s last
layer, denoted as HT ∈ R N ×dh . First, we define a discrete
latent embedding space e ∈ R K ×dh , where K is the size of
the discrete latent space. Thus, there are K embedding vectors
ei ∈ Rdh , i ∈ 1, 2, . . . , K , constituting the embedding space
known as the code book. Our goal is to map each vector in HT
to the code book e for quantisation. The initialization methods
for a code book typically include random initialization and
K-means clustering initialization. Here, we initialize each
vector in the code book by sampling each element from a
standard normal distribution. We then compute the posterior

21714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

categorical distribution probabilities q(z|ot ), which are defined
as one-hot vectors, as follows:
(
1 for k = argmin j ∥ z e (ot ) − e j ∥2 ,
q(z = k|ot ) =
0 otherwise.
(8)
the variable z e (ot ), denoted as HT , represents the result of
processing the original data ot through the Encoder. The
distribution q(z = k|ot ) is deterministic and is based on
the principle of computing the distances between each input
vector and the K vectors in the embedding. The distances
are calculated using the common Euclidean distance ∥·∥2 .
The result of Equation (8), q(z = k|ot ) ∈ R N ×K , indicates
that only the vectors corresponding to z e (ot ) with the closest
Euclidean distances to the ei vectors in the code book e will
have the value 1 in the item at index i of the q(z = k|ot )
vector. all other values are set to 0. The quantized result z q (ot )
can be expressed as:
z q (ot ) = q(z = k|ot ) ⊙ e.

(9)

the described process can be summarized as representing
z e (ot ) through a discrete bottleneck and then mapping it to
the nearest elements in the embedding e:
z q (ot ) = ek ,

where k = argmin j ∥ z e (ot ) − e j ∥2 .

(10)

Due to the fact that messages from multiple neighbors are
aggregated into node tensors by multiple aggregators through
Recurrent Multi-Mask Aggregation (RMMA), and these tensors are then passed as hidden states to the next RMMA, the
information content tends to be coarse. We believe this may
be detrimental to the subsequent tasks of data reconstruction
and classification by the Encoder. Therefore, by employing the
proposed Node Feature Quantisation (NFQ), we aim to map
the output of the Encoder to discretized entries, introducing
a quantisation operation. This operation is intended to help
alleviate the aforementioned issue.
E. Decoder
The Decoder employs the same RMMA structure as the
Encoder. Furthermore, both the Decoder and Encoder have
an equal number of spatiotemporal modules in their RMMA
structures, determined by the depth of the input spatiotemporal dynamic graph, i.e., our window size W. To avoid
the computational burden of repeatedly calculating the edge
set, we use the union of all edges in the Encoder, denoted
as E = E1 ∪ E2 ∪ . . . ∪ ET , as the input for the Decoder.
According to our graph construction approach, the edge set
only restricts the neighborhood around the nodes. The interaction relationships between neighboring nodes and which
neighbors have a more significant impact on the central node
are dynamically determined by the multi-mask aggregation
mechanism of RMMA.
The hidden state Ĥ t ∈ R N ×dh of the Decoder is further
processed through a fully connected layer to generate the
output node state reconstruction X̂ t . Details about X̂ t will be
explained in subsection F. Subsequently, the output X̂ t serves
as the input for the next recurrent step. Unlike the Encoder,
since the vectors at time T are most relevant to the state at

time T , we decode the sequence backward from time step T .
Therefore, the initial input for the Decoder-RMMA will be the
node states at time T .
F. Loss Function
For each ego vehicle at time t, certain features including
the longitudinal position xti , velocity vti , and acceleration ati
are assumed to follow univariate Gaussian distributions, i.e.,
xti ∼ N (µx i , σx i ), vti ∼ N (µvi , σvi ), and ati ∼ N (µa i , σa i ).
t
t
t
t
t
t
Since lane information is a discrete signal, the longitudinal
lane information lti is presumed to be a discrete choice
among several lanes L. For the Decoder, the ego vehicle’s
lane position is a potential discrete category distribution,
represented as p1i , . . . , p L i . The Decoder’s output X̂ will
t
t
eventually evaluate the above Gaussian and categorical distributions, meaning that for each x̂t i ∈ X̂ , there are x̂t i =
[µ̂xti , σ̂ xti , µ̂vti , σ̂ vti , µ̂ati , σ̂ ati , p̂1it , . . . , p̂L it ] to evaluate the
mean, variance of the longitudinal position, velocity, acceleration, and the probability of the lane position.
The probability density functions for evaluating position,
velocity, and acceleration are denoted as q(xti |µ̂x i , σ̂x i ),
t
t
q(vti |µ̂vi , σ̂vi ), and q(ati |µ̂a i , σ̂a i ) respectively. We aim to
t
t
t
t
minimize the negative log-likelihoods as follows:
 

Lx i = − log q xti |µ̂x i , σ̂x i ,
(11)
t
t
t
 

Lvi = − log q vti |µ̂vi , σ̂vi ,
(12)
t
t
t
 

La i = − log q ati |µ̂a i , σ̂a i .
(13)
t

t

For lane classification, we
cross-entropy loss as follows:

aim

Ll i = −

L
X

t

t

to

minimize

 
1l i log p̂l i ,
t

the

(14)

t

l=1

where 1l i is an indicator function that equals 1 if vehicle xit
t
is in lane l at time t, and 0 otherwise.
Given the direct gradient estimation from z q (ot ) to z e (ot )
and that the above loss functions do not account for the
gradient descent problem for each embedding ei in Node Feature Quantisation (NFQ), to learn the code book’s embedding
space, we employ an l2 error to approximate the Encoder
outputs z e (ot ) towards embedding vectors ei . The loss function
for learning the code book, L N F Q , is defined to minimize the
l2 error as follows:
L N F Q =∥ sg[z e (ot )] − z q (ot ) ∥22 + ∥ z e (ot ) − sg[z q (ot )] ∥22 ,
(15)
where | · |2 denotes the Euclidean distance. sg[·] represents the
stop gradient operator, which is defined as the identity function
during forward computation and has zero partial derivatives,
effectively treating its operand as an un-updated constant.
Thus, the overall loss function can be expressed as a weighted
sum of the negative log-likelihood losses and the cross-entropy
loss across all agents and all times, as well as the code book’s
l2 error:
Lit = λx Lx i + λν Lν i + λa La i + λl Ll i ,
t

t

t

t

(16)

HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE

L=

N X
T
X

Lit + λ N F Q L N F Q .

(17)

i=1 t=1

where λx , λv , λa , λl , and λ N F Q are the weights for each loss
component, serving as hyperparameters. Typically, these can
be empirically set as λx = 1, λv = 1, λa = 2, λl = 2 and
λ N F Q = 2.
G. Anomaly Detection
Based on the granularity of detection, anomaly detection
can be divided into anomaly vehicle detection and anomaly
scene detection.
i of the
For anomaly vehicle detection, the anomaly score ρW
vehicle i under time window W is calculated as its average
loss across all time steps:
T

i
ρW
=

1 X i
Lt ,
T

(18)

t=1

where T is the length of the time window W. Anomaly scene
detection primarily identifies anomalies in the entire scene,
aggregating the losses of all vehicles within stretch S during
S :
W to calculate the scene anomaly score ρW
S
ρW
= max(Lit ), ∀(i, t) that xti ∈ S.

(19)

The equation indicates that each scene’s anomaly score
is determined by the maximum anomaly score among its
vehicles, implying that the presence of any anomalous vehicle
within a scene renders the entire scene abnormal. Here,
we obtain the set of anomaly scores V eSco for vehicles and
the set of anomaly scores SceSco for scenes.
After obtaining these anomaly scores, we cannot directly
determine anomalous vehicles and scenarios. However, we can
establish thresholds based on the intuitive distribution of these
anomaly scores. To ensure scientific rigor, this study employs
cross-validation by splitting the dataset into training and
validation sets. Through ROC curve analysis on the validation
set, we select the threshold that maximizes the Area Under the
Curve (AUC). This method allows for a more precise threshold
selection, suitable for scenarios that require a balance between
prediction accuracy and recall.
It is worth mentioning that, unlike using the mean for
aggregation, we adopt maximum aggregation to highlight the
presence of anomalies, rather than averaging the losses of
normal vehicles. In conclusion, the overall process and pseudo
code of the VSD-AD model proposed by us can be referenced
in Algorithm 1.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we utilize two types of data sources, namely
simulation data and real-world data, to validate the performance of our proposed VSD-AD model. Initially, simulation
data with ground truth labels for anomalies is used for a
quantitative performance comparison between our proposed
model and baseline models. Subsequently, the HighD dataset
is employed to verify the effectiveness of our model in
practical applications. Moreover, to demonstrate the strong
customization capability of VSD-AD, we modified different
modules of the VSD-AD model on both datasets to fit actual
needs.

21715

Algorithm 1 The Overall Procedure of VSD-AD
Require: Scenario: sce, Training set: Dtrain , Test set: Dtest ,
Training epochs: epoches, Batch size: batch_si ze, Window size: W.
Ensure: Anomaly scores ρ of trajectory test set.
1: Construct vehicular social dynamics graph G(W) for
Dtrain and Dtest , as shown in Section III-B.
2: Initialize the trainable parameters W and the code book
of feature quantisation e randomly.
3: // T raining phase
4: for epoch in {1, 2, . . . , epoches} do
5:
for batch (G(W)1 , G(W)2 , . . . , G(W)batch_si ze ) do
6:
for t in {1, 2, . . . , T } do
7:
Construct lane embeddings h l .
8:
Get node features X t via concating with h l .
9:
Get hidden state Ht via Eq. (1).
10:
end for
11:
Compute q(z|ot ) via Eq. (8).
12:
Get the quantized result z q (ot ) via Eq. (9)
13:
for t in {1, 2, . . . , T } do
14:
Obtain hidden state Ĥt via Eq. (1).
15:
end for
16:
Compute the position Lx , velocity Lv , acceleration
La and lane loss Ll via Eq. (11) (12) (13) (14).
17:
Compute the NFQ loss via Eq. (15).
18:
Combine all the loss as L via Eq. (16) (17)
19:
Optimize L, update parameters W and code book e.
20:
end for
21: end for
22: // T est phase
23: for ot in Dtest do
24:
Obtain the loss Lit for cars via Eq. (16).
i via Eq. (18).
25:
Obtain the anomaly car score ρW
S via Eq. (19).
26:
Obtain the anomaly scene score ρW
27:
Obtain the anomaly scores set V eSco and SceSco.
28:
return anomaly scores V eSco and SceSco.
29: end for

A. Datasets
The detailed information for both datasets is presented as
follows:
1) TransModeler Simulation Dataset: This dataset originates from the virtual simulation data generated by TransModeler, as referenced in [20]. TransModeler, a traffic simulation
software, accommodates a wide range of granularity and complexity in simulation needs and generates traffic flow on roads
and intersections, including vehicle acceleration, deceleration,
and lane-changing behaviors. The data for this work were captured over a 5-mile stretch of a 4-lane highway at a frequency
of 1Hz, encompassing various scenarios and vehicle behaviors.
Detailed information can be found in Table I. In Table I, the
first column represents the scenario types, and the first row
indicates the types of vehicles present in each scenario. “CTG”
is the abbreviation of “constant time gap”, which stands
for the vehicle that follows the constant time car-following
model where drivers can maintain a consistent desired distance
from the vehicle in front. The “TD” column, representing

21716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE I
D ISTRIBUTION OF V EHICLE T YPES IN D IFFERENT S CENARIOS

TABLE II
S IMULATION DATA T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET D ISTRIBUTION

TABLE III
H IGH D DATA T RAINING S ET AND T EST S ET D ISTRIBUTION

“Traffic Demand”, displays the specific traffic volume for each
scenario in terms of vehicles per lane per hour, simulating
various traffic demands including free flow and congested
conditions. The remaining values in the table indicate the
distribution of each vehicle type within the respective scenario.
The dataset is divided into six distinct scenarios. Among them,
the Comprehensive scenario consists predominantly of normal
vehicles along with all other types of abnormal vehicles. This
scenario is complex and closely reflects real-world conditions,
thereby emphasizing the model’s robustness. In the Normal
scenario, abnormalities are limited to Speeding and Slow
categories only. Each of the remaining scenarios focuses on a
single abnormality type, highlighting the common limitation
of models in detecting only one or two specific anomalies
rather than a comprehensive range.
Unlike most studies that focus only on common anomalies
such as speeding, tailgating, and stalled vehicles, we have
also examined slow driving behaviors, which are difficult
to learn using single-vehicle methods. The specific distribution of the simulation dataset in this work is presented in
Table II.
2) HighD Dataset: The real-world dataset HighD was collected by the Technical University of Munich using drones and
other tools on local highways, amassing a total of 16.5 hours
of high-definition traffic video data. In this work, we selected
approximately 5.8 hours of highway vehicle trajectory data
as our training set, which includes scenarios of both clear
and congested traffic conditions on a three-lane highway, with
corresponding traffic flows ranging from 1200 to 3600 vehicles
per lane per hour. Subsequently, we used a 15-minute segment
with a traffic flow of approximately 2300 vehicles per lane per
hour as our test set. The detailed distribution is presented in
Table III.

B. Baselines and Metrics
1) Baselines: To demonstrate the superiority of our work,
we compared it with the most advanced trajectory anomaly
detection algorithms and heuristic algorithms on the same
trajectory dataset. Our baselines primarily include:
• Linear Temporal Interpolation (LTI) [52] approximates
a trajectory by interpolating between trajectory points at
the first and last time steps.
• Constant Velocity Model (CVM) [53], which assumes
that an agent’s next step velocity and direction are the
same as the previous two sampling points. This approach
has even surpassed some neural network algorithms due
to their erroneous assumptions.
• Robust Tensor Recovery (RTR) [54] introduces a tensor
decomposition method that helps recover low-rank tensor
values containing vehicle information and compares them
with normal patterns to detect sparse anomalies.
• Sequence to Sequence Learning (seq2seq) [55] employs
a classic encoder-decoder neural network architecture
with LSTM to capture the spatiotemporal relationships of
vehicle trajectories, which is used to recognize patterns.
• Spatiotemporal Graph Auto-Encoder (STGAE-biv),
a variant from [52], defines a weighted adjacency matrix
through a kernel function incorporating the distances
between agents and uses a bivariate Gaussian reconstruction loss to build the encoder-decoder to obtain the
anomaly score.
• DSAB [20], an autoencoder composed of RGAT blocks
that captures the relationships of social dynamics between
vehicles, where the most crucial vehicles for the
ego-vehicle are assigned attention coefficients through an
attention mechanism.
Among all the baselines, LTI and CVM are simple
parameter-free reconstruction methods, while the others
require learning model parameters to capture non-linear patterns. Both can only handle simple non-free-flow scenarios
with minor vehicle speed changes. RTR, Seq2seq, CVM, and
LTI consider only the trajectory of the ego-vehicle itself,
while STGAE-biv and DSAB demonstrate the social dynamics
interactions between vehicles.
2) Metrics: Similar to the validation metrics used in most
anomaly detection works in practical experiments, we adhere
to the following metrics:
• ROC-AUC score, a common indicator in the field of
anomaly detection. Firstly, sort real labels and Sco based
on the descending order of Sco values. Subsequently,
it calculates the AUC using the sorted Sco and corresponding real labels’ values. The ROC curve is plotted
with False Positive Rate (FPR) on the x-axis and True
Positive Rate (TPR) on the y-axis. The AUC under the
ROC curve is typically computed using the following
formula:
P
P
i∈ pos
j∈neg 1( pi > q j )
,
(20)
AU C =
| pos| · |neg|
where pos and neg are sets of positive and negative
class samples respectively, pi and q j represent the predicted probabilities (here denoted as Sco) for the i-th

HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE

positive sample and j-th negative sample. The symbol
1(·) denotes the indicator function, which equals 1 if the
condition inside the parentheses holds true, and 0 otherwise.
• Precision@k. This setting is merely for purposes such
as manually validating a fixed number of anomalies,
where Pr ecision@k measures the relevance among our
specified k samples. The mathematical expression is:
P
i∈top_k_indices lables[i]
,
(21)
pr ecision@k =
k
where top_k_indices is a collection of indices corresponding to the top k highest predicted values, identified
using a fast partitioning algorithm. labels refers to the
array of true labels, and k denotes the number of top
predicted values that are of interest to us.
• Average precision, which averages the precision-recall
data into a single value. First, we need to compute the Precision-Recall (PR) curve. The definition of
pr ecision@k is shown in Eq. (21). The definition of
r ecall@k can then be expressed as:
P
i∈top_k_indices lables[i]
.
(22)
r ecall@k =
Total positive examples
Next, we compute the Average Precision (AP). Typically,
the area under the PR curve is approximated by discretizing the PR curve, which sums instead of integrating to
approximate the area under the PR curve.
X
AP ≈
(r ecall@k − r ecall@(k − 1)) · pr ecision@k,
k

(23)
where k iterates over all non-decreasing points on the PR
curve (points where recall does not decrease). Therefore,
the AP function computes the Average Precision using
the aforementioned process, which evaluates the balance
between precision and recall when predicting positives.
C. Implementation Details
The hyperparameter settings for validating our VSD-AD
model on simulation data are presented in Table IV. The
parameters are divided into three parts according to the
process: graph convolution, model, and training parameters.
Notably, the parameter δx representing the distance threshold
between neighbors differs for detecting anomalous vehicles
and anomalous scenarios, being 0.1 miles and 0.15 miles,
respectively. Based on W and sample_time, the graph depth
is determined to be 15. In the model parameter settings, the
recommended calculation method for NFQ embedding space is
K = 2dh , and we adopt a slightly larger vector space to better
aid quantification. The aggr e_list indicates a combination of
masked min and mean aggregators for the MMA aggregator,
the rationale for which is detailed in Section III-C. It’s
worth mentioning that, in the Training section, lr represents
the initial learning rate, which is halved every 50 epochs.
Gradient clipping is used to prevent gradient explosion, with
a maximum norm of 1.
For the HighD dataset, the window size W is set to 10s,
leading to a graph depth of 10. Apart from this, we also adjust

21717

TABLE IV
H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS ON THE VSD-AD
M ODEL U SING S IMULATION DATASET

the neighbor distance threshold δx to 0.2, and set the batch size
to 128, with other parameters configured the same as in the
simulation dataset.
Given that our proposed VSD-AD model requires a constant
number of vehicles in each time window, many vehicle trajectories are not complete, such as those entering or leaving the
observed road segment. Our approach is as follows: For the
TransModeler Simulation dataset, owing to its large volume
and controllable data source, we directly discard all incomplete
vehicle trajectories. For the real-world HighD dataset, due to
its uncontrollable data source, containing numerous incomplete segments and shorter sampling intervals, we complete the
incomplete vehicle trajectories through linear extrapolation,
assuming a constant vehicle speed for the extrapolated parts.
These are masked during loss computation to prevent them
from influencing the experimental results.
D. Results and Analysis
In this section, we conduct a quantitative analysis and
compare the performance of our model on TransModeler
Simulation data with baselines across different scenarios.
We also perform ablation studies and hyperparameter analyses
to understand the impact of each model component and the
variations in hyperparameters on performance.
1) Model Comparison: In this section, we not only compare
different anomaly vehicle detection methods in comprehensive
scenarios but also evaluate the performance of anomaly scene
detection against baselines. Subsequently, we compare the
performance of anomaly vehicle detection in other scenarios.
All baseline methods utilize the formula 18 and 19 to compute
anomaly scores.
Initially, we conduct benchmark tests on the validation
set, where all anomalous social dynamics are manifested on
highways. The comparative experimental results for anomaly
vehicle detection can be seen in Table V. Apart from DSAB,
which captures inter-node correlations through graph attention
mechanisms, our method is the only one capable of identifying
specific behaviors, such as anomalous vehicles that deviate
from typical social dynamics. Concerning precision across
different k values, most methods do not exceed 0.6 and
generally fall within the range of 0.1-0.3. This is because
the social relationships between vehicles cannot be identified
through simple mathematical methods or neural networks

21718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE V
A BNORMAL V EHICLE D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON THE
T EST S ET OF C OMPREHENSIVE S CENARIO

TABLE VI
A BNORMAL S CENE D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON THE
T EST S ET OF C OMPREHENSIVE S CENARIO

modeling individual vehicles. This microscopic approach to
anomaly vehicle detection highlights this fact. In contrast, our
method achieves a precision of over 0.7, even approaching
0.9 at its peak, where DSAB and our method are roughly
comparable. Moreover, our average precision surpasses that
of most methods by approximately 0.6%, and similarly, our
ROC-AUC score is approximately 0.18% higher. These experimental results demonstrate that our VSD-AD method can
delve deeper into the neighbor relationships between vehicles. While STGAE-biv and DSAB can also identify social
relationships between vehicles, the former fails to capture
lane-changing behaviors well due to its use of bivariate
Gaussian trajectory loss, and the latter does not fully explore
neighbor relationships. Not to mention that baselines like
Seq2Seq, RTR, CVM, and LTI are unable to identify dynamic
social relationships at all.
Furthermore, we conducted comparative experiments on the
performance of anomaly scene detection among all methods,
as shown in Table VI. Since anomaly scene detection involves
macroscopically identifying abnormal patterns in entire scene
segments, most methods perform well in this aspect. For
instance, sudden deceleration, braking, or unreasonable acceleration of anomalous vehicles in specific scenes can be easily
identified by simple non-parametric methods like LTI and
CVM. Moreover, when anomalous vehicles are present in
a scene, the scene’s anomaly score is significantly higher
compared to normal patterns.
Nevertheless, our method still maintains a leading position
among all methods, with approximately a 2% improvement
in precision and ROC-AUC indicators. This is noteworthy, considering that anomaly scene detection is generally
well-addressed by existing methods due to its reliance on
macro-level recognition of abnormal patterns in entire scene
segments, unlike the more nuanced anomaly vehicle detection.
Next, we compared the performance between all baselines
and VSD-AD in other distinct scenarios, including slow,
speeding, tailgating, and stalled. The results can be referenced

Fig. 4. Influence of different parameters. The model tends to favor the
min-mean aggregator for fitting the data. Regarding the size of the code book
embedding space, larger spaces enhance model accuracy but must be carefully
balanced to avoid weakening quantization capabilities. The model exhibits
insensitivity towards dropout and sampling time, affording us greater freedom
in parameter selection.

in Table VII. From the metrics of pre@100 and Ave Pre,
it can be observed that for slow and stalled vehicles, most
methods fail to recognize their patterns. Only by deeply
modeling the social relationships between vehicles can their
anomalies be effectively detected. In these two scenarios, our
method achieves optimal performance, with approximately a
1% improvement in each metric compared to the secondhighest method.
It is evident that almost all methods, including the
non-parametric approach CVM specifically designed for
speeding and tailgating scenarios, perform well in the speeding
scenario. Although DSAB stands out as the most outstanding,
almost unbeatable, reaching an impressive 0.995 at ROC-AUC,
the performance gap of our model remains within an acceptable range. Given that CVM follows different car-following
dynamics in its initial setup, its performance surpassing all
methods in the tailgating scenario is not surprising. However,
it is worth noting that no method outperforms ours on every
metric. we consistently outperform others in most scenarios.
2) Hyper Parameter Analysis: In this section, we explore
the impact of different hyperparameter configurations on
the model, considering the customization capability of our
proposed model. We employ different GRU-built graph convolution modules to validate the model’s sensitivity to them. The
RMMA (Recurrent Multi-head Message Aggregator) built-in
aggregator combinations used are min, min-mean, and minmean-max.
Firstly, we investigate the sensitivity of the model to the
hidden dimension during the model and social dynamics
relationship graph construction process. From Figure 4a, it can

HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE

21719

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE OF A BNORMAL V EHICLE D ETECTION IN D IFFERENT I NDEPENDENT S CENARIOS

be observed that the model is not sensitive to the hidden
dimension, and there is no discernible pattern. To ensure fewer
model parameters, we choose 5 as the hidden dimension. Next,
by observing Figures 4b, 4c, and 4d, the distance threshold
signifies that vehicles within this threshold are defined as
neighbor nodes during the construction of the spatiotemporal
relationship graph. When the value is 0, the model focuses
only on a single vehicle without considering social dynamics.
From Figure 4b, it is evident that the model’s performance is
optimal when the distance is 0.1.
Considering the time dimension, we initially set the sampling interval to 1 second and change the window size from
5 seconds to 20 seconds. Then, we fix the window size at
15 seconds and change the sampling interval from 1 second
to 4 seconds. Figures 4c and 4d show that different window
sizes and sampling frequencies have minimal impact on the
overall performance of the model. The model achieves optimal performance when the embedding space for RMMA is
set to 256, and it is sensitive to this parameter according
to 4e.
Finally, considering the introduced NFQ module, Figure 4f
compares the impact of its parameter settings. It can be
observed that after reaching an optimal solution, further
growth in the dropout does not contribute to improving the
model.
Each line plot in Figure 4 illustrates the impact of different
RMMA built-in aggregator combinations under various parameters. In summary, the min-mean aggregator combination is
most suitable for fitting the model to the simulated dataset.
It is essential to note that aggregators like min, mean, and
max do not indicate the nearest, average, and farthest distances
in the spatiotemporal vehicular social dynamics graph, but
rather their impact on ego-vehicles as indicated by the masked
representations learned by the MLP formula.
3) Ablation Study: In this study, we aim to evaluate the
impact of specific modules within the proposed VSD-AD
model on the overall model performance by selectively removing them. We objectively assess the influence of the MMA
(Multi-Mask Aggregator) module and the NFQ (Neighbor
Fusion Queue) module on the model using the AUC (Area
Under the Curve) metric on a simulated dataset across four
scenarios (Slow, Speeding, Tailgating, Stalled). Notably, the
MMA module utilizes a min-mean aggregator combination.
As depicted in Figure 5, the removal of the MMA module, replaced with GCN (Graph Convolutional Network) for
graph convolution operations to process neighboring vehicle
information, results in a significant performance decrease.

Fig. 5.
The ablation study reveals that the MMA module significantly
enhances the overall performance of the model, whereas the NFQ module,
while contributing to improvements, functions more akin to fine-tuning the
model.

Across each scenario, there is an approximate 0.26 drop in
accuracy. Conversely, solely eliminating the NFQ module does
not lead to substantial fluctuations in the model’s performance,
typically resulting in a 1%-2% difference in accuracy.
E. Qualitative Results
In this section, we qualitatively studied the performance of
our proposed VSD-AD model on high-definition data captured
by drones in the real world. Unlike simulated data, the
HighD dataset has relatively fewer trajectories and different
road condition patterns. However, our model still manages to
capture these patterns and detect anomalies.
The data in HighD primarily originates from German highways, where speed limit policies are relatively lenient, with
some areas even having unrestricted speeds. Figure 6a illustrates the road conditions during normal driving. Calculated
from the training set, the average speeds from right to left lanes
are 56, 69, and 76 mph, respectively. Similar to driving rules
in China, faster vehicles tend to be closer to the left, while
slower ones are inclined to be on the right. Therefore, judging
a vehicle’s abnormality solely based on whether its speed
exceeds the limit is insufficient. It’s also necessary to consider
if its speed aligns with other vehicles in the same lane.
Otherwise, it should be considered abnormal. In this section,
we manually inspected the segments where the vehicles with
the highest anomaly scores were found. We discovered that
the abnormal vehicles fell into the two categories mentioned
earlier: speeding/slowing down, indicating aggressive driving
with excessive/insufficient acceleration and speeds not consistent with the normal range of the lane.

21720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

speed, causing vehicle number 4 to brake urgently. Our model
accurately labels vehicle number 4 as normal in this scenario.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we address the critical task of detecting
anomalous social dynamics using trajectories obtained from
a high-speed highway video surveillance system supported by
the Internet of Things. Our approach focuses on employing
VSD-AD, an innovative autoencoder supported by recurrent
multi-mask aggregators, to precisely identify anomalous vehicles. By leveraging this method, we successfully capture the
complex spatiotemporal dynamics of trajectory patterns, taking
into account the interactions between neighboring vehicles
and the inherent randomness in driving behavior. Through
comprehensive experiments on both simulated and real-world
datasets, our model demonstrates its scalability, making it
suitable for large-scale highway monitoring systems with
thousands of vehicles. Furthermore, our user-customizable
approach exhibits significant efficacy in detecting various
anomalous scenarios. Particularly noteworthy is its outstanding performance in identifying anomalies in individual
vehicles, placing it at the forefront of anomaly detection
methods. This implies its potential to accurately pinpoint
specific problematic vehicles within massive traffic flows,
thereby promoting enhanced traffic management and safety
protocols.
Regarding the shortcomings and perspectives of this study,
it is notable that the MMA modules incur significant computational costs, requiring several hours for training in our
experimental setup. Despite achieving commendable results
in both simulation and real-world testing, there remains a
pressing need to enhance the algorithm’s time complexity in
the immediate future. Moreover, the VSD-AD model operates
on a data-driven basis, necessitating extensive data acquisition and preprocessing efforts, particularly challenging in
obtaining highway data, which demands substantial costs,
time, and manpower. To address this challenge, we anticipate
that advancements can swiftly be made through temporal
data reconstruction techniques or the generation of highway
imagery via visual direction neural networks and data augmentation solutions [56], thereby augmenting the quantity of
authentic data and reducing deployment costs for the model.
Fig. 6. Qualitative results. The visualization demonstrates the detection of
the top two instances with the highest anomaly scores by the model. The
reconstructed scenes appear significantly different from the original scenes,
yet the model successfully discerns abnormal and suspicious vehicles within
them.

We visualize our experimental results in Figure 6, showcasing the top two scenes with the highest anomaly scores from
four perspectives: speed, acceleration, normalized anomaly
scores, and normalized anomaly scores reconstructed by the
model. Each arrowhead dot represents the starting point, while
the triangle represents the end point. In the acceleration view
that is shown in Figure 6b, arrows pointing in the opposite
direction indicate vehicles are decelerating. In Figure 6b, vehicle number 1 suddenly decelerates without any interference
from vehicles ahead. In Figure 6c, vehicle number 1 attempts
to accelerate from lane 2 to lane 1, which requires a higher

R EFERENCES
[1] W. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Gong, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, and W. Wei,
“An attention-based deep learning framework for trip destination prediction of sharing bike,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
pp. 4601–4610, Jul. 2021.
[2] W. Wang et al., “Realizing the potential of the Internet of Things for
smart tourism with 5G and AI,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 295–301,
Nov./Dec. 2020.
[3] Y. Chang, E. Tanin, G. Cong, C. S. Jensen, and J. Qi, “Trajectory similarity measurement: An efficiency perspective,” 2023, arXiv:2311.00960.
[4] X. Xie, C. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. N. Wu, and S. Zhu, “Congestion-aware
multi-agent trajectory prediction for collision avoidance,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2021, pp. 13693–13700.
[5] H. Yu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Huang, and B. Yin, “Fine-grained accident
detection: Database and algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33,
pp. 1059–1069, 2024.
[6] M. N. Azadani and A. Boukerche, “Driving behavior analysis guidelines
for intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 6027–6045, Jul. 2022.

HU et al.: VSD-AD WITH RECURRENT MULTI-MASK AGGREGATOR ENABLED VAE

[7] M. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Li, P. Hui, and Y. Zheng, “Urban anomaly
analytics: Description, detection, and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Big Data,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 809–826, Jun. 2022.
[8] H. Ghahremannezhad, H. Shi, and C. Liu, “Object detection in traffic
videos: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 7,
pp. 6780–6799, Jul. 2023.
[9] B. Zhao, P. Han, and X. Li, “Vehicle perception from satellite,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
Apr. 2024.
[10] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, and J. Qi, “GMAN: A graph multiattention network for traffic prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., Apr. 2020, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1234–1241.
[11] K. Doshi and Y. Yilmaz, “An efficient approach for anomaly detection in
traffic videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2021, pp. 4236–4244.
[12] Y. Zhao, W. Wu, Y. He, Y. Li, X. Tan, and S. Chen, “Good practices
and a strong baseline for traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 3993–4001.
[13] K. K. Santhosh, D. P. Dogra, P. P. Roy, and A. Mitra, “Vehicular
trajectory classification and traffic anomaly detection in videos using
a hybrid CNN-VAE architecture,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11891–11902, Aug. 2022.
[14] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Clustering
aided weakly supervised training to detect anomalous events in surveillance videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access,
May 26, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3274611.
[15] M.-H. Oh and G. Iyengar, “Sequential anomaly detection using inverse
reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Disc. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1480–1490.
[16] Y. Cheng, B. Wu, L. Song, and C. Shi, “Spatial-temporal recurrent neural
network for anomalous trajectories detection,” in Advanced Data Mining
and Applications, J. Li, S. Wang, S. Qin, X. Li, and S. Wang, Eds.,
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 565–578.
[17] Y. Ding, W. Zhang, X. Zhou, Q. Liao, Q. Luo, and L. M. Ni, “FraudTrip:
Taxi fraudulent trip detection from corresponding trajectories,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 12505–12517, Aug. 2021.
[18] D. Zhang, Z. Chang, S. Wu, Y. Yuan, K.-L. Tan, and G. Chen, “Continuous trajectory similarity search for online outlier detection,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 4690–4704, Oct. 2022.
[19] A. M. Vegni and V. Loscri, “A survey on vehicular social networks,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2397–2419, 4th
Quart., 2015.
[20] Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and D. Work, “Detecting socially abnormal
highway driving behaviors via recurrent graph attention networks,” in
Proc. ACM Web Conf. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, Apr. 2023, pp. 3086–3097, doi: 10.1145/3543507.3583452.
[21] A. van den Oord, O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu, “Neural discrete representation learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 30, I. Guyon et al., Eds., Curran Associates, 2017,
pp. 1–10. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2017/file/7a98af17e63a0ac09ce2e96d03992fbc-Paper.pdf
[22] R. Krajewski, J. Bock, L. Kloeker, and L. Eckstein, “The highD dataset:
A drone dataset of naturalistic vehicle trajectories on German highways
for validation of highly automated driving systems,” in Proc. 21st Int.
Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Nov. 2018, pp. 2118–2125.
[23] X. Kong, J. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. He, X. Zhao, and G. Shen, “Mobile
trajectory anomaly detection: Taxonomy, methodology, challenges, and
directions,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 19210–19231,
Jun. 2024.
[24] X. Liu et al., “Traffic anomaly prediction based on joint static-dynamic
spatio-temporal evolutionary learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 5356–5370, May 2023.
[25] W. Wang et al., “Vehicle trajectory clustering based on dynamic
representation learning of Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3567–3576, Jun. 2021.
[26] C. Vishnu, V. Abhinav, D. Roy, C. K. Mohan, and C. S. Babu,
“Improving multi-agent trajectory prediction using traffic states on
interactive driving scenarios,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 8, no. 5,
pp. 2708–2715, May 2023.
[27] Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in
driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 444–459, Jan. 2023.
[28] Q. Hu, G. Huang, H. Shi, Y. Lin, and D. Guo, “A short-term aircraft
trajectory prediction framework using conditional generative adversarial
network,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Civil Aviation Saf. Inf. Technol.
(ICCASIT), Oct. 2022, pp. 433–439.

21721

[29] J. Li, H. Shi, Y. Guo, G. Han, R. Yu, and X. Wang, “TraGCAN:
Trajectory prediction of heterogeneous traffic agents in IoV systems,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 7100–7113, Apr. 2023.
[30] X. Kong, H. Lin, R. Jiang, and G. Shen, “Anomalous sub-trajectory
detection with graph contrastive self-supervised learning,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9800–9811, Jul. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TVT.2024.3382685.
[31] W. Ju et al., “A comprehensive survey on deep graph representation
learning,” Neural Netw., vol. 173, May 2024, Art. no. 106207.
[32] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[33] Z. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Li, K. Yu, C. Ding, and Y. Yang, “Spatio-temporal
feature encoding for traffic accident detection in VANET environment,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19772–19781,
Oct. 2022.
[34] A. Stocco, M. Weiss, M. Calzana, and P. Tonella, “Misbehaviour prediction for autonomous driving systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 42nd Int.
Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Oct. 2020, pp. 359–371, doi: 10.1145/3377811.3380353.
[35] J. Wang et al., “Anomalous trajectory detection and classification based
on difference and intersection set distance,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 2487–2500, Mar. 2020.
[36] A. Aboah, M. Shoman, V. Mandal, S. Davami, Y. Adu-Gyamfi, and
A. Sharma, “A vision-based system for traffic anomaly detection using
deep learning and decision trees,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2021, pp. 4207–4212.
[37] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional
adversarial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
[38] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning for
multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816, Sep. 2024.
[39] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
[40] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
Dec. 2023.
[41] H. Tu, S. Yu, V. Saikrishna, F. Xia, and K. Verspoor, “Deep outdated fact
detection in knowledge graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining
Workshops (ICDMW), Shanghai, China, Dec. 2023, pp. 1443–1452.
[42] F. Xia et al., “CenGCN: Centralized convolutional networks with vertex
imbalance for scale-free graphs,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35,
no. 5, pp. 4555–4569, May 2023.
[43] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2018, arXiv:1710.10903.
[44] J. Chen, L. Zheng, Y. Hu, W. Wang, H. Zhang, and X. Hu,
“Traffic flow matrix-based graph neural network with attention
mechanism for traffic flow prediction,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 104,
Apr. 2024, Art. no. 102146. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253523004621
[45] P. Wang, K. Liu, L. Jiang, X. Li, and Y. Fu, “Incremental mobile
user profiling: Reinforcement learning with spatial knowledge graph
for modeling event streams,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Aug. 2020, pp. 853–861, doi:
10.1145/3394486.3403128.
[46] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, H. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and L.-K. Huang,
“Improving generalizability of graph anomaly detection models via
data augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12721–12735, Dec. 2023.
[47] Z. Zhang and L. Zhao, “Unsupervised deep subgraph anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022,
pp. 753–762.
[48] J. Hu et al., “SAMCL: Subgraph-aligned multiview contrastive learning
for graph anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
early access, Nov. 7, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3323274.
[49] H. Zhang, Y. Ren, L. Fu, X. Wang, G. Chen, and C. Zhou, “Multi-scale
self-supervised graph contrastive learning with injective node augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 261–274,
Jan. 2024.
[50] A. Sarígün and A. S. Rifaioglu, “Multi-mask aggregators for graph
neural networks,” in Proc. 1st Learn. Graphs Conf., 2022, pp. 1–10.
[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=hZ3b8CskgC

21722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

[51] R. Dey and F. M. Salem, “Gate-variants of gated recurrent unit (GRU)
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 60th Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst.
(MWSCAS), Aug. 2017, pp. 1597–1600.
[52] J. Wiederer, A. Bouazizi, M. Troina, U. Kressel, and V. Belagiannis,
“Anomaly detection in multi-agent trajectories for automated driving,”
in Proc. 5th Conf. Robot Learn., vol. 164, A. Faust, D. Hsu, and
G. Neumann, Eds., Nov. 2022, pp. 1223–1233. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v164/wiederer22a.html
[53] C. Schöller, V. Aravantinos, F. Lay, and A. Knoll, “What the constant
velocity model can teach us about pedestrian motion prediction,” IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1696–1703, Apr. 2020.
[54] Y. Hu and D. B. Work, “Robust tensor recovery with fiber outliers
for traffic events,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 1–27, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3417337.
[55] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. (NIPS), Montreal, QC, Canada, vol. 2. Cambridge, MA, USA:
MIT Press, 2014, pp. 3104–3112.
[56] Z. Wang et al., “A comprehensive survey on data augmentation,” 2024,
arXiv:2405.09591.

Minho Jo (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.A. degree from the Department of Industrial Engineering, Chosun University, Gwangju, South Korea,
in 1984, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Lehigh
University, Bethlehem, PA, USA, in 1994. He is
currently a Full Professor with the Department of
Computer Convergence Software, Korea University,
Sejong, South Korea, where he is also the Director of the IoT & AI Laboratory. His research
interests include IoT, blockchain, LLM/ChatGPT,
artificial intelligence and optimization theory, big data, network security, cloud/edge computing, wireless energy harvesting, and autonomous
vehicles. Average number of citations per publication authored by him
(from 2012 to 2022) is 41.7 and Average Field-Weighted Citation Impact
(FWCI) of him (from 2012 to 2022) is 4.42 (based on SCOPUS SciVal).
He was a recipient of the 2018 IET Best Paper Premium Award by the
United Kingdom’s Royal Institute of Engineering and Technology. He was
awarded with the 2011 Headong Outstanding Scholar Prize. He is one of
the founders of the Samsung Electronics LCD Division. He is the Founder
and the Editor-in-Chief of KSII Transactions on Internet and Information
Systems (SCIE/JCR and SCOPUS indexed). He was the South Korea’s
Presidential Commission on Policy Planning. He was an Associate Editor
of IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL, IEEE ACCESS, and IEEE I NTERNET OF
T HINGS J OURNAL; and an Editor of IEEE W IRELESS C OMMUNICATION
and Network.

Zehao Hu received the B.Sc. degree in network engineering from Wenzhou University, China,
in 2022. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with the College of Software and the College of
Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, China. His research interests
include federated learning and telematics systems.

Mario Collotta (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science engineering and telecommunications from Catania University, Italy, in 2011.
He received the confirmation by the National Advisory Commission in order to became a Full Professor
in July 2018. He was the Chair of the B.D. Course in
Computer Science Engineering and the M.D. Course
in Telematics Engineering, Kore University of Enna,
Italy. He is scientific responsible of the Computer
Engineering and Networks Laboratory (CENs Lab),
where he coordinates several research projects. He is
currently an Associate Professor of computer engineering with the Department
of Engineering and Architecture, Kore University of Enna. His research
interests include the study of innovative solutions and approaches in expert
systems and networks, focused on real-time and secure application and the
interaction design of related App. He has published more than 100 refereed
articles in these areas. In the following some relevant metrics overview (last
update April 2024): Scopus H-index is 25 with 2229 Citations.

Yuwei He received the B.Sc. degree from China
Jiliang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2022. She is
currently pursuing the master’s degree with Zhejiang
University of Technology, Hangzhou. Her research
interests include urban computing and data mining.

Yuqi Shen received the B.Sc. degree in computer
science and technology from Zhejiang University
City College, China, in 2022. She is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the College of Software
and the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, China.
Her research interests include federated learning and
recommendation systems.

Guojiang Shen received the B.Sc. degree in control
theory and control engineering and the Ph.D. degree
in control science and engineering from Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China, in 1999 and 2004,
respectively. He is currently a Professor with the
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology. His current research
interests include artificial intelligence theory, big
data analytics, and intelligent transportation systems.

Xiangjie Kong (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China. He is currently a Full Professor
with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology. Previously,
he was an Associate Professor with the School of
Software, Dalian University of Technology, China.
He has published over 170 scientific papers in
international journals and conferences (with over
140 indexed by ISI SCIE). His research interests
include network science, mobile computing, and
urban computing. He is a Senior Member of CCF and a member of ACM.