IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

2745

WAKE: A Weakly Supervised Business Process
Anomaly Detection Framework via
a Pre-Trained Autoencoder
Wei Guan , Jian Cao , Senior Member, IEEE, Haiyan Zhao , Yang Gu , and Shiyou Qian , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The ability to detect anomalies in business processes
is crucial for achieving success in business operations. While unsupervised anomaly detection approaches have gained popularity in
recent years due to their label-free nature, in some cases, a limited
number of labelled anomalies can be provided and using them can
improve the performance of anomaly detection. To address this
issue, we propose a novel framework for anomaly detection that
uses a pre-trained autoencoder to extract feature representations
of traces. An anomaly score generator based on a multi-layer
perceptron is utilized to evaluate the extracted features. The entire
framework is trained using a joint loss that ensures the generated
anomaly scores satisfy a specific distribution without compromising
the autoencoder’s ability to reconstruct normal traces. The feature
encoder is fine-tuned to provide insights into the cause of anomalies.
Additionally, we design a novel technique for calculating anomaly
scores to mitigate the effects of varying numbers of potential attribute values. We conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic
and real-life logs, and our results demonstrate that our proposed
method, WAKE, outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised deep
business process anomaly detection methods by a significant margin. Additionally, it outperforms other weakly supervised anomaly
detection methods as well.
Index Terms—Process mining, weakly supervised anomaly
detection, deep learning, recurrent neural networks, autoencoder.

I. INTRODUCTION
NSURING smooth and organized business processes is
crucial to maintaining a successful enterprise. This makes
it an important task for both IT departments and business administrators. Despite efforts to maintain the correct executions
of these processes, anomalies are inevitable and can arise from
various causes such as system malfunctions and human errors.
Detecting anomalies in event traces of business processes can aid

E

Manuscript received 1 June 2023; revised 13 September 2023; accepted 3
October 2023. Date of publication 13 October 2023; date of current version 19
April 2024. This work was supported in part by the China National Science
Foundation under Grant 62072301, and in part by the Program of Technology
Innovation of the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality under Grant 21DZ1205000. Recommended for acceptance by R.C.-W.
Wong. (Corresponding author: Jian Cao.)
Wei Guan, Jian Cao, Yang Gu, and Shiyou Qian are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: guan-wei@sjtu.edu.cn; cao-jian@sjtu.edu.cn;
gu_yang@sjtu.edu.cn; qshiyou@sjtu.edu.cn).
Haiyan Zhao is with the University of Shanghai for Science and Technology,
Shanghai 200093, China (e-mail: zhaohaiyan1992@foxmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3322411

practitioners and decision-makers in analyzing and managing
businesses more effectively, and preventing severe consequences
resulting from anomalies.
Many anomaly detection methods for business processes have
been proposed, including conformance checking-based [1], [2],
information theory-based [3], [4], probabilistic [5], [6], [7] and
distance-based [8], [9]. They are either based on assumptions
about the data distribution or require extensive prior knowledge
of the process, which is not always available in real life.
In recent years, deep learning [10] has achieved remarkable
feats in revealing complex relationships in high-dimensional
data. Not surprisingly, it has become the mainstream approach for business process anomaly detection [11], [12],
[13], [14], [15]. In these models, anomalies are detected in
terms of reconstruction errors directly and there is no need
to spend time annotating the data. However, without incorporating prior knowledge about anomalies, the performance of
these approaches and the reliability of their results can not be
guaranteed.
Providing supervision information to train a model can not
only improve its performance but also enhance its trustworthiness. Unfortunately, fully-supervised anomaly detection approaches are often impractical as they require labelled training
data containing both normal and anomalous samples [16]. However, detecting anomalies using a limited number of labelled
anomalies can be challenging. First, the insufficient supervised
information provided by the limited number of labelled anomalies poses a significant challenge to generalize the detection
of both known anomalies, whose behaviors resemble those of
labelled anomalies, and unknown anomalies, whose behaviors
differ from those of labelled anomalies. Additionally, in the
unlabelled samples, the large number of normal samples can
potentially overwhelm the model’s ability to distinguish between
normal and anomalous behavior.
Thankfully, researchers have proposed several approaches to
address these challenges. For instance, there has been research
into anomaly detection with incomplete supervision, which
involves labeling only a portion of the input data. The major
methods [17], [18], [19] focus on learning feature representations while other approaches [20], [21], [22] directly learn
anomaly scores within an end-to-end learning framework. Approximate labels can also be generated to detect anomalies by
directly addressing the insufficiency of labels [23], [24], [25].

1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

r We provide a formal definition for the problem of detect-

Fig. 1.

Illustration of our proposed framework.

Moreover, the multiple-instance learning (MIL) framework is
applied in [26], [27], [28] to detect anomalies with inexact
labels.
Despite these advances, these weakly supervised anomaly
detection methods for other applications are not directly applicable to business processes. First, they do not have the ability
to learn the temporal relationships between events in traces
of business processes. Second, these methods require identical
features as inputs, while traces have different lengths. Third,
none of these methods simultaneously consider incomplete and
inexact supervision.
Recently, Elaziz et al. [29] introduced a novel weakly supervised anomaly detection method tailored for business processes.
However, a notable limitation of their approach is the absence of
explanations for the detected anomalies, which holds significant
practical importance. Identifying which attribute of an event
contributes to the detection of an anomaly using trace-level
(inexact) labels can be challenging due to ambiguous label
information.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we design a
Weakly-supervised business process Anomaly detection frameworK via a prE-trained autoencoder, named WAKE, which is
illustrated in Fig. 1. WAKE, which effectively exploits a few
labelled anomalies in logs, is optimized through a three-stage
training procedure to detect and interpret anomalies. WAKE
leverages a pre-trained autoencoder capable of reconstructing
normal traces as a feature encoder. The feature representation extracted from the feature encoder somehow reveals prior
knowledge about the normal traces. Specifically, the feature
representation of the trace is composed of three factors (i.e.,
latent representation, reconstruction error vector and maximum
reconstruction error vector) and characterizes whether the trace
deviates from the normal pattern. Latent representation is the
low-dimensional vector representation of the trace, while reconstruction error vector and maximum reconstruction error
vector are the reconstruction errors of the trace. Following
feature extraction, the feature representations are fed into an
anomaly score generator to detect anomalies. The feature encoder and the anomaly score generator are jointly optimized
using both unlabelled traces and a limited number of labelled
anomalies. The feature encoder can also be applied to interpret
the cause of anomalies after fine-tuning to provide an insight into
anomalies.
The main contributions of our work are as follows:

ing and interpreting the cause of anomalies in business
processes using weak supervision.
r We design the WAKE framework, which can detect and
interpret the cause of anomalies by utilizing incomplete
and inexact labelled anomalies.
r We propose a new method for extracting feature representations of traces by utilizing a pre-trained autoencoder.
r To interpret the causes of anomalies, we propose a novel
calculation method for anomaly scores that mitigates the
influence of varying numbers of potential attribute values.
We conduct comprehensive experiments on synthetic and
real-life datasets, which demonstrate that WAKE achieves superior performance. Additionally, we carry out ablation studies
to evaluate the impact of each individual component in our
approach.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the related work. Section III gives the definition of
the problem. Then proposed framework WAKE is elaborated in
Section IV. Section V reports the experiment results on both
synthetic and real-life logs. Finally, we conclude our work and
discuss future work in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
To align with the focus of our research, we provide a concise
review of existing work in three areas: i) traditional business
process anomaly detection approaches, ii) deep business process
anomaly detection approaches, and iii) the utilization of weakly
supervised learning in anomaly detection. To serve as a point of
reference, we present an overview of these works in Table I.
A. Traditional Business Process Anomaly Detection
Approaches
Traditional business process anomaly detection approaches
can be broadly divided into four categories.
The conformance checking-based approaches [1], [30] are
the first category, which utilize conformance checking techniques to examine the synchronisation between the recorded
log and the corresponding process model. The process model
can either be given or discovered from the log using process
mining techniques. In some studies [2], [31], the integration of
conformance checking techniques and association rule learning
has been shown to improve the accuracy of anomaly detection.
The second category is information theory-based approaches [3], [4], [32], [33], which applies statistical leverage
to detect trace-level anomalies in business processes while accounting for varying trace lengths.
The third category is probabilistic approaches, which utilizes
probabilistic graphical models such as likelihood graph [34],
Bayesian networks [35], hidden Markov model (HMM) [5],
[6] and variable order Markov models (VOMMs) [7] to create
normal process behavior probabilistic models based on event
logs for detecting anomalies.
The fourth category involves distance-based approaches that
consider the distance between traces for anomaly detection. For
example, Sureka [8] calculate the normalized longest common

GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER

2747

TABLE I
BRIEF SUMMARY OF RELATED WORKS

sub-sequence (NLCS) between traces and apply k nearest neighbor (KNN) to detect anomalies. Kang et al. [36] use the LOF
algorithm based on k nearest neighbor imputation (KNNI) to
detect abnormal termination. In other studies [37], outlier-aware
clustering algorithms are used, while Hsu et al. [9] utilize the
duration of events to compute the distance between traces for
detecting temporal anomalies.
The traditional approaches are either based on data distribution assumptions or require prior knowledge, and none of them
can take advantage of labelled anomalies.
B. Deep Business Process Anomaly Detection Approaches
Recently, deep business process anomaly detection have
gained significant attention due to their ability to extract complex
underlying relationships from unlabelled data. These techniques
can be categorized into two main groups: unsupervised and
weakly supervised approaches.
Unsupervised: Due to the user-friendly nature of unsupervised methods, they have garnered extensive research attention.
Studies by Tavares et al. [38] and Junior et al. [39] encode
traces as vectors using the word2vec [63] encoding method,
taking into account semantic information about the process.
After encoding, the random forest algorithm [38] or one-class
SVM [39] can be applied to detect anomalous traces. Krajsic
and Franczyk [40] use an autoencoder to reconstruct traces and
detect anomalies based on reconstruction error. To overcome the
overfitting problem, Nolle et al. [11], [41] utilize a denoising
autoencoder that introduces additive Gaussian noise over the
input vector. Nguyen et al. [12], [42] employ a variational
autoencoder (VAE), which is an autoencoder with additional
constraints on the hidden representation. Considering that traces

are time series, the authors in [12], [13], [15], [43] embed
LSTM or GRU in the autoencoder to improve the reconstruction
capability of the model. GAE [14] and GAMA [44] convert
traces into graphs and utilize graph neural networks (GNN) to
obtain graph encoding. Anomalies are detected based on the
reconstruction error of the graphs or traces.
These approaches may be biased by the presence of anomalies, as they treat normals and anomalous data equally.
Weakly Supervised: Krajsic et al. [45] propose a bidirectional LSTM variational autoencoder with self-attention. This
approach requires a clean log for training purposes. In the
study by Elaziz et al. [29], reinforcement learning is employed
to enhance information extraction from a limited number of
labelled anomalies.
Nevertheless, current approaches fall short in their ability to
interpret the fundamental causes underlying anomalies.
C. Weakly Supervised Learning for Anomaly Detection
Given the current limited research on applying weakly
supervised learning to business process anomaly detection, we conduct a thorough review of weakly supervised learning approaches applied in anomaly detection
within various other domains. These studies leverage labelled data to improve the anomaly detection performance,
even though the supervision may be incomplete, inexact, or
inaccurate.
Incomplete supervision refers to the situation where only part
of the input data is labelled. Some studies [17], [18], [19],
[46], [47], [48] have utilized deep neural networks to extract
anomaly-oriented representations from input data. While feature
representation learning can enhance downstream detection, it

2748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

only provides indirect learning for anomaly scores. End-toend anomaly score learning frameworks such as DevNet [20],
PReNet [21], and FEAWAD [22] can directly acquire anomaly
scores from trained models. In addition to using existing labels,
active learning strategies are applied in [23], [24], [25] to gather
more supervision.
Anomaly detection with inexact supervision occurs when
labels are not as precise as required, i.e., only coarse-grained
labels are available due to the high cost of labeling. In [26],
[27], [28], [49], authors detect anomalies with inexact supervision via the multiple-instance learning (MIL) framework, where
video segments are considered as instances, while normal and
abnormal videos are classified as positive and negative bags,
respectively. A self-reasoning framework proposed in [50] trains
neural networks by generating pseudo labels through binary
clustering of video features. WETAS [51] uses dynamic time
wrapping (DTW) alignment to enhance detection performance.
Anomaly detection with inaccurate supervision occurs when
labels are not entirely accurate and may contain errors. Zhang
et al. and Zhao et al. [52], [53] propose to learn a joint model
from multiple sets of noisy labels using ensemble learning. Gao
et al. [54] propose a denoising network based on GAN for
anomaly detection in dynamic graphs that employs self-training
to progressively refine inaccurate node labels.
Our proposed approach is superior to these methods, as it can
detect anomalies with both incomplete and inexact supervision
in business processes.

Please note that activity is a unique attribute in the attribute
set A that reflects the control flow. Let te,a denote the value of
attribute a of event e in trace t.
Example 1: Given an attribute set A = {Activity, Country}.
t = [CRP, ES], [AIC, CN], [LEU, US], [AN, CN], [RA, FR]
represents a trace containing five simple events taking place
in chronological order. The value of the first attribute (i.e.,
Activity) in the second event (i.e., [AIC, CN]) in trace t can
be obtained with t2,1 = AIC.
Next, we define the weakly supervised (i.e., with incomplete
supervision) business process anomaly detection as follows:
Definition III.2 (Weakly Supervised Business Process
Anomaly Detection): Given a log L = t1 , t2 , . . . , tu ,
tu+1 , tu+2 , . . . , tu+g  containing u + g traces, where
U = t1 , t2 , . . . , tu  is a set of unlabelled traces and
G = tu+1 , tu+2 , . . . , tu+g  with g  u is a very small set
of labelled anomalies that provide some prior knowledge of
anomalies, the goal is to detect some anomalous traces that
differ significantly from the majority of traces in U .
However, it is not sufficient to only detect these anomalies, we
also need to interpret the cause of anomalies (i.e., with inexact
supervision), which are defined as follows:
Definition III:3 (Interpretation of the Cause of Anomalies).
Given a set of labelled anomalies G and a set of detected
anomalous traces D, which is a subset of unlabelled trace set,
the goal is to
 determine which attribute a of which event e in
trace t ∈ G D is anomalous.
IV. METHODOLOGY

D. Masked Autoencoding Techniques
Masked autoencoders (MAE) have recently gained significant traction as a scalable self-supervised learning method. The
seminal paper by He et al. [55] introduces masked autoencoders
for self-supervised learning of image representations. This fundamental contribution has paved the way for their exploration
in various domains. For example, in [56], [57], MAEs are effectively employed for learning graph representations. Notably,
Huang et al. [58] extend the application of MAEs to the realm
of audio data.
Notably, MAEs have found utility in anomaly detection. The
authors in [59], [60] have harnessed MAEs to identify image
anomalies. Furthermore, the capabilities of MAEs extend to
video anomaly detection [61], and even to the detection of
anomalies in road networks [62].

In this section, we introduce our proposed anomaly detection
framework, WAKE, which employs a novel feature encoding
strategy to overcome the limitations of inadequately labelled
anomalies. Fig. 2 shows the architecture of WAKE, which
comprises an autoencoder-like feature encoder and an anomaly
score generator that collaborate with each another within the
model. The feature encoder converts the trace into a more meaningful feature representation, i.e., three factors that characterize
whether the trace deviates from the normal pattern, while the
anomaly score generator generates an anomaly score based on
the feature representation from the feature encoder. The anomaly
score is a scalar between 0 and 1 indicating the probability
that the trace is an anomaly. WAKE is optimized through a
three-stage training procedure to detect and interpret the cause of
anomalies in the log. The following subsections provide details
about the proposed framework.

III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
To set the foundation for the following sections, we will
provide definitions for key terms including attribute, event,
trace, and log.
Definition III: 1 (Event, Trace, Log). Let A =
{a1 , a2 , . . . , aA } denote a set of attributes, where A = |A|
represents the total number of attributes. For each attribute
a ∈ A, Va is the set of possible values. An event is a tuple
e = [Va1 , Va2 , . . . , VaA ], where Va ∈ Va is a potential value for
attribute a. A trace t is a sequence of events, and an event log
L is a set of traces. We denote the number of events in a trace t
by |t|, and the number of traces in an event log L by |L|.

A. Feature Encoder
The objective of the feature encoder is to transform the input
trace into a meaningful feature representation that improves
anomaly detection. To accomplish this, we utilize an autoencoder (AE) with recurrent layers to generate the feature representation. Particularly, three factors, namely the latent representation, reconstruction error vector, and maximum reconstruction
error vector, characterize whether the trace deviates from the
normal pattern. In addition, we employ teacher forcing methods
to improve the convergence speed and reconstruction capability
of the feature encoder.

GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER

Fig. 2.

2749

Architecture of WAKE where E = maxt∈L |t| is the maximum length of traces in log L and A is the total number of attributes.

In order to make the model work properly, we pad the traces
that are shorter than E with padding events to make their length
equal to E, where E = maxt∈L |t| is the maximum length of
traces in log L. As different attributes have distinct anomaly
patterns, we assign different embedding layers, bidirectional
gated recurrent units (BGRU) encoders, attention layers, gated
recurrent units (GRU) [64] decoders, linear layers, and softmax,
to different attributes.
Due to the mathematical nature of neural networks, embedding layers are used to convert each attribute value te,a into
vector representation fea . GRUs typically learn information from
previous states. However, in cases where the current attribute
value is influenced by both the attribute value preceding it
and the one following it, the conventional learning behavior of
GRUs proves to be insufficient for accurately reconstructing the
attribute value. Therefore, the embedding vectors fea are fed
into the BGRU, which is an extension of GRU. The BGRU
consists of two GRUs: a forward GRU that accepts forward
inputs and a backward GRU that accepts backward inputs. For
each attribute a of event e, the forward GRU generates forward
−
→
hidden states hae , and the backward GRU generates backward
←−
−−−−
hidden states haE+1−e . These hidden states are concatenated to
−
→ ←−−−−−
produce the BGRU output hae = [hae haE+1−e ]. To generate the
latent representation sa0 based on the autoencoder for attribute
−→
a, the final hidden states of the forward GRU haE and the
←−
backward GRU haE are concatenated and fed into linear layers.
The activation function used in the linear layer is the Leaky
ReLU.
−→ ←−
sa0 = LeakyRELU(Wsa [haE haE ])

(1)

where Wsa is a learnable matrix and LeakyRELU(x) =
max(0.1x, x) is a non-linear activation function. The first factor
of our feature representation is the concatenation of sa0 for all
attributes a ∈ A:
s = a∈A sa0

(2)

where  indicates concatenation.
We will now explain the process of reconstructing the value
of attribute a of event e. To capture the inherent relationships
among attributes, all the outputs of the BGRU encoders, H =
A
{h11 , h12 , . . . , hA
E−1 , hE }, must be fed into the attention layer:
a
a T
a a
= (Vα
) tanh(Wα
[se−1 hi ])
ege,i
a
)
exp(ege,i
a
m exp(ege,m )

(4)

a
αe,i
hi

(5)

a
=
αe,i

cae =



(3)

i
a
where hi ∈ H, ·T represents transposition, Wα
is a learnable
a
a
matrix, Vα is a learnable vector and se−1 is the hidden state of
the GRU decoder for attribute a at the previous event e − 1.
To improve the feature encoder’s reconstruction capability,
we utilize the teacher forcing method, which is a widely used
technique in natural language processing. For the first attribute
(Activity), we use the previous ground truth attribute value (i.e.,
activity name) te−1,1 to guide the reconstruction of the activity
name for the current event e.

s1e = GRU1 (s1e−1 , [c1e tf 1e−1 ]))

(6)

where s1e−1 is the hidden state of the first GRU decoder for the
first attribute at previous event e − 1, tf 1e−1 is the embedding

2750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

vector of te−1,1 and c1e is the output of the attention layer for the
first attribute at event e. The initial hidden state of the first GRU
decoder for the first attribute is s10 . The probability distribution
p1e , which is the probability distribution over all possible values
of the first attribute (Activity) of event e, can be calculated by
p1e = Softmax(Wp1 [s1e c1e tf 1e−1 ])

(7)

which represents the linear layer and the softmax layer.
We assume that the value of the other attribute a is primarily
affected by the current activity name. Thus, we use the ground
truth activity name te,1 of the current event e to predict the
probability distribution over all possible values of attribute a of
event e. The probability distribution pae can be computed by
sae = GRUa (sae−1 , [cae tf 1e ])

(8)

pae = Softmax(Wpa [sae cae tf 1e ])

(9)

where tf 1e is the embedding vector of te,1 .
Specifically, pae is a vector of dimension |Va |. Let pa =
a
[p1 [t1,a ], . . . , pa|t| [t|t|,a ], 1, . . . , 1], where |t| is the original
length of trace t and pae [te,a ] denotes the probability that the
value of attribute a of event e in trace t is te,a . The probability
vector can be represented as
p = a∈A pa

(10)
a

Take the negative logarithm of each element in p , we can obtain ra = [− log pa1 [t1,a ], . . . , − log pa|t| [t|t|,a ], 0, . . . , 0]. Then,
the second factor of the feature representation, i.e., the reconstruction error vector can be represented as
r = a∈A ra

(11)

Finally, the third factor of the feature representation,
i.e., the maximum reconstruction error vector is m =
[max(r1 ), . . . , max(rA )] where max(ra ) represents the maximum value in the vector ra .
In summary, the input trace is characterized by the three
factors (i.e., latent representation s, reconstruction error vector
r and maximum reconstruction error vector m) and anomalies in any one of these factors will be detected by WAKE.
Each of these three factors has its own specific meaning. s is
the low-dimensional vector representation of the trace, while
r and m are the reconstruction errors of the trace, which
have been shown to reflect anomalies in previous studies [11],
[12], [40].
B. Anomaly Score Generator
The anomaly score generator produces a scalar, i.e., an
anomaly score, between 0 and 1 based on the feature representation from the feature encoder. The anomaly score indicates
the probability that a trace is anomalous.
The concatenation of three factors is processed by a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to map the input into an anomaly score.
Specifically, for each layer of the MLP, we have
zk = LeakyRELU(Wzk zk−1 + bk )

(12)

Algorithm 1: Training Procedure.
Stage 1: Pre-training
Input: Unlabelled trace set U
Output: Feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e )
1: Randomly initialize Θf e
2: for i = 1 to n_epochs1 do
3: for j = 1 to n_batches1 do
4:
B ← Randomly sample batch_size traces from U
5:
loss ← Calculate Lpre (B) from (13)
6:
Perform a gradient descent step w.r.t. the parameters
in Θf e
7: end for
8: end for
9: return ψ(·; Θf e )
Stage 2: End-to-end optimization
Input: Unlabelled trace set U , labelled anomaly set G
Output: Feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e ), anomaly score
generator ϕ(·; Θasg )
10: Randomly initialize Θasg and load Θf e from the
pre-trained feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e ) returned in stage
1
11: for i = 1 to n_epochs2 do
12: for j = 1 to n_batches2 do
13:
B ← Randomly sample batch_size traces from G
and U with probability β and 1 − β, respectively
14:
loss ← Calculate Lete (B) from (16)
15:
Perform a gradient descent step w.r.t. the
parameters in Θf e and Θasg
16: end for
17: end for
18: return ψ(·; Θf e ), ϕ(·; Θasg )
Stage 3: Fine-tuning 
Input: Entire log L = U G
Output: Another feature encoder ψ (·; Θf e ) for
interpreting the cause of anomalies
19: Θf e ← Load Θf e from the feature encoder ψ(·; Θf e )
returned in stage 2
20: for i = 1 to n_epochs3 do
21: for j = 1 to n_batches3 do
22:
B ← Randomly sample batch_size traces from L
23:
loss ← Calculate Lf t (B) from (17)
24:
Perform a gradient descent step w.r.t. the
parameters in Θf e
25: end for
26: end for
27: return ψ (·; Θf e )

where zk and zk−1 are the activations at the k-th layer and k − 1th layer, respectively. Wzk and bk are the weight and bias for the
k-th layer. For the first layer of MLP, z0 = [srm]. For the
last layer, we use the sigmoid activation function to map z k to
a scalar between 0 and 1, producing the anomaly score z.

GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER

C. Training Procedure
The training procedure of WAKE consists of three stages:
i) Pre-training: The feature encoder is trained to reconstruct
normal traces. ii) End-to-end optimization: The feature encoder
and the anomaly score generator are jointly trained based on
the pre-trained feature encoder. iii) Fine-tuning: The end-to-end
optimized feature encoder is fine tuned to enable it to interpret
the cause of anomalies. The architecture parameters are trained
using mini-batch stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and optimized with Adam [65]. We use ψ(·; Θf e ) to denote an feature
encoder and ϕ(·; Θasg ) to denote an anomaly score generator,
where Θf e and Θasg represent the model parameters for the
feature encoder and the anomaly score generator, respectively.
The training procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1.
It is worth noting that our anomaly detection framework
is weakly supervised, meaning that only a limited number of
labelled anomalies are available. The set of unlabelled traces
may contain both normal and anomalous traces. However, as
anomalies are rare in real-world and the majority of unlabelled
traces are normal, a straightforward strategy is employed: considering all unlabelled traces as normal. This approach has been
demonstrated to be effective in previous studies [20], [22]. Our
experiments confirm that this simple strategy yields satisfactory
performance.
1) Pre-Training: We first employ a pre-training stage to
train the feature encoder to be able to reconstruct normal traces,
providing a basic reference for the subsequent end-to-end
optimization. The pre-training stage is depicted in lines 1-9 of
Algorithm 1. The feature encoder is pre-trained with all
unlabelled traces by minimizing the reconstruction errors (i.e.,
cross-entropy loss). Our objective is to reconstruct the value of
each attribute a of each event e in each trace t ∈ B, where B is
a batch of traces:

ri
(13)
Lpre (B) =
t∈B ri ∈rt

where rt represents the second factor of the feature
representation of trace t (i.e., the reconstruction error vector).
2) End-to-End Optimization: In stage 2, to ensure that
WAKE was able to effectively detect anomalies, a mini-batch
is constructed by random sampling, i.e., we sample batch_size
traces from labelled anomaly set G and unlabelled trace set U
with user-chosen probability β and 1 − β, respectively, to form
a mini-batch. In other words, the anomalies are oversampled
to address the sample imbalance. The end-to-end optimization
stage is depicted in lines 10-18 of Algorithm 1.
Our objective is to make the anomaly scores generated by the
anomaly score generator satisfy a specific distribution (i.e., the
anomaly scores of normal traces converge to 0 and the anomaly
scores of anomaly traces converge to 1.) without destroying
the ability of the feature encoder to reconstruct normal traces.
Therefore, the first part of the loss function is:

[(1 − yt )zt + yt (log zt )2 ]
(14)
Lasg (B) =
t∈B

where yt ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the current trace t is anomalous (yt = 1) and zt represents the anomaly score of trace t.

2751

In Lasg , we employ different loss functions depending on the
trace’s label. For an unlabelled trace, the loss increases linearly
as its anomaly score increases. However, for a labelled anomalous trace, we utilize a logarithmic function and square to achieve
an exponential increase in loss as its abnormal score decreases.
The square operation is applied to introduce a varying degree
of monotonicity to vary the monotonicity of the logarithmic
function between 0 and 1. The primary objective of this equation
is to assign a significantly higher loss to traces that have been
confidently labelled as anomalous. By incorporating the logarithmic function, we effectively amplify the loss for these traces,
magnifying their impact on the overall loss computation. This
approach underscores the importance of accurately identifying
and penalizing labelled anomalies, as they are deemed to be
more critical and necessitate greater attention during the training
procedure.
The second part of the loss function is to minimize the reconstruction errors for normal traces, and minimize the minimum
probabilities of attribute values in anomalous traces, which is
based on the idea that at least one attribute value in the anomalous
trace is anomalous.




ri + yt min {pi }
(15)
(1 − yt )
Lre (B) =
t∈B

ri ∈rt

pi ∈pt

where rt represents the second factor of the feature representation of trace t. pt represents the probability vector of trace t.
Based on (14) and (15), our joint loss function can be formally
calculated as
Lete (B) = Lasg (B) + λLre (B)

(16)

where λ is a hyper-parameter to balance the contributions of two
parts to the joint loss function.
3) Fine-Tuning: Finally, we fine-tune the feature encoder
obtained in stage 2 to obtain a new feature encoder so that
it can interpret the cause of anomalies. The fine-tuning stage
is depictedin lines 19-27 of Algorithm 1. We use the entire
log L = U G, which contains both labelled anomalous traces
and unlabelled traces without oversampling anomalies. The loss
function in stage 3 is the same as that in (15).
Lf t (B) = Lre (B)

(17)

D. Interpretation of the Cause of Anomalies
The output of stage 3 (i.e., feature encoder) can be applied
to interpret the cause of anomalies. With the input trace t, we
consider the probability distribution pae over all possible values
of attribute a of event e generated by the feature encoder.
Intuitively, compared to a normal attribute value, the probability of an anomalous one is lower. However, since the number
of possible values for each attribute varies (i.e., |Va1 | = |Va2 |
where a1 , a2 ∈ A), it would be unfair to rely solely on a linear transformation of the probability of attribute values when
calculating the anomaly score for each attribute of each event.
To mitigate this phenomenon, we design a novel anomaly score
that is comparable across attributes. We consider the logarithm
of the probability of the value of attribute a in event e to be a

2752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

random variable, then the difference
between the expectation of

this random variable (i.e., pi ∈pae pi log pi ) and the logarithm
of the probability of the actual attribute value (i.e., log pae [te,a ])
is defined as the anomaly score, which is similar to information
gain in decision tree [66]. The introduction of the logarithm
increases the anomaly score for low-probability attribute values,
while this expectation compensates for the effect of the difference in the number of possible attribute values. The anomaly
score zea for attribute a of event e can be calculated by:
⎛
⎞

pi log pi − log pae [te,a ]⎠
(18)
zea = Sigmoid ⎝

Among these methods, GAE, DAE, VAE, LAE and BINet are
deep unsupervised anomaly detection methods specifically for
business processes. They apply different types of autoencoders
to reconstruct traces and detect anomalies based on reconstruction errors. DeepSAD and REPEN are weakly supervised
anomaly detection methods by extracting an anomaly-oriented
representation. DevNet, PReNet and FEAWAD are also weakly
supervised anomaly detection methods by directly learning
anomaly scores. DAE, VAE, LAE and BINet are adapted to
perform the interpretation of the cause of anomalies. However,
the other methods are not proposed for business processes and
they cannot interpret the cause of the anomalies.

pi ∈pa
e

where pi is the i-th element of vector pae . If the actual attribute
value has a low probability compared to the probability distribution, then the anomaly score will be high.
E. Complexity Analysis
Regarding the feature encoder, the computational complexity
of the embedding layer is O(EAxh), where h represents the
hidden layer size and x = max{|Va |}a∈A is the maximum of the
cardinalities of sets Va for all a in A. The computational complexity of the BGRU layer is O(EAh2 ). The linear layer used
to obtain s0 has a computational complexity of O(Ah2 ). The
attention mechanism introduces a complexity of O(E 2 A2 h2 ).
The computational complexity of the GRU layer is O(EAh2 ),
and the linear layer before the Softmax has a complexity of
O(EAxh). Note that x is usually smaller than EAh, the overall
time complexity is O(E 2 A2 h2 ).
Moving on to the anomaly score generator, the input dimension is the sum of the dimensions of vectors s, p and m. The
dimensions of vectors s, p and m are Ah, AE, and A respectively. Note that, the dimension of the hidden layer size is always
smaller than the input dimension, the computational complexity
of the anomaly score generator is O(A(E + h)2 ) = O(AE 2 ) or
O(Ah2 ) based on the relative order of magnitude of E and h.
Overall, when considering an event log comprising T traces,
whether it pertains to the optimization process of the feature
encoder in stages 1 and 3, or the joint training of both the feature
encoder and the anomaly score generator in stage 2, the time
complexity of each epoch is O(T E 2 A2 h2 ).

B. Parameter Settings and Metrics
WAKE is implemented based on PyTorch. In our experiment,
we apply two-layer BGRUs for encoding and two-layer GRUs
for decoding in feature encoder. Dropout is applied after each
layer of both BGRUs and GRUs in the feature encoder and
after each layer of the anomaly score generator to counteract
overfitting. We initialize weights using the initialization introduced in [67], and train the proposed model for 14 epochs
in stage 1, 10 epochs in stage 2 and 4 epochs in stage 3
(i.e., n_epochs1 = 14, n_epochs2 = 10, n_epochs3 = 4) with
Adam optimizer [65]. In the absence of special statements, the
hidden layer size of the BGRUs and GRUs is 64, the learning
rate is 0.0002, the batch size is 64, β used to handle the sample
imbalance in stage 2 is 0.3 and λ in the joint loss is 10. To ensure
a fair comparison, the parameters for all the compared methods
are set according to the values given in the original article. For
the weakly supervised anomaly detection methods, we take ten
percent of all anomalous traces as labelled anomalies and the
other traces are unlabelled.
We employ the commonly used metric F −score which is the
harmonic mean of P recision and Recall to evaluate the effectiveness of these methods. P recision and Recall are defined
P
TP
as P recision = T PT+F
P , Recall = T P +F N , and F −score =
2∗P recision∗Recall
P recision+Recall , respectively, where T P , F N and F P denote
true positives, false negatives and false positives. The F −score
for each method is calculated based on the optimal threshold
value, which is determined by using a grid search method.
The method has excellent anomaly detection performance when
F −score is close to 1. We conduct each experiment five times
and report the mean F −score.

V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we empirically evaluate the effectiveness
of WAKE on both synthetic and real-life datasets. WAKE is
implemented in Python, and the source code is accessible at
https://github.com/guanwei49/WAKE.
A. Compared Methods
To verify the superiority of the proposed method, we compare WAKE with ten state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods: DAE [11], VAE [12], LAE [12], BINet [13], GAE [14],
DeepSAD [17], REPEN [18], DevNet [20], PReNet [21] and
FEAWAD [22].

C. Artificial Anomalies
Similar to previous studies [3], [11], [13], [30], [34], we
create artificial anomalies in logs to evaluate the effectiveness
of WAKE. We manually inject six types of anomalies into
the logs, which are commonly observed in real-life business
processes [13]. Fig. 3 illustrates the different anomalous traces
generated by applying the six types of anomalies to a normal
trace. The definitions of these anomaly types are as follows:
r Skip: A sequence of events has been skipped.
r Insert: A sequence of random events has been inserted.
r Rework: A sequence of events has been executed a second
time.

GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER

2753

TABLE II
STATISTICS OF THE LOGS USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS

Fig. 3.

Different anomaly types applied to a normal trace.

cases from a hospital. iv) Request: This log contains events
related to Requests for Payment. v) Prepaid: This log contains
events related to prepaid travel costs. vi) Loan: This log contains events related to the loan application process of a Dutch
financial institute. vii) Approval: This log contains information
for loan and overdraft approvals processes from submission to
eventual resolution (approval, cancellation, or rejection). viii)
Declaration: This log contains events related to domestic travel
declarations.
The summary of statistics for each event log used in the
experiments is presented in Table II. To evaluate the efficacy
of our approach, we deliberately introduce ten percent artificial
anomalies into both synthetic and real-life logs. This means that
ten percent of the traces will be anomalous.

r Early: A sequence of events has been executed too early,
and hence is skipped later.

r Late: A sequence of events has been executed too late, and
hence is skipped earlier.
r Attribute: Some attribute value has been replaced by an
incorrect value in some events.
D. Dataset
We evaluate our method using both synthetic and real-life
logs. To generate synthetic logs, we utilize simulation technology and adopt eight different business process models [13].
Among these models, two (Paper and P2P) are handmade, while
the remaining six (Small, Medium, Large, Huge, Gigantic, and
Wide) are randomly generated using the PLG2 tool [68]. The
randomly generated process models have different numbers of
activities and varying size ranges. We also use a likelihood
graph [34] to generate causally dependent event attributes. Each
synthetic log contains 2 to 5 attributes, and we generate a total
of 4 ∗ 8 = 32 synthetic logs that are free of anomalies.
For real-life logs, there are eight commonly used logs, which
include the following: i) Billing: This log contains events that
pertain to the billing of medical services provided by a hospital.
ii) Receipt: This log contains records of the receiving phase
of the building permit application process in an anonymous
municipality. iii) Sepsis: This log contains events of sepsis

E. Experiments on Synthetic Logs
1) Performance Evaluation: Table III reports the performance of weakly supervised business process anomaly detection
and interpretation of the cause of anomalies of various methods
over eight synthetic logs. The best results are indicated using
bold typeface. We have the following observations.
The proposed WAKE framework achieves the best performance on all the synthetic logs in terms of weakly supervised business process anomaly detection and interpretation
of the cause of anomalies. In terms of anomaly detection, the
F −scores of WAKE are on average 18.63% better than the
best weakly supervised anomaly detection method (DevNet),
and the F −scores of WAKE are on average 27.48% better than
the best deep unsupervised anomaly detection method (DAE).
This demonstrates that a few labelled anomalies are well leveraged by WAKE to improve the detection performance. While
existing weakly supervised anomaly detection methods are able
to exploit a few labelled anomalies, they do not take into account
the impact of the temporal nature of the events and the varying
length of traces in business processes. WAKE utilises BGRUs to
capture the temporal information of events and employs a mask
mechanism to deal with varying trace lengths. More importantly,
the reconstruction errors of traces, which is widely used in unsupervised anomaly detection, is also incorporated into WAKE

2754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

TABLE III
F −scoreS OVER SYNTHETIC LOGS WHERE “AD” REPRESENTS WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION AND “IA” REPRESENTS
INTERPRETATION OF THE CAUSE OF ANOMALIES. THE BEST RESULTS ARE INDICATED USING BOLD TYPEFACE

Fig. 4.
logs.

F −scores under different ratios of labelled anomalies over synthetic

to improve detection performance. In terms of interpretation
of the cause of anomalies, the F −scores of WAKE are on
average 16.16% better than the best deep unsupervised anomaly
detection method (BINet). This suggests that the feature encoder
which is used to extract feature representations of traces to reflect
anomalies can be fine-tuned and well adapted to interpret the
cause of the anomalies.
2) Impact of Degree of Supervision: Next, we evaluate the
impact of degree of supervision i.e., different ratios of labelled
anomalies γ. F −score is averaged over all synthetic logs.
Fig. 4(a) shows the F −scores under different ratios of labelled anomalies γ (i.e., γ percent of all anomalous traces are
labelled as labelled anomalies) in terms of weakly supervised
anomaly detection. The best unsupervised anomaly detection
results are shown as dark yellow dashed lines. We can see
that all weakly supervised anomaly detection methods behave
similarly with their F −scores increasing with γ. As expected,
more labelled anomalies can provide more supervised information. None of the weakly supervised methods outperform
the unsupervised method with only 1% labelled anomalies. As
expected, the unsupervised approaches only consider the essential features of the process, while the existing semi-supervised
approaches treat all unlabelled anomalies as normal samples,
and the learned detector can be biased by this large number of
unlabelled anomalies (99% of anomalies). Our proposed WAKE
and FEAWAD outperform the best unsupervised method with
only 5% labelled anomalies, confirming the advantage of WAKE
in leveraging a few labelled anomalies more efficiently. When
γ is between 1% and 10%, the F −score of WAKE increases
rapidly, while when γ > 10%, the F −score of WAKE barely

increases and approaches 1. However, other methods require a
higher γ to achieve a relatively good performance (e.g., at least
40% labelled anomalies are required to achieve a F −score of
0.9 for DevNet). This demonstrates that our approach requires
fewer labelled anomalies and saves on human annotation costs.
REPEN hardly varies with γ, whose performance is the worst.
Even 50% labelled anomalies are not enough to surpass the
best unsupervised method, which may be because the distance
between the traces does not reflect the nature of the anomaly.
In terms of interpretation of the cause of anomalies, from
Fig. 4(b), we can see that the F −score of WAKE increases with
the γ and is always higher than the best unsupervised method.
This illustrates that coarse-grained labels are helpful to obtain
more accurate fine-grained labels and the proposed calculation
of anomaly scores for each attribute value does indeed mitigate
the effect of the difference in the number of possible values of
different attributes.
F. Experiments on Real-Life Logs
1) Performance Evaluation: To validate the applicability of
our method, we conduct experiments on eight real-life logs.
The results are shown in Table IV. For the datasets Billing and
Declaration, the hidden layer size of WAKE is set to 16.
As can be seen, the proposed WAKE framework is also
superior over all the real-life logs in terms of weakly supervised business process anomaly detection and interpretation
of the cause of anomalies. In terms of anomaly detection, the
F −scores of WAKE are on average 16.17% better than the
best weakly supervised anomaly detection method (DevNet),
and the F −scores of WAKE are on average 22.21% better than
the best deep unsupervised anomaly detection method (DAE).
At the same time, for most logs (e.g., Request and Declaration),
there are some weakly supervised anomaly detection methods
that perform better than deep unsupervised business process
anomaly detection methods. This also indicates that if a limited
number of anomalies can be used wisely, it can help a lot
in improving the detection results. In terms of interpretation
of the cause of anomalies, the F −scores of WAKE are on
average 15.49% better than the best deep unsupervised anomaly
detection method (BINet), showing that a limited number of
labelled anomalies are equally helpful in interpreting the cause
of anomalies.

GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER

2755

TABLE IV
F −scoreS OVER REAL-LIFE LOGS WHERE “AD” REPRESENTS WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION AND “IA” REPRESENTS
INTERPRETATION OF THE CAUSE OF ANOMALIES. THE BEST RESULTS ARE INDICATED USING BOLD TYPEFACE

TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY - F −scoreS FOR WAKE AND ITS ABLATED VERSIONS IN TERMS OF ANOMALY DETECTION

TABLE VI
EFFECT OF PRE-TRAINING STAGE IN TERMS OF ANOMALY DETECTION

G. Ablation Study

Fig. 5.
logs.

F −scores under different ratios of labelled anomalies over real-life

2) Impact of Degree of Supervision: Next, we evaluate the
impact of degree of supervision. F −score is obtained over all
real-life logs. The results are shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b) in terms
of weakly supervised anomaly detection and the interpretation
of the cause of anomalies, respectively.
Similar to that in Section V-E2, our proposed framework
WAKE achieves a good anomaly detection performance with
only 10% labelled anomalies, which proves that WAKE is also
applicable in real life. However, the F −score of each method
remains scarcely close to 1 even when 50% of the anomalies
are labelled. This is possibly due to some natural anomalies that
are detected but not labelled in the datasets. From Fig. 5(b),
we can see that WAKE is able to better interpret the cause of
anomalies, whose F −score exceeds 0.6 even with only 1%
labelled anomalies.

We investigate the relative importance of each factor of feature
representation in terms of anomaly detection for each log. The
results are shown in Table V .
As can be seen, when only one factor is used for anomaly
detection, the reconstruction error vector r performs best, with
the exception of the log Billing. This demonstrates that the
effectiveness of using the reconstruction error, which is a commonly used indicator for unsupervised anomaly detection, as
a component of the feature representation of a trace. It also
illustrates the ability of our pre-trained autoencoder to reflect the
anomalies. However, using only the maximum reconstruction
error vector m results in relatively poor performance, suggesting that relying solely on the maximum reconstruction error
for each attribute may not be sufficient to reflect anomalies,
and detection results may be biased by special events. Similarly, using only the latent representation s also results in
relatively poor performance, indicating that with few labelled
anomalies, the model may easily overfit without the aid of
a reconstruction error that is representative of the distance
from the normal pattern. The proposed WAKE framework (i.e.,
all three factors were used simultaneously to detect anomalies) has the best performance, suggesting that the combination of the three factors is a more effective strategy, as any
significant deviation in any of the three factors can be detected
by WAKE.

2756

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

TABLE VII
EFFECT OF PRE-TRAINING STAGE IN TERMS OF INTERPRETATION OF THE CAUSE OF ANOMALIES

TABLE VIII
COMPUTATIONAL COST

Fig. 6.

Parameter analysis in terms of weakly supervised anomaly detection.

H. Effect of Pre-Training Stage
We evaluate the effectiveness of the pre-training stage adopted
in our proposed model. We compare WAKE with a model that
does not include the pre-training stage (the first stage described
in Algorithm 1) in the training procedure.
The results in terms of anomaly detection and interpretation of
the cause of anomalies are shown in Tables VI and VII, respectively. In terms of anomaly detection, compared with the model
without a pre-training stage, WAKE achieves a significant improvement by 5.81% (average) and 7.75% (average) on synthetic
logs and real-life logs, respectively. In terms of interpretation
of the cause of anomalies, compared with the model without a
pre-training stage, WAKE achieves a significant improvement
by 4.13% (average) and 10.45% (average) on synthetic logs and
real-life logs, respectively. These results show that pre-training
is a necessary stage to avoid some bad local minima so that our
model can better detect anomalies and interpret their causes.
I. Parameter Analysis
1) Impact of β: Note that the parameter β controls the proportion of labelled anomalies and unlabelled traces in minibatches in training stage 2, aiming to address sample imbalance.
In this section, we investigate the impact of β for weakly supervised business process anomaly detection by varying the value
of β. Fig. 6(a) illustrates the performance of WAKE on Small,
Medium, Gigantic (synthetic logs), Request and Declaration
(real-life logs) under different magnitudes of β in terms of
weakly supervised anomaly detection. The labelled anomalies
are not oversampled when β = 0.
As can be seen, the changing pattern of F −scores is basically
the same on all logs. Their F −scores increase and then decrease
as β increases. When β is small, the model may be biased by
a large number of negative samples, i.e., in order to reduce
anomaly scores for a large number of unlabelled traces, even

some labelled anomalies may be given a very low anomaly score
by the trained model. When β is greater than 0.5, the F −scores
of WAKE decrease sharply on all logs, indicating that the model
is biased by too many labelled anomalies in a mini-batch. At
the same time, since the number of labelled anomalies is few,
they are oversampled. To traverse all unlabelled traces in a
single epoch, the number of batches (i.e., n_batches2 ) has to
be increased, which increases the training time. All in all, a β
between 0.2 and 0.5 seems to be a good choice.
2) Impact of λ: Note that λ is a hyper-parameter to balance
the contributions of two parts in the joint loss (i.e., (16)). When
λ = 0, the anomaly scores generated by the anomaly score
generator only have to satisfy a specific distribution (i.e., without
minimizing reconstruction errors). In this section, we investigate
the impact of λ for weakly supervised anomaly detection by
varying the value of λ.
From Fig. 6(b), we can see that the changing pattern of
F −scores on logs Small, Medium, Gigantic and Request is
basically the same. Their F −scores increase sharply and then
decrease as λ increases which suggests that focusing on the
reconstruction errors of traces in the feature encoder can improve the anomaly detection performance of WAKE when the
limited number of labelled anomalies is not sufficient to cover
all anomaly patterns, but paying too much attention to the
reconstruction errors can lead to a poor anomaly detection
performance. For the log Declaration, λ has less of an effect
on it. When additional analyses are performed to examine the
characteristics of the log, it can be observed that the limited
number of labelled anomalies in the log Declaration can cover
most anomalous patterns and WAKE performs well even when
not concerned with reconstruction errors, but it performs slightly
worse when overly concerned with reconstruction errors.

J. Computational Cost
The time consumption of each method is presented in
Table VIII. These results have been averaged across all the
datasets.
While our proposed method, WAKE, demonstrates superior
performance, it also incurs the highest computational cost. In
contrast to other approaches, WAKE necessitates three stages of
training. Moreover, the incorporation of GRU further intensifies
the computational cost. Similarly, GAE employs graph neural
networks, which contribute to a higher computational cost.

GUAN et al.: WAKE: A WEAKLY SUPERVISED BUSINESS PROCESS ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK VIA A PRE-TRAINED AUTOENCODER

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose WAKE, a weakly supervised
business process anomaly detection framework via a pretrained autoencoder. Our approach takes advantage of a few
labelled anomalies, which are always available in real life,
to detect anomalies in unlabelled traces. We propose a novel
feature encoder that transforms traces into more meaningful
feature representations. The feature encoder is pre-trained to
be able to reconstruct normal traces. The feature representations
are fed into an anomaly score generator to detect anomalies.
To overcome the limitation of data insufficiency for labelled
anomalies, the feature encoder and the anomaly score generator
are jointly optimized through the training process with a specially designed joint loss. The feature encoder is fine-tuned to
interpret the cause of the anomalies. We propose a novel method
for interpreting the cause of anomalies by computing anomaly
scores that can be compared across attributes, addressing the
problem of unfairness caused by differences in the number of
possible values for different attributes. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed approach can effectively exploit
limited-but-valuable information from a few labelled anomalies.
The proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
with superior performance.
Event logs now contain multimedia data such as videos and
images, which capture the scenes upon completion of an event.
These diverse sources of information can easily lead to anomalies. In the future, we plan to investigate the fusion of these
heterogeneous data types to implement cross-media anomaly
detection in business processes.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Ebrahim and S. A. H. Golpayegani, “Anomaly detection in business
processes logs using social network analysis,” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking
Techn., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 127–139, 2022.
[2] R. Sarno, F. Sinaga, and K. R. Sungkono, “Anomaly detection in business
processes using process mining and fuzzy association rule learning,” J.
Big Data, vol. 7, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 5.
[3] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Detecting anomalies in business process event
logs using statistical leverage,” Inf. Sci., vol. 549, pp. 53–67, 2021.
[4] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Keeping our rivers clean: Information-theoretic
online anomaly detection for streaming business process events,” Inf. Syst.,
vol. 104, 2022, Art. no. 101894.
[5] D. Rahmawati, R. Sarno, C. Fatichah, and D. Sunaryono, “Fraud detection
on event log of bank financial credit business process using hidden Markov
model algorithm,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Sci. Inf. Technol., 2017, pp. 35–40.
[6] C. Linn and D. Werth, “Sequential anomaly detection techniques in
business processes,” in Proc. Int. Workshops Bus. Inf. Syst. Workshops,
Springer, 2017, pp. 196–208.
[7] M. G. Armentano and A. A. Amandi, “Detection of sequences with
anomalous behavior in a workflow process,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf.
Database Expert Syst. Appl., Q. Chen, A. Hameurlain, F. Toumani, R.
R. Wagner, and H. Decker, Eds., Springer, 2015, pp. 111–118.
[8] A. Sureka, “Kernel based sequential data anomaly detection in business
process event logs,” 2015, arXiv:1507.01168.
[9] P. Hsu, Y. Chuang, Y. Lo, and S. He, “Using contextualized activity-level
duration to discover irregular process instances in business operations,”
Inf. Sci., vol. 391, pp. 80–98, 2017.
[10] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. E. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[11] T. Nolle, S. Luettgen, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “Analyzing business process anomalies using autoencoders,” Mach. Learn., vol. 107,
no. 11, pp. 1875–1893, 2018.

2757

[12] H. T. C. Nguyen, S. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ko, and M. Comuzzi, “Autoencoders
for improving quality of process event logs,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 131,
pp. 132–147, 2019.
[13] T. Nolle, S. Luettgen, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “BINet: Multiperspective business process anomaly classification,” Inf. Syst., vol. 103,
2022, Art. no. 101458.
[14] S. Huo, H. Völzer, P. Reddy, P. Agarwal, V. Isahagian, and V. Muthusamy,
“Graph autoencoders for business process anomaly detection,” in Proc.
19th Int. Conf. Bus. Process Manage., Springer, 2021, pp. 417–433.
[15] W. Guan, J. Cao, Y. Gu, and S. Qian, “GRASPED: A GRU-AE
network based multi-perspective business process anomaly detection
model,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., early access, Mar. 30, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/TSC.2023.3262405.
[16] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 38:1–
38:38, 2022.
[17] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv:
1906.02694.
[18] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning representations of
ultrahigh-dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection,”
in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2018,
pp. 2041–2050.
[19] B. Tian, Q. Su, and J. Yin, “Anomaly detection by leveraging incomplete anomalous knowledge with anomaly-aware bidirectional GANs,”
2022, arXiv:2204.13335.
[20] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection with
deviation networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2019, pp. 353–362.
[21] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep weakly-supervised
anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv: 1910.13601.
[22] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature encoding
with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465, Jun. 2022.
[23] N. Görnitz, M. Kloft, K. Rieck, and U. Brefeld, “Toward supervised
anomaly detection,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 235–262, 2013.
[24] S. Das, W.-K. Wong, T. Dietterich, A. Fern, and A. Emmott, “Incorporating
expert feedback into active anomaly discovery,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int.
Conf. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 853–858.
[25] T. Huang, P. Chen, and R. Li, “A semi-supervised VAE based active
anomaly detection framework in multivariate time series for online systems,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1797–1806.
[26] Y. Gong, C. Wang, X. Dai, S. Yu, L. Xiang, and J. Wu, “Multiscale continuity-aware refinement network for weakly supervised video
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo, 2022,
pp. 1–6.
[27] J. Wu et al., “Weakly-supervised spatio-temporal anomaly detection in
surveillance video,” 2021, arXiv:2108.03825.
[28] B. Wan, Y. Fang, X. Xia, and J. Mei, “Weakly supervised video anomaly
detection via center-guided discriminative learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Multimedia Expo, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[29] E. A. Elaziz, R. Fathalla, and M. Shaheen, “Deep reinforcement learning
for data-efficient weakly supervised business process anomaly detection,”
J. Big Data, vol. 10, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 33.
[30] F. de Lima Bezerra and J. Wainer, “Algorithms for anomaly detection of
traces in logs of process aware information systems,” Inf. Syst., vol. 38,
no. 1, pp. 33–44, 2013.
[31] R. Sarno, R. D. Dewandono, T. Ahmad, M. F. Naufal, and F. Sinaga,
“Hybrid association rule learning and process mining for fraud detection,”
IAENG Int. J. Comput. Sci., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 59–72, 2015.
[32] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Online anomaly detection using statistical leverage for streaming business process events,” in Proc. Int. Workshops Process
Mining Workshops, S. J. J. Leemans and H. Leopold, Eds., Springer, 2020,
pp. 193–205.
[33] J. Ko and M. Comuzzi, “Business process event log anomaly detection
based on statistical leverage,” in Proc. 1st Italian Forum Bus. Process
Manage. Co-Located 19th Int. Conf. Bus. Process Manage., 2021, pp. 7–
12.
[34] K. Böhmer and S. Rinderle-Ma, “Multi-perspective anomaly detection in
business process execution events,” in Proc. OTM Confederated Int. Conf.
“On Move to Meaningful Internet Syst.”, C. Debruyne, H. Panetto, R.
Meersman, T. S. Dillon, E. Kühn, D. O’Sullivan, and C. A. Ardagna, Eds.,
2016, pp. 80–98.
[35] A. Rogge-Solti and G. Kasneci, “Temporal anomaly detection in business
processes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Bus. Process Manage., Springer, 2014,
pp. 234–249.

2758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

[36] B. Kang, D. Kim, and S. Kang, “Real-time business process monitoring
method for prediction of abnormal termination using KNNI-based LOF
prediction,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 6061–6068, 2012.
[37] F. Folino, G. Greco, A. Guzzo, and L. Pontieri, “Mining usage scenarios
in business processes: Outlier-aware discovery and run-time prediction,”
Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 70, no. 12, pp. 1005–1029, 2011.
[38] G. M. Tavares and S. Barbon Jr, “Analysis of language inspired trace
representation for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Theory Pract.
Digit. Libraries, Springer, 2020, pp. 296–308.
[39] S. B. Junior, P. Ceravolo, E. Damiani, N. J. Omori, and G. M. Tavares,
“Anomaly detection on event logs with a scarcity of labels,” in Proc. 2nd
Int. Conf. Process Mining, 2020, pp. 161–168.
[40] P. Krajsic and B. Franczyk, “Lambda architecture for anomaly detection
in online process mining using autoencoders,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Adv.
Comput. Collective Intell., M. Hernes, K. Wojtkiewicz, and E. Szczerbicki,
Eds., Springer, 2020, pp. 579–589.
[41] T. Nolle, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in noisy business process event logs using denoising autoencoders,”
in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Discov. Sci., T. Calders, M. Ceci, and D. Malerba,
Eds., 2016, pp. 442–456.
[42] P. Krajsic and B. Franczyk, “Variational autoencoder for anomaly detection
in event data in online process mining,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Enterprise
Inf. Syst., 2021, pp. 567–574.
[43] T. Nolle, A. Seeliger, and M. Mühlhäuser, “BINet: Multivariate business
process anomaly detection using deep learning,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf.
Bus. Process Manage., M. Weske, M. Montali, I. Weber, and J. vom
Brocke, Eds., Springer, 2018, pp. 271–287.
[44] W. Guan, J. Cao, Y. Gu, and S. Qian, “GAMA: A multi-graph-based
anomaly detection framework for business processes via graph neural
networks,” 2023, 10.36227/techrxiv.23627850.v1.
[45] P. Krajsic and B. Franczyk, “Semi-supervised anomaly detection in business process event data using self-attention based classification,” Procedia
Comput. Sci., vol. 192, pp. 39–48, 2021.
[46] C. Huang, F. Ye, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and Q. Tian, “ESAD: End-to-end
deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2020, arXiv: 2012.04905.
[47] Z. Li, C. Sun, C. Liu, X. Chen, M. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Dual-MGAN: An
efficient approach for semi-supervised outlier detection with few identified
anomalies,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 107:1–
107:30, 2022.
[48] Z. Feng, J. Tang, Y. Dou, and G. Wu, “Learning discriminative features
for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.
Speech Signal Process., 2021, pp. 2935–2939.
[49] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2018, pp. 6479–6488.
[50] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, H. Shin, and S. Lee, “A self-reasoning
framework for anomaly detection using video-level labels,” 2020, arXiv:
2008.11887.
[51] D. Lee, S. Yu, H. Ju, and H. Yu, “Weakly supervised temporal anomaly
segmentation with dynamic time warping,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 7355–7364.
[52] C. Zhang et al., “Fraud detection under multi-sourced extremely noisy
annotations,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021,
pp. 2497–2506.
[53] Y. Zhao, G. Zheng, S. Mukherjee, R. McCann, and A. H. Awadallah,
“ADMoE: Anomaly detection with mixture-of-experts from noisy labels,”
2022, arXiv:2208.11290.
[54] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Alleviating
structural distribution shift in graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. 16th
ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2023, pp. 357–365.
[55] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 16 000–16 009.
[56] Y. Ye, L. Xia, and C. Huang, “Graph masked autoencoder for sequential
recommendation,” in Proc. 46th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf.
Retrieval, 2023, pp. 321–330.
[57] Q. Tan, N. Liu, X. Huang, R. Chen, S.-H. Choi, and X. Hu,
“MGAE: Masked autoencoders for self-supervised learning on graphs,”
2022, arXiv:2201.02534.
[58] P.-Y. Huang et al., “Masked autoencoders that listen,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 28 708–28 720.
[59] H. Yao, X. Wang, and W. Yu, “Siamese transition masked autoencoders as
uniform unsupervised visual anomaly detector,” 2022, arXiv:2211.00349.
[60] M.-I. Georgescu, “Masked autoencoders for unsupervised anomaly detection in medical images,” 2023, arXiv:2307.07534.

[61] N.-C. Ristea, F.-A. Croitoru, R. T. Ionescu, M. Popescu, F. S. Khan, and
M. Shah, “Self-distilled masked auto-encoders are efficient video anomaly
detectors,” 2023, arXiv:2306.12041.
[62] W. Yu, M. Huang, S. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Ensembled masked graph
autoencoders for link anomaly detection in a road network considering
spatiotemporal features,” Inf. Sci., vol. 622, pp. 456–475, 2023.
[63] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
word representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781.
[64] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoderdecoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., A. Moschitti, B. Pang, and W. Daelemans,
Eds., 2014, pp. 1724–1734.
[65] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[66] J. R. Quinlan, “Induction of decision trees,” Mach. Learn., vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 81–106, 1986.
[67] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep
feedforward neural networks,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist.,
Y. W. Teh and D. M. Titterington, Eds., 2010, pp. 249–256.
[68] A. Burattin, “PLG2: Multiperspective processes randomization and simulation for online and offline settings,” 2015, arXiv:1506.08415.
Wei Guan is currently working toward the PhD
degree with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
His research interests include predictive monitoring,
anomaly detection, and machine learning.

Jian Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently a
tenured professor with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He is also the director of research institute
of network computing and service computing. His
research interests include intelligent data analytics,
service computing. He has published more than 300
research papers in prestigious journals and conferences. Currently, he is the distinguished member of
CCF.
Haiyan Zhao received the PhD degree from the
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, in
2002. She is an associate professor affiliated with the
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology.
She has authored more than 80 papers in journals
and conferences, and her research interests include
data analytics, recommender systems, and business
process management.

Yang Gu is currently working toward the PhD degree
with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research
interests include service computing and data mining.

Shiyou Qian (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree in computer science from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, China, in 2015. He is currently an associate researcher with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests include event
matching for content-based publish/subscribe systems, resource scheduling for hybrid-cloud, and driving recommendation with vehicular networks.