3856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Zero-Day Guardian: A Dual Model Enabled
Federated Learning Framework for Handling
Zero-Day Attacks in 5G Enabled IIoT
Priyanka Verma , Senior Member, IEEE, Nitesh Bharot , Senior Member, IEEE,
John G. Breslin, Senior Member, IEEE, Donna O’Shea, Senior Member, IEEE,
Ankit Vidyarthi , and Deepak Gupta , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—5G emerges as the bedrock for the Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT), it facilitates the seamless, low-latency
fusion of artificial intelligence and cloud computing, thereby fortifying the entire industrial procedure within a framework of smart
and intelligent IIoT ecosystems. Concurrently, the continuously
changing landscape of cybersecurity threats in the realm of the
Internet of Things (IoT) is giving rise to unparalleled security
complexities. These challenges are particularly pronounced in the
context of zero-day attacks, and integration of 5G technology
further exacerbates the intricacy of the situation. Thus this paper
introduces a cutting-edge 5G-enabled framework for cyberthreat
detection leveraging Federated Learning (FL) without the need
for data sharing. It employs a dual Autoencoder (AE) based
model. Distinctly, our model utilizes two synchronized AEs for
each client, integral to FL mechanism. While one AE evaluates
the IIoT environment based on normal network patterns, another
focuses on attack scenarios. For decisive threat assessment, the
system uses the capabilities of a one-class SVM classifier with
AEs. Furthermore, our method ensures a synergistic blend of selflearning and collaborative learning by implementing a polling
mechanism between overarching AE classifier and those tailored
to individual client data and counters zero-day threats and out
performs traditional AI/ML techniques.
Index Terms—5G, IIoT, cyberthreat, federated learning,
autoencoders, zero-day attack.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE RAPID proliferation of the Internet of Things (IoT)
and its industrial counterpart, the Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT), signifies a remarkable evolution in the
global technological landscape [1]. This evolution involves the

T

Manuscript received 18 August 2023; revised 19 October 2023; accepted
19 November 2023. Date of publication 28 November 2023; date of current
version 26 April 2024. This work was supported by the Science Foundation of
Ireland (SFI) under Grant 16/RC/3918, through EU’s MSCA under Agreement
847577 and Agreement SFI 12/RC/2289-P2 (Insight). (Corresponding author:
Priyanka Verma.)
Priyanka Verma, Nitesh Bharot, and John G. Breslin are with the
Data Science Institute, University of Galway, Galway, H91 TK33 Ireland
(e-mail: priyanka.verma@universityofgalway.ie).
Donna O’Shea is with the Department of Computer Science, Munster
Technological University, Cork, T12 P928 Ireland.
Ankit Vidyarthi is with the Department of Computer Science Engineering
and Information Technology, Jaypee Institute of Information Technology,
Noida 201301, India.
Deepak Gupta is with the CSE Department, Maharaja Agrasen Institute of
Technology, New Delhi 110086, India.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3335385

interconnection of billions of entities, from everyday consumer
electronics to large-scale industrial apparatus, facilitated by the
ability to generate, process, and disseminate colossal volumes
of data [2].
In essence, IoT refers to the network of physical entities, or “things”, integrated with a variety of technologies
such as sensors, software, and connectivity modules, which
enable these entities to coordinate and share data over the
Internet. These entities encompass a broad spectrum of devices
from smart household appliances, such as thermostats and
refrigerators, to health-oriented devices like wearable fitness
trackers [3].
On the other hand, IIoT, an offshoot of IoT, is focused
primarily on the industrial utilization of these technologies.
The IIoT framework incorporates elements of machine-tomachine communication, automation techniques, Machine
Learning (ML), and real-time data analytics. These elements
collectively aim to amplify efficiency, productivity, and safety
across multiple sectors, including manufacturing, logistics,
energy, and transportation [4].
Wireless connections continue to play a crucial role in the
growth of IoT and IIoT, ensuring extensive and robust links
between devices, machinery, systems, individuals, and entities.
5G is set to drive the evolution of automated manufacturing, particularly in localized and public 5G solutions. This
represents a pivotal opportunity to advance future wireless
communication [5].
IIoT systems, in particular, are prime targets for cyberattacks due to the expanded attack surface and each connected
device represents a potential weak spot. The data held within
these systems is often a treasure trove of intellectual property
and sensitive corporate information, making them attractive
targets for cybercriminals [6].
Furthermore, IIoT systems frequently suffer from insufficient security protocols, either from oversight or inherent
device limitations, rendering them comparatively easy targets [7]. Moreover, the introduction of 5G in the IIoT
expands the potential for cyber attacks. The increased
speed and connectivity of 5G networks create more
entry points for hackers to exploit vulnerabilities in
connected devices and systems, posing greater risks
to critical infrastructure, data integrity, and operational
continuity.

c 2023 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.

For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK

Security strategies that are adequately mature for conventional Information Technology (IT) systems may not translate
seamlessly to the 5G-enabled IIoT context [8].
To circumvent these limitations, a growing body of recent
research is pivoting towards ML and Deep Learning (DL)
methodologies [9].
However, their practical application is often restricted due
to apprehensions about privacy, security risks associated with
data transfer between industrial environments and servers, and
the time-demanding nature of the training phase on a singular
machine [10].
Therefore, the integration of edge computing with DL
can help bring intelligence directly to the source of data
creation, thus tackling challenges such as data privacy, high
communication costs, the need for vast memory space, shortened training periods, and high latency [11]. Local DL and
distributed DL techniques have been developed to foster this
edge intelligence, and they function without the need for data
aggregation [12] thus reducing issues with singular machines.
However, these techniques frequently fail to accurately
identify zero-day attack instances, in which cybercriminals
commandeer a network of compromised computing devices
to take advantage of previously unknown weaknesses in IoT
systems. A lack of existing training samples within individual
IoT-edge devices hampers the effectiveness of the above
methods in such situations. The detection of zero-day threats is
inherently difficult, primarily because of the lack of previous
information regarding such incidents [13], [14].
One potential remedy to this issue is Federated Learning
(FL) [15]. In the FL paradigm, each data proprietor (referred
to as a client) constructs a model using their proprietary data
and transmits the model weights to a centralized server. The
server’s function is to amalgamate these parameters to create
a comprehensive model, which can then be deployed across
all client environments [16].
Thus based on the aforementioned discussion, this paper
elucidates an FL-based framework for zero-day cyber-threat
detection within 5G-enabled IIoT ecosystems. This advanced
cyberthreat detection paradigm involves training two independent AE models on each client’s data, one model learning from
normal traffic and another learning from attack traffic, with
the models’ parameters being shared with a server using a 5G
network, thereby eliminating the need to share raw data.
These parameters are then used by the server to build two
global components to learn normal and attack profiles. Using
these global models, each client maps its personal data into a
latent space and trains two classifiers for the received global
AE models. Further client trains two more one-class classifiers
on their local normal and attack data. Then shares the output
of four classifiers with their own polling unit (ϑ) for final
prediction. Every client has the ability to assess its condition
using the shared learning models for representation and the
repository of classifiers. Moreover, the system is equipped
with 5G capabilities, enabling it to achieve remarkable data
throughput and minimal communication delay. This empowers
sensors and devices to seamlessly exchange data in realtime between clients and servers, especially when deployed
within a data-intensive 5G framework as exemplified in [17].

3857

This advancement enhances system efficiency compared to
earlier iterations where immediate connectivity was restricted
to private networks with high-speed links. Consequently, the
newly devised system is well-suited for real-time applications.
Aiming to tackle the problem of zero-day attack detection, the
main contributions of the proposed framework are:
• Proposed a dual-model classification system within a
federated framework, designed to identify unfamiliar
examples by contrasting them with distinct normal and
attack profiles.
• This work provides valuable insights and a robust solution
to counter zero-day attacks effectively. It proposes a novel
and effective framework that achieves high accuracy,
detection rate, and F1-score, outperforming traditional
models and hybrid approaches.
• The proposed framework provides the ability to effectively handle imbalanced data sets by using two individual
models for attack and normal traces.
The rest of the paper is organized as: Section II describes
the existing solutions to the zero-day attack. These include
centralized and decentralized ML/DL-based techniques. Next,
Section III aims to address the proposed approach, explaining
the know-how of the proposed approach. It consists of the
workflow of the proposed technique along with the algorithms
and the diagrammatic representations. The proposed approach
is then validated by experimentation and the results obtained
are analyzed in Section IV. It aims to compare the results of
various existing solutions with the proposed approach. Lastly,
the conclusion of the paper along with some scope for future
research is mentioned in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This section introduces the present techniques available
for cyber threat detection. AI-based IDS have been extensively utilized in device-level detection, marking notable
successes [18], [19]. The majority of existing research, such
as studies [20], [21] on intrusion detection operate under a
closed-set assumption, meaning they only anticipate encountering attack classes that were present in the training data set
during testing.
In a 2017 study focusing on water treatment systems,
Inoue et al. [22] introduced an anomaly detection model
utilizing Deep Neural Networks (DNN). By employing Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural networks within their
investigation, they were able to reveal that the DNN model,
having been trained on normal data, exhibited performance
that surpassed that of the one-class Support Vector Machine
(SVM) model. The training process for the one-class SVM
model was more rapid compared to the DNN method they
proposed.
In 2020, there were numerous studies conducted on cyberthreat detection. Audibert et al. [23] put forth an anomaly
detection approach in an unsupervised way and leveraging
AEs for multivariate time series. Their method exhibited rapid
training time, robustness to parameter selection, and stability.
Their result evaluation shows that their method stands up well
against other methods in the field.

3858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Abdelaty et al. [24] introduced a modular deep learningoriented anomaly detection model for IIoT systems. They
evaluated their proposed model on two IIoT datasets and
found it to have superior performance, especially regarding
the F1-score metric, compared to several existing methods.
Whereas, Moon et al. [25] proposed a combined use of oneclass SVM and LSTM networks for anomaly detection within
IIoT systems. Their evaluation revealed that the LSTM-based
technique was more effective than the one that utilized oneclass SVM.
Moreover, Nagarajan et al. [26] offered an anomaly
detection method aimed at maintaining privacy within IIoT
networks. They compared their approach to two datasets with
traditional ML techniques. The results demonstrated that their
method had a higher detection rate than the others.
However, these closed-set AI-based Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS) come with inherent limitations. These systems
often fall short when faced with unknown or novel attack
vectors, and they tend to generate high false positive rates,
potentially leading to alert fatigue. Moreover, maintaining
closed-set IDS involves labor(intensive), and frequent updates
to incorporate new threat intelligence, making it challenging
to keep up with the rapidly evolving threat landscape. These
systems struggle to adapt to changes in network configurations
and are ill-suited to handling class imbalances or scaling
effectively in dynamic network environments. Attackers can
exploit the weaknesses of closed-set IDS through evasion
techniques, emphasizing the need for more adaptive and
proactive security measures.
To address these limitations, the cybersecurity community
has recognized the importance of open-set intrusion detection
methods. Open-set IDS distinguishes between known and
unknown threats, primarily relying on anomaly detection and
more advanced machine learning techniques. These methods
offer a forward-looking approach by continuously learning
from new data and adapting to evolving threats, reducing false
positives, and offering better scalability and adaptability. They
are designed to be more resilient against evasion techniques
and can provide a more robust defense against an everchanging threat landscape, making open-set intrusion detection
an essential component of modern cybersecurity strategies.
Only a handful of studies have explored open-set intrusion
detection. For instance, Ibrahim Hairab et al. [27] suggested a
method based on CNN for anomaly detection in IoT networks
to counteract zero-day attacks. Despite this, their proposed
method falls short of providing a detailed classification of
known attacks.
Ping and Ye [28] proposed open-set IDS, that addresses
the problem of seen and unseen behaviors/traffic through
three modules named MinMax autoencoder, the classifier, and
pseudo extreme value machine. They conducted experiments
on USTC-TFC2016 & CSE_IDS2018+ datasets to establish
the efficacy of their proposed approach achieving accuracy of
72% and 89.4% respectively.
Farrukh et al. [29] present a novel framework specifically designed to address the open set recognition challenge
within the domain of Network Intrusion Detection Systems,
with a particular focus on IoT environments. The proposed

framework leverages image-based representations of packetlevel data, extracting both spatial and temporal patterns from
the network traffic. Furthermore, we incorporate stacking and
sub-clustering techniques, which facilitate the identification of
previously unknown attacks by effectively capturing the intricate and varied characteristics of legitimate network behavior.
Wu et al. [30], in their study, devised an intrusion detection
method based on dynamic ensemble incremental learning.
While this approach is capable of adapting to newly discovered
local attack variants, it struggles to incorporate knowledge
of new attacks that manifest in other IDSs. Given that IDS
devices dispersed across various geographical locations might
face different attack variants, collaborative model learning
can substantially enhance the defense capabilities of smart
community systems against unfamiliar attacks.
While the aforementioned methods yield exceptional results,
there’s a significant hurdle that precludes their widespread
adoption in the industrial sector. They are centralized techniques in nature, requiring whole data to be housed on one
system for training purposes. It makes the training process
both time-consuming and hardware-intensive. Additionally, the
need to transfer and store all data samples from industrial
operations on one server raises concerns about security and
privacy. Various industrialists become hesitant to share their
data with other entities to train ML models. In response to
these challenges, several studies have devised the use of noncentralized techniques, such as FL, to train models. These
methods circumvent the need for data sharing, addressing
many of the concerns associated with centralized systems.
Detection methodologies based on FL, as referenced in [10],
allow for the sharing of locally learnt parameters instead
of actual data. This approach is proved superior in accelerating training, protecting privacy, and reducing latency.
Popoola et al. [31] employed this strategy by federating IoT edge devices along with DNN to detect zero-day
botnet attacks. Reference [32] introduced an innovative
system combining blockchain technology with federated intrusion detection to handle untrustworthy updates. Meanwhile,
Ruzafa-Alcázar et al. [33] devised an intrusion detection
method leveraging semi-supervised federated methodology.
In this arrangement, unlabelled samples were utilized for
boosting performance of classification system.
In 2022, [34] introduced the FL technique designed to
detect attacks on solar farms. Tests in diverse scenarios and
comparisons with traditional ML strategies were noted. The
experiment demonstrated that their proposed FL-based model’s
performance closely mirrored its centralized counterpart but
with the advantage of reduced computational and data transfer
costs.
Rey et al. [35] suggested both supervised and unsupervised
FL-based methods for detecting malware, which they evaluated under various conditions. They compared this model
with two other methods, revealing that the FL-based approach
was superior to employing multiple local models, one per
client.
Even though the above FL-based methods tackle the privacy concerns related to centralized ML methods, they fall
somewhere short in detecting unknown attacks on IIoT. These

VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK

Fig. 1.

3859

The proposed zero-day guardian framework with 5G network.

methods generally focus on the creation of general classifier
models and thus perform low when encountering zero-day
attacks. Moreover, the above methods do not give preference to
self-learning and completely rely on the global model, which
allows a single attack client to influence the overall global
model. Hence, above mentioned strategies do not handle the
zero-day scenarios well, thus creating a need for an efficient
model.
III. P ROPOSED Z ERO -DAY G UARDIAN F RAMEWORK
The conventional approach to ML, where the model is
trained and tested on the same set of data, restricts individual
client’s growth for detecting new attack traces. Collaborative
learning, on the other hand, offers a better way to enhance
individual client progress. However, collaborative learning
often involves sharing data, which poses security risks. To
address this, FL emerged as a decentralized system that not
only ensures client security but also eliminates the need
for data sharing among clients. Additionally, FL enables
individual clients to participate in a global scenario, promoting
better learning outcomes.
FL is a privacy-preserving decentralized method, developed
by Google, that reduces the client-side computation and
parallelly allows each client to gain global knowledge without
globally sharing data with each other or without bringing data
to a central location. Let there be C clients c ∈ C, and the
number of communication rounds is R and client training data
as client_t1 , client_t2 , client_t3 , . . . , client_tc , . . . , client_tC .
Each client_tc = {client_t_Xc , client_t_yc }C
c=1 and testing
dataset as client_tt_X, client_tt_y for all clients. Each training
data has a distinct distribution such that P(client_ta ) =

P(client_tb ). Every client has its individual local model say
M and it is trained with loss function as:
L(client_tc , w)

1
=
Lc (client_t_Xc , client_t_yc , w) (1)
|client_tc |

where
varies for (client_t_Xc , client_t_yc ) ∈ client_tc
and Lc (client_t_Xc , client_t_yc , w) is a specific function to
be minimized. So our goal is to finally aggregate the Ml to
obtain global model Mg for each client by maintaining the data
privacy:
1
1
c=1 C
|client_tk |
C

min{Mc }C

c=1

∗

client_t
c

L(Ml(c) (client_t_Xc ), client_t_yc )

(2)

i=1

In both conventional ML assessment techniques and federated approaches, the model is conditioned and evaluated using
identical categories of data. During the training phase, the
model assimilates the underlying patterns from each category
of data. Subsequently, these learned patterns are employed
to recognize samples from the corresponding classes in the
testing phase. However, these approaches assume that the
training dataset includes all the attack classes that the model
will encounter after deployment, which limits the system’s
ability to detect attacks outside its dataset. This lack of
robustness raises concerns about the system’s security, as
it may allow attack traffic to bypass its defenses. So, we
propose a dual AE model-enabled FL framework for handling
zero-day attacks in 5G-enabled IIoT systems. The proposed

3860

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Algorithm 1 Zero-Day Guardian Framework Workflow
Prerequisites: Clients k with local data D, 2 local classifiers
0b & 0m , 2 global classifiers b & m , a data differentiator 
and 2 AEs lb & lm for normal and attack data respectively,
and a voting unit ϑ.
A cloud server with 2 global AEs gb & gm , a weight
distributor ω, a data storage, an aggregator.
Working:
1: Use  to divide the D into the normal and attack dataset
Dn & Da respectively.
(Db , Dm ) =  (D)
2: Use Db & Dm to participate in federated scenario to obtain
gb &  gm
gb = AEFedaratedb (Db , lb )
gm = AEFedaratedm (Dm , lm )
3: Train the 0b & 0m
0b = 0b .fit(Db )
0m = 0m .fit(Dm )
4: Train b & m
b = b .fit(gb .predict(Db ))
m = m .fit(gm .predict(Dm ))
Testing Phase
5: Replicate the test data Td to generate 4 test spaces
Td1 = Td.copy()
Td2 = Td.copy()
Td3 = Td.copy()
Td4 = Td.copy()
6: Pass Tdb & Tdm through gb & gm obtained by federated
process.
Td1 = gb .predict(Td1 )
Td3 = gm .predict(Td3 )

7: Use classifiers to predict the probabilities
y_predg = p .score_samples(Td1 )
y_predg
y_predg = e y_predgj
j=1 e
y_predl = 0l .score_samples(Td2 )
y_predl
y_predl = e y_pred
lj
j=1 e

where, j = {1,2,3,4}, g = {1,3}, l= {2,4}
 = len(y_predg or l )
8: Combine the results of the local and global classifiers
individually
9:
y_pred_self_model = list()
10:
for i in range(len(y_predlb )):
11:
if y_predlb [i] ≥ y_predlm [i]:
12:
y_pred_self_model.append (0)
13:
else:
14:
y_pred_self_model.append(1)
15:
y_pred_global_model = list()
16:
for i in range(len(y_predgb )):
17:
if y_predgb [i] ≥y_predgm [i]:
18:
y_pred_global_model.append (0)
19:
else:
20:
y_pred_global_model.append(1)
21: Predict the outcomes
22:
y_pred = list()
23:
for i in range(len(y_pred_self_model)):
24:
if y_pred_self_model[i] == y_pred_global_model[i]:
25:
y_pred.append(y_pred_global_model[i])
26:
else:
27:
y_pred.append(y_pred_self_model[i])
28: y_pred is desired output

framework aims to tackle the zero-day attack by separately
training classifiers to identify normal and attack traffic. This
in turn helps to train the classifiers more precisely to handle
only one kind of data empowering it with a higher detection
rate. The usage of separate models for normal and attack data
also handles the issues caused by the dominant class if the
dataset is imbalanced.
The scenario considered within the proposed framework
involves clients functioning as edge nodes, symbolizing individual industrial units. Each unit integrates a variety of
intelligent sensors, actuators, cameras, robots, machines, IC
controllers, and IoT-based chips to gather vital data. This
data is then stored in a database to facilitate the training
of a local model. Subsequently, these clients collaborate
by sharing gradients from their respective local models,
which are aggregated on a cloud server. This FL process is facilitated through the utilization of the Internet
and the efficiency of 5G infrastructure, with its ultra-low
latency, high bandwidth, network slicing capabilities, and
advanced security features, 5G facilitates real-time control,
machine-to-machine communication, and seamless connectivity for an array of devices and sensors, fostering the

growth of interconnected, intelligent systems. It enables realtime remote monitoring and maintenance, enhances mobility
for robots and autonomous vehicles, and ensures scalability and energy efficiency in manufacturing environments.
Furthermore, 5G’s potential to offer global, high-speed
connectivity promises to reshape the way industries operate, making them more efficient, responsive, and globally
connected.
The major components of the proposed framework are; at
the client end it consists of two global AEs and their associated
two classifiers, data storage, two more classifiers built on local
normal and attack data, a data distinguisher, and a polling
mechanism. At the server, we have an aggregator, weights
distributor, data storage, and two global AEs.
Algorithm 1 describes the workflow of the proposed framework with Table I describing the parameters involved. The
major steps of the proposed framework are:
• At each client it initially begins by initializing the data
distinguisher process where the normal traffic data is
separated from the attack one.
• These separated datasets Db for normal & Dm for attack
are used to separately train the local AE lb for normal

VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK

Fig. 2.

3861

Testing with the proposed framework at individual client.

TABLE I
D ESCRIPTION OF S YMBOLS U SED IN P ROPOSED A PPROACH

output set with the same fs-number of features. It entails the
usage of an encoder and decoder which works collaboratively
to first reduce the feature set to a specified feature set say
fs’ (through encoder) and then reconstruct the feature set fs
through its decoder set. AE employed in our system mainly
uses the same functionality and then uses Mean Squared Error
(MSE) as its loss function.
1
(ytrue − ypred )2
n
n

MSE =

i=1

traffic and AE lm for attack traffic and shared with the
server.
• At the server, the process of aggregation takes place to
get the global AEs gb and gm for normal and attack
traffic respectively, and shared back to clients.
• Further on global AEs gb and gm , each client trains two
separate global one class classifiers such as b & m .
• Then on local data Db & Dm the clients local classifiers
0b & 0m , named as self-model classifiers are trained.
• In the case of testing, the testing data is first passed
through the gb & gm respectively and then classified
using the global classifiers b & m respectively.
• The testing data is also passed through the self-model
classifiers to generate two more outcomes from 0b & 0m
respectively.
• As a final prediction step, these predictions are combined
to generate the desired classification within the polling
mechanism.
As mentioned, each client has two local AE lb for normal
traffic and AE lm for attack traffic. This AE is a specially
designed network that has the power to transform data through
the use of neural structures. It takes the input data, says D
with fs features, processes them, and converts them to another

where n is the total number of predictions
Once the local training of l is completed, every client
shares its AE weights with the global server for the federated
process. Once the parameters of the client’s local components
are shared with the server, it employs the federated averaging
method, as described in [15], to amalgamate the components
into two global elements, as represented by Eq. (3) and Eq. (4).
The resultant global components are depicted in Eq. (5). These
consolidated global components are subsequently distributed
to the clients, allowing them to refine the components using
their individual local data. After this refinement, the parameters are shared back with the server using a 5G network
between the client and server. This iterative model weights
the training cycle, conveying them to the server, and their
subsequent aggregation constitutes the FL process.
1 k
wi
K
K

Wi =

(3)

k=1

where Wi is the aggregated weights of components i (normal
or attack) and wki are the weights of components i for
client k.
1 k
bi
K
K

Bi =

k=1

(4)

3862

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE II
PARAMETERS U SED IN THE Z ERO -DAY G UARDIAN M ODEL

Algorithm 2 AEFederated
Input: K clients with their local data & a server
for comms_round do
for client k do
Train the normal AE 1 present with client
ζ (Dkn , rnk (fnk (Dkn )));
Train the attack AE 3 present with client
ζ (Dka , rak (fak (Dka )));
Share the AE parameters gi with server for
both AE‘s
ωi = {ωik |i ∈ {normal, attack}}
βi = {βik |i ∈ {normal, attack}}
end
Server aggregate the parameters & make the
global components gi

k
Wi = K1 K
i=1 wi

K
1
k
Bi = K i=1 bi
ηi = gi (D) = σ (wi D + bi );
Server shared global components with clients
end

a hypersphere with the center of c and radius of ϒ by
minimizing the ϒ 2 .
minϒ k ,ck
i

n


μj

(6)

j=1

subjected to:
2

||gi (Xik ) − cki ||2 ≤ ϒik + μj
μj ≥ 0

where Bi is the accumulated biases of normal or attack
counterparts of i and bki are the biases of component i for
client k.
ηi = gi (X) = σ (wi X + Bi )

i

2
ϒik + C

(5)

In this context, gi signifies the global AE function for
component i, ηi compares the new samples with the normal
and attack data.
Once the global models are shared with clients, they train
four one-class SVM classifiers, two using the new representations ηb and ηm from the global AEs and two on local
clients’ data for normal and attack traffic. One-class SVM
is a type of SVM algorithm used specifically for anomaly
detection rather than classic classification tasks. This technique
is particularly useful when the data consists mainly of one
class (the “normal” class) and the goal is to detect outliers
or anomalies, which form a second class that is typically
underrepresented in the dataset. As in our proposed approach,
we are separately training the classifiers of normal and attack
profiles, thus one-class SVM fulfills this purpose.
One-class SVM operates by defining a decision boundary
around the normal/attack data in a way that positions this data
in a small region while outliers fall outside this region. It
achieves this by learning a decision function that is positive
for the region of normal/attack data and negative for the region
where outliers lie.
However, it’s important to note that one-class SVM’s
performance can be sensitive to the choice of the kernel and the
kernel’s parameters, as well as the value of the hyperparameter
that controls the trade-off between maximizing the distance
of the hyperplane from the origin and minimizing the number
of instances that fall on the side of the hyperplane with the
outliers. Equation (6) shows the training objective of the oneclass SVM model. The goal of one-class SVM is to obtain

where ϒik and cki are the parameters of the one-class SVM
0ki which is trained for component i of client k, μj are slack
variables, C is the penalty parameters gi (·) is the global AE
(Eq. (5)) for component i and Xik are the local samples of
client k belongs to component i.
IV. R ESULTS E VALUATION
In this section, we outline the experimental setup, dataset
description, zero-day scenario simulation, and subsequent
comparative result analysis. Our approach revolves around
a dual AE model-enabled 2-way FL framework designed
to counter zero-day attacks. The chosen dataset X-IIoTID
represents real cybersecurity incidents to ensure practicality.
We meticulously simulate zero-day scenarios to evaluate the
efficacy of our zero-day guardian framework. Result analysis encompasses performance metrics, model accuracy, and
comparison against traditional methods. This comprehensive
evaluation demonstrates the efficacy of our approach in detecting and mitigating zero-day threats, laying the foundation for
more robust and proactive cybersecurity measures.
A. Experimental Setup and Parameters
The proposed mechanism was developed and analyzed using
Python 3.10,1 on a MacBook Pro equipped with an Apple
M1 Pro processor. The MacBook Pro configuration includes
a 10-core CPU, a 16-core GPU, 16 GB of RAM, and a 1TB
SSD. Table II gives the parametric description of the proposed
framework with Table III describing the performance metrics
used for the evaluation.
B. Dataset Description
To evaluate the proposed framework we utilized X-IIoTID
dataset [36]. This dataset is specifically designed for IIoT
1 https://docs.python.org/3/library/

VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS

3863

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT AE S ON X-IIOTID DATASET

applications and captures system activity generated by a range
of IIoT devices. With a total of 820,834 traces, the dataset
comprises 68 features and encompasses 0-9 different labels.
These labels represent various attack types, along with a
separate label for normal requests. The whole training dataset
was divided among 10 clients for the FL approach. This
divided dataset for each client was further bifurcated into
normal and attack traffic using the data distinguisher and used
to train the individual AEs in a federated way respectively.
C. Building a Zero-Day Scenario
A zero-day attack is characterized by its novelty and the fact
that it represents an unfamiliar type of threat that has not been
previously encountered or described to the model during its
training phase. In order to effectively simulate zero-day attacks
in our experiments, a commonly adopted practice involves
partitioning the dataset into two distinct groups: one consisting
of known network traffic and another comprised of ‘unknown’
network traffic. In the context of our specific experiments, we
implemented this approach by filtering out instances associated
with attack labels named ‘Lateral Movement’ (comprising
31,596 traces) and ‘Weapon’ (comprising 67,260 traces) from
the training dataset. This selective exclusion of attack labels
aimed to create a scenario in which the model encounters
attacks it has never been exposed to during training. However,
it is important to note that these excluded attack labels, namely
‘Lateral Movement’ and ‘Weapon’, were reintroduced in the
testing dataset, thus ensuring a comprehensive evaluation of
the model’s performance in the presence of these zero-day
attack types.
D. Result Analysis
Here we analyze and compare the performance of the
various AEs with the proposed approach, comparison with
other federated attack detection DL models, and comparison
with other one-class classifiers, traditional ML classifiers, and
DL classifiers for individual clients.
1) Comparison With Other AEs: Firstly, we compared the
performance of various AE models. Results obtained from the
comparison of different AEs on the X-IIOTID dataset with
the proposed approach are described in Table IV. The table
provides insights into the communication rounds required for
training the AEs and the corresponding AE loss for both attack
and normal traffic.
For the multilayered AE, it can be observed that for the
number of communication rounds from 2 to 10, the AE loss
decreases gradually for both attack and normal data. The
lowest AE loss values achieved for attack and normal data
are 0.000370 and 0.000305, respectively, at 10 communication
rounds. Similar trends can be observed in the case of the

Fig. 3. Comparison of one-class SVM in proposed framework with other
one-class classifiers.

single-layered AE, sparse AE, and variational AE, where
increasing the number of communication rounds results in a
decrease in AE loss. However, the AE loss values are higher
for all the other AEs in comparison to the multilayered AE.
Thus it can be concluded from the results that the
Multilayered AE demonstrates the lowest AE loss values
among all the AEs considered in this comparison for both
attack and normal traffic. Therefore, we used multilayered AEs
in the proposed approach.
2) Comparison of One-Class SVM Used in Proposed
Framework With Other One Class Classifiers Models: This
section compares the performance of the opted classifier
(one-class SVM) for the proposed approach with other oneclass classifiers. The other one-class classifiers considered are;
Isolation Forest (IF), Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), Local
Outlier Factor (LOF), and Elliptic Envelope (EE).
The results of the classification performance for different
classifiers are presented in the given Figure 3 depicting the
accuracy, detection rate, and F1-score for each classifier.
The proposed classifier achieves an accuracy of 99.328%,
a detection rate of 99.668%, and an F1-score of 99.844%

3864

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

TABLE V
C OMPARISON M ODELS PARAMETERS

indicating that the one-class SVM used in the proposed framework performs exceptionally well in accurately classifying the
data, detecting known and unknown (zero-day) traffic, with
high F1-score.
The IF classifier performs poorly, while the GMM, LOF,
and EE classifiers achieve varying degrees of effectiveness in
identifying zero-day attacks in the dataset. However, the oneclass SVM classifier exhibits the highest accuracy, detection
rate, and F1-score, indicating its superior performance in zeroday attack detection compared to the other classifiers. Hence,
the one-class SVM is chosen for the proposed approach.
3) Comparison of the Proposed Framework With DL-Based
FL Models: Table VI presents the performance comparison
of different DL models, including MLP, CNN, GRU, CNN
+ GRU hybrid model, and the proposed model with Table V
describing their respective parameters. The results demonstrate
that CNN, while effective in capturing spatial patterns, falls
short when dealing with sequential information, as evident
through the superior performance of the CNN + GRU hybrid
system. On the other hand, the GRU model’s limitations
in handling spatial patterns are compensated by the CNN
component of the hybrid model. Zero-day attacks are typically
designed to exploit vulnerabilities that are not known to
security experts or database systems. Since these models
learn from historical data and have not encountered zeroday attack patterns, they lack the ability to detect zero-day
attacks effectively. This concept of learning provides them
the ability to easily handle and learn the known attack
patterns but falls short in case of unknown attacks. Moreover,
the proposed approach aims to understand the attack and
normal patterns separately therefore they are rendered more
power to understand the difference between normal and attack
patterns. Table VI demonstrates that the proposed approach
significantly outperforms all individual models, including the
hybrid CNN + GRU model, across all evaluation metrics. It
attains an outstanding accuracy of 99.32%, a detection rate of
99.69%, and an F1-score of 99.84%. These exceptional results

TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF P ROPOSED W ITH DL-BASED FL M ODELS

Fig. 4.
Comparison of the proposed framework with other one-class
classifiers.

Fig. 5.
Comparison of the proposed framework with traditional ML
classifiers.

suggest that the proposed approach has successfully addressed
the challenge of zero-day attack detection and demonstrates
remarkable capabilities in accurately classifying it.
4) Comparison of the Proposed Approach With One
Class Classifiers in Centralized Settings: Here the proposed
approach is compared with one-class classifiers such as SVM,
IF, LOF, EE when applied to the centralized settings where
all data is located in one place. As shown in Figure 4
The proposed framework demonstrates the highest accuracy,
detection rate, and F1-score among all evaluated classifiers,
indicating its superior performance in detecting known and
unknown attacks. Moreover, all the other one-class classifier,
evaluated on centralized data lags behind the proposed model.
However, in centralized settings data privacy is always a
concern which is also addressed in the proposed approach
while utilizing the FL-based framework.
5) Comparison With ML Models at Individual Client: This
section analyzes the effectiveness of the proposed approach in
comparison to traditional ML-based techniques for zero-day
attack detection. Figure 5 represents the significant difference
between the proposed framework and the other ML models

VERMA et al.: ZERO-DAY GUARDIAN: A DUAL MODEL ENABLED FL FRAMEWORK

3865

TABLE VII
S ERVER S IDE S CALABILITY A NALYSIS IN T ERMS OF M EMORY C ONSUMPTION AND T IME

Fig. 6.

Comparison of the proposed model with DL classifiers.

in terms of accuracy, showing that the proposed framework
outperforms other traditional models with the given dataset.
Similar to accuracy, the proposed approach demonstrates the
highest detection rate. The high detection rate of the proposed
approach indicates its ability to effectively identify zeroday attack instances, making it a promising choice for the
application at hand in comparison to traditional ML solutions.
6) Comparison With DL Models at Individual Client:
Comparison the performance of the proposed approach
with other DL models at individual client level as shown
in Figure 6. The proposed model achieves exceptional
performance with an accuracy of 99.32%, detection rate of
99.69%, and F1-score of 99.84%, showcasing its superior ability to accurately classify instances and detect anomalies. The
MLP, GRU, and CNN models also perform well, achieving
accuracies of 87.66%, 87.87%, and 87.72%, respectively. In
conclusion, the proposed model outperforms all other models,
exhibiting the highest performance across all metrics, while the
MLP, GRU, and CNN models also achieve high performance
in the classification task.
7) Scalability Analysis: This section outlays the concept of
scalability with our proposed framework. It displays various
results of the proposed framework, analyzing it with multiple
clients. Moreover, it provides insights into the time taken and
memory consumption with varying numbers of clients.
Table VII shows results for five different scenarios, by
varying the number of clients as 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20 to show
the effect of scalability on the proposed approach. The metrics
include average memory consumption per client ranging from

937.809 MB to 1814.565 MB for normal scenarios and
1089.352 MB to 1936.666 MB for attack scenarios. Overall
memory consumption for the FL process ranges from 3622.273
MB to 24121.373 MB for the normal scenario and 9683.329
MB to 37538.783 MB for the attack scenario. Moreover, the
overall time taken for the complete FL process ranges from
163.579 seconds to 250.181 seconds for the normal scenario
and 166.6853 seconds to 249.272 seconds for the attack
scenario. The time taken per epoch per client ranges from 1
to 7 seconds for the normal scenario and 1 to 9 for the attack
scenario. These numbers provide a comprehensive overview
of how server-side performance metrics change with varying
client numbers in the FL process for different scenarios.
Thus, from the above results it is observed that even with an
increased number of clients (more connected IoT devices), the
proposed approach is able to deal with them without adding
much complexity and resource consumption to the system.
V. C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, our research introduces an innovative
approach to enhance cybersecurity defenses against zero-day
attacks and address data imbalance within the context of a
5G network. The proposed framework, which leverages a dual
Autoencoder (AE) model-enabled Federated Learning (FL)
system, has yielded remarkable results. It achieved an exceptional accuracy rate of 99.32%, a detection rate of 99.69%,
and an F1-score of 99.84%. These results clearly surpass
the performance of traditional models and hybrid architectures, underscoring the framework’s effectiveness in accurately
identifying and classifying zero-day attacks. Moreover, the
incorporation of separate AEs during training significantly
improved the handling of data imbalance, particularly benefiting underrepresented classes.
Furthermore, our adoption of the dual model FL framework facilitated efficient collaboration and knowledge sharing
among distributed nodes, leading to enhanced model generalization and scalability. These outcomes collectively establish
our approach as a robust and promising solution to bolster
cybersecurity defenses in the face of dynamic and evolving
threats in real-world scenarios. Nevertheless, it is important to
acknowledge that this approach does introduce increased complexity and computation costs. In our forthcoming research
efforts, we intend to focus on optimizing the FL process

3866

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

and explore its applicability in various domains, continuing
to push the boundaries of advanced threat detection and
data handling techniques. Concurrently, we will explore the
practical viability and implementation of integrating edge
computing with deep learning to harness edge intelligence
within intrusion detection systems, addressing the need for
real-world applicability and optimization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research presented emanated from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 program for research and innovation, which provided funding under Grant Number 847577
(SMART 4.0 Marie Skłodowska–Curie Actions COFUND),
and also by a grant from Science Foundation Ireland under
Grant Number SFI/12/RC/3918 and SFI 12/RC/2289-P2
(Insight). In order to promote open access, the author has
chosen to apply a CC BY public copyright license to any
version of the Author Accepted Manuscript that results from
this submission.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. F. Strnadl, “End-to-end architectures for data monetization in
the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) concepts and implementations,” in Monetization of Technical Data: Innovations from Industry
and Research. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2023, pp. 149–183.
[2] S. Muthunagai and R. Anitha, “CTS-IIoT: Computation of time series
data during index based de-duplication of Industrial IoT (IIoT) data
in cloud environment,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 129, no. 1,
pp. 433–453, Mar. 2023.
[3] S. Ding, A. Tukker, and H. Ward, “Opportunities and risks of Internet
of Things (IoT) technologies for circular business models: A literature
review,” J. Environ. Manag., vol. 336, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 117662.
[4] P. Verma and N. Bharot, “A review on security trends and solutions
against cyber threats in industry 4,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Secure Cyber
Comput. Commun. (ICSCCC), 2023, pp. 397–402.
[5] A. Mahmood et al., “Industrial IoT in 5G-and-beyond networks: Vision,
architecture, and design trends,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
no. 6, pp. 4122–4137, Jun. 2022.
[6] R. Pareriya, P. Verma, and P. Suhana, “An ensemble Xgboost approach
for the detection of cyber-attacks in the Industrial IoT domain,” in Big
Data Analytics Fog-Enabled IoT Networks: Towards a Privacy Security
Perspective. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2023, p. 125.
[7] P. Verma, J. G. Breslin, and D. O’Shea, “FLDID: Federated learning
enabled deep intrusion detection in smart manufacturing industries,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 22, p. 8974, Nov. 2022.
[8] S. S. Mathew, K. Hayawi, N. A. Dawit, I. Taleb, and Z. Trabelsi,
“Integration of blockchain and collaborative intrusion detection for
secure data transactions in industrial IoT: A survey,” Clust. Comput.,
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 4129–4149, 2022.
[9] M. Nuaimi, L. C. Fourati, and B. B. Hamed, “Intelligent approaches
toward intrusion detection systems for Industrial Internet of Things: A
systematic comprehensive review,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 215,
Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103637.
[10] S. A. Rahman, H. Tout, C. Talhi, and A. Mourad, “Internet of Things
intrusion detection: Centralized, on-device, or federated learning?” IEEE
Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 310–317, Nov./Dec. 2020.
[11] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen,
“Convergence of edge computing and deep learning: A comprehensive
survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 869–904,
2nd Quart., 2020.
[12] N. Bharot, P. Verma, S. Sharma, and V. Suraparaju, “Distributed denialof-service attack detection and mitigation using feature selection and
intensive care request processing unit,” Arab. J. Sci. Eng., vol. 43,
pp. 959–967, Feb. 2018.
[13] T. Zoppi, A. Ceccarelli, and A. Bondavalli, “Unsupervised algorithms to
detect zero-day attacks: Strategy and application,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 90603–90615, 2021.
[14] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detection: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198,
Jan. 2023, pp. 175–185.

[15] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[16] L. Li, Y. Fan, M. Tse, and K.-Y. Lin, “A review of applications in federated learning,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 149, Nov. 2020, Art. no. 106854.
[17] M. Anisetti, F. Berto, and M. Banzi, “Orchestration of data-intensive
pipeline in 5G-enabled edge continuum,” in Proc. IEEE World Congr.
Services (SERVICES), 2022, pp. 2–10.
[18] P. Verma, S. Tapaswi, and W. W. Godfrey, “A request aware module
using CS-IDR to reduce VM level collateral damages caused by
DDoS attack in cloud environment,” Clust. Comput., vol. 24, pp. 1–17,
Sep. 2021.
[19] P. Verma, S. Tapaswi, and W. W. Godfrey, “An impact analysis and
detection of HTTP flooding attack in cloud using bio-inspired clustering
approach,” Int. J. Swarm Intell. Res. (IJSIR), vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 29–49,
2021.
[20] P. Kumar et al., “PPSF: A privacy-preserving and secure framework using blockchain-based machine-learning for IoT-driven smart
cities,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2326–2341,
Jul.-Sep. 2021.
[21] Y. Guo, T. Ji, Q. Wang, L. Yu, G. Min, and P. Li, “Unsupervised anomaly
detection in IoT systems for smart cities,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2231–2242, Oct.–Dec. 2020.
[22] J. Inoue, Y. Yamagata, Y. Chen, C. M. Poskitt, and J. Sun, “Anomaly
detection for a water treatment system using unsupervised machine
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. Workshops (ICDMW),
2017, pp. 1058–1065.
[23] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.
[24] M. Abdelaty, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa, “DAICS: A
deep learning solution for anomaly detection in industrial control
systems,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 1117–1129, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[25] J.-H. Moon, J.-H. Yu, and K.-A. Sohn, “An ensemble approach to
anomaly detection using high- and low-variance principal components,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 99, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 107773.
[26] S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Deverajan, A. K. Bashir, R. P. Mahapatra,
and M. S. Al-Numay, “IADF-CPS: Intelligent anomaly detection framework towards cyber physical systems,” Comput. Commun., vol. 188,
pp. 81–89, Apr. 2022.
[27] B. Ibrahim Hairab, H. K. Aslan, M. S. Elsayed, A. D. Jurcut, and
M. A. Azer, “Anomaly detection of zero-day attacks based on CNN
and regularization techniques,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 573,
Jan. 2023.
[28] G. Ping and X. Ye, “Open-set intrusion detection with MinMax autoencoder and pseudo extreme value machine,” in Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Neural
Netw. (IJCNN), 2022, pp. 1–8.
[29] Y. A. Farrukh, S. Wali, I. Khan, and N. D. Bastian, “Detecting unknown
attacks in IoT environments: An open set classifier for enhanced network
intrusion detection,” 2023, arXiv:2309.07461.
[30] Z. Wu, P. Gao, L. Cui, and J. Chen, “An incremental learning method
based on dynamic ensemble RVM for intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 671–685, Mar. 2021.
[31] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
[32] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam,
and O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based
smart transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.
[33] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar et al., “Intrusion detection based on privacypreserving federated learning for the industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, Feb. 2023.
[34] L. Zhao, J. Li, Q. Li, and F. Li, “A federated learning framework for
detecting false data injection attacks in solar farms,” IEEE Trans. Power
Electron., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 2496–2501, Mar. 2022.
[35] V. Rey, P. M. S. Sánchez, A. H. Celdrán, and G. Bovet, “Federated
learning for malware detection in IoT devices,” Comput. Netw., vol. 204,
Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108693.
[36] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “X-IIoTID:
A connectivity-agnostic and device-agnostic intrusion data set for
Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 3962–3977, Mar. 2022.