IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

12399

Zero-X: A Blockchain-Enabled Open-Set Federated
Learning Framework for Zero-Day
Attack Detection in IoV
Abdelaziz Amara Korba , Member, IEEE, Abdelwahab Boualouache , Member, IEEE,
and Yacine Ghamri-Doudane , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The Internet ofVehicles (IoV) is a crucial technology
for Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) that integrates vehicles with the Internet and other entities. The emergence of 5G
and the forthcoming 6G networks presents an enormous potential
to transform the IoV by enabling ultra-reliable, low-latency, and
high-bandwidth communications. Nevertheless, as connectivity expands, cybersecurity threats have become a significant concern.
The issue has been further exacerbated by the rising number of
zero-day (0-day) attacks, which can exploit unknown vulnerabilities and bypass existing Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs). In this
paper, we propose Zero-X, an innovative security framework that
effectively detects both 0-day and N-day attacks. The framework
achieves this by combining deep neural networks with Open-Set
Recognition (OSR). Our approach introduces a novel scheme that
uses blockchain technology to facilitate trusted and decentralized
federated learning (FL) of the Zero-X framework. This scheme
also prioritizes privacy preservation, enabling both CAVs and
Security Operation Centers (SOCs) to contribute their unique
knowledge while protecting the privacy of their sensitive data. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to leverage OSR
in combination with privacy-preserving FL to identify both 0-day
and N-day attacks in the realm of IoV. The in-depth experiments
on two recent network traffic datasets show that the proposed
framework achieved a high detection rate while minimizing the
false positive rate. Comparison with related work showed that the
Zero-X framework outperforms existing solutions.
Index Terms—5G, 6G, blockchain, connected and automated
vehicles, differential privacy, federated learning, IoV, zero-day
attacks, open-set recognition, security.

I. INTRODUCTION

W

ITH the rapid development of computing and communication technologies, we are witnessing a growing

Manuscript received 24 August 2023; revised 3 February 2024; accepted 3
April 2024. Date of publication 11 April 2024; date of current version 19 September 2024. This work was supported in part by 5G-INSIGHT bilateral project
(ID: 14891397) under Grant ANR-20-CE25-0015-16, in part by Luxembourg
National Research Fund, in part by French National Research Agency, and in part
by FEDER MISMAR, Région Nouvelle-Aquitaine B4IoT. The review of this
article was coordinated by Prof. Xu Chen. (Corresponding author: Abdelaziz
Amara Korba.)
Abdelaziz Amara Korba is with the L3I, University of La Rochelle, 17000
La Rochelle, France, and also with the LRS, Badji Mokhtar Annaba University,
Annaba 23000, Algeria (e-mail: abdelaziz.amara_korba@univ-lr.fr).
Abdelwahab Boualouache is with the FSTM, University of Luxembourg, 4365
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg (e-mail: abdelwahab.boualouache@uni.lu).
Yacine Ghamri-Doudane is with the L3I, University of La Rochelle, 17000
La Rochelle, France (e-mail: yacine.ghamri@univ-lr.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3385916

prevalence of Connected and Automated Vehicles (CAVs) in our
modern world. Internet of Vehicles (IoV) technology provides
a crucial communication framework for CAVs, facilitating reliable communication between CAVs and other IoV entities, such
as infrastructure, pedestrians, and smart devices. The fifth generation (5G) and the forthcoming sixth generation (6G) networks
promise to revolutionize the IoV by enabling ultra-reliability
with ultra-low latency and high bandwidth communications.
With the growing level of connectivity and complexity in the
IoV, cybersecurity risks have become a major concern. Among
these risks, Zero-day cyberattacks stand out as a significant
threat. A zero-day attack refers to a new type of cyber attack
that is unknown to both the general public and the cybersecurity experts [1]. This kind of attack exploits unknown vulnerabilities or uses innovative methods to evade detection by
security mechanisms. Upstream [2], a cybersecurity and data
management platform for CAVs has analyzed over 900 publicly
reported cyberattacks on cars in the last decade. Examples of
real-world cyberattacks can be found in [2], including instances
where hackers could disable the brakes and kill a car’s engine
traveling at 65 mph using a laptop and custom-written software
plugged into the OBD II port. In another case, hackers remotely
controlled a Jeep’s engine while driving on a highway. These
incidents highlight the significant cybersecurity risks associated
with IoV and the urgent need for robust cybersecurity measures
to ensure the safety of vehicle occupants and other road users.
To mitigate cyberattacks in the context of the IoV, Artificial
Intelligence (AI) has emerged as a crucial tool for cybersecurity. Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) based
IDSs have been proposed to protect vehicular networks from
cyber-attacks [3]. In ML, classification involves assigning data
to predefined categories based on their features, using a trained
model. This model, developed with a labeled dataset, learns
to recognize patterns indicative of each class for predicting
unlabeled data. In a real IoV environment, zero-day attacks will
inevitably occur frequently. However, existing IDSs [4], [5],
[6] are typically designed for static and closed-set scenarios.
Assuming that all possible attack types an intrusion can belong
to are known and predefined during the training phase of the
IDS. However, this assumption is unrealistic as new types of
attacks are constantly emerging. The majority of current IDSs
rely on Supervised Learning (SL), a method that can prove to

0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

12400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

be inefficient in effectively identifying unknown attacks characterized by patterns substantially divergent from those observed
during the training phase.
To enable the detection of zero-day attacks, anomaly and novelty detection techniques have been used [7], [8], [9]. Although
the solutions based on these techniques yield promising results
in detecting unseen/ zero-day attacks, they can unfortunately not
recognize the type of detected attacks. This poses a substantial
challenge in the development of a security mechanism capable of identifying known (N-day) attacks while also detecting
emerging zero-day (0-day) attacks.
Open-Set Recognition (OSR) [10] offers a realistic approach
in a dynamic field like intrusion detection. This method equips
models to manage both known and unexpected attack types,
considering the limitations of incomplete training data and the
possibility of encountering new attack types after training. OSR
emphasizes the need for classifiers to be both accurate and
flexible, adapting to scenarios where test samples may include
previously unseen attack types. This adaptability is crucial for
effectively responding to the continuously evolving nature of
such fields. In recent years, combining deep neural networks
with open-set recognition has led to significant advances in
detecting unknown classes in computer vision [11], [12], [13].
However, this approach has yet to be fully utilized in intrusion
detection. While some studies have explored the application of
open-set recognition in this context [14], [15], to the best of
our knowledge, OSR has never been leveraged to detect 0-day
attacks in IoV.
Recent IDSs [6], [16], [17], [18] leveraged the potential of
Federated Leaning (FL) paradigm to train the detection model
in a distributed and privacy-preserving manner. FL enables
collaborative training of the model without requiring the transmission of raw data, which enhances participants’ data privacy.
Due to centralized model aggregation, however, standard FL is
susceptible to server failures and external attacks, which can
result in inaccurate detection model updates or training failures.
To address the limitations mentioned in existing IDSs within
the IoV environment, this paper introduces the Zero-X framework. This security framework effectively identifies both 0-day
and N-day attacks by integrating deep neural networks with
Open-Set Recognition (OSR). Our approach introduces a pioneering scheme that utilizes blockchain technology to facilitate
secure and decentralized federated training of the Zero-X framework. The framework not only guarantees high accuracy but also
ensures fast detection, which is a critical factor in mitigating
the impact of attacks. The Zero-X framework is designed to
detect and classify attacks solely based on network traffic. Its
device-agnostic nature makes it suitable for deployment on both
CAVs and Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) infrastructure.
Its purpose is to secure CAVs against inter-vehicular attacks
while protecting the MEC infrastructure from possible attacks,
including Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, that
may originate from compromised CAVs. In summary, the main
contributions of this paper are:
r Our proposed framework uses unsupervised privacypreserving FL to train an attack detection (AD) model.
Specifically, we use a Deep Auto-Encoder (DAE) to model

the expected communication pattern of CAVs and detect
any deviations from this pattern as malicious activity. This
approach is highly effective in detecting various types
of attacks, as opposed to existing methods that require
separate training for each new attack.
r The Zero-X framework leverages open-set federated learning to train the attack classifier (AC) model, a deep multiclass data descriptor that aims to identify a spherical decision boundary for each type of attack. This boundary
determines whether a network flow belongs to a given
attack type, making it effective in detecting unseen attacks
while accurately identifying known attacks. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first work to leverage OSR in
combination with FL for intrusion detection in the context
of the IoV.
r We propose a new training scheme utilizing blockchain
technology to empower the federated learning, enhancing
the security and decentralization of the Zero-X framework’s training process. Our contribution lies in the introduction of an innovative Byzantine Fault Tolerance consensus mechanism named Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA). This
mechanism plays a pivotal role in guaranteeing the secure
dissemination and aggregation of FL model updates.
r The framework’s effectiveness is thoroughly assessed by
extensive evaluations on two recent datasets. The first
dataset, 5G-NIDD [19], comprises 5G network traffic
traces of attacks that target the infrastructure (MEC). The
second dataset, VDoS [20], contains network traffic originating from inter-vehiclar attacks. To create a realistic
test scenario, we designate one type of attack as the 0-day
attack, while the remaining attack types are considered as
N-day attacks.This process is repeated with different 0-day
attacks, resulting in K test scenarios per dataset, where K
represents the number of attack types in the dataset.
The remainder of this paper is outlined as follows. Section II
provides an overview of the related work. Section III introduces
the system design of the framework. In Section IV, we present
in detail the development and operation of the framework.
The performance evaluation results are depicted in Section V.
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
The development of IDS for IoV has gained significant attention in recent years due to its criticality in ensuring the security
and privacy of these connected systems. A security framework [5] is proposed for efficient cyber-attack detection in the
intravehicle networks (IVN) and External Vehicular Networks
(EVNs). To differentiate cyberattack patterns more easily, Anbalagan et al.’s [21] IDS framework transforms vehicle network
data into images, enhancing attack identification. However, both
approaches rely on centralized learning, which raises privacy
concerns within the broader context of the IoV, as data collection
could potentially infringe on user privacy.
Uprety et al. [16] introduced a FL-based collaborative IDS,
enabling CAVs to train Deep Learning (DL) models on locally
labeled datasets and share model parameters with a central FL

AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV

server for global model aggregation. Similarly, Hbaieb et al. [18]
proposed an IDS for CAVs combining Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and FL, where SDN controllers train local
models using data from CAVs, and global model aggregation
is performed on a central cloud server. Both approaches [16],
[18] rely on a central server, presenting risks as potential attack
targets and single points of failure. There is also the risk of
attackers intercepting and observing model updates during network transmission. Differently, Boualouache et al. [6] proposed
an FL-based privacy-preserving IDS using multiple FL servers
for global model aggregation. However, this solution, along with
the previous ones [16], [18], do not consider the risk of a
compromised FL client poisoning the model during training.
To address these challenges, Zero-X employs differential privacy and blockchain technology, facilitating decentralized and
privacy-enhanced federated training of the framework. Additionally, it incorporates a Byzantine Fault Tolerance consensus
mechanism, named Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA), to ensure secure
dissemination and aggregation of FL model updates.
Liu et al. [17] introduced an FL-based IDS that incorporates a
blockchain-based incentive mechanism to mitigate adversarial
attacks. In this system, CAVs function as FL clients, building
models from their locally labeled datasets, with Roadside Units
(RSUs) aggregating the global models. However, this approach’s
reliance on a simple MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) network
for the classification task in intrusion detection may not be
sufficiently effective in detecting new attack patterns. To classify
various attack types, Abdel-Basset et al. [4] presented FED-IDS,
a Blockchain-enabled FL IDS utilizing a transformer network,
capable of understanding the spatial and temporal patterns of
traffic flows in vehicles. However, the authors acknowledge
practical challenges with their consensus mechanism, such as
divergence, limited efficiency, and high computational demands.
Lai et al. [22] introduced a FL and Edge Cloud communication
architecture (FL-EC) and a Feature Select Transformer (FSFormer) model for robust intrusion detection in the IoV. Yet,
they recognize that this model comes with the drawback of high
computational costs.
The aforementioned FL-based IDSs operate under the assumption that CAVs possess labeled datasets for FL rounds, an
assumption that might be unrealistic due to the general absence
of pre-labeled malicious traffic data. Additionally, these systems
often assume an IID (Independent and Identically Distributed)
configuration for classifier training, which may not reflect the
significant imbalances in real-world training data, a known
factor adversely affecting collaborative detection performance.
Moreover, their dependence on closed-set and supervised learning methods limits the detection of unseen and zero-day attacks.
In contrast, our framework employs a more realistic configuration, recognizing that CAVs typically do not have traffic labeling
functions and considering the case of non-IID training data.
Additionally, Zero-X enhances attack detection, including zeroday attacks, by integrating deep neural networks with Open-Set
Recognition (OSR) capabilities.
To detect zero-day attacks in the IoV, Khan et al. [23] introduced an IDS using state-based Bloom filters and a bidirectional
LSTM classifier for detecting cyber-attacks in both In-Vehicle

12401

and external networks. This approach, however, necessitates
a considerable number of observations for high detection accuracy, and its detection rate for certain attack types is lower
compared to other methods. Other recent studies [8], [24], [25]
have focused on detecting zero-day attacks in Intra-Vehicular
Networks. Jeong et al. [8] utilized autoencoders to process live
streams in CAN (Controller Area Network) message payloads.
However, X-CANIDS [8] might face limitations in effectively
detecting suspension attacks, which are typically identified by
time-interval or sequence-based IDSs. In their respective works,
Agrawal et al. [24] and Yang et al. [25] employed unsupervised
learning and anomaly-based IDS for CAN message analysis.
While the approaches [8], [23], [24] enable zero-day attack detection, they fall short in identifying the types of N-day attacks.
Their effectiveness is further constrained by the lack of shared
CAN databases among carmakers. Moreover, their dependence
on centralized learning poses privacy concerns, where data
collection could infringe on user privacy. In contrast, Zero-X,
with its OSR detection model, enables the detection of zero-day
attacks and the identification of N-day attacks. Additionally, it
respects user privacy through federated learning, eliminating the
need for data collection.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN
This section introduces the system model, seamlessly putting
in collaboration different CAVs with SOCs. It illustrates the synergy operation between them through the Blockchain-enabled
collaborative training of the Zero-X Framework. Furthermore,
an exploration of the system’s addressed threat model will also
be presented.
A. System Model
Our framework enables privacy-preserving collaboration
among multiple CAVs and Security Operation Centers (SOC)
that may be owned by different stakeholders within the ITS
ecosystem, as illustrated in Fig. 1. To participate in the federated
training process, the SOCs deploy MEC servers on strategically
placed Base Stations (BSs). The system model is composed of
three main elements with different roles which can be summarized as follows:
1) CAVs: are tasked with training the Attack detector (AD)
model using their own local dataset, which exclusively
consists of benign traffic, as CAVs typically lack traffic
labeling functions. When a CAV drives near a BS, it can
download and read the last block of the blockchain to
get the latest global AD model. Acting as FL workers,
each CAV conducts the learning process using its own
On Board Unit. The CAV trains the global model on its
local data and adds a specific amount of Gaussian noise
to the trained parameters before sending them back to the
BS. This technique, known as differential privacy, protects
the privacy of CAV’s native data from honest-but-curious
MEC nodes.
2) MECs: play a crucial role in validating and aggregating
AD model updates that are received from CAVs. During
the training of the Attack Classifier (AC) model, each

12402

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

System design for the Zero-X framework.

MEC is assigned one of three roles: worker, validator, or
miner. As a worker, the MEC trains the AC model using its
local dataset, which includes labeled malicious network
flows. Given that SOCs are equipped with cyber threat
intelligence tools, it is reasonable to assume that they
possess labeled samples of malicious network traffic. As
a validator, the MEC ensures the accuracy of transactions
and validates blocks that are proposed by miners. Finally,
as a miner, the MEC is responsible for creating new blocks
during the consensus process.
3) Blockchain: to ensure secure and transparent FL model
updates, the framework uses blockchain technology for
AD and AC model updates sharing and aggregation (see
Fig. 1). By establishing a consortium blockchain, SOCs
can create a trusted and immutable ledger to store and
securely distribute the AD and AC model updates. The decentralized nature of the blockchain ensures that no single
SOC controls the entire network, thereby minimizing the
risk of a single point of failure or data tampering.
B. Threat Model
We consider three categories of potential cybersecurity attacks
that could target the IoV ecosystem. These include inter-vehicle
attacks, attacks against the MEC infrastructure, and attacks
against the intrusion detection mechanism itself.
r Inter-vehicular attacks: our threat model considers scenarios where one or colluding internal/external malicious
CAVs launch DoS/DDoS attacks affecting the availability
of the CAV and the network. For example, a colluding malicious CAVs can perform flooding attacks against a target
CAV, aiming to overwhelming its capacity and preventing
legitimate traffic from being processed. For comprehensive
information on examples of attack scenarios please refer
to [3].
r Attacks against the MEC infrastructure: MEC handles sensitive and valuable data, making it a target for various network attacks from both internal and external sources [26].

As a crucial component of the IoV ecosystem its security
is essential for ensuring the overall security of the IoV.
Hackers could potentially create an IoV botnet [5] by
compromising a group of CAVs and using them to launch
DDoS attacks on the MEC infrastructure. Such attacks are
similar to DDoS attacks based on IoT bots.
r Attacks against the detection framework: one potential
threat against the security framework is attacks on the
framework’s detection capabilities. This could happen during the training phase, where malicious CAVs or compromised MECs may be selected as FL workers. If this occurs,
the attackers could attempt to undermine the collaborative
learning process by injecting malicious updates during the
global model aggregation, which is known as a poisoning
attack [27]. Additionally, attackers may also try to infer
sensitive information from the model parameters through
an inference attack [28]. Both types of attacks can significantly compromise the accuracy and effectiveness of the
security framework.
IV. PROPOSED ZERO-X FRAMEWORK
This section details the Zero-X framework. It begins with
a presentation of the framework overview. Following this, the
flow extraction and feature engineering processes are described.
Then, the attack detection process and subsequent attack classification phase are explained. Finally, we will present the proposed
blockchain-enabled FL scheme to ensure secure sharing and
aggregation of model updates.
A. Zero-X Overview
During the development phase, the AD and AC models are
trained independently on the network flows using a decentralized
FL approach, as illustrated in Fig. 2. First, network flows are
extracted from collected raw network traffic, and then a set of
features is calculated for each flow. The AD model is designed as
a deep auto-encoder (DAE) trained exclusively on benign traffic
data. On the other hand, the AC model is a deep multi-class

AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV

Fig. 2.

12403

Zero-X framework workflow.

data descriptor [29] trained on the MEC’s local dataset, which
includes labeled malicious network flows. During the deployment phase,as illustrated in Fig. 2, the flow collector monitors
incoming and outgoing packets. The preprocessing module extracts network flows from the raw traffic data, according to a
specific Time Window (TW), and generates a vector of features.
This features vector is then sent to the AD module, which
evaluates the flow as benign or malicious. The framework’s
attack classifier module further examines any malicious flows
detected by the AD to determine if they correspond to a new
(0-day) or existing (N-day) attack.
B. Flow Extraction & Features Engineering
First, we use a combination of five properties from the packet
header, including the network and transport layer headers of the
TCP/IP protocol stack, to identify a traffic flow. These include
the source IP address, the destination IP address, the source port
number, and the destination port number, as well as the protocol.
For each flow extracted, a set of features are calculated according
to a given time window (ex. 10 seconds). Flow features include
mainly packet header characteristics and statistics computed
based on header information of network and transport layers.
This set of features is then used as a features vector.
C. Attack Detector
As a CAV runs a set of well-known applications such as
those related to safety, convenience, and commercial use, its
communication pattern should exhibit a high degree of regularity
as long as it is not under attack or experiencing any faults.
Conversely, any attack on the CAV’s system would inevitably
alter its communication pattern. Hence, we use a Deep AutoEncoder (DAE) to model the expected communication pattern
of the CAV and detect any attacks as anomalous occurrences.
The DAE model [30] is an unsupervised model that compresses
input vectors as code vectors using a set of recognition weights

and then converts back to m (m < d) number of neurons
reconstructed input vectors using a set of generative weights.
An AE architecture has two major parts: the encoder and the
decoder. The encoder reduces the dimension of the input vectors
(xi ∈ Rd ) to numbers of neurons that form the hidden layer. The
activation of the neuron i in the hidden layer is given by:
⎞
⎛
n

⎠
hi = f θ (x) = s ⎝
(1)
Wijinput xj + binput
i
j=1

where x is the input vector, θ is the parameters W input , binput ,
W is an encoder weight matrix of dimension m × d, while b is
a bias vector of dimension m. Thus, the input vector is encoded
to a vector with fewer dimensions. The decoder maps the lowdimensional hidden representation hi to the original input space
Rd by the same transformation as the encoder. The function of
mapping is as follows:
⎞
⎛
n

⎠
xi = gθ (h) = s ⎝
(2)
Wijhidden hj + bhidden
i
j=1

The set of decoder parameters is θ (W hidden hj + bhidden ).
The objective of an autoencoder is to minimize the reconstruction error relative to θ and θ :


θ∗ , θ ∗ = argθ,θ min

1
ε(xi , xi )
n i=1

(3)

1
ε(xi , gθ (fθ (xi )))
n i=1

(4)

n

n

= argθ,θ min

The reconstruction error is utilized as the anomaly score. Network flows with significant reconstruction errors are regarded as
malicious flows (anomalies). Only benign flows are used to train
the DAE model. After training, the DAE model will reconstruct
benign flows exceptionally well, but not malicious flows that

12404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Algorithm 1: Attack Detection.

class-conditional probabilities are calculated. This reflects the
likelihood that an input sample is drawn from each distribution,
and this probability can serve as a good confidence measure [29].
Based on the K-th class conditional distribution, the distance
function D can be defined in (5):
Dk (x) ≈

f (x; W ) − μk 2
+ log σkd
2σk2

(5)

The Deep MCDD loss is defined as a Maximum A Posteriori
(MAP) loss estimation of the generative classifier as defined in
(6):
exp(−Dyi (xi ) + byi )
1 
log k
N i=1
k=1 exp(−Dk (xi ) + bk )
N

Loss =

it has never seen. Algorithm 1 shows the anomaly detection
process using the reconstruction errors of the DAE model. The
threshold, α, is the mean squared error (MSE) median, and the
sample’s C times the MSE Median Absolute Deviation (MAD)
over the validation set. MAD uses the deviation from the median,
which is less likely to be skewed by outlier values.
In Algorithm 1, the DAE training complexity is O(n × m)
(lines [1–2]), where n is the number of samples and m the count
of weighted connections. RE computations for datasets (lines
[3–4]) and median determination using a specialized algorithm
(lines [5–6]) have a linear complexity of O(N ). The testing
phase functions g0 and fφ (lines [7–9]) also operate in O(N ),
independent of the dataset size, with N being the test sample
size.
D. Attack Classifier
To identify the type of the detected attack (N-day), or eventually determine if it is an unseen or 0-day attack, we leverage the
potential of OSR through FL. In this paper, we use deep multiclass data description method, called Deep-MCDD [29], as it
can accurately classify in-distribution (ID) samples into known
classes and detect out-of-distribution (OOD) samples as well.
This method seeks to identify, for each class, a spherical decision
boundary that determines whether a test sample belongs to the
class or not. Deep-MCDD integrates K hypersphere-modeled
one-class classifiers into a single network. The objective of
learning a single hypersphere is to assess whether or not a test
sample belongs to the target class; hence, training it for each class
is useful for recognizing OOD samples that do not belong to any
given class. Each sample from a K-th class-conditional distribution can be considered as an isotropic Gaussian distribution with
class mean μk and standard deviation σk within the latent space,
denoted by N (μk , σk2 I). Using the resulting distributions, the

(6)

The objective can be defined as follow:

N
1 
exp(−Dyi (xi )+byi )
1
min
Dyi (xi )− log k
W,μ,σ,b N
ν
k=1 exp(−Dk (xi ) + bk )
i=1
(7)
The training can be seen as minimizing the intra-class deviation in the embedded space. The four trainable parameters
used in the objective, that is, DNN weights (W ), class means
(μclassx ), standard deviations (σclassx ), and biases (bclassx ), can
be optimized simultaneously and effectively using minibatch
SGD and gradient back-propagation. The confidence score S(x)
represents the distance between a test sample and the closest
class-conditional distribution in the latent space. The CS represents the minimum value of the confidence score calculated on
the training set. If the confidence score S(x) of a network flow
x is less than CS , then it is considered an unseen/ 0-day attack.
Otherwise, we predict the class label of an input sample to the
class with the highest posterior probability ŷ(x). The procedure
of training and testing the attack classifier is described in detail
in Algorithm 2.
The computational complexity of the training phase in Algorithm 2 (lines [1 - 7]) for a dataset with N samples, k classes,
and a latent space dimensionality of d is O(N × k × d). This
includes squared difference and variance normalization operations per sample and class, as well as the cost of propagating
samples through a neural network with m total connections,
adding an extra complexity of O(N × m). Therefore, the combined complexity for the dataset stands at O(N × (m + k × d)),
prior to considering any potential optimizations from parallel
processing and GPU acceleration that can be available in MEC
infrastructure, since this model is trained by MECs. In the testing
phase (lines [9–15]), each test sample is evaluated with a complexity of O(k × d) due to distance computations for k classes
in a d-dimensional feature space. The subsequent classification
involves an arg max operation across classes with a complexity
of O(k). The total complexity for testing N samples, therefore,
is O(N × k × d).
E. Blockchain-Enabled Federated Training
To ensure the secure and decentralized federated training of
both AD and AC models, we use blockchain technology. In
our framework, updates of both models are recorded on the

AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV

Algorithm 2: Attack Classification.

same blockchain, while their training is performed independently. Integrating blockchain with FL requires careful selection of the blockchain type and consensus protocol, as they
significantly impact scalability, latency, complexity, and cost.
Public blockchains face issues like scalability limitations and
high latency. Private blockchains improve scalability and latency but may reduce decentralization and privacy. Consortium
blockchains, which Zero-X employs, strike a balance, making
them well-suited for our system. Zero-X utilizes a consortium
blockchain featuring a novel Byzantine Fault Tolerance consensus mechanism known as Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA). This
mechanism ensures secure sharing and aggregation of model updates. Our approach strategically prioritizes scalability, latency,
and security, with a slight compromise in decentralization. We
consider two types of nodes within the blockchain network:
r Passive node: refers to CAVs that solely download and
read blocks without actively participating in the consensus
process.
r Active node: refers to MECs actively participating in the
consensus process. In each round, every MEC is assigned
to one of the following roles: worker, validator, and miner.
A worker participates in the FL of the AC model and aggregates local AD model updates received from CAVs before
relaying them. A validator node checks the correctness
of transactions, and validates miner-proposed blocks. The
miner is responsible for creating a new block during the
consensus round.
The node’s identifier (ID) is its public key. This key is used to
verify the signatures of transactions or blocks created by the device. The following outlines the process of selecting miners and
validators in each round. The role-switching policy guarantees
that miners and validators are re-selected for each new round,

12405

thereby minimizing the likelihood of a compromised MEC being
repeatedly assigned to a validator or a miner role.
1) Federated Training: In our framework, updates of both
models are recorded on the same blockchain. However, it is
worth noting that sharing AD model updates from CAVs to MEC
is done off-chain to enhance the scalability of the system. This
approach allows faster and more efficient communication without overburdening the main blockchain with every AD update.
We assume that a reference dataset BT est containing only benign
network flows has been provided to all participating MECs. Each
CAV extracts the AD model from the blockchain, then trains it on
its local dataset. After local training, each CAV sends the model
updates to the adjacent MEC node. Since an adversary may
attempt to infer the data at the i-CAV from its uploaded updates,
we use differential privacy to enforce privacy-preserving of local
updates. After completing the local training, a CAVi will add
a specific quantity of Gaussian noise to the trained parameters
wit . As outlined in Algorithm 3, after clipping the gradient wt :
t+1
wt+1 ← wt+1 / max(1, ||wC || ), where C denotes the gradient
norm bound, an additive noise nti is added to wt . Then, the noised
updates wit are sent to the adjacent MEC node. To avoid model
poising, the MEC node will first check the AD model updates
ADU p on BT est . The model is considered to be valid when the
gap between l(wt ) and l(wt−1 ) locates within a certain range δ.
When a MEC node is designated as a worker, it leverages
its local dataset to train the AC model retrieved from the
blockchain. Upon completing the training, the worker generates
two transactions: TAD , which includes the AD model update
(computed based on the aggregated updates received from the
CAVs), and TAC , which contains the AC model’s local updates.
Both transactions are signed with the worker’s private key and
transmitted to the validator nodes. The procedure of federated
training of the AD and AC models is described in detail in
Algorithm 3.
2) Proof-of-Accuracy Consensus Mechanism: In our proposed blockchain framework, collaboration among MECs is
achieved through a consensus process where model updates
are shared, packaged into blocks, and validated by a group
of validators. To ensure the consensus process is efficient and
secure, we introduce a lightweight consensus mechanism called
Proof-of-Accuracy (PoA), which is inspired by the Delegated
Byzantine Fault Tolerance (dBFT) algorithm [31]. The PoA
mechanism involves selecting a set of validator nodes (delegates)
based on their contributions to improving the model’s accuracy.
We assume a total of 3f + 1 validators, where f is the maximum
number of validators that can be faulty. Among these validators,
one is designated as the miner. The detailed design of the PoA
mechanism is explained in the following three steps.
a) Collecting and verifying transaction: When a validator
receives a transaction, it first verifies its signature. Then, it
creates a test model MT est with the update, which it evaluates
on its local dataset (for AC transactions) or on the reference
dataset BT est (for AD transactions). Next, it calculates the
accuracy gain ACC_gain of a transaction using the (8), with
the Gj−1 representing the global model constructed in round
Rj−1 . Validators exchange ACC_gain values for all transactions

12406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

with its private key as an endorsement. The endorsed candidate block is then sent to the miner. Once 2/3 validators have
signed the candidate block, the miner broadcasts the block along
with the collected signatures to the other validators. Upon receiving the block from the miner, a validator verifies the signatures
and checks if the block has enough signatures from validators to
meet the required consensus threshold (2/3 validators). If the
threshold is met, the block is considered final and is added
to the blockchain. However, if the threshold is not met, the
block is discarded, and the consensus process starts anew with
a new round and a new miner. Once the block is successfully
added to the blockchain, the validators propagate the block to
other nodes in the network, and the nodes update their local
copy of the blockchain to reflect the new block. Adding a new
block triggers a new round of federated training of the two
models (AD and AC). Model training stops when the average
value of the model’s ACC_gain (calculated from the last block)
approaches 0. The top 3f+1 worker nodes with the highest
ACC_gain in the current round will be selected as validators for
the next round. On the other hand, nodes that have accumulated
a negative ACC_gain over a specified number of rounds will
be considered unreliable and excluded from participating in
subsequent training and consensus rounds. This measure helps
eliminate poor updates that could hinder the convergence of the
global models. Importantly, it also protect the training process
against potential model poisoning attacks that may arise from a
compromised MEC.
3) Incentive/ Reward Mechanisms: The SOCs participating
in the federated training are intrinsically motivated by the advantage of having an updated IDS, which obviates the need for
supplementary incentives or reward mechanisms. However, to
promote the active engagement of CAVs in the learning process,
it is vital to establish an incentive mechanism. In this regard, we
have adopted the Stackelberg game theoretic-based incentive
mechanism proposed in our previous research [6].

Algorithm 3: Federated Training.

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

with each other. The final score of ACC_gain value for a given
transaction is the sum of the ACC_gain values calculated by all
validators. At the end of the validation process, all validators will
have the same list of transactions with their respective ACC_gain
values.
ACC_gain = ACC(MTest ) − ACC(Gj−1 )

(8)

b) Generating Blocks: The MEC assigned with the
miner’s role is responsible for creating a new block. Once
the FL process has expired, the miner collects TAD and TAC
transactions, including their corresponding ACC_gain, from the
transaction pool. These transactions are then combined to form
a candidate block. The miner signs the block with its private key,
before broadcasting it to the other validators in the network.
c) Consensus process: Each validator examines the content of the candidate block, comparing the transactions and
ACC_gain values with their own calculated values. If they match,
the candidate block is accepted, and the validator signs the block

In this section, we will assess the effectiveness of the Zero-X
framework by conducting a thorough evaluation on two recent
datasets. The first dataset, 5G-NIDD [19], consists of 5G network traffic traces of attacks that target the MEC infrastructure.
The second dataset, VDoS [20], contains network traffic originating from inter-vehicle attacks. After briefly introducing the
datasets and the experimental setting, we analyze the detection
performance in detail. We also test various time-window (TW)
sizes as it directly impacts the detection delay. Further, we
will comprehensively analyze the identification performance of
N-day and 0-day attacks. We then evaluate the performance of
the blockchain system, and present the incentive mechanism’s
performance. Next, we present a security analysis of the Zero-X
framework. Finally, we compare our approach with existing
solutions in the literature.
A. Datasets
The 5G Network-Intrusion Detection and Defense (5GNIDD) dataset [19] comprises data collected from a 5G testbed
connected to the 5G Test Network at the University of Oulu

AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV

TABLE I
DATASET SAMPLES DISTRIBUTION

TABLE II
DATASET SPLITTING

in Finland. The testbed consists of two base stations, each
equipped with an attacker node and multiple benign 5G users.
The attacker nodes simulate various attack scenarios against
the server deployed in the 5GTN Mobile Edge Computing
(MEC) environment. The dataset includes examples of Denial
of Service (DoS) attacks, such as ICMP Flood, UDP Flood,
SYN Flood, HTTP Flood, and Slowrate DoS, as well as port
scans, including SYN Scan, TCP Connect Scan, and UDP Scan.
The VDoS dataset [20], is a publicly available dataset that
contains both benign and malicious network traffic data. The
dataset was generated using a realistic testbed comprising two
vehicles, physical and virtual machines, access points, and Cisco
antennas. Three different scenarios, urban, rural, and highway,
were used to collect the network traffic data. The dataset contains
the network traces of three types of DoS attacks: UDP Flood,
SYN Flood, and Slowloris. The sample distribution of network
traffic per attack for both datasets is presented in Table I.
B. Experimental Setting
To extract flows and calculate features from raw traffic (PCAP
files), we developed some scripts using CICFlowMeter [32],
a popular flow traffic exporters. For a more comprehensive
understanding of the list of features and their corresponding
descriptions, kindly refer to [7]. We perform data preprocessing,
which includes data cleaning, data normalization, and feature
engineering. To ensure accurate results, we follow a specific
protocol for splitting the datasets. Legitimate traffic is divided
into three parts: 60% for training the AD, 20% for AD validation,
and 20% for testing. Similarly, malicious traffic is split into 60%
for training the AC, 20% for AC validation, and 20% for testing.
The dataset splitting is illustrated in Table II. To create a realistic
test scenario, we designate one type of attack as the 0-day attack,
while the remaining attack types are classified as N-day attacks.

12407

The training set excludes samples from the 0-day attack, and
the AC is trained on N-day attacks for classifying inputs into
K − 1 attack types. The test set comprises all samples from the
0-day attack and N-day attack samples reserved for testing. This
process is repeated with different 0-day attacks, resulting in K
scenarios per dataset.
We implemented a DAE with five hidden layers. The local
models’ weights were computed using the Stochastic Gradient
Descent (SGD) algorithm. The Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss
function was used, with a learning rate of 0.012. After each
round, the weights of the global model were calculated using
the Federated Averaging algorithm [33]. We trained and tested
the model in the Google Colab cloud environment. We used the
Pytorch package to implement the local and federated learning
models.
C. Attack Detection Performance
Firstly, we evaluate the accuracy of the global model AD on
the two datasets, considering the IID and Non-IID configurations. Next, we conduct a thorough analysis of the model’s performance using various metrics. Finally, we test multiple levels
of differential privacy to determine the optimal balance between
privacy and model performance. To obtain a comprehensive
and insightful evaluation of attack detection performance, we
consider the following metrics:
r Precision: the ratio of classified malicious flows that are
truly malicious:
TP
TP + FP

(9)

TP + TN
TP + FN + FP + TN

(10)

P recision =

r Accuracy: the ratio of correctly predicted malicious samples to the total samples:
Accuracy =

r TPR: measures the proportion of benign flows that are
incorrectly classified as malicious by the model:
TPR =

TP
TP + FN

(11)

r FPR: measures the effectiveness of the model in incorrectly
recognizing normal flow as an anomaly:
FPR =

FP
FP + TN

(12)

r F1-Score: is the harmonic average of the precision and
recall:
F 1_Score =

2 ∗ (T P R ∗ P recision)
(T P R + P recision)

(13)

r AUCROC: measures how effective the model is in distinguishing between normal and malicious flows:
AU CROC =

1
2

TP
TN
+
TP + FN
TN + FP

(14)

TP, TN, FP, and FN denote true positive, true negative, false
positive, and false negative, respectively.

12408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 3.

Learning performance of AD models. (a) VDoS - AD Loss. (b) 5G-NIDD - AD Loss.

Fig. 4.

AD performance versus the number of CAVs: Accuracy and F1-score analysis. (a) Accuracy. (b) F1-Score.

TABLE III
DETECTION PERFORMANCE

Fig. 3 illustrates the AD loss function over the number of
federated learning rounds, which typically exhibits a decreasing
trend as the model is trained with more data. Although slight
fluctuations may be observed, the function stabilizes for both
datasets and with both IID and Non-IID configurations. After
the 10th round, we observe minor improvements in the model’s
accuracy. The results as shown in Table III are quite promising.
They suggest that the model exhibits strong and consistent
performance across both datasets and data distribution scenarios.
The minor differences observed between the IID and Non-IID
conditions indicate that the model is resilient and maintains its
robustness, even when faced with different data distributions.
We tested different configurations by varying the number of
CAVs per FL round. Fig. 4 illustrates that an increasing number
of CAVs tends to slightly decrease the accuracy and F1-score,
particularly for the Non-IID distribution. This could be due to the
data becoming more diverse as more CAVs are involved, making
it more challenging for the model to find a global optimum.
As expected, the results consistently demonstrate that the IID
distribution outperforms the Non-IID distribution in terms of
accuracy and F1-score, regardless of the number of CAVs.
According to the results presented in Table IV, the AD model
exhibited a high detection rate and a low false positive rate.

This indicates that the model effectively distinguished between
benign and malicious network traffic in both configurations
(IID and Non-IID). Table IV further demonstrates the impact of
differential privacy level on the performance of the AD model.
The differential privacy level is varied by changing the epsilon
() value, which controls the amount of noise added to the model
updates. As the differential privacy level increases (i.e., epsilon
decreases), the precision, accuracy, TPR, F1-score, and ROC all
tend to decrease. This is expected because increasing the amount
of noise added to the model update will make it more difficult for
the model to detect malicious traffic accurately. By setting the
value of  to 1, DP only slightly impacts system performance.
For the IID configuration, we observe a degradation of 0.24%
in AUROC, while for the Non-IID configuration, we observe
a degradation of 0.07%. It is worth noting that even with the
most challenging configuration - Non-IID with a high noise level
(epsilon=0.01) - the model still achieves an accuracy higher than
92% and a precision of 97%. The fact that DP has a relatively
small effect on the model’s performance can be attributed to the
fact that detection also depends on the threshold α. Even if the
addition of noise increases the loss of the model, the threshold
will still be calculated based on the new loss and remain slightly
affected.
D. Detection Delay
The time-window (TW) size is a critical parameter that has a
direct impact on detection delay. While a smaller TW can reduce
detection delay, it may not capture certain traffic properties that
require a longer time interval to become detectable. Therefore,
we conducted experimental tests using multiple TW sizes to
determine the optimal one.

AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV

12409

TABLE IV
DETECTION PERFORMANCE WITH DP

TABLE V
N-DAY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION

E. Attack Identification Performance

Fig. 5.

Impact of TW size on the detection accuracy.

The results presented in Fig. 5 reveal a correlation between
the TW and the accuracy and F1-score of the AD model.
Specifically, as the TW decreases, both performance metrics
deteriorate. The default window size, which corresponds to
the flow lifetime, yields the highest accuracy and F1-score.
However, if a smaller window size is desired, the 10-second
window remains the best option as it still maintains a high level
of accuracy and F1-score. The 1-second window, on the other
hand, performs the poorest among the tested windows, with an
accuracy of 83.16% and an F1-score of 88.15%. Nevertheless,
it still provides satisfactory detection capabilities. Ultimately,
the choice of TW will depend on the desired level of security
when deploying the framework, including considerations such
as the tolerance for false negatives and the acceptable detection
delay.

The framework’s attack classifier module further examines
any malicious flows detected by the AD to determine if they
correspond to a new (0-day) or existing (N-day) attack. We
evaluate the accuracy of the global AC model on the two datasets,
considering both IID and non-IID configurations. Additionally,
we conduct a comprehensive analysis of the model’s performance in detecting both N-day and 0-day attacks.
1) N-Day Attack Identification Performances: Overall, the
AC model successfully detects various types of attacks, even
when confronted with different data distributions, as illustrated
in Table V. For the 5G-NIDD dataset, the AC model achieved
high performance, with precision and TPR scores of 100%
in most cases. The FPR was also low, indicating that the
model did not classify benign traffic as malicious. However,
for SlowrateDoS and TCPConnectScan attacks with Non-IID
data distribution, the F1-score was slightly lower compared to
other cases. The slow nature of traffic makes it challenging
to detect the Slowrate DoS attack, which differs from other
DoS attacks in terms of speed and packet volume sent. In a
TCPConnectScan attack, the three-way handshake process is
successfully established, mimicking a legitimate connection and
making the attack challenging to detect. However, it is worth
noting that the detection rate for this type of attacks remains
very high, with a detection rate of over 95%. For the VDoS
dataset, the AC model achieved a perfect score in all cases with
both IID and Non-IID data distributions.
2) 0-Day Attack Identification Performances: As previously
mentioned, to create a realistic testing scenario, we designate

12410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

TABLE VI
0-DAY ATTACK IDENTIFICATION

one type of attack as the ‘0-day’ attack, while classifying the
remaining attack types as ’N-day’ attacks. For each dataset, we
repeat this process with different 0-day attacks, resulting in K
scenarios per dataset. To evaluate our model’s performance, we
use standard metrics such as accuracy and AUROC. Additionally, we use the true negative rate (TNR) at 85% true positive
rate (TPR), denoted as TNR85, a performance metric commonly
used for out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [29].
Overall, the model’s performance is quite satisfactory. The
results in Table VI indicate that the effectiveness of the AC
model can vary depending on the type of attack. However, it can
identify most attacks with a high level of accuracy. Specifically,
in the 5G-NIDD dataset, the model accurately detected 7 out
of 8 attacks with an accuracy exceeding 85%. Moreover, in the
VDoS dataset, the model accurately detected 2 out of 3 attacks
with an accuracy exceeding 93%. It can be observed that the
model has superior performance against scan-type attacks.
The model’s limited accuracy in identifying Slowrate DoS
attacks can be attributed to its resemblance to HTTP flood attack, which makes distinguishing between the two challenging.
It is crucial to note that closed-set supervised methods have
also yielded similar misclassifications between HTTP flood
and Slowrate DoS attack flows [19]. Despite the differences
between the two attacks regarding speed and packet volume,
they exhibit some similarities. In HTTP Flood attacks, a massive influx of HTTP requests overwhelms the server, whereas
in Slowloris (first scenario of slowrate DoS [19]) attack, the
attacker maintains multiple connections for extended periods,
leading to resource depletion on the server.
The results of our experiment indicate that, on average, the
detection rate for 60% of attacks is 4.09% better in the IID
setting than in the Non-IID setting. In addition, the accuracy
and AUROC are 3.5% and 6.94% better, respectively, in the
IID setting. However, the TNR for ICMP flood and TCPConnectScan attacks are similar in both IID and Non-IID settings.
Interestingly, the Non-IID setting outperforms the IID setting in

the case of SYNFlood and UDPScan attacks. Overall, the AC
model demonstrates promising performance in both Non-IID
and IID settings. The Non-IID configuration is more challenging but, simultaneously, more representative of the real-world
scenario where participating MECs (SOCs) may not have the
same distribution of attack samples.
F. Blockchain System’s Performance
This section evaluates the performance of the blockchain system proposed for sharing model updates. In this experiment, we
consider implementing this framework in Luxembourg as a case
study. To comprehensively assess the system’s performance, we
plan to deploy a certain number of MEC servers, ranging from 40
to 160, at key base stations across each of Luxembourg’s 12 administrative cantons. Considering the nature of our consortium
blockchain, which is comprised of MEC nodes, the experiment
includes varying the number of these nodes to examine scalability. We have configured the number of validators to be 10%
of the MEC nodes, while ensuring compliance with the PoA
requirement of having 3f + 1 validators, where f signifies the
maximum number of potentially faulty MECs.
This evaluation was conducted on a machine equipped with a
CPU (Intel i9 2.6 GHz) and 32 GB of RAM. The performance of
the blockchain system is illustrated in Fig. 6, which displays metrics such as the message overhead, the number of transactions
per block, and the consensus time. As anticipated, an increase
in the number of MEC nodes leads to a corresponding rise in
message overhead, the number of transactions per block, and
consensus time, as observed in Fig. 6. It is important to note,
however, that despite these increases, both the consensus time
and message overhead (shown in Fig. 6(a) and (c), respectively)
continue to remain within reasonable limits. The architecture
of the system demonstrates its ability to scale, as shown by the
moderate increase in consensus time, even when the number of
nodes quadruples. From Fig. 6(c), we can see that deploying

AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV

Fig. 6.

12411

Performance of the blockchain system. (a) Messages Overhead. (b) Nb. Transactions per block. (c) Consensus Time (s).

Fig. 7. Impact analysis of model poisoning attack on Zero-X Accuracy. (a) 0% malicious workers (MW). (b) 30% MW & PoA disabled. (c) 30% MW & PoA
enabled. (d) 50% MW & PoA enabled.

TABLE VII
DETAILED RESULTS OF THE BLOCKCHAIN SYSTEM EVALUATION

10 MEC nodes in each canton keeps the consensus time below
2 seconds, with transaction counts steady at 26, and message
overhead stable at 180. Table VII presents a detailed overview
of blockchain performance.
Since CAVs operate as passive nodes, their increasing numbers do not influence the transaction volume per block due
to the MEC nodes’ role in aggregating AD model updates
from the CAVs. Consequently, the addition of CAVs also does
not impact consensus time, as they are not participants in the
consensus mechanism. Given that each MEC is capable of
serving an average of 500 participating CAVs, our system is
projected to sustain its performance levels even with a network
comprising approximately 120 MECs and 60,000 CAVs. The
system’s design ensures that the expansion in node count does
not detract from blockchain performance, which affirms the
system’s scalability.
The robustness tests on the PoA mechanism under compromised MEC nodes reveal its effectiveness against poisoning
attacks on the AC model. Fig. 7(a) and (b) compare model
accuracy without and with 30% compromised workers, demonstrating a convergence failure without PoA. Upon enabling PoA,

configured such that workers accumulating a negative ACC_gain
over two consecutive rounds are deemed unreliable and thus
excluded from further training and consensus participation, the
resilience of the system is evident. Fig. 7(c) depicts the accuracy
after enabling PoA, which confirms that our system effectively
filtered out malicious nodes while maintaining performance
nearly identical to that in a scenario free from such workers.
Even with an increased presence of malicious workers to 50%,
Fig. 7(d) shows the model still converges with comparable
accuracy. We can, therefore, conclude that the solution is both
effective and robust, even when faced with a model poisoning
attack involving multiple nodes.
G. Security Analysis
This section provides a comprehensive security analysis of
our proposed framework, addressing the mitigation of three critical threat vectors (discussed in Section III-B): Inter-vehicular
attacks, attacks targeting MEC infrastructure, and adversarial
attacks against the Zero-X framework.
r Inter-Vehicular and MEC Infrastructure attacks: Single or
multiple colluding malicious CAVs can launch flooding attacks on a target CAV, a scenario known as Inter-Vehicular
Attacks. These attacks impair the target CAV’s ability to
process legitimate traffic. For a greater impact, these malicious CAVs, including compromised CAVs part of an IoV
botnet, may also target the MEC infrastructure. In this case,
the CAVs begin their attack by scanning the MEC server,
followed by executing flood-type DDoS attacks through
open ports. For both these attack vectors, Zero-X’s ’Attack

12412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 8. Comparative Performance Analysis of Zero-X with Related Works. (a) CIC-IDS-2017. (b) 5G-NIDD DoS Attacks. (c) 5G-NIDD Scan Attacks. (d) VDoS
Attacks.

Detector’ plays a pivotal role. It employs reconstruction
error as an anomaly score to identify malicious traffic
flows, whether in inter-CAV communications or targeting
the MEC system. Our study conducted tests on three types
of DoS attacks in inter-vehicular scenarios and five types
in the context of MEC infrastructure, in both N-day and
0-day scenarios. The effectiveness of Zero-X is consistently demonstrated in these tests, as shown in Tables V
and VI. These results substantiate our hypothesis that both
inter-vehicular and MEC-targeted attacks by compromised
CAVs can be detected through distinct traffic pattern disruptions. Once identified, packets from malicious CAVs are
systematically rejected, ensuring the integrity and security
of the IoV network.
r Poisoning attack: To secure the training of the AD
and AC global models against poisoning by malicious
CAVs or MECs uploading substandard model parameters
(see [27]), our framework incorporates a model validation
mechanism that focuses on model accuracy gain. The
process starts with the MEC node examining the AD
model updates (ADU p ) against the test batch BT est . A
model update is deemed valid only if the difference in loss
function values between l(wt ) and l(wt−1 ) remains within
a predefined threshold δ (detailed in Section IV-E2).
Updates failing to satisfy this criterion are discarded. For
the AC model’s integrity, the framework employs a PoA
consensus mechanism. It systematically excludes MEC
nodes demonstrating a consistent negative ACC_gain
over several rounds from future training and consensus
activities. This proactive approach effectively prevents
model poisoning that could stem from a compromised
MEC node. Additionally, the PoA’s role-switching policy
ensures periodic re-selection of validators for each training
round, significantly reducing the risk of a compromised
MEC node being repeatedly chosen as a validator.
r Inference attack: An adversary might attempt to infer
raw data from a i-CAV using its uploaded weight and
gradient information [28]. To preserve privacy, Zero-X
implements differential privacy in local updates. Upon
completing local training, CAVi adds Gaussian noise to
the trained parameters wit . The gradient wt is then clipped:

t+1

wt+1 ← wt+1 / max(1, ||wC || ), where C is the gradient
norm bound. Subsequently, additive noise nti is incorporated into wt . The resulting noised updates wit are then
transmitted to the adjacent MEC node.
H. Discussion and Comparison
In the current state-of-the-art, only a few studies [7], [23],
[24], [25] have addressed the detection of zero-day attacks in
the IoV. Agrawal et al. [24] primarily focused on intra-vehicular
networks, whereas Khan et al. [23], [25] extended their research
to both intra and inter-vehicular networks. Only Yang et al. [25]
conducted experiments specifically focused on zero-day scenarios. We conducted a comparative analysis with their work using
the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset [36]. As demonstrated in Fig. 8(a),
the performance difference between MTH-IDS and Zero-X in
detecting N-Day attacks is relatively small, with MTH-IDS
achieving a 99.8% detection rate, compared to 93.39% for ZeroX. In the context of 0-Day attacks, however, Zero-X significantly
outperforms MTH-IDS, achieving a 98.36% detection rate versus 75.943% for MTH-IDS. Notably, MTH-IDS employs centralized learning, which raises privacy concerns in the IoV due to
the necessity of data centralization. We further compared Zero-X
with three recent studies that utilized the same datasets [19],
[20] as those used in our experimentation. Fig. 8(b) shows
Zero-X outperforming Schan et al.’s method [19] in DDoS
attack detection, except for SlowrateDoS. As demonstrated in
Fig. 8(c), Zero-X also excels in detecting Scan-type attacks.
Fig. 8(d) reveals Zero-X’s superiority over Rahal et al. [20]
and [7] in inter-vehicular attack detection. Zero-X addresses the
limitations of [20]’s inability to detect zero-day attacks and [7]’s
inability to recognize N-day attacks.
The practicality and real-world potential of the Zero-X framework are demonstrated through evaluations conducted on both a
realistic vehicular traffic testbed [20] and real traffic attacks on
MEC infrastructure [19]. Both datasets contain diverse attacks
mainly categorized as DoS and Scan. Their similar characteristics lead to resembling network behaviors, complicating
the detection of zero-day attacks. These new patterns may
mimic known attacks, challenging the classification model’s
ability to differentiate them. Table VIII compares the features

AMARA KORBA et al.: ZERO-X: A BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED OPEN-SET FL FRAMEWORK FOR ZERO-DAY ATTACK DETECTION IN IOV

12413

TABLE VIII
COMPARISON BETWEEN ZERO-X AND OTHER RELATED WORKS

of the Zero-X framework with other recent studies in various
key aspects. Notably, Zero-X stands out by effectively detecting 0-day and recognizing N-day attacks, a capability shared
with MTH-IDS [25]. However, it goes further by prioritizing
data privacy through federated learning. Additionally, Zero-X
leverages blockchain technology to decentralize and distribute
the coordination of federated training. This not only enhances
robustness against adversarial attacks but also minimizes the
risks associated with single points of failure and potential data
tampering.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed Zero-X, a novel security framework
designed to detect both 0-day and N-day attacks in the realm
of the IoV. The framework uses a blockchain-enabled federated
training approach to build detection and identification models
that enable secure collaboration and trust between CAV and
MEC nodes. We empirically evaluate the proposed framework
and compare its performance with existing IDS using recent
publicly available datasets. The results show that the Zero-X
framework outperforms existing IDS, demonstrating its superiority in detecting a wide range of cyberattacks. For our future
work, we plan to develop a security framework with the ability
to detect zero-day attacks, as well as evolve its detection capabilities. This system will incrementally update the detection model
to convert newly discovered “unknown” attacks into “known”
attacks. Another direction to extend this work is to integrate
an intrusion response mechanism where multiple reinforcement
learning agents are running on a set of vehicular edge nodes and
learn to mitigate newly discovered attacks.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detection: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198,
pp. 175–185, 2023.
[2] N. Turgeman, “Infographic: Top real-world threats facing connected cars
and fleets,” Apr. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://upstream.auto/blog/
infographic-top-real-world-threats-facing-connected-cars-fleets/
[3] A. Boualouache and T. Engel, “A survey on machine learning-based
misbehavior detection systems for 5G and beyond vehicular networks,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1128–1172, 2023,
doi: 10.1109/COMST.2023.3236448.
[4] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam, and
O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based smart
transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.

[5] R. Rahal, A. Amara Korba, N. Ghoualmi-Zine, Y. Challal, and M. Y.
Ghamri-Doudane, “AntibotV: A multilevel behaviour-based framework
for botnets detection in vehicular networks,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage.,
vol. 30, pp. 1–40, 2022.
[6] A. Boualouache and T. Engel, “Federated learning-based inter-slice attack
detection for 5G-V2X sliced networks,” in Proc. IEEE 96th Veh. Technol.
Conf., 2022, pp. 1–6.
[7] A. A. Korba, A. Boualouache, B. Brik, R. Rahal, Y. Ghamri-Doudane,
and S. M. Senouci, “Federated learning for zero-day attack detection in
5G and Beyond V2X networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2023,
pp. 1137–1142.
[8] S. Jeong, S. Lee, H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, “X-CANIDS: Signal-aware
explainable intrusion detection system for controller area network-based
in-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technol., vol. 73, no. 3,
pp. 3230–3246, Mar. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2023.3327275.
[9] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, and A.
Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder architecture
for discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4507–4518,
Jul. 2021.
[10] C. Geng, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Recent advances in open set recognition: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10,
pp. 3614–3631, Oct. 2021.
[11] S. Kong and D. Ramanan, “OpenGAN: Open-set recognition via open
data generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
pp. 813–822.
[12] L. Neal, M. Olson, X. Fern, W.-K. Wong, and F. Li, “Open set learning
with counterfactual images,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018,
pp. 613–628.
[13] P. Oza and V. M. Patel, “C2AE: Class conditioned auto-encoder for openset recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2019, pp. 2302–2311.
[14] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Niu, and D. Guo, “Unknown network attack
detection based on open-set recognition and active learning in drone
network,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 33, no. 10, 2022,
Art. no. e4212.
[15] S. Xu, L. Li, H. Yang, and J. Tang, “KCC method: Unknown intrusion
detection based on open set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE 33rd Int. Conf.
Tools Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1343–1347.
[16] A. Uprety, D. B. Rawat, and J. Li, “Privacy preserving misbehavior
detection in IoV using federated machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE 18th
Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[17] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative intrusion
detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
[18] A. Hbaieb, S. Ayed, and L. Chaari, “Federated learning based IDS approach for the IoV,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Availability, Rel. Secur., 2022,
pp. 1–6.
[19] S. Samarakoon et al., “5G-NIDD: A comprehensive network intrusion
detection dataset generated over 5G wireless network,” IEEE Dataport,
Dec. 2022, doi: 10.21227/xtep-hv36.
[20] R. Rahal, A. Amara Korba, and N. Ghoualmi-Zine, “Towards the development of realistic DoS dataset for intelligent transportation systems,”
Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 115, no. 2, pp. 1415–1444, 2020.
[21] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
“IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12,
pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.

12414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

[22] Q. Lai et al., “Improved transformer-based privacy-preserving architecture
for intrusion detection in secure V2X communications,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., 2023, early access, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3324081.
[23] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, W. Haider, B. Li, and A. Jolfaei, “An
enhanced multi-stage deep learning framework for detecting malicious
activities from autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 25469–25478, Dec. 2022.
[24] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane,
“NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intra-vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22596–22606,
Nov. 2022.
[25] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[26] H. Sedjelmaci and N. Ansari, “On cooperative federated defense to secure
multi-access edge computing,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., 2022, early
access, doi: 10.1109/MCE.2022.3167527.
[27] H. Chen, S. A. Asif, J. Park, C.-C. Shen, and M. Bennis, “Robust
blockchained federated learning with model validation and proof-of-stake
inspired consensus,” 2021, arXiv:2101.03300.
[28] P. Zhao, Z. Cao, J. Jiang, and F. Gao, “Practical private aggregation in
federated learning against inference attack,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 318–329, Jan. 2023.
[29] D. Lee, S. Yu, and H. Yu, “Multi-class data description for out-ofdistribution detection,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1362–1370.
[30] G. E. Hinton and R. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum description length
and Helmholtz free energy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 1993, vol. 6, pp. 3–10.
[31] Q. Wang et al., “Security analysis on DBFT protocol of NEO,” in Proc.
24th Int. Conf. Financial Cryptogr. Data Secur., 2020, pp. 20–31.
[32] “Cicflowmeter,” 2018. Accessed: Apr. 26, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//github.com/CanadianInstituteForCybersecurity/CICFlowMeter
[33] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[34] A. Boualouache, B. Brik, S.-M. Senouci, and T. Engel, “On-demand
security framework for 5GB vehicular networks,” IEEE Internet Things
Mag., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 26–31, Jun. 2023.
[35] A. Selamnia, B. Brik, S. M. Senouci, A. Boualouache, and S. Hossain, “Edge computing-enabled intrusion detection for C-V2X networks
using federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2022,
pp. 2080–2085.
[36] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, vol. 1, pp. 108–116.

Abdelaziz Amara Korba (Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Annaba, Annaba, Algeria, in 2016, in a collaborative program with the University of La Rochelle,
La Rochelle, France. He is currently an Associate Professor of computer science. His research interests include network security, machine learning (ML) applications in cybersecurity, intrusion detection systems,
decentralized ML techniques, and the development of
blockchain-based security solutions for the Internet of
Things (IoT) and connected vehicles.

Abdelwahab Boualouache (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
the University of Science and Technology Houari
Boumediene, Algiers, Algeria, in 2016. He is currently a Research Associate with the Faculty of
Science, Technology, and Medicine, University of
Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg. His
research interests include security and privacy in
connected vehicles, privacy-preserving collaborative
learning solutions for 5G, and blockchain-based solutions for decentralized systems.

Yacine Ghamri-Doudane (Senior Member, IEEE) is
currently a Full Professor with the University of La
Rochelle, La Rochelle, France, where he is also the
Director of Laboratory of Informatics, Image and Interaction (L3i). His research interests include the area
of wireless networking and mobile computing with a
current emphasis on topics related to the Internet of
Things (IoT), Vehicular Networks, and Digital Trust.