2426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

A Cascaded Broad Learning Network Embedded
Image Features for Malware Traffic Classification
Junzhi Xu, Yibin Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Kaijie Zhou, Qin Wang , Senior Member, IEEE,
Minyu Hua, Lin Shan , Senior Member, IEEE, Yun Lin , Senior Member, IEEE, and Guan Gui , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Malware traffic classification (MTC) is a critical
technology in network security, Internet of Things (IoT) devices,
and big data traffic, and has been mainly used for encrypted malicious traffic detection and various network traffic classification.
The traditional MTC technology mainly relies on payload-based
deep packet inspection methods and port-based identification
detection techniques. Meanwhile, In recent years, many studies
have begun to explore the application of machine learning (ML)
and deep learning (DL) in MTC tasks. However, ML methods
require extracting excellent feature information, which can be
challenging for traffic detection tasks. DL methods require excellent computing power equipment, such as GPUs, but also have
the drawbacks of long training time and poor interpretability.
Consequently, this paper proposes an image feature embedding
cascaded broad learning network (IFCBLN) to address the shortcomings of ML and DL in MTC tasks. The proposed IFCBLN
method utilizes multiple cascaded broad learning networks (BLN)
combined with image feature extractors to improve the original
BLN. Meanwhile, it achieves good performance in MTC tasks.
In the datasets of USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016, the
proposed IFCBLN achieves better performance than ML and DL
methods. The best results of the algorithm achieve an accuracy of
99.543% and 90.93%, respectively. The proposed method reduces
computational overhead by 98% compared to the DL method.
Index Terms—Malware traffic classification, image feature
embedding cascaded broad learning, feature extraction, network
security.

I. I NTRODUCTION

M

ALWARE traffic classification (MTC) [1], [2], [3], [4]
technology is an excellent way to detect encrypted

Received 19 June 2024; revised 31 October 2024; accepted 16 December
2024. Date of publication 23 December 2024; date of current version
8 August 2025. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62471247, and in part by the Key Project of
the Natural Science Foundation of the Higher Education Institutions of Jiangsu
Province under Grant 22KJA510002. The associate editor coordinating the
review of this article and approving it for publication was N. Zhang.
(Corresponding author: Guan Gui.)
Junzhi Xu, Yibin Zhang, Qin Wang, Minyu Hua, and Guan Gui are
with the College of Telecommunications and Information Engineering,
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003,
China (e-mail: 1023010410@njupt.edu.cn; 2021010208@njupt.edu.cn;
wangqin@njupt.edu.cn; 1022010410@njupt.edu.cn; guiguan@njupt.edu.cn).
Kaijie Zhou is with the School of Physical and Electrical Engineering,
Huaiyin Normal University, Huaian 223300, China (e-mail: zhoukaijie@
hytc.edu.cn).
Lin Shan is with the Center for Information Infrastructure, Shinshu
University, Nagano 390-8621, Japan (e-mail: shanlin@shinshu-u.ac.jp).
Yun Lin is with the College of Information and Communication
Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150000, China (e-mail:
linyun@hrbeu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3522143

malicious traffic for relevant network management departments and device providers. With the development of the 6th
generation mobile networks [5], [6] technology and Internet of
Things (IoT) [7], [8], [9], [10] technology, data transmission
speed is getting faster and the amount of data is getting
larger. Network attacks [11] are also increasing and becoming
more covert. The development of IoT technology has enabled
traditional electronic devices to be connected to the network,
bringing great convenience to public lives. For example, smart
homes, smart cities, autonomous driving, etc. However, while
bringing convenience, these devices are more susceptible to
malicious traffic attacks. Illegal traffic can steal important
confidential information from users and businesses. In these
situations, malicious traffic detection technology has also
developed and achieved significant results. Traditional traffic
detection techniques include deep packet inspection (DPI) [12]
methods based on payloads (TCP, UDP, IP, etc.), as well as
identification and detection techniques based on ports (HTTP,
FTP, SNMP, etc.), which can effectively detect illegal network
traffic. However, they are powerless against encrypted malicious traffic and the complex network environment. Therefore,
finding more effective and robust methods to detect encrypted
malicious traffic is necessary.
To solve this problem, some researchers have applied
machine learning (ML) methods to malicious traffic detection [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] techniques. Traditional machine
learning methods include support vector machine (SVM) [18],
naive Bayes, and random forest algorithms. ML has significant
advantages in training time, but it requires extracting sufficient
and effective feature information. Therefore, researchers need
to expend a lot of energy in the feature extraction process. With
the development of computing power in computer devices,
deep learning (DL) [19], [20], [21], [22], [23] has also
emerged. DL has also been applied in traffic detection tasks.
Common DL networks include convolutional neural network
(CNN), gated recurrent unit (GRU), and long short-term
memory (LSTM). Zhao et al. [24] proposed a CNN-based
CL-ETC malicious traffic detection method. Yao et al. [21]
proposed a HAN traffic classification method based on LSTM.
Wang et al. [25] proposed deep learning-based methods for
real-valued convolution neural networks (RVCNN) and realvalued convolution neural networks (CVCNN). DL technology
can automatically extract potential feature information without
the need for manual feature extraction. However, deep learning
requires powerful computing devices, such as GPU, which can
provide acceleration. Although GPU can be used, the inference

c 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
2332-7731 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC

time is still extremely long. Therefore, this article proposes a
MTC method based on broad learning networks (BLNs).
BLN [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33] is a neural
network structure with only one layer, consisting of a forward propagation network without a feedback mechanism to
automatically adjust weights. Although there is only one layer
of a network, the network width can be infinitely expanded.
The weight coefficient is randomly generated in BLN. For
newly added nodes, only the pseudo inverse of the newly
added node needs to be calculated. The training time is greatly
reduced. However, the feedback mechanism and convolution
calculation of DL networks greatly increase time overhead.
Consequently, widening the network width does not significantly increase the training time of the network compared to
DL networks. Due to its unique results, it has a fast training
speed and can achieve good experimental performance. BLN
has demonstrated excellent performance in multiple application fields. Firstly, it has achieved good performances in the
field of specific emitter identification (SEI), and the signal
feature embedded broad learning network (SFEBLN) method
proposed by Zhang et al. [34] has been applied to the SEI
field. This method not only has fast training speed but also
recognition accuracy comparable to deep learning algorithms.
Secondly, it also excels in the field of industrial manufacturing.
The ABTCI method proposed by Liu et al. [35] is applied in
industrial production environments, and BLN can effectively
monitor the operation of machine rotors and large equipment
in industrial workshops. It provides a good method for the
automation and unmanned operation of factory workshops. In
addition, it has also achieved success in tasks such as computer
vision (CV) [36], as it can process large-scale image data
and extract important features. It is also widely applied in
automatic modulation classification [38], [39]. Overall, BLN
has shown excellent application potential in processing largescale, high-dimensional data, especially in SEI, industrial
manufacturing, and CV fields.
Given the excellent algorithm performance of BLNs, we
propose an image feature embedding cascaded broad learning
network (IFCBLN) method. In this paper, we introduce classic
image processing methods into malicious traffic detection,
effectively avoiding the complex detection methods of traditional malicious traffic techniques. Converting text data into
image format data, and extracting feature [37] information
from the image using image processing methods. Next, we
cascade the BLN in different ways and evaluate the algorithm
performance of different cascaded networks. Then, based
on the above situation, a new network traffic classifier is
applied to the network traffic classification task. The main
contributions of this paper can be briefly summarized as
follows:
• We propose an image feature embedding cascaded
broad learning network (IFCBLN) method. The proposed
method uses image processing methods to process transformed data and cascaded BLN for malicious traffic
detection. The IFCBLN method is trained on the central
processing unit (CPU).
• In contrast to traditional MTC methods, we innovatively design image feature nodes, which extract image

2427

features from network traffic through image processing
techniques. It is embedded into the proposed algorithms.
Additionally, we implement three different cascades for
the feature mapping nodes and enhancement nodes of
basic BLN. The improved algorithms demonstrate excellent performance in MTC tasks.
• The proposed IFCBLN method was experimented
with in the public datasets of USTC-TFC2016 and
ISCXVPN2016. Compared with two ML algorithms
and three DL algorithms, the proposed algorithm can
effectively learn robust features and achieve better
performance. At the same time, it ensures that time
consumption is much less than that of DL algorithms.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we introduce the recent research progress in the
field of MTC. In Section III, we introduce the system model
and the mathematical model for MTC problems. In Section IV,
We introduce the technical details of the proposed IFCBLN
method, including the basic network, improved network architecture, and algorithm flow chart. The experimental results and
analysis are given in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes
the research work of this paper.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Traditional ML-Based MTC Methods
As encryption technologies advance and new applications
emerge, traditional methods based on port numbers and
Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) have become inadequate for
handling the complexities of modern network environments.
Yamansavascilar et al. [40] extract 111 features from the
UNB ISCX dataset and achieved 93.94% classification accuracy using a KNN classifier on 14 applications. Similarly,
Koroniotis et al. [41] extract 46 features from captured traffic
and stored them in CSV format, achieving nearly 99% accuracy with an SVM classifier. Chebrolu et al. [42] employ two
feature selection methods–Bayesian Networks and Regression
Trees–to identify key traffic features. However, traditional ML
approaches, which rely heavily on manually designed features,
face challenges when dealing with large and complex network
traffic, often leading to difficulties in feature design and limited
generalization capabilities.
B. DL-Based MTC Methods
With the rising complexity of modern cyberattacks [43],
[44], [45], [46], [47], MTC has become a critical focus in
cybersecurity. DL techniques have gained prominence due
to their ability to extract meaningful features from raw
network data. However, various challenges persist, including
limited datasets, computational constraints, and the need for
models that can efficiently adapt to new threats. This section consolidates the contributions and outcomes of recent
DL-based MTC research [48], [49], [50], [51], [52], [53],
presenting how each approach tackles key challenges in the
field. Zhang et al. [48] propose a few-shot malware traffic
classification (FS-MTC) framework that addresses the data
scarcity problem in MTC. Their method combines knowledge
transfer and neural architecture search (NAS) to develop an

2428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

adaptive model that performs well with minimal training samples and limited computational resources. The experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of this method, with the
USTC-TFC2016 dataset achieving 86.91% accuracy in 1-shot
scenarios, outperforming traditional approaches that struggle
with data scarcity. Ge et al. [50] propose MetaCluster, an
interpretable classification framework that enhances the transparency and reliability of DL-based MTC models. MetaCluster
uses semantic prototypes to generate meaningful feature representations at multiple granularities. This method ensures
robust classification while reducing model overfitting and
computational overhead. Compared to other DL models,
MetaCluster reduces parameter consumption by 79.52% to
91.78%, improves operational speed by 71.37%, and maintains
stable or slightly improved F1 scores.
Additionally, it offers interpretability by visually representing the importance of image, text, and statistical features,
bridging the gap between the complexity of DL and practical
cybersecurity needs. Sheng et al. [51] introduce ScannerHunter, a novel system for identifying malicious scanning
groups targeting industrial control systems (ICS) by leveraging honeynet data. Scanner-Hunter employs a self-expanding
multi-class classification (SEMCC) model and IP prefix judgment to accurately identify sophisticated scanning patterns.
The model effectively analyzes six years of honeynet data,
uncovering previously unknown scanning groups, some with
advanced persistent threat (APT) characteristics. The ability
of a system to identify suspicious attackers enhances proactive threat defense by providing actionable intelligence on
potential cyberattack campaigns. Given the resource limitations of IoT devices, He et al. [53] propose a lightweight
intrusion detection method based on feature grouping and
protocol parsing. This approach focuses on reducing computational overhead without compromising detection accuracy. The
method achieves 99.5% classification accuracy across three
IoT datasets, significantly outperforming traditional methods
in terms of computational efficiency. Its lightweight design
makes it ideal for deployment in resource-constrained environments, ensuring robust IoT security.
The reviewed studies demonstrate diverse applications of
DL techniques in MTC, addressing various challenges such
as data scarcity, model interpretability, catastrophic forgetting,
and computational constraints. These advancements illustrate
the growing role of DL in addressing the evolving landscape
of cyber threats. Future research can benefit from integrating
these approaches to develop more adaptive, interpretable, and
efficient MTC systems.

providing clearer insights into the learned features and decision processes, which is particularly useful in cybersecurity.
Additionally, their lightweight architecture allows them to
achieve competitive performance. Lin et al. [54] tackle the
challenge of imbalanced network traffic classification by
introducing MC-OCBLS (Maximum Correntropy-based OneClass Broad Learning System). Their method enhances the
robustness of the model by using the maximum correntropy
criterion (MCC) to handle noise and outliers effectively. To
improve performance further, they propose SMC-OCBLS, an
ensemble boosting model that increases diversity by disrupting
feature columns during training, forming multiple feature
spaces. This strategy enables the ensemble to train hybrid classifiers across varied feature spaces, improving accuracy and
generalization. Experimental results show that MC-OCBLS
and SMC-OCBLS outperform existing advanced methods,
particularly in handling noisy and imbalanced network traffic
datasets. Zhang et al. [1] focus on lightweight MTC for
IoT environments, aiming to address the limitations of traditional ML and DL techniques. Quickly train models by
adding feature layers horizontally rather than increasing model
depth. Minimize computational overhead without sacrificing
accuracy. The model showcases a significant reduction in
computational cost, making it highly suitable for deployment
in IoT environments.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
A. System Model
Network traffic is transmitted in the data link and routing
ports, which are added to hardware collection devices to
collect network traffic data. Refining the data using software
analysis tools and converting it into message-format data.
This paper uses the IFCBLN to complete the task of network
traffic classification. The model is shown in Fig. 1. The four
parts of the traffic recognition system include 1) Network
Traffic Collection, 2) Visualization, 3) IFCBLN, and 4) Traffic
Classification. Firstly, it is necessary to convert the collected
message format data into image-type data. Then, the converted
data is placed into the IFCBLN model, which includes feature
mapping nodes, enhancement nodes, and image processing
nodes. Finally, IFCBLN is capable of identifying various types
of network traffic and encrypted malicious traffic. The details
of the model architecture will be explained in detail in the
following texts. The proposed model can effectively solve the
MTC problem in this paper.
B. Problem Formulation

C. BL-Based MTC Methods
In recent years, some researchers have introduced Broad
Learning (BL) into the field of malware traffic detection and
achieved promising results. BLN offers several advantages,
making them well-suited for tasks like malware traffic classification. One key benefit is their ability to rapidly learn
features without requiring extensive training time, unlike DL
models that often demand large datasets and high computational resources. BLN models are also more interpretable,

This paper finds a fast and effective method to solve the
MTC problem. We use encrypted malicious traffic and normal
traffic as the overall input. And convert the input data format.
It can be expressed as follows:


(1)
xj (t) = T xj (t)
where xj (t) is the data after format conversion, T means data
format transformation, xj (t) is network traffic header format
data.

XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC

Fig. 1.

2429

System model of the proposed IFCBLN method.

Essentially, the proposed MTC method solves the problem
of matching traffic packets with network traffic types in real
life. Encrypting malicious traffic is similar to it. As long as the
type of malicious traffic can be identified, specific measures
can be taken against illegal network traffic. Therefore, traffic
packets and network traffic types can be summarized as
datasets D{
xj , yj }N
j =1 , where yj are the real network traffic
labels. It is the label corresponding to the real network traffic
type. The MTC task of this article can be summarized as
follows:


(2)
yj = fMTC xj (t), W
where fMTC stands for the mapping function used to identify
various network traffic data and yj are the network traffic
labels of prediction. W is the weight coefficient after iteration.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed MTC model.
We will compare the predicted network traffic type labels with
the actual network traffic type labels. The probability of this
series of data can be defined as accuracy as follows:
⎧
⎫
⎨M 
⎬
yj = yj
Acc =
/M
(3)
⎩
⎭

Fig. 2.

Illustration of basic BLN structure.

IV. T HE P ROPOSED MTC M ETHOD U SING IFCBLN
In this section, the proposed IFCBLN algorithm for MTC
problems is introduced, which includes features mapping
nodes, enhancement nodes, and image processing nodes, as
well as three cascading methods of features mapping nodes
and enhancement nodes. Before that, we will first introduce the
preliminaries of the classic BLN and then provide a detailed
introduction to the proposed IFCBLN method. Finally, the
flowchart and summary of the algorithm are introduced in this
section.

j =1

and the corresponding error rate is Error = 1 − Acc. At the
same time, we also need to optimize the function during the
training process to improve the accuracy of the model and
reduce its error rate, which can be summarized as follows:


 
(4)
W = arg min  yj = fMTC xj , W , yj
W

where  stands for the difference between real labels yj and
predicted labels yj , which is the error rate Error and W is the
weight coefficients that cause the predicted labels to deviate
from the true labels.

A. Theoretical Foundations
The basic BLN structure can be described as Fig. 2. The
model structure only has a single layer of network, which has a
forward propagation network and has no feedback mechanism.
The feedback mechanism has been removed, allowing the
network to train at a fast speed. At the same time, with
its unique network structure, it not only has fast speed but
also excellent performance. Next, we will introduce the main
components of basic BLN. Three parts are as follows:
1) Features Mapping Nodes: The features mapping nodes
H are obtained by linear transformation of input data X. In

2430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

the BLN, there can be multiple feature mapping nodes, which
can be represented as follows:
H = [H1 , H2 , . . . , Hn ]

(5)

where Hn is the part of the feature mapping node, and the
linear transformation of the input data is as follows:


Hj = ζ X̃ex WHj + β Hj ,
(6)
where ζ represents the linear transformation of the BLN, and
X̃ex is the preprocessed data, which is processed differently
in different application fields. WHj is a random coefficient
matrix generated by the system and follows a Gaussian
distribution. β Hj is a sparse representation of the matrix
after linear transformation. The overall processing flow of the
above formula is as follows: first, preprocessing the input data
and then multiplying the input coefficient matrix with the
random coefficient matrix to complete random convolution.
Next, the obtained coefficient matrix needs to normalize the
coefficients of the entire matrix through the maximum and
minimum values. Finally, sparse representation is performed
to reduce the correlation between feature mapping nodes.
Avoid generating weights with a correlation that is too high,
reduce waste, and improve the utilization of weights. From this
process, it can be seen that this network structure is strongly
random.
2) Enhancement Nodes: The enhancement nodes Z generated through linear transformation cannot fully complete the
training task of the network structure. The features obtained
from linear transformation are extremely limited. Therefore, it
is necessary to supplement other feature information through
other means. Nonlinear transformations, which are opposite
to linear transformations, can effectively compensate for this
deficiency. The enhancement nodes in this summary are
obtained by non-linear transformation of the coefficient matrix
obtained from the feature mapping node section. Enhancement
node processing can be described as follows:


(7)
Z = Z1 , Z2 , . . . , Zm
where Z is composed of m enhancement nodes windows, and
Zm is one of the enhancement node windows. The specific
nonlinear transformation is as follows:


Zi = ξ HWzi + β zi


= ξ [H1 , H2 , . . . Hn ]Wzi + β zi





= ξ . . . ζ X̃ex WHl + β Hl , . . . Wzi + β zi , (8)
where H represents the number of windows for the features
mapping nodes, ξ is a nonlinear transformation function for
the feature mapping node, and Wzi and β zi are randomly
generated weight matrices and biases corresponding to the
enhancement nodes, which also follow a Gaussian distribution.
The enhancement nodes processing process is as follows:
firstly, all coefficient matrices H of the feature mapping nodes
are placed into the enhancement node network as input data.
Secondly, the input matrix H is multiplied by the randomly
generated matrix Wzi for the purpose of random convolution
and bias terms. Normalizing the coefficients in the matrix after

Fig. 3.

Architecture of the IFCBLN method for MTC problems.

calculation. Finally, non-linear activation functions are used to
perform non-linear operations on the coefficient matrix. In this
way, the enhanced node processing is completed, and adding a
nonlinear activation function can increase the nonlinear factors
of the network.
3) Nonlinear Activation Functions: This summary provides a concise description of nonlinear functions. In neural
networks, adding nonlinear functions is to enhance their nonlinear characteristics and apply them to nonlinear problems. In
reality, the vast majority of problems are nonlinear problems.
The common nonlinear activation functions are as follows:
2
−1
(9)
tan sig(b) =
1 + e −2b
1
sigmoid(b) =
(10)
1 + e −b
e b − e −b
tanh(b) = b
.
(11)
e + e −b
These activation functions are often used for both DL and
BLN.
B. Our Proposed IFCBLN Method
The MTC problem is often solved by DL and its improved
algorithms, so this paper adopts a broad learning network to
address MTC task. In this paper, we propose an IFCBLN
method for the MTC problem. The detailed model architecture
of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 3. This mainly
includes three cascade methods of features mapping nodes
and Enhancement Nodes for BLN: a cascade of features
mapping nodes (CF), a cascade of enhancement nodes (CE),
and a cascade of features mapping nodes and enhancement
nodes (CFE), as well as adding new incremental nodes: image
processing nodes. The IFCBLN method mainly extracts the
features of malicious traffic data through network cascade and
the idea of extracting image features from network traffic data.
The main components of IFCBLN are as follows:
1) Image Processing Nodes: Ordinary malicious traffic
data is transformed into image format data through format
transformation. Extracting features from network traffic data

XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC

2431

in header format is too cumbersome and difficult. Therefore,
converting the data format is necessary. There are relatively
few methods for feature extraction from traffic data, and
the research in this area remains incomplete. On the other
hand, image processing is more mature, with many established
methods available for feature extraction. Therefore, traffic data
is converted into image data to leverage these advanced techniques. Extracting malicious traffic data feature information in
image format through image processing methods. At present,
researchers have conducted comprehensive research in the field
of CV, and there are many methods for image processing
to extract feature information. This conclusion adopts classical image processing, due to its fast processing speed and
good processing results. Extract gradient changes in image
format data through image processing. Significant gradient
location can be helpful for network traffic classification tasks.
The processing process of image processing nodes can be
expressed as:
Xin = pin (X, Ψ)

(12)

where Xin is the coefficient matrix obtained by processing the
input data through image processing nodes. X and Ψ are the
input data and the parameters that the transformation function
may require. Among them, the classic image processing
methods are as follows:
1
f [n]Φj ,k [n]
Xin [j , k ] = √
M k

(13)

where f [n] is the input data, Φj ,k [n] is the wavelet basis
function, and in discrete cases, it is a matrix. The formula
is discrete wavelet transform (DWT). Common wavelet bases
include Haar, Daubechies, etc. After transformation, the gradient transformation feature information of the image can be
extracted. However, its output cannot be directly input into the
network, and we still need to perform nonlinear transformation
on it. We define image processing nodes as follows:


(14)
P = P1 , P2 , . . . , Pp
where Pk is the k-th image processing nodes window, which
can be obtained through the following processing steps, as
follows:


(15)
Pk = γ Xin WPk + βPk
where γ is the non-linear transformation activation function
of the enhancement nodes. WPk and βPk are the randomly
generated weights for image processing nodes and the parameters that may be required for nonlinear transformations,
respectively. In these nodes, we perform image processing
on the converted format data. After the image processing
transformation, we matrix the image format data to easily put it
into the BLN. Finally, a non-linear transformation of the input
data is performed to extract non-linear features. So, image
processing nodes can be represented by P.
2) Cascade of Features Mapping Nodes: We introduce the
cascaded feature mapping nodes, as shown in Fig. 4(a). We
make a cascading connection for feature mapping nodes. Next,

Fig. 4. The cascaded broad learning network of features mapping nodes and
enhancement nodes.

we need to create the first feature mapping nodes. The input
data is placed in them, represented as follows:


(16)
H1 = φ XWh1 + β h1 ,
where Wh1 and β h1 are randomly generated weight matrices
and parameters used, respectively, and φ is the linear transformation. Then, the output of the first node is placed into the
second feature mapping node, expressed as follows:


H2 = φ H1 W h 2 + β h 2


(17)
= φ φ(XWh1 + β h1 )Wh2 + β h2 ,
where H2 is the output of the second feature map node
obtained through a linear transformation from the first node.
And Wh2 and β h2 , like the above parameters, are randomly
generated weight matrices and parameters used.
The subsequent feature mapping nodes follow a similar
processing. Therefore, the cascading connection method of
feature mapping nodes can be summarized as follows:


(18)
Hk = φ Hk −1 Whk + β hk
where Whk and β hk are both randomly generated.
Next, the feature mapping nodes are connected to the
enhancement nodes as follows:


Zj = ξ Hn Wzj + β zj ,
(19)

2432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

where Zj is the output of enhancement nodes obtained by
non-linear transformation of features mapping nodes. ξ is
the nonlinear transformation, and Wzj and β zj are randomly
generated parameters for enhancement nodes. Hn represents
the entire output of the feature mapping node.
Therefore, we have obtained all the outputs of the feature
mapping nodes, enhancement nodes, and image processing
nodes. Next, we need to use the outputs of these three parts
to obtain the final output of the BLN. The above process can
be described as follows:
Y = [Φ(X; Wh , βh )|Ξ(Hn ; Wz , βz )|Γ(Xin ; WP , βP )]Wnm


= H1 , . . . , Hn |Z1 , . . . , Zm |P1 , . . . , Pp Wnm
= [Hn |Zm |Pp ]Wnm ,
(20)
where Y is the final output of the BLN, which is the
predicted network traffic type label, Wnm is the weight
matrix obtained from the outputs of features mapping nodes,
enhancement nodes, and image processing nodes. Overall, this
improved cascaded network can learn more effective features
and process them quickly. In MTC problems, it has good
performance.
3) Cascade of Enhancement Nodes: Similar to the cascade
method of feature mapping nodes, the cascade connection of
enhancement nodes is achieved through the same connection
approach as the feature nodes mentioned earlier. However,
with slight differences, enhancement nodes require the output
of feature nodes as input. Therefore, feature nodes Hi can be
described as follows:


Hi = φ XWhi + β hi .
(21)
Next, the output of the feature nodes is subjected to
nonlinear transformation processing to obtain the first group
of enhanced nodes, which includes numerous individual
enhanced nodes. The nonlinear transformation of feature nodes
is as follows:
Z1 = ξ(Hn Wz1 + βz1 )

(22)

where Z1 represents the nonlinear transformation of the
features nodes Hn , and Hn represents the entire output of the
features mapping nodes. Wz1 and βz1 are randomly generated weight matrices and coefficients used in transformations
for enhancing nodes. Then, connecting the output of the
first enhancement nodes to the next enhancement nodes, as
described below:
Z2 = ξ(Z1 Wz2 + βz2 )
= ξ(ξ(Hn Wz1 + βz1 )Wz2 + βz2 ),

(23)

where Z2 is the result obtained by non-linear transformation
of the first enhancement nodes output. ξ is the nonlinear transformation function, and Wz2 and βz2 are randomly generated
parameters for the nonlinear transformation function.
The next enhancement nodes cascade connection method is
similar to the above, which can be described as:


(24)
Zu = ξ u Hn ; {Wzi , β zi }ui=1
However, it should be noted that the number of groups
for enhancement nodes and the number of single group

enhancement nodes are two parameters, not the same. If it
is the same parameter, the following situations will occur.
When the variables are small, although the running speed
is fast, the number of enhancement nodes is too small, and
their nonlinear transformation cannot extract enough nonlinear
features. When the variables are large, although there are
enough enhancement nodes, the number of cascaded connection layers of enhancement nodes is too many, which will
seriously consume training time. Therefore, we optimize the
structure by setting the number of enhancement nodes in a
single group to a larger value, which ensures that the nonlinear
transformation can extract sufficient nonlinear features. Taking
a smaller value for the number of groups of enhancement
nodes can ensure fast training time and excellent network
performance.
4) Cascade of Features Mapping Nodes and Enhancement
Nodes: In this section, we introduce the cascading of features
mapping nodes and enhancement nodes. Firstly, the feature
mapping nodes are cascaded and connected, and then the
connected feature nodes are linearly transformed and put
into the enhancement nodes section. The enhancement nodes
section also needs to be cascaded. When the features nodes
output obtains the first group of enhancement nodes through
nonlinear transformation, The output of the first group of
enhancement nodes is transformed into the next group of
enhancement nodes through their nonlinear transformation. By
connecting in this way, the final group of enhancement nodes
is obtained.
Next, we will introduce the cascaded connection between
feature nodes and enhancement nodes. Firstly, the feature
nodes are described as follows:


(25)
Hk = φk X; {Whi , β hi }ki=1
where Whi and β hi are randomly generated.
Next, the l groups of the enhancement nodes are generated
by features mapping nodes, as follows:


(26)
Zl = ξ l Hn ; {Wzi , β zi }li=1
where Wzi and β zi are random weights obtained through
Gaussian distribution sampling.
After obtaining the output of the feature and enhancement
nodes, we can obtain the final input of the broad learning
network. The final input is as follows:
Afinal = [Hn |Zm |Ip ]

(27)

The entire improved BLN can be described as follows:
Y = [Hn |Zm |Ip ]Wnm = Afinal Wnm .

(28)

C. Summary and Workflow
In this paper, we propose an improved algorithm IFCBLN
based on BLN. This algorithm inherits the simple network
architecture of BLN. It has few network layers and less
weight coefficients than DL networks. This also determines
that the proposed algorithm has a fast processing speed.
At the same time, three network parts can extract feature
information from network traffic data: features mapping nodes,

XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC

Algorithm 1: Workflow of the Proposed IFCBLN Method
for MTC
Input: Malware traffic data for train and test X̂train ,
X̂test ;
Real traffic type labels for train Ytrain ;
Training hyperparameters Θinit , Θtrain .
Output: Predicted labels results Ypre ;
1 [Stage of train]:
a×n , Ŷ
a×m ;
2 Load X̂train ∈ R
train ∈ R
3 Converting leader type data X̂train into image type data
X̂out ;
 

 and β , β ;
4 Randomly generate Wh ∈ Rn ×l , Wz ∈ R(ll)×p
h
z
5 if features mapping nodes then
6
if cascaded features mapping nodes then

7
Compute nodes H ∈ Ra×(ll) by (16) ∼ (18);
8
else


Compute nodes H ∈ Ra×(ll) by (5) and (6);
10
end
11
Linear transformation φ(Wh , H, β h );
12 end
13 if enhancement nodes then
14
if cascaded enhancement nodes then
15
Compute nodes Z ∈ Ra×(qq) by (22) ∼ (24);
16
else
17
Compute nodes Z ∈ Ra×(qq) by (7) and (8);
18
end
19
Non-linear transformation tansig(Wz , β z , Z);
20 end
21 if image processing nodes then
22
Computer Xin ∈ Ra×M by (12);

f [n]Φ[n];
23
Process Xin through Xin = √1
9

M

Randomly generate Wik ∈ RM ×p and β ik ;
25
Compute nodes I ∈ Ra×(pp) by (14) and (15);
26
Non-linear transformation tansig(Wi , β i , I);
27 end
28 Concatenate all nodes as input A = [H|Z|I];

−1
29 Equation Ytrain = AWtrain , A† = AT A
AT ;
†
30 Obtain equation solution Wtrain =A Ytrain ;
31 [Stage of test]:
32 Load X̂test , Wh , β h , Wz , β z , Wi , β i , Ytrain ;
33 Compute features mapping nodes Htest , enhancement
nodes Ztest and image processing nodes Itest through
φ(Wh , Htest , β h ), tansig((Wi , β i , Itest ), (Wz , β z , Ztest ));
34 Concatenate all nodes Atest = [Htest |Ztest |Itest ];
35 Get the classification labels by Ypre = Atest Wtrain ;
24

enhancement nodes, and image processing nodes. These three
nodes extract the features of network traffic data through
linear transformation, nonlinear transformation, and image
processing transformation methods, respectively. Therefore, it
can be ensured that the proposed algorithm not only has fast
training speed but also excellent performance. The workflow
of IFCBLN can be found in Algorithm 1.

2433

V. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
This section mainly presents our proposed IFCBLN method
and the algorithms for comparison. At the same time, it
also introduces the dataset used, data preprocessing, related
parameter settings, and experimental equipment used. When
comparing with other algorithms, we compare them from
various aspects such as computer overhead, test accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1 scores.
A. Datasets, Data Preprocessing and Experiment Settings
1) Datasets: To test the performance of the model
proposed in this article, we conduct experiments on two public
network traffic datasets, including encrypted malicious traffic
and normal traffic. Both datasets consist of 80% training
dataset and 20% testing dataset. Next, we will introduce the
dataset used in the experiment as follows:
• USTC-TFC2016 dataset [58] consists of real-world
network traffic, including ten types of normal network
traffic and ten types of malicious network traffic. This
dataset is divided into 10 categories of normal traffic, 10
categories of malicious traffic, and 20 mixed categories of
normal and malicious traffic. Correspondingly, there are
134563 samples, 138145 samples, and 272708 samples,
respectively.
• ISCXVPN2016 dataset [55] is a dataset used for private
networks to detect encrypted malicious traffic. The entire
dataset is divided into network traffic under VPN and
network traffic under non-VPN. This includes 12 types of
encrypted network traffic. There are a total of 39446 samples in the entire dataset.
2) Data Preprocessing: To establish an effective training
task interface, we first use the network packet analysis tool
USTC-TK2016 [58] to convert the data into grayscale images,
and extract and analyze network traffic features from the
perspective of computer vision. The entire data preprocessing
process can be divided into the following steps: firstly, we
split the original traffic data into discrete data streams, and
then anonymize the data packets by replacing MAC addresses,
IP addresses, and port numbers. Secondly, to ensure a more
reliable training process, duplicate or empty content must be
removed. Trim all stream files to standardized 784 bytes to
ensure consistency. Thirdly, converting to a grayscale image
means proportionally transforming its numerical values into
grayscale values ranging from 0 to 255 based on the maximum
value. In this step, we convert the data stream file into a
grayscale image for visualization. Each 784 bytes data stream
is converted into a 28 × 28 pixel grayscale image. Finally,
to speed up computer data retrieval, we save these images in
IDX format as input data for the neural network. Through the
above process, we successfully transform the original network
traffic data into image format data, providing appropriate input
for subsequent training tasks.
3) Experiment Settings: The experiments were conducted
using PyTorch 2.0.1 and Python 3.8. In the proposed IFCBLN
method, we need to manually set some parameters. After a
series of tests, we found the optimal parameters that would
make the model perform well. However, these parameters are

2434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 5.

The confusion matrix of the three cascaded methods on USTC-TFC2016 dataset.

Fig. 6.

The T-SNE of the three cascaded methods on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.

TABLE I
PARAMETERS S ETTING OF P ROPOSED IFCBLN M ETHOD

not applicable to all scenarios, and in different scenarios, it
is necessary to find another set of optimal parameters. The
parameters of the proposed IFCBLN method are presented in
Table I.
B. Classification Performance of IFCBLN
The proposed IFCBLN method was experimentally analyzed on two public datasets, evaluating the IFCBLN method
based on three evaluation metrics: computational overhead,
test accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores. The experimental results indicate that our proposed method performs well.
We propose three image feature embedding cascaded broad
learning networks: a cascade of features nodes (IFCFBLN),
a cascade of enhancement nodes (IFCEBLN), and a cascade
of features nodes and enhancement nodes (IFCFEBLN), and
analyze them. In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, IFCFBLN,
IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN achieve accuracies of 99.16%,

99.383% and 99.543% for benign traffic in 10 categories,
respectively. They achieve accuracies of 98.295%, 98.813%
and 98.531% for malicious traffic in 10 categories. Among
the 20 mixed categories of traffic, their accuracies are
97.912%, 98.513% and 98.321%. In the ISCXVPN2016
dataset, IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN achieve the
accuracy of 90.93%, 90.887% and 90.824% in traffic of
12 types of VPN and Non-VPN. The above results are
all shown in the Fig. 11. Due to the encrypted network
traffic of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, identification is difficult.
Therefore, the classification results may be slightly worse than
those of the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. This is a good result, far
less than the computational overhead of deep learning.
In addition, to further demonstrate the classification
performance of IFCBLN, we use the confusion matrix
and T-SNE visualization tool to demonstrate the classification performance of the proposed method on two datasets.
In Fig. 5, this is the confusion matrix for 20 mixed
benign and malicious traffic in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
Fig. 5(a), Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 5(c) are the confusion matrices
of IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN and IFCFEBLN for 20 categories. In
Fig. 6, the T-SNE of IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN
show the classification results of visualization for 20 mixed
benign and malicious traffic in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
The confusion matrix of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset is shown
in Fig. 7. Meanwhile, in Fig. 8, the T-SNE of IFCFBLN,
IFCFEBLN, and IFCFEBLN show the classification results
of visualization in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset. In the T-SNE

XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC

Fig. 7.

The confusion matrix of the three cascaded methods on ISCXVPN2016 dataset.

Fig. 8.

The T-SNE of the three cascaded methods on the ISCXVPN2016 dataset.

analysis, there is partial overlap between Category 14 and
Category 18 in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, indicating that the
traffic data of these two categories are quite similar. Similarly,
in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, multiple overlaps occur between
Category 0 and Category 1, as well as between Category 2
and Category 5. This suggests a high similarity among these
categories, making it challenging for the model to accurately
classify and distinguish them.
C. Comparison With Other Methods
To comprehensively evaluate our proposed method, we
compared IFCBLN with traditional ML algorithms and the
latest DL algorithms. As follows:
• SVM and Naive Bayes algorithms are ML-based algorithms that use statistical features for network traffic
classification.
• CL-ETC [24], RVCNN [25] and CVCNN [25]are DL
based algorithms that are all based on CNN [56], [57]
and improved upon. They have strong feature extraction
capabilities in both CV and national language processing
(NLP) fields.
We use accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 scores to compare
with the comparison algorithms. These indicators can be
represented as follows:
Accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

(29a)

2435

TP + TN
(29b)
TP + TN + FP + FN
TP
(29c)
Precision =
TP + FP
TP
(29d)
Recall =
TP + FN
2 × Precision × Recall
F1 − score =
(29e)
Precision + Recall
where TP, FP, TN and FN represent true positive, false
positive, true negative and false negative, respectively. The
proposed IFCBLN method was experimentally conducted on
the CPU platform. SVM and Naive Bayes algorithms were
also tested on CPU platforms. Due to its deep network structure and feedback mechanism, deep learning algorithms have
excellent classification performance. But the disadvantage is
that the training time is long. In Table II, the training time
of all algorithms is shown. The training time of the CL-ETC
algorithm is significantly longer than that of the algorithm
proposed in this paper, and its classification accuracy is not as
high as the proposed algorithm on both datasets. The RVCNN
and CVCNN algorithms consist of 8 convolutional layers
and 9 convolutional layers, respectively. This means that its
training time is greatly increased, and the fact is the same.
Their training time is much longer than that of IFCBLN. The
algorithms proposed in this article are IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN,
and IFCFEBLN. They only account for 0.26%, 0.55%, and
0.48% of the training time of CVCNN, respectively, in the
20 classification tasks of the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. Among
Accurac =

2436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

TABLE II
C OMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD OF IFCBLN AND C OMPARED M ETHODS

the 10 benign traffic classification tasks, they only account
for 0.28%, 0.61%, and 0.5% of the training time of CVCNN.
Among the 10 malicious traffic classification tasks, they
only account for 0.23%, 0.48%, and 0.41% of the training
time of CVCNN. In the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, IFCFBLN,
IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN account for 0.41%, 0.6%, and
1.54% of the training time of CVCNN. In the USTCTFC2016 dataset, parameter configurations for IFCFEBLN
and IFCEBLN models are largely consistent. Specifically, the
cascade of feature mapping nodes, which involves minimal
parameters, has negligible impact on runtime. However, the
enhancement nodes contain more parameters, contributing
significantly to computational time. Variations in CPU usage
during experiments caused fluctuations of 10-30 seconds in
training time between trials, affecting consistency between
the two models. To address this, additional experiments were
conducted under stable CPU conditions, revealing that the
training times for IFCFEBLN and IFCEBLN were effectively identical, as expected, given their similar parameter
configurations. Moreover, the cascading of feature mapping
nodes preserves the weights from preceding nodes, reducing
computational overhead.
To intuitively demonstrate the time advantage of the
proposed algorithms, we use horizontal bar charts to describe
the training and testing time in the USTC-TFC2016 and
ISCXVPN2016 datasets. We use a logarithmic scale, which
can better reflect the data. Among them, the training time is
shown in Fig. 9, and the testing time is shown in Fig. 10.
From them, it can be seen that compared to deep learning
algorithms, the proposed broad learning algorithms have significant advantages.
The accuracy results of IFCBLN and comparison algorithms
on the USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016 datasets are
shown in Fig. 11. The accuracy of IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and
IFCFEBLN is significantly higher than SVM and Naive Bayes.
Although Naive Bayes has low computational overhead, its
classification accuracy is significantly poor. Compared with
RVCNN and CVCNN, our method has an accuracy difference
of within 1% in the 10 benign traffic classification tasks in
the USTC-TFC2016 dataset. In the ISCXVPN2016 dataset,
IFCFBLN, IFCEBLN, and IFCFEBLN achieved accuracies
of 90.93%, 90.887%, and 90.824%, respectively. Better than
the 89.21% accuracy of CVCNN. Slightly inferior to the
92.89% accuracy of RVCNN. In addition to testing accuracy,

Fig. 9. Train time of all algorithms in USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016
datasets.

Fig. 10. Test time of all algorithms in USTC-TFC2016 and ISCXVPN2016
datasets.

we also evaluate the proposed IFCBLN using three metrics:
precision (PC), recall (RC) and f1 score (F1). The PR,
RC, and F1 of the proposed algorithm and the comparison
algorithms are presented in Table IV on the USTC-TFC2016
dataset. The PR, RC and F1 of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset
are shown in Table III. Especially in the ISCXVPN2016
dataset, our proposed IFCBLN algorithm outperforms all five

XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC

2437

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN IFCBLN ON ISCXVPN2016

Fig. 11.

Fig. 12.

Results of mask testing in USTC-TFC2016 dataset.

Fig. 13.

Results of mask testing in ISCXVPN2016 dataset.

Performance of IFCBLN and compared methods.

algorithms in terms of three metrics. However, the IFCFEBLN
method, with its more complex parameters, risks overfitting
by capturing noise and specific patterns in the training data.
This leads to solid performance on the training set but
reduced generalization on the test set, weakening the ability
of the model to identify certain class samples and lowering
recall. Additionally, complex models are prone to finding local
optima in high-dimensional spaces, which can increase class
confusion, causing samples from smaller classes to be misclassified as larger ones, thereby raising false negatives and further
reducing recall. For example, in tasks involving malicious
traffic or radiation source detection, similar patterns across
certain categories may lead to misclassification. Furthermore,
class imbalance is more pronounced in complex models, where
the model may prioritize majority classes to improve accuracy
while neglecting minority classes, further diminishing recall
for underrepresented categories. Meanwhile, we compare the
computational complexity and parameters of the DL model
with the proposed methods.
The computational complexity and parameter count of the
proposed algorithm and deep learning model are presented in
Table V. The testing time for our algorithm is slower than
other models because deep learning models typically run on
GPUs, while ours runs on CPUs. Although training on CPUs
offers some advantages, our approach faces drawbacks during
testing due to the GPU-optimized operations of PyTorch and
the speed of GPU-based matrix computations. We have now
deployed testing on GPUs using the ISCXVPN2016 dataset,
reducing the testing time to about 1 second. However, since
some modules remain on CPUs, further optimization is still
possible.

D. Mask Testing
Due to the actual network environment and various encryption methods, the network data used is not complete. This is a
challenge for proposed algorithm models. Therefore, based on
the above actual situation, we use mask testing to simulate the
actual network environment. In the USTC-TFC2016 dataset,
we masked 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and 30% of the test
data to complete the masking test. Due to the inclusion of
mask testing, this poses a challenge to the generalization
ability of the algorithm model. The generalization ability of
ML is far inferior to DL, so the proposed method is only
compared with three DL algorithms: CL-ETC, RVCNN, and
CVCNN. The results show in Fig. 12 that the accuracy of
IFCFBLN and IFCEBLN is all due to the comparison of the
three algorithms under different scale masks. The accuracy
of IFCFEBLN is inferior to that of CVCNN at 15%, and
it is also better than the three algorithms compared in other
cases. In addition, in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, we masked
5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, and 30% of the test data. Proposed
algorithms also performed well, and the results are shown in
Fig. 13.

2438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025

TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN IFCBLN ON USTC-TFC2016

TABLE V
C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY AND PARAMETERS OF DL AND THE
P ROPOSED M ETHODS

VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposed the IFCBLN method for MTC problems, which can be quickly trained on CPU platforms. The
proposed method, based on the basic BLN, solved the problem
of identifying encrypted malicious traffic by cascading feature
mapping nodes and enhancement nodes in multiple ways,
as well as adding image processing nodes. The proposed
methods achieved good results. This algorithm was compared
with classical ML algorithms and advanced DL, and compared through multiple metrics. This further demonstrated
the excellent performance of IFCBLN. It also eliminated the
limitations of GPU, making it more convenient to deploy on
MTC devices. The experimental results show that our proposed
method performed well. In the subsequent process, we would
further improve the connection method of the network model
to accelerate the model’s training time. We would also search
for stronger feature extraction methods as better incremental
nodes.

R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Zhang, G. Gui, and S. Mao, “A lightweight malware traffic classification method based on a broad learning architecture,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 10, no. 23, pp. 21131–21132, Dec. 2023.
[2] S. Xu, G. Geng, X. Jin, D. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic paths:
Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
[3] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C. Xu, “A novel multimodal
deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
[4] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN:
Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,”
IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 3521–3538,
Sep./Oct. 2022.

[5] G. Gui, M. Liu, F. Tang, N. Kato, and F. Adachi, “6G: Opening new
horizons for integration of comfort, security, and intelligence,” IEEE
Wireless Commun., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 126–132, Oct. 2020.
[6] C. Lee, H. Nam, D. Kim, S. Kim, and D. Lee, “A D-band variable
gain low noise amplifier in a 28-nm CMOS process for 6G wireless
communications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 71,
no. 1, pp. 131–135, Jan. 2024.
[7] H. Qi, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Wang, and T. Qiu, “A blockchain-driven IIoT
traffic classification service for edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2124–2134, Feb. 2021.
[8] B. Kang, D. Kim, and H. Choo, “Internet of Everything: A large-scale
autonomic IoT gateway,” IEEE Trans. Multi-Scale Comput. Syst., vol. 3,
no. 3, pp. 206–214, Jul. 2017.
[9] J. Li, W. Liang, W. Xu, Z. Xu, Y. Li, and X. Jia, “Service home identification of multiple-source IoT applications in edge computing,” IEEE
Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1417–1430, Mar./Apr. 2023.
[10] S. Pokhrel, H. Vu, and A. Cricenti, “Adaptive admission control for
IoT applications in home Wi-Fi networks,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput.,
vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2731–2742, Dec. 2020.
[11] Z. Li, T. Sen, H. Shen, and M. Chuah, “A study on the impact of memory
DoS attacks on cloud applications and exploring real-time detection
schemes,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1644–1658,
Aug. 2022.
[12] M. Al-Hisnawi and M. Ahmadi, “Deep packet inspection using quotient
filter,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 2217–2220, Nov. 2016.
[13] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 2012–2025, Jun. 2024.
[14] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
[15] S. Zhu, X. Xu, J. Zhao, and F. Xiao, “LKD-STNN: A lightweight malicious traffic detection method for Internet of Things based on knowledge
distillation,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 6438–6453,
Feb. 2024.
[16] Z. Xu, X. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Towards persistent detection of DDoS
attacks in NDN: A sketch-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3449–3465, Jul./Aug. 2023.
[17] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A
channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025,
2023.
[18] Y. Shi, X. Zhang, Z. He, and J. Yang, “A novel malware traffic classification method based on differentiable architecture search,” in Proc.
IEEE 96th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), London, U.K., Sep. 2022,
pp. 1–5.
[19] A. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traffic:
Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
[20] J. Zhang, F. Li, and F. Ye, “Sustaining the high performance of AI-based
network traffic classification models,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
no. 2, pp. 816–827, Apr. 2023.
[21] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.

XU et al.: CASCADED BROAD LEARNING NETWORK EMBEDDED IMAGE FEATURES FOR MTC

[22] Y. Lin, M. Wang, X. Zhou, G. Ding, and S. Mao “Dynamic spectrum
interaction of UAV flight formation communication with priority: A deep
reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 892–903, Sep. 2020.
[23] Y. Lin, Y. Tu, Z. Dou, L. Chen, and S. Mao, “Contour stella image and
deep learning for signal recognition in the physical layer,” IEEE Trans.
Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 34–46, Mar. 2021.
[24] Z. Zhao, Y. Guo, J. Wang, H. Wang, C. Zhang, and C. An, “CL-ETC: A
contrastive learning method for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
IFIP Netw. Conf., Catania, Italy, 2022, pp. 1–9.
[25] Y. Wang, G. Gui, H. Gacanin, T. Ohtsuki, O. Dobre, and H. Poor,
“An efficient specific emitter identification method based on complexvalued neural networks and network compression,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2305–2317, Aug. 2021.
[26] C. Chen and Z. Liu, “Broad learning system: An effective and efficient
incremental learning system without the need for deep architecture,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 10–24,
Jan. 2018.
[27] C. Chen, Z. Liu, and S. Feng, “Universal approximation capability of
broad learning system and its structural variations,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1191–1204, Apr. 2019.
[28] S. Feng and C. Chen, “Fuzzy broad learning system: A novel neurofuzzy model for regression and classification,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 414–424, Feb. 2020.
[29] X. Gong, T. Zhang, C. Chen, and Z. Liu, “Research review for broad
learning system: Algorithms, theory, and applications,” IEEE Trans.
Cybern., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 8922–8950, Sep. 2022.
[30] H. Zhao, J. Zheng, W. Deng, and Y. Song, “Semi-supervised broad
learning system based on manifold regularization and broad network,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Pap., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 983–994,
Mar. 2020.
[31] X. Yuan, J. Chen, N. Zhang, X. Fang, and D. Liu, “A federated
bidirectional connection broad learning scheme for secure data sharing
in Internet of Vehicles,” China Commun., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 117–133,
Jul. 2021.
[32] X. Wang, Y. Zhu, S. Han, L. Yang, H. Gu, and F. Wang, “Fast and
progressive misbehavior detection in Internet of Vehicles based on broad
learning and incremental learning systems,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4788–4798, Mar. 2022.
[33] S. Han, K. Zhu, M. Zhou, and X. Liu, “Evolutionary weighted broad
learning and its application to fault diagnosis in self-organizing cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 3035–3047,
May 2023.
[34] Y. Zhang, Y. Peng, J. Sun, G. Gui, Y. Lin, and S. Mao, “GPUfree specific emitter identification using signal feature embedded broad
learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 14, pp. 13028–13039,
Jul. 2023.
[35] G. Liu, W. Shen, L. Gao, and A. Kusiak, “Active broad-transfer learning
algorithm for class-imbalanced fault diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–16, Jan. 2023.
[36] P. Li, B. Sheng, and C. Chen, “Face sketch synthesis using regularized
broad learning system,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
no. 10, pp. 5346–5360, Oct. 2022.
[37] Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Luo, and Y. Chen, “A cognitive feature
extracting method for space target,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote
Sens. Symp. (IGARSS), Beijing, China, 2016, pp. 3148–3151.
[38] Y. Lin, Y. Tu, and Z. Dou, “An improved neural network pruning
technology for automatic modulation classification in edge devices,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5703–5706, May 2020.
[39] Y. Tu, Y. Lin, J. Wang, and J. U. Kim, “Semi-supervised learning with
generative adversarial networks on digital signal modulation classification,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 243–254, Feb. 2018.
[40] B. Yamansavascilar, M. A. Guvensan, A. G. Yavuz, and M. E. Karsligil,
“Application identification via network traffic classification,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Jan. 2017, pp. 843–848.

2439

[41] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things
for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019.
[42] S. Chebrolu, A. Abraham, and J. P. Thomas, “Feature deduction and
ensemble design of intrusion detection systems,” Comput. Security,
vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 295–307, 2005.
[43] S. Datta, A. Kotha, U. Venkanna, and K. M. Rao, “XNetIoT: An extreme
quantized neural network architecture for IoT environment using
P4,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 5756–5767,
Oct. 2024.
[44] S. Jorgensen, J. Holodnak, J. Dempsey, K. Souza, A. Raghunath, and
V. Rivet, “Extensible machine learning for encrypted network traffic
application labeling via uncertainty quantification,” IEEE Trans. Artif.
Intell., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 420–433, Jan. 2024.
[45] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity:
Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural
network and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Services Manag., vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024.
[46] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Self-supervised traffic classification: Flow embedding and few-shot solutions,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Serv. Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3054–3067, Jun. 2024.
[47] K. Xu, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Ohtsuki, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari,
“Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification based on
masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
pp. 17330–17340, May 2024.
[48] X. Zhang, Q. Wang, M. Qin, Y. Wang, T. Ohtsuki, and B. Adebisi,
“Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
[49] X. Xu et al., “Advancing malware detection in network traffic with
self-paced class incremental learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 12, pp. 21816–21826, Jun. 2024.
[50] W. Ge, Z. Cui, J. Wang, B. Tang, and X. Li, “MetaCluster:
A universal interpretable classification framework for cybersecurity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 3829–3843,
2024.
[51] C. Sheng, Y. Yao, L. Zhao, P. Zeng, and J. Zhao, “Scanner-hunter: An
effective ICS scanning group identification system,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 3077–3092, 2024.
[52] X. Zhang, L. Hao, G. Gui, Y. Wang, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari,
“An automatic and efficient malware traffic classification method for
secure Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5,
pp. 8448–8458, Mar. 2024.
[53] M. He, Y. Huang, X. Wang, P. Wei, and X. Wang, “A lightweight
and efficient IoT intrusion detection method based on feature
grouping,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 2935–2949,
Jan. 2024.
[54] M. Lin, K. Yang, Z. Yu, Y. Shi, and C. Chen, “Hybrid ensemble
broad learning system for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 5622–5633, Apr. 2024.
[55] G. Draper-Gil, A. Lashkari, M. Mamun, and A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[56] Y. Tu, Y. Lin, C. Hou, and S. Mao, “Complex-valued networks for
automatic modulation classification,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69,
no. 9, pp. 10085–10089, Sep. 2020.
[57] Y. Lin, H. Zhao, X. Ma, Y. Tu, and M. Wang, “Adversarial attacks
in modulation recognition with convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
Trans. Rel., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 389–401, Jan. 2020.
[58] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
2017, pp. 712–717.