IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

13373

A Hierarchical Framework With Spatio-Temporal
Consistency Learning for Emergence Detection
in Complex Adaptive Systems
Siyuan Chen , Xin Du , and Jiahai Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Emergence, a global property of complex adaptive
systems (CASs) constituted by interactive agents, is prevalent in real-world dynamic systems, e.g., network-level traffic
congestions. Detecting its formation and evaporation helps to
monitor the state of a system, allowing it to issue a warning signal for harmful emergent phenomena. Since there is
no centralized controller of CAS, detecting emergence based
on each agent’s local observation is desirable but challenging.
Existing works are unable to capture emergence-related spatial
patterns, and fail to model the nonlinear relationships among
agents. This article proposes a hierarchical framework with
spatio-temporal consistency learning (HSTCL) to solve these
two problems by learning the system representation and agent
representations, respectively. Spatio-temporal encoders (STEs)
composed of spatial and temporal transformers are designed to
capture agents’ nonlinear relationships and the system’s complex
evolution. Agents’ and the system’s representations are learned
to preserve the spatio-temporal consistency by minimizing the
spatial and temporal dissimilarities in a self-supervised manner
in the latent space. Our method achieves more accurate detection
than traditional methods and deep learning methods on three
datasets with well-known yet hard-to-detect emergent behaviors.
Notably, our hierarchical framework is generic in incorporating
other deep learning methods for agent-level and system-level
detection.
Index Terms— Complex adaptive systems (CASs), emergence
detection, self-supervised learning on dynamic graphs, spatiotemporal modeling.

I. I NTRODUCTION

M

ANY real-world dynamic systems can be regarded
as complex adaptive systems (CASs) composed of

Received 17 January 2024; revised 20 July 2024 and 19 September 2024;
accepted 28 September 2024. Date of publication 21 October 2024; date
of current version 9 July 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2018AAA0101203; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62406083, Grant 62472461, and Grant 62072483; and in
part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under
Grant 2022A1515011690. (Corresponding author: Jiahai Wang.)
Siyuan Chen is with the School of Computer Science and Cyber
Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
chensiyuan@gzhu.edu.cn).
Xin Du is with the Civil Aviation Electronic Information Engineering
College, Guangzhou Civil Aviation College, Guangzhou 510403, China
(e-mail: duxin@gcac.edu.cn).
Jiahai Wang is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China (e-mail:
wangjiah@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3477320, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3477320

Fig. 1. (a) Illustrates the emergence through the traffic flow. (b) Shows that
emergence detection is framed as a CPD problem.

autonomous, adaptive, and interacting agents, whose interactions at the micro level can result in emergent phenomena
at the macro level, namely, emergence [1], [2], [3]. Fig. 1(a)
presents an example. When there is adequate space among
cars, the road net enjoys a smooth traffic flow. When the distances between cars significantly narrow down, network-level
congestion occurs as an emergent phenomenon. Emergence
is irreducible to the properties of agents that constitute CAS,
and it is unpredictable by nature [1], [4]. Nonetheless, it will
be beneficial to detect the formation and evaporation of
emergence, specifically, weak emergence that is scientifically
relevant [5]. It can help monitor some global properties of
the system and issue a warning signal when an undesirable
phenomenon arrives. For example, reporting a traffic jam based
on the feedback of cars can help with the health management
of traffic systems. It will complement existing monitors relying
on static devices like sensors or cameras [6].
Emergence detection can be formulated as an online
change-point detection (CPD) problem by regarding the
time steps when emergence forms or evaporates as change
points [7], [8]. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the number of congested
streets can serve as a global variable to monitor the emergence.
However, CASs are distributed by nature, i.e., there is no

2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

13374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

centralized controller that can access the states of all agents.
Therefore, methods requiring all agents’ states to compute
a global metric for emergence detection become impractical
under the distributed setting. Hence, it is desirable to detect
emergence using agents’ local observation, which is feasible
because all agents experience the downward causation [7]
when the emergence forms, as shown in Fig. 1(a). For
example, cars slow down in a crowded street. Based on this
observation, O’toole et al. [7] proposed DETect, the only feasible emergence detection method for the distributed setting.
In DETect, each agent analyzes its relationship with neighbors,
communicates with them, and sends feedback when finding a
noticeable change in the relationship. DETect concludes the
formation or evaporation of emergence when the number of
feedback gets significantly larger.
Though making a big step, DETect has two main limitations.
First, it simply counts agents’ feedback to monitor the emergence, which may neglect the spatial patterns that are highly
correlated to emergence. Second, it adopts linear regression to
model an agent’s relationship with its neighbors, which may
fail to capture nonlinear relationships.
This article tries to overcome the above limitations from
a graph perspective. CAS can be regarded as a dynamic
graph [9], and thus emergence detection can be cast to online
CPD in dynamic graphs under the distributed setting. Based
on this formulation, it suffices to learn a system-level representation aware of emergence-related patterns, and agent-level
representations encoding the nonlinear relationships. When
emergence forms or evaporates, the system representations
between adjacent time steps are expected to be inconsistent, which can serve as a detecting signal for emergence.
Specifically, a hierarchical framework with spatio-temporal
consistency learning (HSTCL) is proposed for emergence
detection. HSTCL is of a three-layer structure, “agentsregion monitors-global monitor,” which allows to capturing of
emergence-related spatial patterns by aggregating agent-level
detecting results from bottom-up. HSTCL can be conceptually
implemented by the efficient end-edge-cloud collaborative
framework. Spatio-temporal encoders (STEs) composed of
spatial and temporal transformers are designed to model the
complex variation of agents’ nonlinear relationships and the
system states in highly dynamic scenarios. Representations of
agents and the system are learned to jointly preserve the spatial
and temporal consistency by, respectively, minimizing the spatial and temporal dissimilarities in the latent space. Compared
with DETect, HSTCL can capture nonlinear spatio-temporal
relationships with the aid of STEs, and identify system-wide
emergence-related spatial patterns beyond agents’ scope. As a
framework, HSTCL is more flexible than DETect. It can
incorporate other deep learning methods to further boost the
performance. Our contributions are summarized as follows.
1) The hierarchical framework HSTCL can capture
emergence-related spatial patterns by aggregating
agent-level detecting results from the bottom-up.
2) STEs composed of spatial and temporal transformers are designed to model the nonlinear relationships
among agents and the evolution of the system. Featured by parallel execution and incremental updates of

representations, these encoders are especially suitable
for online detection.
3) The agent representations and the system representation
are learned to preserve the intrinsic spatio-temporal
consistency in a self-supervised manner. The training
strategy avoids data augmentations that may break
spatio-temporal consistency and negative samples that
increase the computational overhead.
4) Extensive experiments on three datasets with
well-known yet hard-to-detect emergent phenomena
validate the superiority of HSTCL over DETect and
deep learning methods. Notably, other deep learning
methods can be incorporated into our framework for
emergence detection.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Emergence Detection
Detecting the emergence of CAS, generally requires at
least one global monitor [2]. Depending on how the monitor
acquires the information of agents for detection, existing
methods fall into three design choices of architectures:
1) a single monitor with direct access to agents’ states;
2) a monitor collecting agents’ information indirectly, e.g.,
from static sensors; and 3) a monitor collecting feedback from
mobile agents. Our method belongs to class 3.
Class 1 methods define global variables to monitor the
system state, e.g., information entropy [10], [11], [12], [13],
statistical divergence [14], and Granger-emergence [15]. These
methods require centralized monitoring, and are thus inapplicable under the distributed setting. Class 2 methods allow
distributed monitoring. However, they require prior knowledge
of emergence to decide what to detect at each sensor [16],
[17], falling short in detecting unknown emergent phenomena.
DETect [7], the only existing method from class 3, overcomes
the limitations of the first two classes. Each agent serves as a
local detector, and agents’ feedback is aggregated to monitor
the emergence. Our method inherits the advantages of DETect,
and further introduces region monitors between agents and the
global monitor, allowing us to analyze spatial patterns ignored
by DETect. STEs are tailored to model nonlinear relationships
among agents, which is difficult for the linear models adopted
by DETect.
Similar to region monitoring, Santos and Zhao [18] detect
emergence by utilizing subsystem-level information. Their
work requires collecting and labeling data of predefined subsystems, which is not applicable to emergence detection rooted
in agents’ local observations. More backgrounds of CAS and
emergence, along with a detailed description of DETect are
shown in Appendix A (supplementary material).
B. Related Graph Mining Tasks
Emergence detection can be viewed as CPD in dynamic
graphs [19], [20]. It is also closely related to graph-level
anomaly detection (AD) [21], [22] and multivariate time series
AD [23], [24], since emergence is a novel global property.
Structural changes from the perspectives of edges [25], singleview [26] and multiview [19] graph Laplacian have been

CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS

sustainably explored for CPD. Finer-grained detection is also
studied on overlapping communities with respect to different
stages of evolution [27].
Nonetheless, these methods cannot jointly model the
changes in node features and structures. Graph neural networks
(GNNs) [28] can overcome this limitation. sGNN [20] adopts
siamese GNNs to compare the similarity between two adjacent graph snapshots, but it ignores the temporal dependence
of graph snapshots. An offline detection method [29] uses
the Gaussian mixture model to cluster the graph snapshots
and identifies a change point when adjacent graph snapshots
belong to different clusters. However, it is unsuitable for online
detection because it needs to acquire the information of graphs
over all time steps.
For graph-level AD, the structural changes of dynamic networks are studied from the levels of nodes, communities, and
the full-graph [30], [31]. Related multiscale dependence is also
explored via graph framelets [32] and graph contrastive learning [33] in general graph learning methods. For time series
AD, the anomaly-related multiscale spatio-temporal patterns
are modeled by dilated temporal convolution and multihop
GNNs [24], and the cross-time spatial dependence is modeled
by the fuzzy embedding [34]. The anomaly is measured by
prediction error [23], [24], one-class classification loss [35],
and contrastive loss [36]. However, these methods are originally designed for centralized detection. Protogerou et al. [37]
proposed a distributed graph AD method, where each node
shares the latent vector with its neighbors. This will raise
privacy concerns and increase the communication cost. Thus,
methods from graph-level CPD and AD are inapplicable for
emergence detection, but they can adapt to our framework
regarding the distributed settings [7], where agents can only
sense their neighbors’ states and share the detecting results.
C. Self-Supervised Learning for Spatio-Temporal Data
Rich deep learning methods that capture multiscale
spatio-temporal correlations have been developed for
spatio-temporal data like videos [38] and dynamic graphs [39],
with applications to spatio-temporal forecasting [39], task
scheduling [40], and decision-making [41]. However, the
scarcity of labels makes it difficult to effectively train
complex models. Self-supervised learning is explored to
leverage rich information underlying the unlabeled data,
with success in time series [42], videos [43], and static
graphs [33], [44]. However, the efforts in dynamic graphs are
limited. Contrastive learning is a typical paradigm, but it is
nontrivial to construct different views of a node or a graph
that preserve spatio-temporal semantics [45], [46]. Besides,
the large number of negative samples substantially increases
the computational overhead. To avoid these issues, this article
develops noncontrastive spatio-temporal learning strategies.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
A. Problem Formulation
Regarding the time steps when the emergence forms or
evaporates as change points, emergence detection in CAS can
be formulated as CPD in dynamic graphs as follows.

13375

Definition 1 (Dyanmic Graph): A dynamic graph is comT
posed of a graph series {G t }t=1
, where G t = (V, E t , Xt ) is a
snapshot at time t, with V as the set of nodes over all time
steps, E t as the set of edges at time t, and Xt as the node
features at time t.
Definition 2 (CPD in Dynamic Graphs): The task of CPD
in dynamic graphs aims to find a set of change points
K
T
from a graph series {G t }t=1
. The change points
T ∗ = {tk∗ }k=1
split
[1,
T
]
into
contiguous
segments
such
that [1, T ] =
S K ∗ −1 ∗ ∗
∗
∗
=
T
.
,
t
],
with
t
=
1
and
t
[t
K
k k+1
k=1
1
The node features xt ∈ R4 is an agent’s 2-D position
and velocity. The topology of graphs can change over time,
including the addition and removal of nodes and edges.
For convenience, this article groups all appearing nodes and
T
assumes the node set is time-invariant, i.e., V = ∪t=1
V t [19].
t
The edge set E is essentially dynamic because the edge
is defined by thresholding the distance between two agents,
as will be described in Definition 3. Specifically, the curve
of the number of edges over time is reported in Appendix D
(supplementary material).
Under the distributed setting, the global monitor does not
have direct access to agents’ states. Each agent as a local
detector has limited vision and shares limited messages.
Definition 3 (Distributed Setting for Emergence Detection):
A qualified emergence detection method under the distributed
setting should satisfy the following three conditions.
1) Condition 1: An agent only senses the states of other
agents within a certain radius. Formally, the neighborhood of agent j at time t is defined as N jt = {i : dit j ≤
δ}, where dit j is the Euclidean distance.
2) Condition 2: An agent j only communicates with its
neighbors in N jt .
3) Condition 3: The only message that an agent j shares
with its neighbors or uploads to some monitor is its
detecting score for emergence, i.e., a scalar s tj ∈ [0, 1].
Inspired by Ranshous et al. [47], this article uses a dissimilarity
function to calculate the detecting scores, and defines the
criterion for CPD as follows.
Definition 4 (Criterion for CPD): Given a graph series and
a dissimilarity function d(G, G ′ ) ∈ R≥0 , a change point t is
detected when d(G t , G t−1 ) > c and d(G t , G t+1 ) ≤ c for some
threshold c.
B. Motivation and Overview of HSTCL
The distributed setting stated in Definition 3 poses severe
challenges to existing spatio-temporal modeling techniques
and emergence detection methods:
1) Conditions 1 and 3 state that the hidden vectors of
agents are not shared. Thus, the common practice of
stacking multiple GNN layers [48] to capture long-range
dependence over multihop neighbors is inapplicable.
2) Conditions 2 and 3 state that it is hard to reach consensus among agents via local communication within a
limited time, because the communication graph changes
constantly and it is not necessarily connected [49].
See Appendix A (supplementary material) for further
demonstration.

13376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

a three-step process, corresponding to its three-level structure

s1:T = AgentDetect X1:T ∈ RT ×|V|

y1:T = CoarseGrain s1:T ∈ RT ×M

sG1:T = SystemDetect y1:T ∈ RT .
(1)
s1:T is agent-level detecting scores, which are coarse-grained
to M regions’ states y1:T . sG1:T is system-level detecting scores
based on region states. Sections III-C and III-D will describe
the process of HSTCL in detail.
C. Agent-Level Detection
Fig. 2. Overview of HSTCL. HSTCL contains three hierarchies, agents,
region monitors, and a global monitor, which can be conceptually implemented by the end-edge-cloud collaborative framework. Agents sense the
states of neighbors, measure the change in relationships, and communicate with them to make agent-level detection. The detecting results are
coarse-grained to region states, whose spatial patterns are used for system-level detection. Representations of agents and the system are learned
via the STCL technique to support agent-level and system-level detection,
respectively.

3) Condition 3 states that the global monitor is unable to
make global detection by utilizing agents’ states in an
end-to-end manner.
These challenges motivate the key design choice of HSTCL,
that is, modeling the spatio-temporal dependency at different levels and aggregating the information hierarchically.
An overview of HSTCL is shown in Fig. 2. It contains three
hierarchies from bottom-up, agents, region monitors, and a
global monitor. It can be conceptually implemented by the
end-edge-cloud collaborative framework [50]. The area where
all agents move is split into several connected regions. In each
region, every agent senses the states of its neighbors and
detects if its relationship with neighbors changes significantly.
Each agent communicates with its neighbors to enhance the
agent-level detecting results. The detecting results of agents
within the same region are aggregated by the corresponding
region monitor. The regional results are analyzed by the global
monitor to make a system-level detection that is aware of
emergence-related patterns.
Agent-level detection compresses an agent’s local observations into a single detection score, while system-level
detection unifies these scores to gain a global view. They
are supported by agent-level and system-level representation learning, respectively. STEs are designed to capture
nonlinear agent-to-agent and region-to-region relationships.
Spatio-temporal consistency learning (STCL) strategy guides
STEs to learn agents’ and the system’s representations that preserve both spatial and temporal consistency. Both agent-level
and system-level STCL preserve the temporal consistency of
representations within a time window. The former preserves
the spatial consistency between each agent’s and its neighbors’
representations, and the latter preserves the spatial consistency
between the system’s and the regions’ representations. The
inconsistency in system representation serves as a detection
signal for emergence. Formally, HSTCL can be described as

1) Spatio-Temporal Encoder: To make online detection at
time τ , each agent records its state and its neighbors’ states
in the last w time steps. Denoting τ (w) = τ − w + 1 as the
initial step of the time window, these states are transformed
to agent representations by the agent-level STE



τ
hτj (w):τ = STE A xτj (w):τ , xit : i ∈ N jt t=τ (w) ∈ Rw×D . (2)
Due to Conditions 1 and 3 of the distributed setting, each
agent cannot acquire their neighbors’ latent representations.
Thus, the popular design choice of integrated dynamic GNNs
that model spatio-temporal entangled relations [51], [52] is
inapplicable. Instead, this article adopts a stacked architecture
composed of a spatial transformer and a temporal transformer [53], disentangling spatial and temporal dependency.
The spatial transformer models the relationship between an
agent and its neighbors at each time step. The state of an agent
xtj is first embedded as a hidden vector through a single-layer
perceptron, i.e., etj = Emb(xtj ). Then, a scaled dot-product
attention mechanism [53] with a skip connection is applied to
calculate the spatial representation
X

αit j f V eit − etj
(3)
ztj = etj +
i∈N jt

where eit − etj measures the spatial difference between agent
j and its neighbor i in the latent space. It may capture
nonlinear relations that are not fully reflected in quantities
of the raw space, e.g., relative positions and velocities. f V
is a value function implemented by a linear mapping. αit j =
softmax({ait j : i ∈ N jt }) is the normalized attention score, with
ait j defined as
⊤

1
(4)
ait j = √ f Q etj f K eit
D
where f Q and f V are linear layers accounting for the query
function and the key function, respectively. The spatial transformer does not require temporal embeddings of neighbors
within a time window, which is desirable because the neighbors frequently change.
The temporal transformer is instantiated as a standard transformer [53], because it is powerful for sequential modeling,
and it allows parallel execution, which is favorable for online
detection. At its core is a temporal attention mechanism that
maps spatial representations to temporal representations


⊤ 
1
hτj (w):τ = softmax √ qτj (w):τ kτj (w):τ
vτj (w):τ
(5)
D

CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS

13377

via a temporal pooling function PoolT , mean pooling here



vtj = ProjT htj , v(τj ) = PoolT vτj (w):τ .
(6)

Fig. 3.

Procedure of agent-level STCL.

where qτj (w):τ , kτj (w):τ , and vτj (w):τ are query, key, and value
vectors transformed from zτ (w):τ , respectively.
Disentangling the spatial and temporal information also
makes the spatio-temporal encoder friendly to streaming data
because the agent representations can be updated incrementally. As the time step τ increases by 1, only the current spatial
representation zτj +1 needs to be computed, while zτj (w)+1:τ can
be reused. For the temporal transformer, intermediate results
like the unnormalized attention scores and the query vectors
that only involve zτj (w)+1:τ can be stored. The normalized
attention scores and the temporal representations can be computed by further incorporating zτj +1 . Details can be found in
Appendix C (supplementary material).
2) Spatio-Temporal Consistency Learning: Since the labels
of emergence are rarely known a priori, this article proposes to train STE in a self-supervised manner by preserving
the spatio-temporal consistency of the agent representations.
STCL is inspired by an influential noncontrastive method
called bootstrapping your own latent (BYOL) [54], which
avoids explicit negative samples by aligning different views
of the same sample encoded by asymmetric neural networks.
BYOL is briefly introduced in Appendix A (supplementary
material).
Unlike BYOL that uses a single objective, STCL disentangles the learning objectives of temporal consistency and
spatial consistency since they characterize different aspects
of the dynamic system. For each aspect, an online network
and a target network with asymmetric network structures are
designed to process different views of the same agent. These
views are constructed by leveraging the intrinsic spatial and
temporal relations within the data other than data augmentation
that may damage the spatio-temporal semantics [45]. Given a
view of some agent, the online network is trained to align the
output of the target network for another view. The procedure
of agent-level STCL is depicted in Fig. 3.
In Sections III-C2a–III-C2c, a symbol with a tilde stands
for an element from the target branch, e.g., a vector e
h and
a function e
f . Symbols without a tilde come from the online
branch. A vector with a superscript t is called a transient representation at time t, e.g., ht . A vector with a superscript (τ )
stands for a short-term representation within a time window
[τ (w), τ ], e.g., h(τ ) .
a) Temporal consistency loss: When emphasizing the
temporal consistency, the agent representation htj is mapped
to a temporal space via the temporal projection ProjT . The
resulting vectors vtj are reduced to a short-term representation

To ensure that the short-term representation is consistent with
the transient representations, and thus capturing the tendency
within the time window, this article minimizes the dissimilarity
between them. The dissimilarity is defined as the complement
of the cosine similarity



 1
1 − cos v(τj ) , e
htj .
(7)
d v(τj ) , e
htj =
2
Then, the temporal consistency loss is defined as the average
temporal dissimilarity of all agents within the time window
LT =

τ
1 X X  (τ ) et 
d vj , hj .
w|V| j∈V t=τ (w)

(8)

b) Spatial consistency loss: When emphasizing the spatial consistency, htj is mapped to a spatial space via the
spatial projection Proj S . To avoid disturbing the optimization
of the temporal counterpart, this article further transforms
the resulting vectors with a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to
construct an asymmetric branch, i.e.,




ntj = Proj S htj , m(τj ) = PoolT MLP nτj (w):τ . (9)
By minimizing the dissimilarity between the short-term
representation of each agent and its neighbors, the model
learns to preserve spatial consistency, i.e.,
1 X X  (τ ) (τ ) 
d m j ,e
ni
(10)
LS =
κ|V| j∈V i∈N
j

where N j contains κ random neighbors from the temporal
neighborhood ∪τt=τ (w) N jt . The sampling probability of a neighbor is proportional to its frequency.
As STE A is responsible for the representation, while ProjT
and Proj S are responsible for projections, they are simply
implemented as MLPs. Mean pooling is adopted for PoolT and
Pool S for simplicity, and more advanced spatial pooling [48],
[55] and temporal pooling [56] methods are left for future
work.
c) Optimization: Combining the temporal consistency
loss and the spatial consistency loss, the overall loss for
agent-level learning is
LAgent = LT + L S .

(11)

Directly minimizing the above loss will lead to collapsed
representations [54]. To avoid this, the parameters 2 A of the
online branch are optimized by a gradient-based algorithm,
e A of the target branch are
e.g., Adam [57], while parameters 2
updated by exponential moving average [54]

e A ← η2
e A + (1 − η)2 A (12)
2 A ← Opt LAgent , 2 A , 2
where η ∈ [0, 1] is a decay rate. The final 2 A for emergence
detection is obtained when the iterative process converges.

13378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

3) Communication: Although each agent can make detection independently, sharing the detecting scores will make
the detection more robust. In DETect [7], an agent only
communicates with a randomly selected neighbor. Taking a
step further, our method allows each agent to update its own
score s tj by combining the scores of all neighbors and the
dissimilarity between representations of adjacent steps


(1 − α) X τ
si .
(13)
s τj +1 = α · d h(τj ) , h(τj −1) +
|N jτ | + 1
τ

Fig. 4.

Procedure of system-level STCL.

i∈N j ∪{ j}


where h(τj ) = pT hτ (w):τ . α ∈ [0, 1] is a mixing coefficient.
When α = 1, the messages from neighbors are ignored, and
when α = 0, the agent is overwhelmed by its neighbors’
detecting scores. The communication cost can be controlled
by setting a budget for the number of neighbors.
D. Coarse Graining and System-Level Detection
1) Coarse Graining: The area where all agents move is
M
split into several adjacent regions {Rm }m=1
in a grid shape.
The detecting scores of agents within a region are aggregated
as the region’s state
X
ymt =
s tj .
(14)
j∈Rm

These regions form a region graph RG t = (RV, RE, yt ), with
RV as the set of regions, RE as the set of edges between
regions, and yt as the region states at time t. The formulation
can be naturally extended to regions with irregular boundaries
and complex graph structures [58], [59]. This article considers
grid-shape region graphs for a proof of concept, while more
complex scenarios are left for future work.
2) Region Representation: As in agent-level detection,
a region-level STE with a similar network structure is applied
to the region graph for obtaining the representation rtm for each
region, i.e.,



τ
rτm(w):τ = STE R ymτ (w):τ , ynt : n ∈ RN m t=τ (w)
(15)
where RN m is the set of region m’s neighboring regions.
Based on region representations, a system representation is
learned to gain a global view of the system. Hence, the
variation in system representations indicates the formation
or evaporation of emergence. Likewise, temporal and spatial consistency losses are designed to guide the learning
procedure.
3) Spatio-Temporal Consistency Learning:
a) Temporal consistency loss: The procedure of
system-level detection is depicted in Fig. 4. A regional spatial
projection ProjRS with a regional spatial pooling function
PoolRS is applied to obtain the transient system representation



rtG = PoolRS ProjRS rtm : m ∈ RV .
(16)
Then, a regional temporal projection ProjRT followed by a
regional temporal pooling function PoolRT is applied to obtain
the short-term system representation



u(τ ) = PoolRT ProjRT rτG(w):τ .
(17)

By minimizing the dissimilarity between u(τ ) and e
rtG , the
model learns to preserve system-level temporal consistency
LST =

τ

1 X
d u(τ ) ,e
rtG .
w t=τ (w)

(18)

b) Spatial consistency loss: The system-level spatial
consistency loss ensures that the system representation u(τ ) is
consistent with the representation of each region. A regional
spatial projection ProjRS together with a regional temporal
pooling function PoolRT is applied to obtain the region representation within a time window

)
g rτm(w):τ .
e
w(τ
(19)
m = PoolRT ProjRS e
)
By minimizing the dissimilarity between u(τ ) and e
w(τ
m , the
characteristics of each region are preserved in the system
representation

1 X
)
LSS =
d u(τ ) , e
w(τ
(20)
m
κ m∈D

where D contains κ sampled regions from RV. For simplicity,
ProjRT and ProjRS are implemented as MLPs, while PoolRT
and PoolRS are mean pooling, as in agent-level detection. The
overall loss for system-level learning is the sum of temporal
consistency loss and spatial consistency loss
LSystem = LST + LSS .

(21)

The parameters of region-level online and target networks
are updated in the same way as (12). Currently, agent-level
and system-level STCL are trained separately. The reasons are
twofold: 1) the construction of region states requires highquality agent-level detecting scores and 2) it is hard to define
meaningful system-level training signal for agent-level models
without the truth change points. A joint optimization of the two
hierarchies is left for future work.
The system-level detecting score is defined as the dissimilarity between system representations of adjacent time steps

sGτ = d u(τ ) , u(τ −1) .
(22)
A summary of notations used in this article is shown in
Appendix B (supplementary material). The pseudo codes for
STCL and emergence detection are shown in Appendix C
(supplementary material).
E. Time Complexity Analysis of HSTCL
This article analyzes the time complexity of HSTCL from
its implementation within the end-edge-cloud collaborative

CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS

framework and in a single machine, respectively, corresponding to the potential real-world deployment and the actual
implementation in our experiments for proof of concept. Their
complexities mainly differ in agent-level detection.
In the end-edge-cloud collaborative implementation, agents
accomplish the computation in parallel [60], [61]. Recall that
D is the dimension of the hidden vector. For agent j, the time
complexity of spatial encoding at time t is O(|N jt |D 2 ), and the
time complexity of temporal encoding within a time window is
O(w D 2 +w 2 D). Thus, the total complexity
of spatio-temporal
P
encoding is O(w D 2 + w 2 D + τt=τ (w) |N jt |D 2 ). The time
complexities for evaluating the temporal consistency loss and
the spatial consistency loss are O(w D 2 ) and O(κ D 2 ), respectively. The time complexity of communication is O(|N jt |) at
each time step. Therefore, at both the training and inference
stages, the time complexity is linear with respect to the number
of neighbors, which can be controlled by setting a budget.
Hence, the distributed implementation scales well to largescale systems.
In the single-machine implementation, the complexity of
agent-level detection is relevant to the number of agents. The
time complexity of spatial encoding at time t is O(|E t |D 2 ),
and the time complexity of temporal encoding within a time
window is O(|V|(w D 2 + w2 D)). Thus, the total complexity of spatio-temporal encoding is O(|V|(w D 2 + w 2 D) +
P
τ
t
2
t=τ (w) |E |D ). The time complexities for evaluating the
temporal consistency loss and the spatial consistency loss are
O(w|V|D 2 ) and O(κ|V|D 2 ), respectively. The time complexity of communication is O(|E t |) at each time step. Therefore,
at both the training and inference stages, the time complexity
is linear with respect to the number of agents and the number
of edges.
In both implementations, the system-level detection is conducted by the global monitor. The time complexity of systemlevel spatio-temporal encoding is O(|RV|(w D 2 + w 2 D) +
|RE|w D 2 ). The complexities of evaluating system-level
temporal consistency loss and spatial consistency loss are
O(w D 2 ) and O(κ D 2 ), respectively. Thus, the complexity of
system-level detection is linear with respect to the number
of regions and the number of edges, which are generally
irrelevant to the number of agents.
In Section IV-G, this article provides a running time analysis that matches the time complexity analysis to verify the
scalability of HSTCL.
F. Characteristics of HSTCL
HSTCL is characterized by the following features.
1) By hierarchically aggregating agent-level detecting
results, HSTCL can capture emergence-related spatial
patterns ignored by DETect, where agents’ feedback is
summed up indiscriminately.
2) Thanks to the spatio-temporal disentangled architecture, STE can capture agents’ nonlinear relationships
under the distributed setting, where popular designs of
spatio-temporal integrated GNNs are infeasible.
3) STCL preserves the spatio-temporal consistency within
both agent-level and system-level representations. Com-

13379

TABLE I
S TATISTICS OF DATASETS

pared with BYOL, it avoids potentially harmful data
augmentations, and can handle multiple objectives in
a disentangled way. It is free of negative samples,
significantly reducing the computational cost for spatiotemporal data.
4) HSTCL is flexible in integrating other deep learning
methods as long as they satisfy the distributed setting
described in Definition 3. First, existing nondistributed
AD and CPD methods can be transformed into distributed detectors by adapting them to agent-level and
system-level detection separately. Second, STEs can
be implemented by other spatio-temporally disentangled GNNs. Third, STCL can be replaced by other
self-supervised training schemes like contrastive learning. Finally, other dissimilarity functions and detection
criteria can be adopted for emergence detection.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
For a fair comparison, this article follows DETect [7] and
adopts three simulation environments implemented by NetLogo [62] to generate data. These simulators are equipped with
well-known yet hard-to-detect emergent phenomena. In all
simulators, agents move in a 2-D-bounded world composed of
patches. The resulting datasets are briefly described as follows.
1) Flock [63]: Each agent is a bird. The emergence is the
flocking behavior. The objective measure of emergence
is the number of patches that contain no birds.
2) Pedestrian [11]: Each agent is a pedestrian walking
either from left to right or in the opposite position. The
emergence is the counter-flow. The objective measure of
emergence is the number of lanes formed by pedestrians.
3) Traffic [7]: Each agent is a car running on the road net
of Manhattan, New York City. The road net contains
6657 junctions and 77 569 road segments. The cars are
routed by a routing engine GraphHopper [64] based on
real-world car records. The emergence happens when
a significant number of streets get congested. Thus,
the objective measure of emergence is the number of
congested road segments.
On the Flock and Pedestrian datasets, real-world data is
unavailable. Thus, reasonable behavioral rules are designed
for agents. On the Traffic dataset, the real-world data is
combined with simulation rules to mimic agents’ behaviors.
Visualizations of emergent behaviors on all datasets and
more details of the Traffic dataset are shown in Appendix D

13380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

(supplementary material). A summary of important statistics
of the datasets is shown in Table I. Each dataset contains
20 times of simulations, with five times as the training set,
five times as the validation set, and the rest as the testing set.
Following O’toole et al. [7], the objective measure is evaluated
every 50 steps. The ground truth change points are labeled
by running offline CPD algorithms provided by ruptures [65].
Offline CPD algorithms have access to the whole series, and
thus the labeled change points are more reliable and accurate.
The results are checked manually. It turns out that change
points make up no more than 1% of all evaluation steps. The
severe imbalance between change points and normal points
further increases the challenge of emergence detection.
A natural question arises: Why not examine the performance of detectors on real-world datasets? To the best of
our knowledge, there is no benchmark based on purely realworld data. Currently, collecting such data can be difficult in
three aspects: 1) the emergent behavior should be properly
understood because labeling emergence formation and evaporation requires prior knowledge; 2) contiguously recording
all agents’ states for a long period can be challenging to the
sensing devices; and 3) due to some unavailability issues of
real data, it is hard to ensure the diversity. The simulators can
overcome these limitations, and they may generate potentially
diverse and challenging data that are uneasy to collect in
practice, helping to evaluate the detector’s performance more
comprehensively. We will try to construct qualified real-world
datasets in the future.
B. Evaluation Metrics
Due to the unpredictability of emergence, it can be difficult
to detect the exact change points. The formation or evaporation
of emergence can happen in a short period rather than a
specific time step. Therefore, it is reasonable to accept more
than one detection around a true change point in practice.
In this article, the detections within a given tolerance θ are
regarded as one true positive (TP), while the rest detections
are regarded as false positive (FP), i.e.,

TP = t ∗ ∈ T ∗ : ∃t ∈ Tb, s.t. |t − t ∗ | ≤ θ

FP = t ∈ Tb : ∀t ∗ ∈ T ∗ , |t − t ∗ | > θ
where T ∗ and Tb are the set of true change points and the set
of detected ones, respectively. This article sets θ = 20 for all
datasets. Defining the precision Prec = (TP/TP + FP) and the
recall rate Rec = (TP/|T ∗ |), the F1 score can be computed
as
2 × Prec × Rec
.
F1 =
Prec + Rec
The F1 score measures the overall accuracy of CPD. This
article further uses the covering metric [66], [67] to measure
the overlapping degree between the ground truth segments and
the detected segments. Let A∗ be the set of ground truth
b and b
segments I ∗ , with a similar definition for A
I. The
covering metric is defined as
X


b = 1
Cover A∗ , A
|I ∗ | · max J I ∗ , b
I
b
b
T I ∗ ∈A∗
I∈A


I is the Jaccard index [68]
I / I∗ ∪ b
where J I ∗ , b
I = I∗ ∩ b
measuring the overlapping degree between two segments.
In the original paper of DETect [7], the detecting performance is quantitatively evaluated by checking if the number
of detected events is significantly larger during the emergent
periods than the nonemergent periods. Nonetheless, the deviation between detected change points and the ground truth
is not assessed. Therefore, this article hopes to fill the gap
by introducing the two metrics, and push the current research
toward more timely emergence detection.

C. Baselines
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, this
article compares it with DETect and some state-of-the-art
deep learning methods in closely related fields, including
dynamic network CPD method sGNN [20], time series CPD
method TS-CPP [69], time series AD method GDN [23], and
graph-level AD method OCGTL [36]. Advanced techniques
like GNNs and contrastive learning are used in these methods.
They are adapted to our framework at both agent-level and
system-level detection. They are renamed with the suffix
“+H,” short for hierarchical framework.
1) DETect: A decentralized method for online emergence
detection. Each agent detects the change in relationships
between its neighbors and itself via a linear model.
The detecting results are aggregated to make a global
decision.
2) sGNN+H: A dynamic network CPD method that uses
siamese GNNs to learn the graph similarity between two
graph snapshots. A top-k pooling module is applied to
summarize the node-wise distances in the latent space
into a graph similarity.
3) TS-CPP+H: A time series CPD method based on contrastive learning. Temporal convolutional networks [70]
are used for time series encoding, and the similarity
between two contiguous time segments is used as the
indicator for CPD.
4) GDN+H: A GNN-based method for multivariate time
series AD. It uses graph attention to capture the relationships between sensors and defines the maximum
deviation score for AD.
5) OCGTL+H: A graph-level AD method that combines
one-class classification and neural transformation learning [71], an advanced self-supervised learning technique.
The codes of all baselines are publicly available. The code
of DETect1 is directly applied to our experiments. The code
of sGNN,2 TS-CPP,3 GDN,4 and OCGTL5 are adapted to our
framework. Implementation details of HSTCL are described
in Appendix D (supplementary material). The threshold c in
Definition 4 is decided by maximizing the F1 score on the
validation set.
1 https://github.com/viveknallur/DETectEmergence/
2 https://github.com/dsulem/DyNNet
3 https://github.com/cruiseresearchgroup/TSCP2
4 https://github.com/d-ailin/GDN
5 https://github.com/boschresearch/GraphLevel-AnomalyDetection

CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS

13381

TABLE II
D ETECTING P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS . B OTH THE M EAN VALUE AND THE S TANDARD D EVIATION A RE R EPORTED . T HE B EST R ESULTS
A RE IN B OLD . T HE I MPROVEMENTS A RE S IGNIFICANT ( p-VALUE < 0.05). T HE R ELATIVE I MPROVEMENTS A RE C OMPUTED W ITH
R ESPECT TO DET ECT

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY. B OTH THE M EAN VALUE AND THE S TANDARD D EVIATION A RE R EPORTED . T HE B EST R ESULTS OF AGENT-L EVEL AND S YSTEM L EVEL D ETECTION A RE IN B OLD . T HE I MPROVEMENTS A RE S IGNIFICANT ( p-VALUE < 0.05)

D. Comparison With Baselines
The detecting performance of different methods is shown
in Table II. The metrics of DETect are relatively low on
all datasets, showing that emergence detection can be difficult for traditional methods even on the simulation datasets.
Deep learning methods generally outperform DETect in both
metrics, and HSTCL achieves the highest performance. The
results verify the superiority of our framework, which can
capture emergence-related spatial patterns and model nonlinear
spatio-temporal dynamics. sGNN+H is relatively poor on
the Pedestrian dataset. It ignores the temporal dependence
between adjacent graph snapshots and simply averages the
similarities within the time window. HSTCL captures the
temporal dependence via the STEs and learns a short-term
representation of the system within the time window, which
can better reflect the system-level variation in the latent space.
GDN+H calculates the detecting score based on next-step
prediction error, which can be sensitive to the noise in the
states. HSTCL calculates the score based on the consistency of
representations, which is resistant to potential noise. HSTCL
jointly preserves spatial and temporal consistency, and thus
outperforms TS-CPP+H which ignores spatial consistency and
OCGTL+H which ignores temporal consistency.
E. Ablation Study
Some variants of HSTCL are introduced to verify the necessity of capturing emergence-related patterns and modeling
agents’ relationships with neighbors. HSTCLAgent removes
system-level detection. HSTCLSelf makes agent-level detection

without modeling the spatial relationships, i.e., removing the
spatial encoder and training without the spatial consistency
loss. The results are shown in Table III.
1) Effect of System-Level Detection: Without system-level
detection, the average F1 score and covering metric of
HSTCLAgent decrease by 0.0943 and 0.0970, respectively. The
results verify that the spatial patterns of agent-level detecting
results help with emergence detection.
To see what patterns are captured by HSTCL, a case study
is conducted on the Traffic dataset. Fig. 5 visualizes the
congesting states of the road net and the region states when the
network-level congestion forms. Fig. 5(a) shows that congested
road segments constitute a connected subnetwork with a
diameter of 80, accounting for more than (1/3) of the diameter
of the road net. The phenomenon confirms the emergence
of widespread congestion. Such emergence-related pattern is
almost faithfully reflected in region states. The results also
show that HSTCL can detect the emergence of widespread
congestion even when the traffic flow is not provided.
2) Effect Of Agent-Level Detection: Compared with
HSTCLAgent , the average F1 score and the covering metric of
HSTCLSelf decrease by 0.0264 and 0.0171, respectively. The
results show that modeling the nonlinear relationship between
an agent and its neighbors is indispensable for agent-level
detection. Note that HSTCLAgent is better than DETect on the
Flock and Pedestrian datasets, and on par with it on the Traffic
dataset, which again verifies the effectiveness of agent-level
spatio-temporal modeling.
To see how HSTCLAgent captures the relationships, this
article conducts a case study on the Flock dataset. Inspired

13382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 5. Case study of spatial patterns on the Traffic dataset. In (a), each line segment represents a road segment. Segments in red are congested, while those
in gray are normal. In (b), each grid represents a region state. The darker the color, the more agent-level detections are collected. Best viewed in color.

Fig. 6. Case study of agents’ relationships on the Flock dataset. The variation
curves of the objective measure, agents’ dissimilarity in latent space, and
agents’ relationships with respect to three indicators are visualized. Best
viewed in color.

by O’toole et al. [7], three indicators are used to measure
the relationships with respect to agents’ states, including the
distance to the center of neighbors, the number of neighbors,
and the difference between an agent’s velocity and its neighbors’ average velocity. The objective measure of emergence
is set as a reference. Agents’ and their neighbors’ dissimilarity in representations stands for relationships in the latent
space. The variation curves of the aforementioned metrics are
shown in Fig. 6. As expected, during the emergent period
of flocking, birds get crowded, and thus, the distances are
smaller, the neighbor count increases, and the difference in
velocity decreases. Unexpectedly, the difference in velocity
between 400 and 600 steps is larger than those in other periods.
This anomalous phenomenon may be attributed to the flocking
simulation rules. Birds are set to align during the emergent
period and move randomly during the nonemergent period.
The second emergent period is relatively long and thus the
subsequent nonemergent period witnesses a sharp increase in
velocity difference. The unstable behavior of the last metric
shows that a single metric may not always be reliable for
indicating emergence.
Different metrics present different patterns, yet these patterns are approximately captured by the latent representations.
The tendency of the dissimilarity curve also agrees with that of
the objective measure. These results show that our method can

somehow comprehensively capture the relationships defined by
some intuitive metrics with respect to agents’ states.
3) Effect of Spatial and Temporal Consistency Losses:
To validate the effectiveness of STCL for both agent-level
and system-level detection, this article introduces variants
of HSTCLAgent and HSTCL trained with only the spatial
or the temporal consistency loss. The resulting methods
are denoted as HSTCLAgent-S , HSTCLAgent-T , HSTCLS , and
HSTCLT , respectively. As shown in Table III, removing any
term in the loss function will lead to degenerated performance in most cases. For example, HSTCLAgent-T removes the
agent-level spatial consistency loss, and noticeable drops in
both metrics can be observed on all datasets. The results verify
that inconsistency in spatial relation is an accurate indicator of
emergence. Similarly, HSTCLS removes the system-level temporal consistency loss and both metrics decrease. The results
verify that temporal inconsistency of the whole system helps to
detect the emergent behavior. Thus, the spatial consistency loss
and temporal consistency loss are complementary to learning
discriminative representations for emergence detection.
F. Hyperparameter Analysis
1) Effect of Region Granularity: The area where agents
move is split into many regions for system-level detection.
The granularity of regions decides how many details are
preserved for global analysis. To study the effect of region
granularity, this article trains the system-level detector on
the Traffic dataset under several N × N grids, with N ∈
{5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30}. The results are shown in Fig. 7. The
F1 score is lowest when N = 5. Maybe coarsening too
much will result in inadequate information that cannot support
accurate detection. The F1 score and covering metric increase
on the whole as N grows but start to decrease at N = 20.
An exception is that the covering metric decreases at N = 10.
The F1 score is the harmonic mean of the precision and the
recall rate. Since the threshold c for determining a change
point is searched by maximizing the F1 score on the validation
set, it is possible that the precision or the recall rate increases
while the other metric decreases, leading to the growth of the
F1 score and the drop of the covering metric. Some examples
are provided in Appendix D (supplementary material). When
N is too large, the regions are too small to collect sufficient
feedback from agents and present stable spatial patterns. Thus,
our method achieves the highest performance for N = 20 with
a moderate computational cost.

CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS

Fig. 7. Effect of region granularity on the Traffic dataset. The dashed vertical
line indicates the best results. Best viewed in color.

Fig. 8. Effect of agents’ communication on the Traffic dataset. The dashed
vertical line indicates the best results. Best viewed in color.

2) Effect of Mixing Coefficient for Communication: Agents
communicate with neighbors to make agent-level detections.
The mixing coefficient α in (13) balances the importance of
an agent’s current observation and its neighbors’ detecting
scores. α is set to 0.05 to keep consistent with DETect.
To see how α affects the detecting accuracy, this article
evaluates HSTCLAgent on the Traffic dataset with α ranging
from 0.1 to 1. As shown in Fig. 8, the F1 score and covering
metric can be promoted by increasing α, i.e., assigning a larger
weight to agents’ current observation. However, when α = 1,
i.e., agents ignore the detecting scores of their neighbors,
the F1 score drops significantly, verifying the necessity of
communication. The results show the possibility of tuning
α to improve the detecting accuracy. Furthermore, α can be
personalized and adaptive over time. Optimizing the choices
of α is left for future work.
3) Effect of Window Size for Emergence Detection: The
window size w is the temporal scope of emergence detection.
Like the granularity of regions, there is a tradeoff between
precision and efficacy with respect to w. It is set to 10 for
agent-level detection, since the objective measure of emergence is evaluated every 50 steps and the states of agents are
downsampled every 5 steps. In this way, agents can make relatively accurate and timely detections. However, performance
degeneration is observed for system-level detection with the
same window size. It is conjectured that system-level detection
needs a larger temporal scope with coarse-grained spatial
information. The effect of w is studied on the Pedestrian
dataset, with w ∈ {10, 20, . . . , 100}. As shown in Fig. 9, the
F1 score generally increases as w grows, while the covering
metric peaks at w = 40. Although the F1 score peaks at
w = 60, both the running time and the memory consumption
will increase, as depicted in Fig. 10. Since online detection
is sensitive to the computational cost, w is set to 40 for
system-level detection to achieve a good tradeoff between
accuracy and efficiency. This choice is also practical since the
global monitor generally has a larger capacity than a single
agent.

13383

Fig. 9. Effect of window size in system-level detection on the Pedestrian
dataset. Best viewed in color.

Fig. 10.
Running time and GPU memory consumption of system-level
detection with respect to w on the Pedestrian dataset.

Fig. 11. Effect of threshold θ on the Pedestrian dataset. Best viewed in color.

4) Effect of Threshold θ: In the experiments, the threshold
θ is set to 20 on all datasets for fairly comparing the detecting
precision of different methods. Apparently, the F1 scores
are affected by the choices of θ. This article evaluates the
F1 scores of HSTCL and DETect on the Pedestrian dataset for
θ ∈ {10, 20, . . . , 100}, and the results are shown in Fig. 11.
For both methods, the F1 score grows approximately as θ
increases, because a larger tolerance allows to include more
detected change points. On the whole, HSTCL consistently
achieves higher detecting precision than DETect for all θ,
yet the difference narrows down as θ increases. Besides, the
variance of DETect’s F1 scores tends to grow up for a larger
θ, while HSTCL preserves a considerably smaller variance,
showing that the performance of HSTCL is more stable.
In practice, a relatively smaller threshold is more favorable,
because detected change points with smaller displacement help
to detect the emergence more timely.
To further differentiate the detecting quality of DETect and
HSTCL, this article visualizes their detected change points on
the Pedestrian dataset. As shown in Fig. 12, DETect fails to
detect change points in several periods, and the detected points
are relatively far from the nearest ground truth. By contrast,
HSTCL successfully detects all change points with significantly smaller deviations.
5) Sensitivity Analysis: It is crucial to analyze the sensitivity of HSTCL with respect to the initial parameters

13384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 12. (Top) Visualization of the ground truth change points, and change
points detected by (middle) DETect and (bottom) HSTCL on the Pedestrian
dataset. The variation curves are in black. The change points are marked as
stars. The periods of emergence are in green. The normal periods are in purple.
Best viewed in color.

for instructing its real-world applications. As reported in
Tables II and III, the standard deviations for both agent-level
and system-level detection of HSTCL are relatively small,
which indicates that HSTCL is relatively robust to the stochastic nature of deep learning, including the weight initialization
and the training process. In Section IV-Fa)–d), this article
analyzes the effect of region granularity N × N , mixing
coefficient α for communication, window size w, and the
threshold θ for evaluating metrics. To summarize, HSTCL
is sensitive to N × N , α, and w, but is relatively stable
with respect to θ. In practice, one can use the historical
data as a validation set to determine essential parameters and
adjust these parameters when there is a distribution shift of
the online data. Specifically, α can be tuned without retraining the agent-level model. Adjusting N may not affect the
deployment of edge monitors because one monitor can collect
agents’ feedback from several regions, but the system-level
model should be updated. Adjusting w requires updating the
agent-level model and the system-level model sequentially.
When the system is nonstationary, it can be analyzed on
multiple time scales simultaneously to achieve timely detection
with relatively low cost [72].
G. Running Time Analysis
To study the efficiency of all methods for online emergence
detection, this article reports their average running time per
step for agent-level detection and system-level detection in
Fig. 13. Although DETect is the most efficient on the Flock
dataset which contains only 150 agents, its running time grows
steeply with respect to the number of agents and peaks on the
Traffic dataset which contains 2522 agents. Such inefficiency
may be due to its concrete implementation in NetLogo. Among
deep learning methods within our framework, GDN+H and
sGNN+H are faster than others because of their simplicity
in spatio-temporal modeling. The overall running time of

Fig. 13. Runtime of different methods on all datasets. Best viewed in color.

HSTCL, TSCPP+H, and OCGTL+H are comparable. However, OCGTL+H takes more time in agent-level detection than
other methods, which may be due to its computationally costly
design of transformation learning. Notably, on the large-scale
Traffic dataset, the efficiency of HSTCL becomes closer to
sGNN+H, which demonstrates the scalability of HSTCL.
On the Traffic dataset where agents are significantly more
than regions, the overall running time is dominated by agentlevel detection. On the Flock and Pedestrian datasets where
regions are more than agents, system-level detection dominates
the running time for HSTCL and TSCPP+H. For GDN+H,
OCGTL+H, and sGNN+H, agent-level detection takes more
time. This may be attributed to the simplicity or ignorance
of temporal modeling, and that agent graphs are denser than
region graphs. Note that the running time of all methods
is evaluated on a single machine. In practice, agent-level
detection can be accomplished by each agent in parallel. Thus,
it is expected that all distributed detection methods scale well
as the number of agents grows.
V. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes a hierarchical framework named
HSTCL for emergence detection in CAS under the distributed
setting. By aggregating agent-level detecting results from
the bottom-up, HSTCL learns a system representation that
captures emergence-related patterns. Nonlinear relationships
between agents and their neighbors are encoded in agent
representations through STE. These representations are learned
in a self-supervised manner by preserving the spatio-temporal
consistency. HSTCL surpasses the traditional methods and
deep learning methods on three datasets with well-known
yet hard-to-detect emergent phenomena. HSTCL is flexible
in incorporating deep learning methods from graph-level CPD
and AD for effective emergence detection.
In the future, HSTCL can be extended from three dimensions: data, problems, and methods. On the data dimension,
we plan to acquire real-time data streams from devices in

CHEN et al.: HSTCL FOR EMERGENCE DETECTION IN COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS

the Internet of Things to test HSTCL’s effectiveness in live
environments. Besides, allowing the addition and removal of
agents will make the simulators more realistic and bring extra
challenges to dynamic graph learning [51]. It is also promising
to utilize simulators based on large language models [73] to
promote the quality of simulation data and make the evaluation
results more convincing. These simulators can better incorporate domain knowledge, and recover complex agent behaviors
beyond predefined simulation rules. When real-world observations of agent states are sparse and incomplete, graph learning
methods can be developed to complement missing information
and possible auxiliary information can be leveraged to assist
the detection [74]. When the systems contain heterogeneous
agents, category-aware STEs and learning strategies can be
designed to modeling heterogeneous dynamics and interacting
patterns [75]. On the problem dimension, it is more realistic to
consider partially missing messages and time delays in agents’
communication, which will trigger the research of more robust
detectors. On the method dimension, distributed GNNs and
advanced CPD methods can further boost the performance of
emergence detection. Besides, it is promising to develop graph
learning methods that can capture emergence-related higher
order structures of a system.
R EFERENCES
[1] O. Artime and M. De Domenico, “From the origin of life to pandemics:
Emergent phenomena in complex systems,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A,
Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 380, no. 2227, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 20200410.
[2] S. Kalantari, E. Nazemi, and B. Masoumi, “Emergence phenomena
in self-organizing systems: A systematic literature review of concepts,
researches, and future prospects,” J. Organizational Comput. Electron.
Commerce, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 224–265, Jul. 2020.
[3] E. O’Toole, “Decentralised detection of emergence in complex adaptive systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, School Comput. Sci. Statist., Trinity
College, Dublin, Ireland, 2016.
[4] J. Fromm, “Types and forms of emergence,” 2005, arXiv:nlin/0506028.
[5] M. A. Bedau, “Weak emergence,” Phil. Perspect., vol. 11, pp. 375–399,
Jan. 1997.
[6] G. Zeng et al., “Percolation-based health management of complex traffic
systems,” Frontiers Eng. Manage., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 557–571, Dec. 2021.
[7] E. O’toole, V. Nallur, and S. Clarke, “Decentralised detection of emergence in complex adaptive systems,” ACM Trans. Auton. Adapt. Syst.,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–31, 2017.
[8] S. Aminikhanghahi and D. J. Cook, “A survey of methods for time series
change point detection,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 339–367,
Sep. 2016.
[9] J. Gignoux, G. Chérel, I. D. Davies, S. R. Flint, and E. Lateltin,
“Emergence and complex systems: The contribution of dynamic graph
theory,” Ecol. Complex., vol. 31, pp. 34–49, Sep. 2017.
[10] M. Mnif and C. Müller-Schloer, “Quantitative emergence,” in Organic
Computing—A Paradigm Shift for Complex Systems. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2011, pp. 39–52.
[11] J. Procházka and K. Olševičová, “Monitoring lane formation of pedestrians: Emergence and entropy,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Intell. Inf. Database
Syst., 2015, pp. 221–228.
[12] Q. Liu, M. He, D. Xu, N. Ding, and Y. Wang, “A mechanism for
recognizing and suppressing the emergent behavior of UAV swarm,”
Math. Problems Eng., vol. 2018, pp. 1–14, Sep. 2018.
[13] J. Luo, J. Xin, G. Binghui, H. Zheng, W. Wu, and W. Lv, “Dynamic
model and crowd entropy measurement of crowd intelligence system,”
(in Chinese), Scientia Sinica Informationis, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 99–110,
2022.
[14] D. Fisch, M. Jänicke, B. Sick, and C. Müller-Schloer, “Quantitative
emergence - a refined approach based on divergence measures,” in
Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Self-Adaptive Self-Organizing Syst., Sep. 2010,
pp. 94–103.
[15] A. K. Seth, “Measuring emergence via nonlinear Granger causality,” in
Proc. ALIFE, vol. 2008, 2008, pp. 545–552.

13385

[16] R. L. Grossman et al., “Discovering emergent behavior from network
packet data: Lessons from the angle project,” in Next Generation of Data Mining. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2008,
pp. 267–284.
[17] M. A. Niazi and A. Hussain, “Sensing emergence in complex systems,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 2479–2480, Oct. 2011.
[18] E. Santos and Y. Zhao, “Automatic emergence detection in complex
systems,” Complexity, vol. 2017, pp. 1–24, Jan. 2017.
[19] S. Huang, S. Coulombe, Y. Hitti, R. Rabbany, and G. Rabusseau,
“Laplacian change point detection for single and multi-view dynamic
graphs,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1–32,
Apr. 2024.
[20] D. Sulem, H. Kenlay, M. Cucuringu, and X. Dong, “Graph similarity
learning for change-point detection in dynamic networks,” Mach. Learn.,
vol. 113, no. 1, pp. 1–44, Jan. 2024.
[21] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[22] A. D. Pazho, G. A. Noghre, A. A. Purkayastha, J. Vempati, O. Martin,
and H. Tabkhi, “A survey of graph-based deep learning for anomaly
detection in distributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 1–20, Jun. 2024.
[23] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI),
May 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[24] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning
for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11802–11816, Sep. 2024, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3325667.
[25] Y. Wang, A. Chakrabarti, D. Sivakoff, and S. Parthasarathy, “Fast change
point detection on dynamic social networks,” in Proc. 26th Int. Joint
Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2017, pp. 2992–2998.
[26] S. Huang, Y. Hitti, G. Rabusseau, and R. Rabbany, “Laplacian change
point detection for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 349–358.
[27] J. Cheng, M. Chen, M. Zhou, S. Gao, C. Liu, and C. Liu, “Overlapping
community change-point detection in an evolving network,” IEEE Trans.
Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 189–200, Mar. 2020.
[28] M. Li et al., “Guest editorial: Deep neural networks for graphs: Theory,
models, algorithms, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4367–4372, Apr. 2024.
[29] X. Zhang et al., “VGGM: Variational graph Gaussian mixture model for
unsupervised change point detection in dynamic networks,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 4272–4284, 2024.
[30] P. Jiao et al., “Generative evolutionary anomaly detection in dynamic
networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12234–12248, May 2023.
[31] P. Jiao, T. Li, H. Wu, C.-D. Wang, D. He, and W. Wang, “HB-DSBM:
Modeling the dynamic complex networks from community level to
node level,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11,
pp. 8310–8323, Jun. 2023.
[32] J. Li, R. Zheng, H. Feng, M. Li, and X. Zhuang, “Permutation
equivariant graph framelets for heterophilous graph learning,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11634–11648,
Sep. 2024.
[33] Y. Zheng et al., “Toward graph self-supervised learning with contrastive
adjusted zooming,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 7,
pp. 8882–8896, Sep. 2024.
[34] K. Zhu, P. Song, and C. Zhao, “Fuzzy state-driven cross-time spatial
dependence learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 8, 2024, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3371109.
[35] L. Zhao and L. Akoglu, “On using classification datasets to evaluate
graph outlier detection: Peculiar observations and new insights,” Big
Data, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 151–180, Jun. 2023.
[36] C. Qiu, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Raising the bar in graphlevel anomaly detection,” in Proc. Thirty-First Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intell., Jul. 2022, pp. 2196–2203.
[37] A. Protogerou, S. Papadopoulos, A. Drosou, D. Tzovaras, and I. Refanidis, “A graph neural network method for distributed anomaly detection
in IoT,” Evolving Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 19–36, Mar. 2021.
[38] Z. Qin, X. Lu, X. Nie, D. Liu, Y. Yin, and W. Wang, “Coarse-tofine video instance segmentation with factorized conditional appearance
flows,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1192–1208,
May 2023.

13386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2025

[39] W. Hu et al., “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks via view
fusion for trajectory data analytics,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4608–4620, Apr. 2023.
[40] H. Yuan, J. Bi, and M. Zhou, “Spatiotemporal task scheduling for heterogeneous delay-tolerant applications in distributed green data centers,”
IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1686–1697, Oct. 2019.
[41] Y. Wang, T. Xu, X. Niu, C. Tan, E. Chen, and H. Xiong, “STMARL:
A spatio-temporal multi-agent reinforcement learning approach for
cooperative traffic light control,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21,
no. 6, pp. 2228–2242, Jun. 2022.
[42] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis:
Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024.
[43] M. C. Schiappa, Y. S. Rawat, and M. Shah, “Self-supervised learning
for videos: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 13s, pp. 1–37,
Dec. 2023.
[44] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning
on graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023.
[45] X. Liu, Y. Liang, C. Huang, Y. Zheng, B. Hooi, and R. Zimmermann,
“When do contrastive learning signals help spatio-temporal graph forecasting?” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., Nov. 2022,
pp. 1–12.
[46] Q. Zhang, C. Huang, L. Xia, Z. Wang, Z. Li, and S. Yiu, “Automated
spatio-temporal graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf.,
Apr. 2023, pp. 295–305.
[47] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos,
and N. F. Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks:
A survey,” Wiley Interdiscipl. Rev., Comput. Stat., vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 223–247, Mar. 2015.
[48] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Mar. 2020.
[49] W. Ren and R. W. Beard, Distributed Consensus in Multi-Vehicle
Cooperative Control, vol. 27. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2008.
[50] Q. He, Z. Dong, F. Chen, S. Deng, W. Liang, and Y. Yang, “Pyramid:
Enabling hierarchical neural networks with edge computing,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1860–1870.
[51] J. Skarding, B. Gabrys, and K. Musial, “Foundations and modeling of
dynamic networks using dynamic graph neural networks: A survey,”
IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 79143–79168, 2021.
[52] S. Wang, J. Cao, and P. S. Yu, “Deep learning for spatio-temporal
data mining: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 8,
pp. 3681–3700, Aug. 2022.
[53] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[54] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS),
Dec. 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[55] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, F. M. Bianchi, and C. Alippi, “Understanding
pooling in graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2708–2718, May 2024.
[56] D. Lee, S. Lee, and H. Yu, “Learnable dynamic temporal pooling
for time series classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 8288–8296.
[57] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in Proc. ICLR, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=8gmWwjFyLj and https://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.6980
[58] J. Sun, J. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yi, Y. Liang, and Y. Zheng, “Predicting
citywide crowd flows in irregular regions using multi-view graph convolutional networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 5,
pp. 2348–2359, May 2022.
[59] F. Li, J. Feng, H. Yan, D. Jin, and Y. Li, “Crowd flow prediction for
irregular regions with semantic graph attention network,” ACM Trans.
Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1–14, Oct. 2022.
[60] H. Hua, Y. Li, T. Wang, N. Dong, W. Li, and J. Cao, “Edge computing with artificial intelligence: A machine learning perspective,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–35, Sep. 2023.
[61] T. Gong, L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, and T. Tang, “Edge intelligence in intelligent
transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 8919–8944, Sep. 2023.
[62] S. Tisue and U. Wilensky, “NetLogo: A simple environment for modeling complexity,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Complex Syst., vol. 21, 2004,
pp. 16–21.

[63] C. W. Reynolds, “Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed behavioral
model,” in Proc. 14th Annu. Conf. Comput. Graph. Interact. Techn.,
Aug. 1987, pp. 25–34.
[64] P. Karich and S. Schöder. Graphhopper, Version 0.4. Accessed: Mar. 5,
2015. [Online]. Available: https://graphhopper.com/
[65] C. Truong, L. Oudre, and N. Vayatis, “Selective review of offline
change point detection methods,” Signal Process., vol. 167, Feb. 2020,
Art. no. 107299.
[66] G. J. J. van den Burg and C. K. I. Williams, “An evaluation of change
point detection algorithms,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06222.
[67] P. Arbelaez, M. Maire, C. Fowlkes, and J. Malik, “Contour detection and hierarchical image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 898–916, May 2010.
[68] P. Jaccard, “The distribution of the flora in the Alpine zone. 1,” New
Phytologist, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 37–50, 1912.
[69] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change
point detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in
Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
[70] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic
convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018,
arXiv:1803.01271.
[71] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2021, pp. 8703–8714.
[72] X. Wang, Q. Kang, M. Zhou, L. Pan, and A. Abusorrah, “Multiscale
drift detection test to enable fast learning in nonstationary environments,”
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 3483–3495, Jul. 2021.
[73] C. Gao et al., “S3: Social-network simulation system with large language
model-empowered agents,” 2023, arXiv:2307.14984.
[74] J. Zhang, Z. Wei, Z. Yan, M. Zhou, and A. Pani, “Online change-point
detection in sparse time series with application to online advertising,”
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 1141–1151,
Jun. 2019.
[75] S. Chen and J. Wang, “Heterogeneous interaction modeling with reduced
accumulated error for multiagent trajectory prediction,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 8040–8052, Jun. 2024.
Siyuan Chen received the B.S. degree in mathematics and applied mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in
computer science and technology from Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China, in 2018 and 2023,
respectively.
He is currently a Lecturer with the School
of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering,
Guangzhou University, Guangzhou. His research
interests include graph learning, crowd intelligence,
spatio-temporal data mining, and social network
mining.
Xin Du received the B.S. degree in computer science
and technology from Jiangnan University, Wuxi,
China, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science and technology from Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China, in 2023.
He is currently a Lecturer with the Civil Aviation Electronic Information Engineering College,
Guangzhou Civil Aviation College, Guangzhou. His
research interests include deep learning and deep
reinforcement learning.

Jiahai Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from the University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan, in 2005.
In 2005, he joined Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China, where he is currently a Full
Professor with the School of Computer Science and
Engineering. He is currently leading the Intelligent
Optimization and Learning Laboratory, Sun Yatsen University. He has published a series of papers
in leading conferences and top journals including
AAAI, ACL, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS. His main
research interests include computational intelligence (deep neural networks
and metaheuristics) and its applications.
Prof. Wang is a Distinguished Member of CCF, China.