IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

317

A Membership Inference and Adversarial Attack
Defense Framework for Network Traffic Classifiers
Guangrui Liu , Weizhe Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Xurun Wang , Stephen King ,
and Shui Yu , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Malicious traffic identification methods in intrusion
detection systems have evolved from rule-based matching to
machine learning. However, security risks such as membership
inference and adversarial attacks hinder the practical deployment
of machine learning-based network intrusion detection systems
(ML-NIDSs). In this work, we design a defense framework called
hierarchical differential privacy (HierarchicalDP) to safeguard
ML-NIDS against membership inference and adversarial attacks.
First, we analyze the principles of membership inference and
adversarial attacks to find their correlation. Based on this, we
propose the feature distribution security metric (FDSM) to measure the risk of membership inference and adversarial attacks
on ML-NIDS. Then, we design the HierarchicalDP framework,
which partitions network traffic sample features according to
security levels and introduces distinct noise on each security
level feature to satisfy FDSM, thus defensing against membership inference and adversarial attacks. Finally, we evaluate
the defensive performance of the HierarchicalDP framework on
two network traffic datasets and four machine-learning models.
The HierarchicalDP defense framework, based on Laplace noise,
reduces the success rate of membership inference from 64.9%
to 54.4% (ineffective binary classification), the evasion rate
of adversarial samples from 86.1% to 23.2%, and maintains
model accuracy (ACC) fluctuations within 4.2%. Furthermore,
the HierarchicalDP framework adjusts sample features without
modifying the model, thereby not affecting the inference speed.
HierarchicalDP offers efficient and convenient defenses for
ML-NIDS deployed in a network.
Impact Statement—Artificial intelligence (AI)-driven network
intrusion detection is on the rise. ML-NIDSs are superior to
rule-based NIDS in identifying new network attacks. However,
AI security problems hinder ML-NIDS deployment. Existing
Manuscript received 30 October 2023; revised 18 December 2023; accepted
19 January 2024. Date of publication 26 January 2024; date of current version
27 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the Joint Funds of the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U22A2036 and in
part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under
Grant 2021YFB3101102. This article was recommended for publication by
Associate Editor Qinghua Lu upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments.
(Corresponding author: Guangrui Liu.)
Guangrui Liu and Xurun Wang are with the School of Cyberspace Science,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, China (e-mail:
liuguangrui@hit.edu.cn; 22S003113@stu.hit.edu.cn).
Weizhe Zhang is with the School of Cyberspace Science, Harbin Institute
of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, China, and also with Peng
Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China (e-mail: wzzhang@
hit.edu.cn).
Stephen King is with Leland High School, San Jose, CA 95120 USA
(e-mail: stephenking192008@gmail.com).
Shui Yu is with the School of Computer Science, University of Technology
Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia (e-mail: shui.yu@uts.edu.au).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at https://
doi.org/10.1109/TAI.2024.3357791, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAI.2024.3357791

AI security defenses ignore the network traffic characteristics,
resulting in weak protection for ML-NIDS. They not only failed
to effectively defend against member inference and adversarial
attacks, but they also lead to a decrease in ACC. This article
introduces the HierarchicalDP defense framework to protect MLNIDS. HierarchicalDP reduces the success rate of membership
inference to 54.4% (ineffective binary classification), lowers the
evasion rate of adversarial samples to 23.2%, and maintains ACC
fluctuations within 4.2%. Furthermore, HierarchicalDP does not
affect the inference speed, providing efficient and convenient
defenses for ML-NIDS.
Index Terms—Artificial intelligence (AI) in cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence safety, machine learning, responsible artificial intelligence, verifiable artificial intelligence.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE number of security vendors planning to integrate artificial intelligence (AI) technology into network intrusion
detection systems is increasing [1]. However, the practical deployment of machine learning-based network intrusion detection systems (ML-NIDSs) often encounters obstacles [2]. On
the one hand, the accuracy of malicious traffic identification by
ML-NIDS is unstable. On the other hand, the machine learning
security risks make ML-NIDS susceptible to attacks [3].
Membership inference and adversarial attacks are two primary machine learning security risks [4], [5]. Membership inference threatens the privacy of a model. This attack primarily
stems from vulnerabilities in the model training process, where
slight differences between training samples can be amplified
and reflected in the training results of the model. Adversarial
attacks threaten the inference accuracy of a model. This attack
primarily stems from vulnerabilities in the model inference
process, where specific small perturbations to test samples can
be amplified and reflected in the inference results of the mode.
Most existing defenses against membership inference and
adversarial attacks are designed for computer vision [6], [7],
which neglects particular characteristics of network traffic.
When applied to network traffic classifiers, these defenses not
only exhibit poor protection performance but also yield a significant drop in ACC [8], [9]. To address this issue, we introduce
a defense framework custom-built to protect ML-NIDS called
HierarchicalDP. This framework leverages the structural characteristics of network traffic samples. The HierarchicalDP
framework adjusts sample features without modifying the
model, thereby not affecting the inference speed. HierarchicalDP offers efficient and convenient defenses for ML-NIDS

2691-4581 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

318

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Hierarchical differential privacy (HierarchicalDP) defense effectiveness and FDSM operation principle.

deployed in a network. There are three major challenges in
designing this new defense framework.
1) CH1: How to design a security metric method for
network traffic classifiers? For member inference risk,
existing methods [10] use differential privacy to measure
the privacy security of the model, but they lack consideration for the characteristics of network traffic samples.
For adversarial attack risk, existing methods [11] conduct
adversarial robustness testing after model training is finished, lacking a way to evaluate the adversarial attack risk
before model training.
2) CH2: How to identify the security-sensitive features of
network traffic samples? Network traffic samples exhibit
structured characteristics, with the feature distributions of
samples in the same category displaying similarity [12].
Moreover, the impact of each feature on model privacy
and robustness varies. If privacy- and category-sensitive
features can be identified and protected, it can minimize
the impact of defense methods on model performance.
This aspect is rarely considered in existing work.
3) CH3: How to design differential privacy for ML-NIDS
to defend against member inference and adversarial
attacks? On the one hand, since most ML-NIDS use
incremental learning to update models [1], the defenses
should not change the model structure but rather add noise
to sample features. On the other hand, different sensitivity
features should add different noise to effectively protect
the security of ML-NIDS while keeping the added noise
as small as possible.
To address the above challenges, we design the HierarchicalDP, as shown in Fig. 1, which solves the above problems

by feature smoothing based on the structured characteristics of
traffic samples. First, since differential privacy and adversarial
robustness are quantifiable metrics for describing membership
inference and adversarial attack risks, we analyze their correlation and combine them by defining the feature distribution
security metric (FDSM). FDSM aims to ensure that the feature probability distribution of samples meets the robustness
requirement under the security budget. Then, we design the
HierarchicalDP defense framework based on FDSM, which
realizes the smoothing of feature distribution by adding differential noise to the critical features of the samples. The critical features contain privacy- and category-sensitive features
computed by the feature hierarchization strategy based on the
attention mechanism. HierarchicalDP can defend ML-NIDS
based on raw traffic or statistical feature datasets. Due to only
modifying input data, it applies to any commonly used machine
learning model.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows.
1) Targeting CH1, we introduce the FDSM. By extending
the existing descriptions of differential privacy and adversarial robustness using Rényi divergence, we unify their
formal expressions under α-metric and β-divergence.
2) Targeting CH2, we calculate the contribution of each feature to the predicted label using the self-attention mechanism. Then, we design a feature hierarchization strategy
to identify the privacy- and category-sensitive features of
network traffic samples.
3) Targeting CH3, we design HierarchicalDP defense
framework for ML-NIDS. For training samples, we add
differential noise to privacy-sensitive features, enabling
a lightweight differential privacy mechanism. For test

LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

samples, we introduce differential perturbations to
category-sensitive features, achieving provably secure
techniques for enhancing adversarial robustness.
4) Furthermore, we evaluate the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP on two publicly available malicious traffic
datasets, consisting of packet and session samples, using
four standard models. Compared to the state-of-the-art
existing methods, HierarchicalDP reduces the membership inference success rate (MIR) by 8.4% and lowers the
adversarial example escape rate (AER) by 23.7% while
keeping the impact on ACC within 4.2%.
The rest is organized as below. Related works are discussed
in Section II. The analysis of the correlation between member
privacy and adversarial robustness and the formal definition of
FDSM are introduced in Section III. The feature hierarchization strategy and HierarchicalDP algorithms are explained in
Section IV. Experiment results are shown and discussed in
Section V. Finally, we conclude our work in Section VI.

319

TABLE I
IMPORTANT NOTATIONS
Symbol

Definition

xi = (xi1 , xi1 , . . . , xid )
f i = (fi1 , fi1 , . . . , fid )
i(1 ≤ i ≤ n)
j(1 ≤ j ≤ d)
Y = {Y1 , Y2 , · · · , Ym }
c(1 ≤ c ≤ m)
w ∼ Yc = (w1 , w2 , · · · , wd )
Strain
Stest
X
F
α
β

The vector of sample features
The distribution of sample features
The index of samples
The index of feature dimensions
The set of sample category labels
The index of category labels
The feature weights of category Yc
The set of training samples
The set of testing samples
The set of all possible samples
The model of machine learning
The norm of the metric
The order of divergence

In this section, we review related works in machine learning
on differential privacy and adversarial robustness, as well as related works on the attention mechanism, an essential technique
for HierarchicalDP to determine key sample features.

Various studies enhance the adversarial robustness of machine learning models, but they interpret the adversarial example differently. Standard robustness enhancement techniques
[11] include adversarial training, feature denoising, and random
transformation. However, most existing works only test the effectiveness of methods experimentally and rarely theoretically
analyze the adversarial robustness. Diochnos et al. [18] gave a
more reasonable formal description of adversarial robustness,
but there is room for generalization.

A. Differential Privacy

C. Attention Mechanism

Differential privacy was proposed by Dwork et al. [13],
which uses randomized responses to ensure that the database
output is affected by a single record below a threshold. It
became the gold standard for data security due to its rigorous
quantitative proof of privacy leakage. Chatzikokolakis et al.
[14] extended the measure of dataset variation from Hamming
distance to an arbitrary metric space. Mironov [15] generalized
the extent of the difference in statistical information of datasets
from Max-divergence to Rényi divergence.
The differential privacy mechanism for machine learning
models [10] is divided into adding random noise to the output,
gradient, loss function, and input. Adding noise to the output
and loss function significantly affects the ACC. Differential
privacy can be achieved by adding a small amount of noise
to the gradient with the help of composition theory, but strict
differential privacy cannot be achieved. Studies on adding noise
to the input have focused on distributed problems related to
local differential privacy.

The attention mechanism was proposed by Bahdanau et al.
[20] to improve the effectiveness of models in processing
sequential information. The core idea of the attention mechanism is the kernel regression theory proposed by Nadaraya and
Watson in statistics. The self-attention mechanism allows for
analyzing the correlations among the internal elements in a single sequence. The multiheaded self-attention (MSA) proposed
by Vaswani et al. [21] improves the accuracy of feature correlation by taking the average of multiple correlation matrices.
Since attention scores and weights reflect the impact of different
features on the classification results of machine learning models, many works use the attention mechanism to estimate and
rank the contribution of sample features to category labels [22].

II. RELATED WORKS

B. Adversarial Robustness
Adversarial example was discovered by Szegedy et al. [16],
which enables a machine learning model to output a high
confidence misclassification result by adding a specific small
perturbation to the sample. Goodfellow et al. [17] formally
described adversarial examples and improved model adversarial
robustness through adversarial training. The first concise definition of adversarial robustness was given by Diochnos et al.
[18]. Then, Pinot et al. [19] further analyzed the relationship
between adversarial robustness and differential privacy.

III. FEATURE DISTRIBUTION SECURITY METRIC
In this section, we analyze the characteristics of network
traffic samples. Then, we propose a FDSM for ML-NIDS,
which unifies the definitions of differential privacy and adversarial robustness. Table I lists the important notations used in
this article.
A. Network Traffic Characteristics
Previous studies have analyzed the relationship between differential privacy and adversarial robustness in machine learning
[23]. However, due to the lack of the premise assumption with
structured samples, providing a unified description of both aspects is challenging. Furthermore, existing research either confuses the machine learning training and inference processes [19]

320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

or only examines one of the scenarios [24]. In this section, our
contribution lies in systematically exploring these relationships
and articulating their practical significance.
Two data preprocessing methods exist for network traffic
samples in ML-NIDSs [12].
1) Packet samples (network traffic samples based on packet
field information): Each packet is an independent sample,
and the field information of each packet is recorded.
2) Session samples (network traffic samples based on session statistics information): Packets are grouped into
sessions, and each session is a sample, with the statistical
information of the session being recorded.
Both types of samples exhibit structured characteristics, with
the feature distributions of samples in the same category displaying similarity. This is because traffic sessions with the same
network attack have similar structural characteristics, while
different network attacks have significant structural differences.
The purpose of highlighting the structural characteristics of
network traffic samples is to determine the presence of privacyand category-sensitive features.
For packet samples, their file format complies with the network transmission protocol, providing structural characteristics
to the features and making it possible to identify sensitive
features by the self-attention mechanism.
For session samples, which store features in a tabular format,
sensitive features can be identified based on feature meanings.
Of course, sensitive features of session samples can also be
identified by the self-attention mechanism.
B. FDSM
FDSM achieves the following.
1) Differential privacy of the training dataset Strain should
be guaranteed before the training samples are input into
the model.
2) Adversarial robustness of the testing dataset Stest should
be guaranteed before the testing samples are input into
the model.
The definition of FDSM is as follows.
Definition 1 (FDSM): A randomized mechanism M : X →
X satisfies (α-γ, β-)-FDSM if for any similar sample feature
vectors xi , xi ∈ X
Dβ (f (M (xi ))f (M (xi ))) ≤ , s.t. dα (xi , xi ) ≤ γ

(1)

where  is the safety budget under β-divergence. As  decreases
or β increases and γ increases or α decreases, the machine
learning model is safer. xi is any sample feature vector whose
difference with xi satisfies dα (xi , xi ) ≤ γ. γ is the maximum difference between similar samples xi and xi under the
α-metric. X is all possible values of the sample feature vectors
xi . M is a randomization mechanism for the feature vector
xi . f is the feature distribution of X obtained by the machine
learning model F .
FDSM is derived from differential privacy and adversarial
robustness, and the derivation process is described in Appendix
A (see the supplementary material).

IV. HIERARCHICALDP
In this section, we propose a feature hierarchization strategy
for samples, analyze the correlation between different levels
of features with differential privacy or adversarial robustness,
and induce the theoretical basis of HierarchicalDP. Then, we
introduce the attention mechanism network for computing feature weights and explain the implementation of HierarchicalDP
using Laplace noise as an example.
A. Feature Hierarchization Strategy
Existing differential privacy mechanisms in machine learning, such as Gaussian mechanisms, face the curse of dimensionality. The noise in high-dimensional settings is unbearably
considerable and severely affects model performance [1]. An intuitive question is whether differential privacy can be achieved
by adding noise to only a subset of sample features.
Due to the structured characteristics of network traffic samples, whether packets or sessions, the assumption of sparsity in
critical features can be fully exploited. Only a subset of sample
features is relevant to differential privacy or adversarial robustness. In contrast, most features are nearly irrelevant to privacy
or robustness. For instance, the protocol feature is always TCP
in the semiconnect scanning traffic category. Obfuscating this
feature does not contribute to privacy protection. Therefore, the
primary objective is to identify the key features of differential
privacy and adversarial robustness. To achieve this, we propose
a feature hierarchization strategy. The following four levels are
sufficient for a nonredundant partitioning of sample features,
while more detailed levels would result in unnecessary computational overhead.
Feature hierarchization strategy. For any d-dimensional sample xi ∼ Yc , there exists four levels of features.
1) Level-1 features (intraclass critical features) are strongly
correlated to the Yc category, with dimension number j ∈
S 1 ∼ Yc .
2) Level-2 features (interclass critical features) are weakly
correlated to the Yc category but strongly correlated to
any other category, with dimension number j ∈ S 2 ∼ Yc .
3) Level-3 features (intraclass noncritical features) are
weakly correlated to any category but strongly correlated
to a particular sample xi , with dimension number j ∈
S 3 ∼ Yc .
4) Level-4 features (interclass noncritical features) are
weakly correlated to any category or sample, with dimension number j ∈ S 4 ∼ Yc .
Level-1 features are decisive for sample xi to belong to category Yc , so their values are generally stable. Level-2 features
are related to adversarial robustness because adjusting these
features causes the machine learning model to infer xi to other
categories. Level-3 features are related to differential privacy
because these features carry information unique to xi . Level-4
features take almost the same value in any sample. Accordingly,
we define several foundational concepts in HierarchicalDP.
Definition 2 (Range and sensitivity of HierarchicalDP):
Let there be n samples in any dataset S, each sample with
d-dimensional features. There are m categories in S, and

LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

321

Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the defense effects of HierarchicalDP on the model training and inference process. During model training, high privacysensitive features of training samples are protected to defend against membership inference. During model inference, high category-sensitive features of testing
samples are protected to defend against adversarial attack.

m
each category Yc has nc samples, n = c=1 nc . For any
sample, xi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) has (for training sample) or implicitly has (for testing sample) a category label Yc (1 ≤ c ≤ m).
possesses a feature weight vector w ∼ Yc =
Each category Yc 
j=1
1. The weight vector of the uni(w1 , w2 , . . . , wd ), d wj =
m
versal sample set X is w = c=1 nnc w ∼ Yc . f denotes the
information of the feature distribution obtained by the machine
learning model F from xi ∼ Yc .
1) The global sample range in S is R = maxi dα (xi , xi ).
2) For the class Yc , the intraclass sample range in S is R ∼
Yc = maxi dα (xi , xi ), where xi , xi ∼ Yc .
3) The global sample sensitivity in S is Δf = maxi dα (w 
xi , w  xi ).
4) For the class Yc , the intraclass sample sensitivity
in S is Δf ∼ Yc = maxi dα (w  xi , w  xi ), where
xi , xi , w ∼ Yc .
5) For the jth feature of class Yc (1 ≤ j ≤ d), the
intraclass feature sensitivity in S is Δfj ∼ Yc =
maxi dα (wj xij , wj xij ), where xi , xi ∼ Yc and wj is the
jth dimension of w ∼ Yc .

6) For the Lv-l of class Yc (1 ≤ l ≤ 4), the intraclass Lv-l
sensitivity in S is Δf l ∼ Yc = maxi,j dα (wj xij , wj xij ),
where xi , xi ∼ Yc , j ∈ S l ∼ Yc and wj is the jth dimension of w ∼ Yc .
Where wj denotes the importance of the jth feature for xi
to belong to class Yc . Considering the samples in S as random vectors, the sample xi ∼ Yc has d-dimensional features
xij (1 ≤ j ≤ d), where the jth feature xij takes a value that
follows the probability distribution pj ∼ Yc , then the sample
xi ∼ Yc follows the joint probability distribution p1,2,··· ,d ∼ Yc .
HierarchicalDP protects data privacy by ensuring that samples of the same class are indistinguishable, then γ = Δf ∼ Yc
in (α-γ, β-)-FDSM. It assumes that the number of samples
in each category minc nc  1 and Δf ∼ Yc Δf . Intraclass
privacy protection can reduce the noise variance with a fixed
privacy budget . As shown in Fig. 2, during the model training
process, HierarchicalDP focuses on protecting privacy-sensitive
features of training samples. Since different samples of the same
class have significant differences in level-2 and level-3 features,
the privacy correlation of these features is high.

322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. Architecture of HierarchicalDP. It is divided into the feature weight calculation network and the noise and perturbation generation algorithm. The
former calculates the importance weights of each feature for different categories. The latter levels the features according to the weights and adds different
noises to the training and testing samples based on the leveling results to achieve differential privacy and adversarial robustness.

HierarchicalDP enhances inference robustness by ensuring
that samples do not change their feature distributions due to
minor perturbations, then γ = Δf ∼ Yc in (α-γ, β-)-FDSM.
It assumes that the sample feature distribution of the same category in Stest is centralized and R ∼ Yc R. Adding intraclass
perturbations to samples can destroy the structure of the adversarial perturbation without changing the feature distribution too
much. As shown in Fig. 2, during the model inference process,
HierarchicalDP focuses on protecting category-sensitive features of testing samples. Changes in level-1 and level-2 features
are more likely to cause class changes, hence the higher class
correlation of these features.
B. HierarchicalDP
The architecture of the HierarchicalDP is shown in Fig. 3,
which is divided into two parts: the feature weight calculation
network and the noise and perturbation generation algorithm.
1) Feature Weight Calculation Network: Feature weight
calculation network is based on the method proposed by Škrlj
et al. [25]. The difference is that our method can compute feature weight vectors for different categories. The feature weight

calculation network is divided into the MSA and the multilayer
perceptron (MLP). The MLP can be replaced with the target machine learning model to compute more accurate feature weights.
The MSA can be represented as
1
softmax(W k xi + bk )
h
h

MSA(xi ) =

k=1
xij

e
softmax(xi ) = d

j=1 e

xij

where xi = (xi1 , xi1 , . . . , xid ) is the d-dimensional feature vector of the ith input sample. xi is multiplied by the matrix W k
and adds the bias vector bk , essentially a spatial mapping of
xi . The mapping result is input to the softmax function, which
changes each vector dimension into a weight in the interval
[0, 1]. This process is repeated h times to obtain h weight
vectors w1i , w2i , . . . , whi . The final weight vector wi of xi is
the average of the h weight vectors.
The MSA is a parametric Nadaraya–Watson kernel regression using a radial basis function. The feature vector xi is
mapped to a new space using matrix W k and vector bk . The
softmax function weighted the average of the mapped vectors

LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

to obtain the feature weight vectors. The weights are calculated
multiple times and averaged to mitigate the effect of the initialization of W k and bk on the results.
The MSA is connected to the MLP using the  (Hadamard
product). The weight vectors wi are multiplied by the corresponding dimensions of the feature vectors xi . The weighted
feature vectors are input into the MLP. The parameters of MSA
(W k and bk ) and MLP are trained to optimize the cross-entropy
loss to make the feature weights more accurate.
When the network training is completed, the MLP can be
removed. Samples in Strain are reinput into the MSA. Each xi ∈
Strain outputs a d-dimensional weight vector wi . Let there be
n
in Strain and nc samples for each category Yc , n =
samples
m
c=1 nc . The weight vector w ∼ Yc of the Yc category and the
weight vector w of the universal sample set X are as follows:
w ∼ Yc =

1 
MSA(xi )
nc
xi ∼Yc
n

1
w=
MSA(xi ).
n
i=1

2) Noise and Perturbation Generation Algorithm:
The noise and perturbation generation algorithm contains
three parts: the feature hierarchization strategy algorithm,
the privacy-sensitive features protection algorithm, and
category-sensitive features protection algorithm.
The feature weight calculation network can provide the
weight of each feature for each category. The security budget
 and feature sensitivity Δfj determine how the feature levels
are classified based on the weights wj . The noise added to each
level feature can be adjusted according to the problem. This
article focuses on the most common Laplace noise [13], but the
methods involved can be extended to other types of noise.
The differential privacy can result to different probabilities
for the two queries generating the same value smaller than e .
The different probabilities are resulted from adding the random noise to the output. The reason of HierarchicalDP adding
noise to only a subset of features to achieve (α-γ, β-)-FDSM
is as follows.
A machine learning model F gets a randomly returned feature vector xi = (xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xid ) for a query of Strain or Stest .
Suppose the difference in the probability of the two features
xij , xij returning the same value for two queries is initially
smaller than e ; adding noise to these features is not needed.
So  and Δfj determine which xij does not require adding
noise. In particular, if the  → ∞ or Δfj → 0, any xij does
not need to add noise. Algorithm 1 shows how to hierarchize the features of network traffic samples based on their
feature weights. Algorithm 2 shows how HierarchicalDP protects the privacy-sensitive features of network traffic samples.
Algorithm 3 shows how HierarchicalDP protects the categorysensitive features of network traffic samples.
The proof that Algorithms 2 and Algorithm 3 satisfy
(α-γ, β-)-FDSM is shown in Appendix C (available online).
The HierarchicalDP mechanism does not add noise to features
with high weights, as the features with lower weights often

323

Algorithm 1 Feature Hierarchization Strategy
Input: weight vectors w ∼ Yc , safety budget , intra-class feature sensitivities Δfj ∼ Yc
Output:
results
S ∼ Yc =
 hierarchization
 1 feature
S , S2, S3, S4
1: for c = 1 to m do
2:
Initialize Sall = {1, 2, · · · , d};
3:
for j = 1 to d do
4:
if wj ≥  then
 the j-dimension of w ∼ Yc
5:
put j into S 1 ;
2
6:
put j into Stemp
;

7:
else if Δfj ≤ d then
 Δfj ∼ Yc
8:
put j into S 4 ;
9:
end if
10:
end for
11: end for
12: for c = 1 to m do
2
13:
S 2 ← Stemp
− S1;
3
14:
S ← Sall − S 1 − S 2 − S 4 ;
15: end for
16: return S ∼ Yc ;

Algorithm 2 Privacy-Sensitive Features Protection
Input: training set Strain , privacy budget , intra-class Lv2 ∨ 3 feature sensitivity Δfj2∨3 ∼ Yc , feature hierarchization results S ∼ Yc
Output: training set Strain satisfying (α-γ, β-)-FDSM
1: for c = 1 to m do
2:
for i = 1 to nc do
3:
for j = 1 to d do
4:
if j ∈ S 2 or j ∈ S 3 then
2∨3
5:
noise z ∼ Laplace(0, Δf );
6:
x
ij ← xij + z;  xi ∈ Strain , xi ∈ Strain
7:
else
8:
x
ij ← xij ;
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
end for
12: end for
train ;
13: return S

lead to privacy disclosure. It may be counterintuitive. However, it is easy to understand when considering that overfitting
is one of the fundamental causes of membership inference
and adversarial attack. Overfitting is precisely caused by models learning too much detail about irrelevant features. On the
one hand, the adversarial robustness of models trained with
Strain is also improved. Algorithm 2 can be used jointly with
Algorithm 3 to achieve a more robust model security protection. On the other hand, depending on the actual requirements,
using only one of Algorithm 2 or Algorithm 3 to achieve more
lightweight security protection.

324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Algorithm 3 Category-Sensitive Features Protection
Input: training set Stest , robustness budget , intra-class Lv1 ∨ 2 feature sensitivity Δfj1∨2 ∼ Yc , feature hierarchization results S ∼ Yc
Output: testing set Stest satisfying (α-γ, β-)-FDSM
1: for i = 1 to n do
2:
for j = 1 to d do
3:
if j ∈ ∀S 1 ∼ Yc then
max Δf 1∨2

perturbation z ∼ Laplace(0, c 
);
5:
x
ij ← xij + z;
 xi ∈ Stest , xi ∈ Stest
6:
else
7:
x
ij ← xij ;
8:
end if
9:
end for
10: end for
test ;
11: return S
4:

V. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate HierarchicalDP by answering four key
questions.
1) Q1: Does HierarchicalDP correctly partition sample features into security levels?
2) Q2: Does HierarchicalDP achieve optimal defense effectiveness by adding noise to each security level feature?
3) Q3: How effective is HierarchicalDP in defending against
membership inference and adversarial attacks? How does
it compare with other best-effort defenses?
4) Q4: How does HierarchicalDP perform on datasets other
than network traffic?
To address the above questions, we selected a packet sample
dataset (USTC-TFC2016) and a session sample dataset (CICIDS2017) for experimentation. We evaluated the performance
of both datasets using four typical machine learning models.
We compared the defense effect of HierarchicalDP against two
types of membership inference and two types of adversarial
attacks. Section V-A describes the datasets, prior defenses, and
our evaluation methodology. Subsequent sections address each
question in turn. The evaluation code is available at https://
github.com/liuguangrui-hit/HierarchicalDP.
Evaluation highlights: HierarchicalDP provides reasonable
and quantifiable privacy budgets and robustness budgets for
different models on network traffic datasets. This is the first
work that unifies and implements differential privacy and adversarial robustness. HierarchicalDP provides the privacy budget
 ≤ 0.2 and the robustness budget  ≤ 0.2 under D∞ divergence, with the sensitivity γ ≤ 1 under d1 metric. Comparing
HierarchicalDP to the best-effort defenses on membership inference, HierarchicalDP models give better privacy protection
(e.g., 69.2% versus 50.0% MIR for CICIDS2017 on LSTM)
and similar ACC fluctuations (less than 3.2%). Comparing HierarchicalDP to the best-effort defenses on adversarial attacks,
HierarchicalDP models give better adversarial robustness (e.g.,
18.7% versus 10.9% AER for MNIST on CNN) and similar
ACC fluctuations (less than 4.2%).

A. Methodology
1) Datasets: We evaluated the defensive effectiveness
of HierarchicalDP using two network traffic datasets listed
in Table II.
USTC-TFC2016 [26] is a network traffic classification task
containing 20 categories and 65k samples. Each sample is composed of 28 × 28 = 784 features and a classification label. We
randomly selected ten categories for testing.
CICIDS2017 [27] is an intrusion detection task composed of
malicious network traffic containing 22 categories and 238 000
samples. Each sample is composed of 78 features and a classification label. Due to the uneven distribution of samples in
each category, we integrated the categories according to the
method in [28].
2) Models: We evaluated the defensive effectiveness of HierarchicalDP using four machine learning models.
MLP is a three-layer neural network consisting of an input,
hidden, and output layer. It is the simplest feedforward neural
network structure.
Deep neural network (DNN) is a deeper feedforward neural
network with one input layer, eight hidden layers, and one
output layer.
Convolutional neural network (CNN) is a neural network
suitable for image recognition, consisting of one input layer,
five convolutional layers, five pooling layers, three fully connected layers, and one output layer. The size of the convolutional kernel is 3 × 3.
LSTM is a recurrent neural network suitable for processing
temporal tasks, and we used the network structure from [29].
We trained three baseline models for each dataset in our
experiments. Table II shows the training and testing set for each
dataset and the corresponding accuracy of each baseline model.
The USTC-TFC2016 dataset structure resembles image data,
making it suitable for CNN models. The CICIDS2017 dataset
structure exhibits strong temporal characteristics, making it
suitable for LSTM models.
3) Evaluation Metrics: We use three metrics to evaluate the
defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP:
MIR represents the probability of inferring whether a given
sample is from the training set through membership inference.
AER represents the probability that an adversarial example
can escape the recognition of the model.
ACC represents the classification accuracy of the model on
the testing set.
4) Attack Methodology: We randomly selected 1000 samples for each dataset as cases for membership inference and
adversarial attacks, among which 500 samples were from the
testing set and 500 samples were from the training set.
For membership inference, we choose two methods based
on the loss function of the target model and the predictions of
the shadow model. Modification of prediction entropy (MPE)
[30] is a prediction-based inference attack based on prediction
entropy modification. Enhanced membership inference (EMI)
[31] is a shadow model-based EMI attack.
For adversarial attacks, we choose two methods with higher
transferability and richer attack forms. Nesterov iterative fast

LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

325

TABLE II
EVALUATION DATASETS AND BASELINE MODELS
Symbol
USTC-TFC2016
CICIDS2017

Feature Size

Training Set Size

Testing Set Size

Target Labels

Model Architecture (Baseline Accuracy)

784
78

6k
20k

3k
10k

10
7

MLP (0.859), DNN (0.897), CNN (0.916)
MLP (0.854), DNN (0.887), LSTM (0.901)

Fig. 4. Grading results of different class features in USTC-TFC2016: (a) BitTorrent; (b) Facetime; (c) FTP; (d) Gmail; (e) Miuref; (f) MySQL; (g) Neris;
(h) Nsis-ay; (i) Outlook; and (j) WorldOfWarcraft.

gradient sign method (NIFGSM) [32] is an iterative adversarial
attack based on the Nesterov accelerated gradient method with
high transferability of adversarial examples. AutoAttack project
gradient descent (APGD) [33] is an extended version of the
PGD attack that integrates multiple attack methods.
5) Prior Defenses for Comparison: We compared HierarchicalDP, a defense method based on Laplace noise, with
previous defense methods.
For membership inference defense, we choose two methods
involving loss function optimization and model output correction. Adversarial regularization (AdvReg) [34] is an enhanced
adversarial training technique that minimizes the prediction
loss of the model and maximizes the cost of inference attacks.
MemGuard [35] is a defense technique that adds noise to the
confidence to create an adversarial deception against membership inference attackers.
For adversarial attacks defense, we choose two methods involving sample feature smoothing and reverse adversarial perturbations. Denoised smoothing (DenSmo) [36] is a technique
that trains a denoiser for the target model and smooths sample
features to eliminate adversarial perturbations. Antiadversaries
(AntiAdv) [37] is a technique that adds a noise vector with
the opposite direction of adversarial perturbations to testing
samples to counteract their adversarial effects.

obvious as possible and the number of features balanced while
ensuring the privacy and robustness budget  ≤ 0.2. Figs. 4 and
5 show the feature hierarchization results for each dataset.
For USTC-TFC2016 ( = 0.2), as shown in Fig. 4, the level1 and level-2 features are concentrated in the upper part of the
image. In contrast, the level-3 and level-4 features are in the
lower part. This is because the USTC dataset converts the PCAP
files into 28 × 28 image pixels in hexadecimal form and append
0x00 if the PCAP file is shorter than 784 bytes. The feature
hierarchization result graph reflects this process well. The level1 features account for 7.8%, the level-2 features account for
9.4%, the level-3 features account for 26.6%, and the level-4
features account for 56.1%.
For CICIDS2017 ( = 0.2), as shown in Fig. 5, since it is not
an image sample, its features do not have a positional relationship. Due to the brief nature of CICIDS features, the sample
dataset tends to focus on distinguishing between malicious and
benign instances for better intrusion detection. Consequently,
the differences among malicious samples are relatively small,
but the distinction between malicious and benign samples is significant. However, attack traffic with similar functions (such as
Dos and DDoS) also exhibits more similar feature distributions.
The level-1 features account for 19.4%, the level-2 features
account for 26.7%, the level-3 features account for 16.5%, and
the level-4 features account for 37.4%.

B. Security Level Partitioning Results (Q1)
Q1: Does HierarchicalDP correctly partition sample features into security levels?
We used the feature hierarchization strategy to partition the
features of each dataset. First, we normalized the sample feature vectors. Then, we tried to make the feature differences as

C. Impact of Noise (Q2)
Q2: Does HierarchicalDP achieve optimal defense effectiveness by adding noise to each security level feature?
We choose the USTC-TFC2016 dataset and the MLP model
as an example.

326

Fig. 5.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Grading results of different class features in CICIDS2017: (a) Benign; (b) Bot; (c) Bruteforce; (d) DDoS; (e) Dos; (f) PortScan; and (g) web-attack.

Fig. 6. Trends of MIR and ACC as the number of protected features in training samples increases (USTC-TFC2016 on MLP). The number of features is
increased in three ways, increasing ten each time: (a) MIR of MPE; (b) MIR of EMI; and (c) ACC of MLP.

1) Validation of Feature Privacy Relevance: During model
training, HierarchicalDP noise is gradually added to more features in the training samples input into the model in the following three orders, and the changes in ACC and MIR are observed.
a) High privacy-sensitive features priority: HierarchicalDP
noise is added to the second, third, first, and fourth level
features of the training samples in order, with features
arranged in descending order of weight and increasing
the number of protected features by ten each time.
b) Low privacy-sensitive features priority: HierarchicalDP
noise is added to the fourth, first, third, and second level
features of the training samples in order, with features
arranged in ascending order of weight and increasing the
number of protected features by ten each time.
c) Random: Add HierarchicalDP noise to features randomly, increasing the number of protected features by ten
each time.
2) Validation of Feature Category Relevance: During
model inference, HierarchicalDP noise is gradually added to
more features in the testing samples input into the model in the
following three orders, and the changes in the ACC and AER
are observed.
a) High category-sensitive features priority: HierarchicalDP noise is added to the first, second, third, and fourth
level features of the testing samples in order, with features

arranged in descending order of weight and increasing the
number of protected features by one each time.
b) Low category-sensitive features priority: HierarchicalDP
noise is added to the fourth, third, second, and first level
features of the testing samples in order, with features
arranged in ascending order of weight and one protected
feature added each time.
c) Random: Add HierarchicalDP noise to features randomly, increasing the number of protected features by one
each time.
As shown in Fig. 6, MIR decreases the fastest when protecting high privacy-sensitive priority and the slowest when
protecting low privacy-sensitive priority. When protecting high
privacy-sensitive priority, after protecting all level-2 and level-3
features (the top 30%), adding more protected features leads to
MIR decrease slowly. However, adding HierarchicalDP noise to
the training samples significantly impacts the ACC. Therefore,
only HierarchicalDP noise to level-2 and level-3 features can
protect privacy without severely affecting the ACC. When protecting low privacy-sensitive features priority, MIR decreases
rapidly after protecting the bottom 30% of the features. This is
mainly due to two reasons: 1) HierarchicalDP starts to protect
high privacy-sensitive features (level-3) and 2) enough features
have been protected. When protecting low privacy-sensitive
features, ACC begins to rapidly decrease after protecting the

LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

327

Fig. 7. Trends of AER and ACC as the number of protected features in testing samples increases (USTC-TFC2016 on MLP). The number of features is
increased in three ways, increasing one each time: (a) AER of NIFGSM; (b) AER of APGD; and (c) ACC of MLP.

Fig. 8. Comparison of MIR for different models under various member
inference defenses against MPE [30]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

Fig. 9. Comparison of MIR for different models under various member
inference defenses against EMI [31]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

bottom 40% of the features, mainly due to adding noise to high
category-sensitive features (level-1).
As shown in Fig. 7, AER decreases the fastest when protecting high category-sensitive features priority and the slowest when protecting low category-sensitive features priority.
Adding HierarchicalDP noise to the testing samples hardly

affects the ACC. When protecting high category-sensitive features priority, after protecting all level-1 features (the top
10%), increasing the number of protected features leads to a
higher AER. This is because the adversarial samples are located on the model classification boundary, and adding noise
to too many features can easily change the sample category.

328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 10. Comparison of the impact of various member inference defenses
on ACC: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

Fig. 11. Comparison of AER for different models under various adversarial
attack defenses against NIFGSM [32]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

Therefore, adding HierarchicalDP noise only to level-1 features
can achieve the best defense effect against adversarial attacks.

Fig. 9 compares the defense effectiveness of various defense
methods against EMI attacks. HierarchicalDP shows improved
performance on the USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS2017 datasets
compared to existing methods, reducing MIR by an average of
8.6% on various models. Fig. 10 shows the impact of various
defense methods on ACC. The effect of adding HierarchicalDP
noise during model training on accuracy is similar to that of
other methods, with fluctuations within 3.2%.
Regarding the robustness of testing samples, Fig. 11 compares the effectiveness of various defense methods against
NIFGSM attacks. HierarchicalDP offers significantly improved performance on the USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS2017
datasets, reducing AER by an average of 26.9% on various
models. Fig. 12 compares the defense effectiveness of various
defense methods against APGD attacks. HierarchicalDP shows
slightly improved performance on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset
compared to existing methods, reducing AER by an average of
10.8% on various models. HierarchicalDP offers significantly
improved performance on the CICIDS2017 dataset, reducing
AER by an average of 28.8% on various models. Fig. 13
shows the impact of various defense methods on ACC. The
effect of adding HierarchicalDP noise during model training
on accuracy is smaller than other methods, with fluctuations
within 4.2%.

D. Effectiveness of Defense (Q3)
Q3: How effective is HierarchicalDP in defending against
membership inference and adversarial attacks? How does it
compare with other best-effort defenses?
We applied HierarchicalDP protection to model input samples during training and inference. We test the differences
between the model with and without defense in ACC, MIR,
and AER. We also compared the defense effectiveness of
HierarchicalDP with other membership inference defenses and
adversarial attack defenses.
Regarding the privacy of training samples, Fig. 8 compares the effectiveness of various defense methods against MPE
attacks. HierarchicalDP shows slightly improved performance
on the USTC-TFC2016 dataset compared to existing methods,
reducing MIR by an average of 4.0% on various models. HierarchicalDP offers significantly improved performance on the
CICIDS2017 dataset, reducing MIR by an average of 15.5%
on various models. This is because the CICDIDS2017 dataset
has a stronger structural regularity. A more accurate calculation of feature weights is caused by more explicit features.

LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

Fig. 12. Comparison of AER for different models under various adversarial
attack defenses against APGD [33]: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

E. Extending Experiments (Q4)
Q4: How does HierarchicalDP perform on datasets other
than network traffic?
Structured characteristics are not only present in network
traffic samples but also in center-aligned image samples. To
demonstrate this point, we conducted defense effectiveness
tests of HierarchicalDP on both a center-aligned image dataset
(MNIST) and a noncenter-aligned image dataset (CIFAR-10).
The experiments utilized the MLP, DNN, and CNN models
mentioned in Section V-A. Table III presents the training set
and testing set configuration for each dataset, along with the
corresponding accuracy of each baseline model. This section
focuses on the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP across
different image classifiers. The specific privacy budget settings
and feature hierarchization results are shown in Appendix B
(available online).
Regarding the privacy of training samples, Table IV shows
the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP against membership inference attacks on different models in the MNIST dataset
classification task. With the model ACC impact controlled
within 2.4%, HierarchicalDP effectively defends against membership inference attacks. On average, the MPE attack reduced
the MIR by 11.7%, and the EMI attack reduced the MIR by

329

Fig. 13. Comparison of the impact of various adversarial attack defenses
on ACC: (a) USTC and (b) CICIDS.

13.5%. Table V shows the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP against membership inference attacks on different models in the CIFAR-10 dataset classification task. With the model
ACC impact controlled within 4.5%, HierarchicalDP shows
slight defense effectiveness against membership inference attacks. On average, the MPE attack reduced the MIR by 11.0%,
and the EMI attack reduced the MIR by 2.6%. This is due to
the structured characteristics of image samples in the MNIST
dataset resulting from central processing, while the CIFAR-10
samples lack central processing.
Regarding the robustness of testing samples, Table VI shows
the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP against adversarial
attacks on different models in the MNIST dataset classification task. With the model ACC impact controlled within 2.7%,
HierarchicalDP effectively defends against adversarial attacks.
On average, the NIFGSM attack reduced the AER by 59.7%,
and the APGD attack reduced the AER by 65.7%. Table VII shows the defense effectiveness of HierarchicalDP
against adversarial attacks on different models in the CIFAR10 dataset classification task. With the model ACC impact controlled within 5.8%, HierarchicalDP shows little defense effectiveness against adversarial attacks. On average,
the NIFGSM attack reduced the AER by 9.0%, and the
APGD attack reduced the AER by 10.1%. This indicates

330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE III
EXTENDING EXPERIMENTS DATASETS AND BASELINE MODELS
Symbol

Feature Size

Training Set Size

Testing Set Size

Target Labels

Model Architecture (Baseline Accuracy)

MNIST
CIFAR-10

784
1024 × 3

6k
10k

3k
10k

10
10

MLP (0.746), DNN (0.760), CNN (0.808)
MLP (0.425), DNN (0.379), CNN (0.608)

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

TABLE IV
DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST MEMBERSHIP
INFERENCE ON THE MNIST DATASET

Model
MLP
DNN
CNN

MIR of MPE [30]

MIR of EMI [31]

ACC of Model

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

0.702
0.616
0.599

0.599
0.517
0.507

0.700
0.620
0.613

0.503
0.500
0.524

0.746
0.760
0.808

0.739
0.736
0.803

TABLE V
DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST MEMBERSHIP
INFERENCE ON THE CIFAR-10 DATASET

Model
MLP
DNN
CNN

MIR of MPE [30]

MIR of EMI [31]

ACC of Model

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

0.644
0.807
0.737

0.602
0.756
0.501

0.633
0.794
0.736

0.600
0.741
0.743

0.425
0.379
0.608

0.417
0.362
0.563

TABLE VI
DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS
ON THE MNIST DATASET

Model
MLP
DNN
CNN

AER of NIFGSM [32]

AER of APGD [33]

ACC of Model

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

0.913
0.930
0.893

0.315
0.328
0.301

0.925
0.914
0.974

0.289
0.262
0.292

0.746
0.760
0.808

0.743
0.753
0.781

TABLE VII
DEFENSE EFFECT OF HIERARCHICALDP AGAINST ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS
ON THE CIFAR-10 DATASET

Model
MLP
DNN
CNN

AER of NIFGSM [32]

AER of APGD [33]

ACC of Model

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

w/o

w/

0.802
0.891
0.857

0.695
0.776
0.808

0.824
0.901
0.891

0.719
0.894
0.701

0.425
0.379
0.608

0.398
0.377
0.550

that HierarchicalDP is only suitable for protecting structured
sample classifiers.
In summary, HierarchicalDP provides strong privacy protection and robustness improvement for structured data. As
network traffic datasets typically exhibit highly structured characteristics, HierarchicalDP is well suited to enhance the privacy
and robustness of these datasets. It also offers protection for
centralized image datasets.

In this article, we propose the feature hierarchization strategy
and HierarchicalDP to ensure the differential privacy of MLNIDS while improving their adversarial robustness. HierarchicalDP is a differential privacy technique that protects network
traffic sample classifiers, including packet samples and session
samples. Compared to the state-of-the-art existing methods,
HierarchicalDP reduces the MIR by 9.2% and lowers the AER
by 23.3% while keeping the impact on ACC within 4.2%.
Another essential advantage of HierarchicalDP is decoupling. Compared to the differential privacy mechanism that adds
noise to the gradient, HierarchicalDP only adds noise to the
sample features and does not require modification to the model.
In addition to the network traffic classifier, HierarchicalDP can
also be used for other structured sample classifiers, such as
center-aligned image samples. Future research will focus on
utilizing graph convolutional neural networks to discover more
accurate relationships between features, aiming to enhance the
defensive performance of HierarchicalDP. This approach is intended to be applicable in fields with unstructured samples, such
as complex images.
We focus the safety of machine learning on sample data
and seek to avoid machine learning models that are currently
uninterpretable. Only the bond of feature weights is left between
the data and the model. On the one hand, we unify differential
privacy and adversarial robustness in machine learning through
a formal description that will inspire cross collaboration among
relevant researchers. On the other hand, machine learning is
essentially the fitting of model distributions to data distributions, and security issues arise in both distributions. This article focuses on addressing privacy and robustness problems
through data distribution. However, the above issues can also
be addressed through model distributions. It relies on developing interpretable machine learning and will be the focus of
future work.
REFERENCES
[1] I. H. Sarker, “Machine learning: Algorithms, real-world applications and
research directions,” SN Comput. Sci., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–21, 2021.
[2] H. Peng, S. Bao, and L. Li, “A survey of security protection methods
for deep learning model,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., early access,
Sep. 12, 2023.
[3] B. Liu, M. Ding, S. Shaham, W. Rahayu, F. Farokhi, and Z. Lin, “When
machine learning meets privacy: A survey and outlook,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–36, 2021.
[4] K. A. Crockett, L. Gerber, A. Latham, and E. Colyer, “Building trustworthy AI solutions: A case for practical solutions for small businesses,”
IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 778–791, Aug. 2023.
[5] J. Curzon, T. A. Kosa, R. Akalu, and K. El-Khatib, “Privacy and artificial
intelligence,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 96–108,
Apr. 2021.

LIU et al: MEMBERSHIP INFERENCE AND ADVERSARIAL ATTACK DEFENSE FRAMEWORK

[6] C. Qin et al., “Feature fusion based adversarial example detection against
second-round adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 4,
no. 5, pp. 1029–1040, Oct. 2023.
[7] I. Ilahi et al., “Challenges and countermeasures for adversarial attacks
on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 90–109, Apr. 2022.
[8] T. Zhu, D. Ye, W. Wang, W. Zhou, and P. Yu, “More than privacy:
Applying differential privacy in key areas of artificial intelligence,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2824–2843, Jun. 2022.
[9] A. Triastcyn and B. Faltings, “Bayesian differential privacy for machine learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020,
pp. 9583–9592.
[10] S. Sajadmanesh and D. Gatica-Perez, “Locally private graph neural
networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021,
pp. 2130–2145.
[11] R. Shao, P. Perera, P. C. Yuen, and V. M. Patel, “Open-set adversarial
defense with clean-adversarial mutual learning,” Int. J. Comput. Vis.,
vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 1070–1087, 2022.
[12] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traffic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network
traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
[13] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith, “Calibrating noise
to sensitivity in private data analysis,” in Proc. Theory Cryptogr. Conf.,
New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 265–284.
[14] K. Chatzikokolakis, M. E. Andrés, N. E. Bordenabe, and C. Palamidessi,
“Broadening the scope of differential privacy using metrics,” in Proc.
Int. Symp. Privacy Enhancing Technol. Symp., pp. 82–102, New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2013.
[15] I. Mironov, “Rényi differential privacy,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Comput.
Secur. Found. Symp. (CSF), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2017,
pp. 263–275.
[16] C. Szegedy et al., “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations (ICLR), 2014.
[17] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
[18] D. Diochnos, S. Mahloujifar, and M. Mahmoody, “Adversarial risk
and robustness: General definitions and implications for the uniform distribution,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 31, 2018,
pp. 10380–10389.
[19] R. Pinot, F. Yger, C. Gouy-Pailler, and J. Atif, “A unified view
on differential privacy and robustness to adversarial examples,” in
Proc. Workshop Mach. Learn. CyberSecurity (ECMLPKDD), 2019,
pp. 368–373.
[20] D. Bahdanau, K. H. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation
by jointly learning to align and translate,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations (ICLR), 2015, pp. 1–15.
[21] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[22] A. Bommert, X. Sun, B. Bischl, J. Rahnenführer, and M. Lang,
“Benchmark for filter methods for feature selection in high-dimensional
classification data,” Comput. Statist. Data Anal., vol. 143, 2020,
Art. no. 106839.
[23] M. Lecuyer, V. Atlidakis, R. Geambasu, D. Hsu, and S. Jana, “Certified
robustness to adversarial examples with differential privacy,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press,
2019, pp. 656–672.
[24] H. Phan, M. T. Thai, H. Hu, R. Jin, T. Sun, and D. Dou, “Scalable
differential privacy with certified robustness in adversarial learning,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020, pp. 7683–7694.
[25] B. Skrlj, S. Dzeroski, N. Lavrac, and M. Petkovic, “Feature importance
estimation with self-attention networks,” 2020, arXiv:2002.04464.
[26] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Piscataway, NJ, USA:
IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 712–717.
[27] D. Stiawan, M. Y. B. Idris, A. M. Bamhdi, and R. Budiarto, “CICIDS2017 dataset feature analysis with information gain for anomaly detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 132911–132921, 2020.
[28] G. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Li, K. Fan, and S. Yu, “VulnerGAN: A
backdoor attack through vulnerability amplification against machine
learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” Sci. China Inf. Sci.,
vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 28–46, 2022.

331

[29] R.-H. Hwang, M.-C. Peng, V.-L. Nguyen, and Y.-L. Chang, “An LSTMbased deep learning approach for classifying malicious traffic at the
packet level,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 3414–3428, 2019.
[30] L. Song and P. Mittal, “Systematic evaluation of privacy risks of machine
learning models,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., vol. 1, 2021,
pp. 2615–2632.
[31] J. Ye, A. Maddi, S. K. Murakonda, V. Bindschaedler, and R. Shokri,
“Enhanced membership inference attacks against machine learning
models,” in Proc. 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
pp. 3093–3106, 2022.
[32] J. Lin, C. Song, K. He, L. Wang, and J. E. Hopcroft, “Nesterov
accelerated gradient and scale invariance for adversarial attacks,” 2019,
arXiv:1908.06281.
[33] F. Croce and M. Hein, “Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness
with an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020, pp. 2206–2216.
[34] M. Nasr, R. Shokri, and A. Houmansadr, “Machine learning with
membership privacy using adversarial regularization,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 634–646.
[35] J. Jia, A. Salem, M. Backes, Y. Zhang, and N. Z. Gong, “MemGuard:
Defending against black-box membership inference attacks via adversarial examples,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
2019, pp. 259–274.
[36] H. Salman, M. Sun, G. Yang, A. Kapoor, and J. Kolter, “Denoised
smoothing: A provable defense for pretrained classifiers,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 21945–21957.
[37] M. Alfarra, J. C. Pérez, A. Thabet, A. Bibi, P. H. Torr, and B. Ghanem,
“Combating adversaries with anti-adversaries,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell., vol. 36, 2022, pp. 5992–6000.

Guangrui Liu received the B.E. degree in information security from the School of Computer Science
and Technology, China University of Mining and
Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China, in 2018. He
is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
cyberspace security with the School of Cyberspace
Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin,
Heilongjiang, China.
His main research interests include artificial intelligence security and network traffic analysis.

Weizhe Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Eng., M.Eng., and Ph.D. degrees in engineering
of computer science and technology from Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China,
in 1999, 2001, and 2006, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
of Technology, and the Director of the Cyberspace
Security Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory,
Shenzhen, China. His research interests primarily
include parallel computing, distributed computing,
cloud and grid computing, and computer network. He has published more
than 100 academic papers in journals, books, and conference proceedings.

332

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 6, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Xurun Wang received the B.E. degree in information security from the School of Cyberspace
Science, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin,
Heilongjiang, China, in 2022, where he is currently
working toward the Ph.D. degree in Cyberspace
Security.
His main research interests include artificial intelligence security and network traffic analysis.

Stephen King is currently working toward the
graduate degree with Leland High School, San Jose,
CA, USA.

Shui Yu (Fellow, IEEE) obtained his Ph.D. degree in computer science from Deakin University,
Melbourne, Australia, in 2004.
He is a Professor with the School of Computer Science and the Deputy Chair of University Research Committee, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia. His research interests include cybersecurity, network science, big data, and mathematical modeling. He
has published five monographs and edited two
books and published more than 500 technical papers
at different venues, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND
SECURE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED
SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE
COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, IEEE/ACM
TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, and IEEE INFOCOM. His current h-index
is 72. He promoted the research field of networking for big data since 2013,
and his research outputs have been widely adopted by industrial systems, such
as Amazon cloud security.
Prof. Yu is currently serving on the editorial boards as an Area Editor of
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS and an Editor of IEEE
INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL. He served as a Distinguished Lecturer of
IEEE Communications Society (2018–2021). He is a Distinguished Visitor of
IEEE Computer Society, and an Elected Member of Board of Governors
of IEEE VTS and ComSoc, respectively. He is a member of ACM and AAAS.