4362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

A Moving Target DDoS Defense Approach in
Consortium Blockchain
Keke Gai , Guolei Zhang, Peng Jiang, Member, IEEE, Liehuang Zhu , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Although consortium blockchain has an identification
mechanism, the captured internal clients are potentially threatening internal blockchain nodes. Internal Distributed Denial-ofService (DDoS) attacks threaten the specific nodes in consortium
blockchain, e.g., the executor, consensus, and committer nodes.
Typical attack methods may include SYN Flooding and ACK
Flooding and deny normal transaction service by sending many
invalid transactions and blocks. In this work, we have proposed
an organization collaboration-based DDoS defense approach and
a Deep Q-learning (DQN)-based Moving Target Defense (MTD)
for changing attack surface of victims in consortium blockchain.
On one hand, contracts are used to synchronize attack information
obtained from organizations, e.g., bots’ IP addresses and public
keys. On the other hand, we have developed a DQN-based MTD
defense mechanism for organizations to change the attack surface
of victims in order to mitigate the malicious traffic, in the case
of missing detections of bots. Our approach applies a multi-stage
game to reflect interactions between attackers and defenders. The
evaluation results have demonstrated that our approach could
effectively mitigate DDoS attacks in consortium blockchain.
Index Terms—Consortium blockchain, DDoS, moving target
defense, deep Q-network.

I. INTRODUCTION
EMPORARILY, Distributed-Denial-of-Service (DDoS)
attacks are common threats to majority of applications
running on the Internet. A variety of new DDoS attacks have
brought new challenges to existing DDoS defense technologies,
including consortium blockchain [1], [2], [3]. Even though
blockchain presents services in a decentralized manner, which
implies a higher-level defense capability, the DDoS attack still is

T

Received 17 May 2023; revised 16 February 2025; accepted 23 February
2025. Date of publication 28 February 2025; date of current version 11 July
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2021YFB2701300, in part by
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62232002, Grant
U24B20146, and Grant 62372044, and in part by Beijing Municipal Science and
Technology Commission Project under Grant Z241100009124008. The work of
Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo was supported by the Cloud Technology Endowed
Professorship. (Corresponding author: Keke Gai.)
Keke Gai, Peng Jiang, and Liehuang Zhu are with the School of Cyberspace
Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
(e-mail: gaikeke@bit.edu.cn; pengjiang@bit.edu.cn; liehuangz@bit.edu.cn).
Guolei Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail:
3220201004@bit.edu.cn).
Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo is with the Department of Information Systems
and Cyber Security and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249 USA (e-mail:
raymond.choo@fulbrightmail.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3546625

threatening the security of blockchain [4], [5], [6], [7]. Existing
Internet DDoS defense methods focus on defending large-scale
malicious traffic requests on the Internet. However, due to the
limited number of participating nodes, the nodes inside each
organization are public for internal clients to call functions, but
internal clients are probably compromised by attackers, which
cannot be defended by existing Internet DDoS defense methods.
In the typical consortium blockchain, the authorized internal
clients have permission to obtain the node’s information and
smart contracts. Most consortium blockchains (e.g., Hyperledger Fabric [8]) implement built-in rate restrictions mainly targets transaction processing speed or block generation frequency
to mitigate DDoS attacks, encompassing limits on a variety
of aspects, such as the number of peers and orderors, overall
query capacity, concurrency thresholds, and batch timeouts.
However, the traditional setting encounters a failure in defending
internal DDoS attacks, since an internal DDoS attacker is able
to not only launch typical DDoS attacks (e.g., SYN Flood or
ACK Flood) but also compromise internal clients to implement
different internal attacks at the application layer, threatening the
execution, consensus, and block committing of transactions [9].
Therefore, these built-in rate limitations cannot mitigate the
target DDoS attacks considered in this work. The challenge
issue is that the internal attacks make various types of nodes
ignore current identity authentication rather than evading Internet DDoS defense [10]. A typical internal DDoS attack scenario,
for example, is that DDoS attackers may create a large number
of invalid transactions (e.g., incorrect signatures) to block the
execution of normal transactions for targeting executor nodes,
as the blockchain network allows anyone to freely send transactions [11]. In addition, when attacking consensus nodes, the
attacker can send a large number of endorsed transactions until
the node’s transaction pool is filled with malicious transactions.
Attackers can also attack committer nodes by initiating a large
number of empty blocks, unsigned blocks, or blocks containing
conflict transactions to block the storage of normal blocks. The
bots controlled by the attacker can rationally arrange attack
resources in different organizations.
However, there are rare works focusing on the DDoS defense
inside the consortium blockchain. We have investigated the typical DDoS defense approaches and analyzed the defense effect
on consortium blockchain, including traffic filtering, Softwaredefined Networking (SDN) [12], Network Function Virtualization (NFV) [13], Moving Target Defense (MTD) [14], [15], [16]
and collaborative defense approach [17], [18], [19], [20]. The

1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

Fig. 1.

The architecture of proposed DDoS defense approach.

filtering method generally performs well in most situations, but
the method can hardly handle the moving attackers due to its
inflexibility limitations [21]. SDN-based and NFV-based methods present higher-level flexibility but generally cause a longer
latency [22]. The MTD is one of the important active defense
approaches, but resource consumption and uncertainty lead to
the MTD strategy not being applied in consortium blockchain
directly. The collaborative defense is a suitable approach for
defending against DDoS attacks inside consortium blockchain,
which can not only fit the architecture of consortium blockchain
but also enhance DDoS defense of single organizations.
Combining Contract-based Collaborative Defense with MTD
is a better way to mitigate DDoS attacks in consortium
blockchain. MTD avoids being attacked by malicious traffic
while ensuring normal blockchain service and changes the Attack Surface (AS) for preventing persistent attacks. Besides,
reinforcement learning [23] provides MTD strategy generation
with continuous solutions that fully utilize smart contracts to
collect DDoS attack information concerning attack features for
every node.
In this work, we have proposed a two-stage DDoS defense
approach for consortium blockchains. The architecture of proposed defense approach consists of four parts as shown in Fig. 1,
including malicious traffic detection and filtering, attacks data
synchronization contract, DQN-based MTD action generation,
and MTD execution module. The traffic detection and filtering
module filters malicious traffics by using the attack data stored
in the distributed ledger through the contract. When the attacker
is recorded in the ledger, the traffic is directly filtered by the filtering module. There are some persistent malicious traffics, and
each node in the organization uses MTD module to change its
own environment for mitigating the attacks. The MTD method in
each node comes from the DQN. Attack data required by DQN
model derives from the data stored in the distributed ledger.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) We have explored using an MTD-based mechanism to
defend DDoS attacks in the consortium blockchain. In
order to construct an adoptable solution, we have attempted to apply a DQN to generate MTD strategies in
each organization.
2) We have developed a smart contract-based collaborative
defense method in consortium blockchain. The proposed
method allows the organizations in consortium blockchain
to share information on collected malicious traffics, so

4363

that the independent organizations have a broader scope of
knowledge about attacks compared to a centralized-based
defense setting.
3) This work utilizes blockchain smart contracts to collect
and record the attack feature data in order to provide
sufficient and qualified training data for DQN. Due to
the collaborative defense setting, combining with smart
contracts can facilitate a higher-level efficiency when adversaries appear a dynamic attacking manner.
The advantages of our proposed approach in this paper, compared to other methods, are: (i) Focus on Consortium Blockchain
Security: Most existing work focuses on public blockchain,
despite DDoS attacks posing a greater threat to consortium
blockchain systems. Consortium blockchains have fewer nodes
centralized within specific organizations, making them easier
targets for attackers. In contrast, public blockchains have a
vast, globally distributed network, requiring more resources to
disrupt [24], [25]. Additionally, consortium blockchains rely on
cryptographic-based consensus (e.g., PBFT or RAFT), which
can be severely impacted by attacking a few key nodes. Public
blockchains use more robust mechanisms (e.g., PoW or PoS)
that are more resistant to such attacks. Furthermore, consortium blockchain nodes are easier to identify and target due to
their limited anonymity, whereas public blockchain nodes are
anonymous. Node management rules in consortium blockchains
mitigate malicious attacks using Sybil accounts and other stealth
strategies, serving as prerequisites for moving target defense.
(ii) Attack Data Sharing: Existing defense methods do not
effectively leverage blockchain’s data sharing capabilities. Our
approach combines the distributed ledger characteristics of
blockchain with deep reinforcement learning to create defensive
methods. The consortium blockchain provides the necessary
conditions for implementing our approach and the infrastructure
for data sharing, enabling each node to store a complete dataset
and generate effective defense solutions using synchronized
attack data.
The rest of this paper is organized by the followings. Section II
presents the threat model and defines the proposed problem. Sections III and IV explain smart contract-based collaborative defense mechanism and DQN-based model, respectively. The evaluation and main findings are given in Section V. Finally, we review related work and draw conclusions in Sections VI and VII.
II. CENCEPTS AND THE DEFINITIONS
A. Threat Model
Our attack vector assumes that rational attackers can compromise internal nodes in the consortium blockchain with public
information to achieve maximum profit. The goal of internal
attackers launching DDoS attacks is to make the consortium
blockchain unable to provide normal services, without generating direct benefits, but will appear indirectly in the form
of external benefits, such as disrupting or extorting competing
organizations within the consortium blockchain, or driven by
economic interests. Rational attackers will terminate their attacks when the cost and benefits of launching attacks are unequal
or even less. In contrast, compromised bots are authenticated to

4364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

access internal information of consortium blockchain, e.g., types
of nodes, deployed contracts of different nodes, and addresses
of internal nodes.
DDoS attackers can make the optimal attack strategy deriving
from the information asymmetry by collecting the defender’s
information in advance. In an ideal case, the attacker concentrates on attacking those nodes with a higher benefit, e.g., the
Leader node in the consensus mechanism, the Endorser, and
Executor node with essential contracts and Anchor nodes in
organizations. Multiple attack strategies are generally available
for attackers to deal with different types of nodes at application
layer. We formulate threats targeting at different types of nodes
in consortium blockchain.
Threats to Executor Nodes: Assume that attackers can launch
legitimate attacks by sending a large volume of invalid transactions at a small cost to block the node’s transaction pool and
deny the normal service of transaction execution. Attack benefit
generally positively correlates with the number of contracts and
logical nodes employed at the target node. Nodes will consider
invalid transactions as such and exclude them from blocks, yet
each node will still verify the validity of all received transactions.
Empty blocks, adhering to the basic blockchain protocol rules,
can be successfully added to the chain. Both invalid transactions
and empty blocks are special transactions initiated by attackers
within the consortium blockchain and cannot be restricted by
built-in rate limits.
Threats to Endorser Nodes: the Timeout-manipulation attack [10], [26] mainly targets the Leader node and a specific
number of Follower nodes. Attacking Leader node delays processing transaction messages sent by normal clients. Attacking
a specific number of Follower nodes (at least F+1 nodes need to
be attacked in the Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT)
consensus) destroy the Leader replacement of the consensus system. There are not enough Follower nodes to vote for replacing
the current Leader node.
B. Problem Definition
Consortium blockchain is only open to authorized organizations or institutions, and the joining and exiting of nodes usually
require specific conditions defined by the governance rules, so
that the total size of nodes in the consortium blockchain is
smaller than that of the public blockchain. And the internal identity in the consortium blockchain is unforgeable, which creates
a barrier for becoming an attacker. For example, Hyperledger
Fabric has implemented a series of built-in rate restrictions to
mitigate DDoS attacks. However, when attackers within the
consortium blockchain control clients to initiate a large number
of invalid transactions, such as empty blocks, normal generation
of empty blocks is not hindered by built-in rate limitations.
The primary issue of this work is to prevent each node in
organizations from attacks and lead to the minimum attack
return, while reaching a Nash equilibrium between the attacker
and organization. Rational attackers adopt an optimal DDoS
attack strategy at each organization by selecting nodes to gain the
maximum return at the instant state. Rational attackers can also
take advantage of the feature of blockchain networks that allow
anyone to freely send transactions and can launch legitimate

attacks by sending invalid transactions at a small cost. These
invalid transactions may have meaningful purposes, such as
simulating sending transactions to their own accounts when
developing and testing blockchain applications to verify the
format and logic of transactions, and sending transactions with
zero transaction amounts may help ensure that accounts are not
considered inactive or cleared. In addition, attack targets will be
continuously changed after each round of MTD moves. Defenders learn MTD moves from DQN-based model and change states
of nodes in each organization. Logically, the effect of MTD will
be enhanced along with the increment of attack rounds. Our work
has proved that there exists a Nash equilibrium for the situation
above.
A necessary condition of terminating DDoS to an organization
is all nodes in organization are survived from the attack. We
define the problem as when the Nash equilibrium is reached,
attacker’s profit is as small as possible under the condition when
all nodes in organization are not attacked.
We present the problem formally in Definition II.1.
Definition II.1: Minimizing Attack Profit Under Node-Saving
Condition Problem (MAPOC): Inputs: include a set of attack
cost
profits for a node {abe
ij }, a set of attack costs node {aij },
a set contains the number of container deployed in each node
cont
}, the number of logical nodes deployed in each server
{Nij
lon
{Nij }, a set contains the number of IP moving time for each
IP
node {Mij
}, a set contains the number of port moving time in
P ort
each node {Mij
} and a set contains initial malicious traffics
interception rates of each node {αij } in each organization.
Outputs: include a set contains node attack profits {apro
ij } and

} when
a set contains malicious traffics interception rates {αij
the Nash equilibrium is reached.
The proposed MAPOC problem is to find out optimal MTD
actions to minimize the total attack profit (Ptotal ) under the con
> αij ).
dition when none node in organization is attacked (αij
Mathematical expression of MAPOC is given by (1).
⎤
⎡
m 
n


⎦ and αij ≥ αij
apro
(1)
Ptotal = MIN ⎣
ij
i=1 j=1

The subscript ranges in (1) are i ∈ [1, m] and j ∈ [1, n].
MIN[·] is the function that obtains the minimum attack profit
value in (1). Regarding notations in an organization, we take the
organization O1 as an example. The attack profit,
 benefit, and
cost of the organization O1 are denoted by P1 = nj=1 apro
1j , j ∈

n
cost
[1, n], B1 = nj=1 abe
,
j
∈
[1,
n],
and
C
=
a
1
1j
j=1 1j , j ∈
[1, n]. Oi = {O1 , O2 , . . ., Om } denotes the set of organizations.
The number of nodes in each organization is denoted by n. Value
be
cost
of profit apro
ij is obtained from aij − aij . The profit of each
organization is denoted in (2). When profit is less than 0, the
DDoS attack will be ended for that organization.
Pi = Bi − Ci , ∀i ∈ [1, m]

(2)

For the benefit and cost of attacking nodes in MAPOC, we
define the node attack benefit as a sum of the number of
deployed containers (denoted as N cont ) and the number of
running logical nodes (denoted as N lon ). Therefore, there is
cont
lon
+ Nij
. MTD action changes victims’ attack
a abe
ij = Nij

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

surface, which increases attack cost. We define the node attack
cost as a sum of the times of IP MTD action (denoted as M IP )
and Port MTD action (denoted as M P ort ). Thus, there is a
IP
P ort
= Mij
+ Mij
.
acost
ij
Our model defines a malicious traffic interception rate α
for traffic detection and filtering. The effective attack’s cost is
denoted by acost
ij (1 − αij ). The DDoS attacker needs to cost additional resources when malicious traffics are filtered. Assuming
that k rounds of attacks are filtered, there exists a cost of attack
to node pij is acost
ij (1 + kαij ). DDoS cost in pij needs to satisfy

.
requirement of (3). Equation (4) defines αij
be
acost
ij (1 + kαij ) < aij
cost
abe
ij − aij

=
αij
cost
kaij

1 ≤ i ≤ m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n
1 ≤ i ≤ m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n.

(3)
(4)

The proposed multistage game between DDoS attackers and
defenders is explained in the followings.
Multistage Game Model between DDoS Attacker & Multiple
Defenders. In our game model, players involve both organizations and attackers. The action space of each organization
is the collection of MTD actions at each node from relevant
organizations (refer to Section IV).
We use malicious traffics to measure the efficiency of DDoS
defense, by taking a single organization Ok as an analysis object.
Considering the discount factor γ (γ ∈ (0, 1)), the accumulated reward of Ok is denoted by Vk (s). Vk (s) is essentially an
expected reward function on player states, which is a function
of state s. Vk (s) is expressed in (5).
Vk (s) = Eπ [Pks |st = s]

(5)

st is the state of Pk in MTD round t. The π denotes our
DQN-based MTD strategy and the Pks is the reward of Ok in
state s. Another representation of (5) is expressed by Bellman
Equation in (6) (i.e., in a recursion format), in which the sk is the
next state after the current action. The rk,t is the action reward
of Ok in MTD round t and the s is the next state of Ok .
Vk (s) = rk,t + γVk (s )

attacker. Suppose there exists a time spot t∗ that arrives the
Nash equilibrium, state of defender Ok is s∗k , which is the states
collection of all internal nodes. Equation (8) shows the occasion
(t∗ ) when the Nash equilibrium is reached. Nash equilibrium
point can be expressed by ({s∗1 , s∗2 , s∗3 . . .s∗m }, s∗a ).

V (s∗k ) ≥ V (sk ) T he def ender Ok
(8)
V (s∗a ) ≥ V (sa ) T he DDoS attacker
Next, we prove the existence of Nash equilibrium for the
proposed model by proving presence of potential game [28].
The key is to prove the existence of function called φ(a), which
satisfies (9).
Va−i (ai ) − Va−i (ai ) < 0 ⇒ φa−i (ai ) − φa−i (ai ) < 0

(7)

The operating principle of our gaming model is formulating
multi-phase interactions between attackers and organization defenders in a consortium blockchain. Organizations in the same
channel play as defenders, each of which adopts a specific MTD
action (obtained from Reinforce learning) based on the attacker’s
strategy. The DDoS attacker changes DDoS targets according to
defenders’ states. We assume the attacker takes an optimal attack
strategy at every step to maximize the attack benefit.
The proposed game model is essentially a limited Noncooperative mixed strategy game. According to Nash Equilibrium [27], the proposed game model has at least one Nash
equilibrium point. Specifically, the Nash equilibrium point can
be expressed as the states of every defender and the DDoS

(9)

In (9), Va−i (ai ) denotes the sum of accumulated benefit except
the i-th player (when i-th player with an action ai ). The i ∈ [i, k]
denotes the defenders; otherwise, the player is the attacker. The
ai is another action, which satisfy (11).
ra−i (s, ai ) < ra−i (s, ai )

(10)

We further define the potential function of the proposed game
in (11).
m


φa−i (ai ) =

[r(s, ai ) + γV (s , πk )] Ii∈[1,k]

k=1,k=i

+ [r(sa , ai ) + γV (sa , πa )] Ii/∈[1,k] .

(11)

An I is the indicator function that is valued 1 when the condition
is satisfied and is valued 0 if not. We formulate the assumption
by Theorem II.1.
Theorem II.1: The proposed multistage game between multiple defenders and the DDoS attacker is a potential game with
the potential function of (11).
Proof: We prove this theorem on both defenders and attackers, including i ∈ [1, k] (defenders) and i ∈
/ [1, k] (attacker).
First, for the DDoS defenders (i ∈ [1, k]), the potential function
is shown in (12).

(6)

Similar to defenders, the reward of DDoS attackers is defined
by (7), where ra,t and Va (s ) denote bots’ reward after MTD
round t and accumulated reward in next state, respectively.
Va (s) = ra,t + γVa (s ).

4365

φa−i (ai ) =

m


[r(s, ai ) + γV (s , πk )]

(12)

k=1,k=i

The operation φa−i (ai ) − φa−i (ai ) is expressed by (13).
φa−i (ai ) − φa−i (ai )
m
=
[r(s, ai ) + γV (s , πk )]
k=1,k=i

−
=

m

k=1,k=i
m


[r(s, ai ) + γV (s , πk )]

[r(s, ai )−r(s, ai )] = ra−i (s, ai )−ra−i (s, ai ) < 0

k=1,k=i

(13)
Therefore, Theorem II.1 is proved in the condition of i ∈ [1, k].
For the DDoS attacker (i = [1, k]), the potential function is
depicted in (14).
φa−i (ai ) = [r(sa , ai ) + γV (sa , πa )] Ii/∈[1,k]

(14)

4366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

For different actions of DDoS attackers, the states of defenders
are constant in the assumption. The consequence of the computation φa−i (ai ) − φa−i (ai ) is shown in (15).
φa−i (ai ) − φa−i (ai ) = r(sa , ai ) − r(sa , ai )
= ra−i (sa , ai ) − ra−i (sa , ai ) < 0. (15)
Therefore, Theorem II.1 is proved when i ∈
/ [1, k].

III. CONTRACT-BASED COLLABORATIVE DEFENSE
We define a special smart contract that can only be called
by internal nodes in organizations. Transactions with attacker
information or attack data are generated by smart contract. The
DDoS attack information will be recorded by each organization
when the consensus and verification are made.


A. Architecture

C. Overview
In our approach, when an organization detects a DDoS attack, victims will initiate transactions to synchronize attack
data between organizations via smart contracts. To prevent
malicious internal clients from uploading error information to
disrupt the defense, we set up a special proxy node in each
organization to synchronize DDoS data, which is only called
by authenticated participant organizations and cannot be discovered by other internal clients. When an organization detects
DDoS attacks, the proxy node in the victim organization will
synchronize the obtained attacks information/data with other
organizations by initiating transactions, such as bots IPs, attack
types, attack intensity, and attack duration. The traffics sent
from bots can be successfully filtered once other organizations
update the strategy. Moreover, the persistent malicious traffic
generally cannot be directly detected or filtered, as the attacker
continuously adjust the attack resource following the constantly
changing environment of the defender in order to obtain better
returns. In order to address this type of attack, we utilize the
Deep Q-network (DQN) to generate an MTD strategy in each
organization. We represent the DDoS malicious traffics by attack
type, attack intensity, and attack duration. A variety of MTD
hopping methods are covered in our approach, such as hopping,
port hopping, container hopping, and logic node hopping. With
the increment of happenings of malicious traffics, our approach
will continuously update its filter strategy to improve the defense
accuracy. Finally, we adopt a multi-round optimized MTD strategy to defend persistent malicious traffics.
A fundamental philosophy of our approach is to formulate the
attack-defense interactions between the attacker and defender.
We describe the interaction via formulating a multistage game
model [29]. Once a DDoS attack occurs, the nodes of defenders
first filter out detected malicious traffics, retrieving the knowledge from the ledger. When persistent malicious traffics attack
occurs, the MTD method that follows the local DQN training
result can be adopted to mitigate the threats. The DQN is trained
by malicious traffics collected by all organizations. In this case
(after MTD actions), attackers discover the new environment of
each node in consortium blockchain, so that the attack strategy
at each node will be adjusted for achieving an optimal attack
return. In the meantime, defenders’ nodes synchronize the new
updated attack data to the ledger via implementing a smart
contract. The interactions above are repeated to increase the
defense performance. Therefore, the interaction between DDoS
attackers and defenders are formulated into a multistage game,
such that a Nash equilibrium eventually can be reached. After
the repeated executions of MTD, the rational attacker’s cost will
increase. Logically, when the attacker’s gain from the defender’s
node becomes negative, the attack will be terminated.

In a consortium blockchain, only necessary business information can be synchronized between organizations due to the autonomy and independence of each organization. Therefore, information on bots and malicious traffics cannot be directly synced
across organizations, which makes the information asymmetry
between internal DDoS bots and victimized nodes in consortium
blockchain.
Malicious traffics from internal bots are essentially as the
same as normal traffic. The typical SDN-based programmable
switch defenses and firewalls cannot completely filter malicious
traffics. Typical Internet DDoS defenses cannot defend DDoS attacks launched by nodes inside different organizations bypassing
the identity authentication of the consortium blockchain. When
the scale and intensity of attacks launched by internal attackers
have not yet reached the Internet DDoS defense standards,
insider attackers can successfully slow down the transaction
processing and block generation services of the consortium
blockchain. Attackers do not need to launch a full DDoS attack
at a single node, which is much easier than an Internet DDoS
attack. The incremental amount of the attacked nodes will further
negatively influence the whole efficiency of the blockchain system due to a slower speed of block generations caused by DDoS
attacks. Thus, traditional Internet DDoS defense is inapplicable
for the proposed attack scenario.
We proposed a smart contract-based DDoS attack data sharing
and collaborative defense method, the first defense method in the
proposed defense approach. Internal DDoS attackers not only
launch typical DDoS attacks, but also control internal clients
to collect information from defenders in advance to formulate
the best attack strategy, making malicious traffic ignore current
identity verification, threaten transaction execution, consensus,
and prevent submissions, thereby achieving maximum attack
benefits. We have defined a special smart contract to synchronize DDoS attack information that is only called by internal
blockchain nodes. The proposed contract generates the transactions with attackers or malicious traffic information. Each
organization saves DDoS attack information after the consensus
and verification, which is as same as normal transactions.
The contract-based collaborative method between organizations takes advantage of quickly committing blocks by smart
contract in consortium blockchain. However, the problem of
the denial of service for synchronizing attack data should be
solved. In response to the threat of compromised malicious
internal nodes uploading wrong bot information to disrupt the
defense, we set a special proxy node in each organization for
synchronizing DDoS data, including the transactions executing,
consensus, and committing blocks, which can be only called
between organizations and cannot be found by internal clients.
The proxy node also broadcasts the blocks with DDoS data to

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

Fig. 2.

4367

Architecture of contract-based collaborative defense method.

other nodes in the same organization. The proxy node ensures
there is at least one ledger that keeps complete attack data in each
organization, which ensures the integrity of attack data [30], [31]
in the whole consortium blockchain. The collaborative defense
method is shown in Fig. 2.
Specifically, each organization’s traffic detection and filter
module calls the function of UPLOAD_ATTACK in contract of
DDoS recording, which uploads the DDoS attack data by transactions. The proxy node broadcasts the launched transactions to
other proxy nodes in organizations. These transactions will be
blocked and broadcast to other organizations for synchronizing
the attack data and information of attackers.
B. Functionality
The smart contract for DDoS attacks records the malicious
traffic information. The bots have specific node names (N b )
and public keys (Pkb ) since the bots are authenticated clients.
In addition, the attacker’s address (Ab ) and state (malicious or
normal, denoted by Stab ) are also recorded in the distributed
ledger. The bot can be represented by bot = N b , Ab , Pkb , Stab .
A tuple with five parameters are used to record the DDoS attacks
data, which is shown as Ab , T a , I a , pij . In the attacks data
tuple, the parameters represent the address of the bot, the DDoS
attack method, the attack intensity and the victim’s ID.
The operation of the proposed smart contract includes uploading attack data, obtaining node information and changing
the state of internal clients, all of them are invoked by the traffic
detection and filtering module. Three operations are described
as follows.
r UPLOAD_ATTACK: Uploading the detected attack data
to the ledger and synchronizing the data to other organizations. The form of attack data is a tuple with five
parameters.
r GET_CLI_INFO: Defenders obtain the client’s state from
the contract when detecting the traffic. The traffic from
malicious clients will be filtered directly.
r CHANGE_NODE_STATE: This function sets the node’s
state to malicious if the node is detected as malicious
(sending malicious traffic). In addition, this function also
sets the node’s state to normal if the node’s traffic return to
normal.

The following is a detailed presentation of contract execution
and code snippets.
UPLOAD_ATTACK: First, the traffic detection and filtering module sends transactions with detected malicious traffic
and malicious attacker to proxy node. Attacker information is
presented as N b , Ab , Pkb , Stab and the DDoS attack data is
presented as Ab , T a , I a , pij . Second, the proxy node executes
the transactions and generates the blocks. The transactions and
corresponding results will be sent to proxy nodes in other organizations. The proxy node packages the received transactions
into blocks and broadcasts them to other proxy nodes. In the
last, proxy nodes verify the received blocks and decide whether
to save the block or not. The core logic of UPLOAD_ATTACK
is shown in code M AIN _U P LOAD_AT T ACK.
In the code above, the function of DetectionAndCollect is
used to detect and collect malicious traffics, which is not essential in this paper. The function of UploadDDoSInfo calls
the function UPLOAD_ATTACK in the contract, which commits the transactions to proxy for the next processing. The
UploadDDoSInfo returns true if the transaction is successfully
saved by blockchain.
GET_CLI_INFO: This function is called before traffic detecting and filtering. The traffic detection and filter module obtains

4368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

the DDoS data from contract first and checks whether there are
bots in current traffic. The current malicious traffics from the
bots will be filtered directly. The core logic of GET_CLI_INFO
is shown in code M AIN _GET _CLI_IN F O.

the function ChangeCliState to launch the transaction.
ChangeCliState returns a T rue when the transaction is successfully executed.

IV. DQN-BASED MTD STRATEGY GENERATION
A. Method

The traffic detection and filtering module call function of
GetBotsInfo to obtain the saved bots and calls function of
CheckIsBots to check whether there are bots in the current client
node.
CHANGE_NODE_STATE: The traffic detection and filtering
module dynamically changes the state (normal or malicious) of
internal clients according to whether current traffic is malicious.
The core logic of CHANGE_NODE_STATE is shown in code
M AIN _CHAN GE_N ODE_ST AT E.

The contract caller generates a transaction based on the
client’s state (by function DetectStateChange) and calls

Smart contracts collect and store malicious traffic data within
each organization. The effectiveness and accuracy of this approach will increase as more malicious traffic is identified. Once
an internal attacker gains access, it may use external botnets
to control nodes and launch DDoS attacks. Attack patterns are
varied in type, intensity, or duration, depending on the node
type. Since attacker identities within the consortium blockchain
cannot be forged, we must discretize the state space to prevent
morphing through stealth strategies, e.g., using different Sybil
accounts and IPs. Each organization uses a training model that
incorporates malicious traffic detected by others, but direct
malicious traffic carries greater weight. Our primary concern
is internal nodes within the consortium blockchain, as they can
control internal clients to gather information from defenders,
formulate optimal attack strategies, and bypass identity verification. This threatens transaction execution, consensus, and
prevents submissions, maximizing attack benefits. Thus, attacks
must evade both traditional DDoS defenses and our dynamic
defense strategies to succeed. Rational attackers will cease their
attacks when the costs outweigh the benefits.
1) State Space: We focus on the blockchain node pij in
organization Orgi , the DDoS attacker pays attention to the types,
the attacking cost and profit in time slot t, which can be expressed
as ptij = pT ype , {bot}cost , apro tij . The pT ype is a set of types
because one node may display multiple roles of consortium
blockchain; for example, pTijype = Endorser, Committer
means the pij provides the transaction execution service and
blocks storage service. The malicious traffics in time t in pij
t
t
called rij
can be denoted by rij
= { Ab , T a , I a , Da }tij , which
is the collection of all malicious traffics to the pij . The state of
t
t
= ptij , rij
, which is the node
pij in time t denoted by the Sij
state in the analysis of DQN learning.
2) Action Space: According to the MTD theory and the features of consortium blockchain, the attack surface of blockchain
node can be expressed as two parts, including the service addresses and the logic nodes deployed in the physical node.
The service addresses of node pij in time t are denoted by
t
= M IP , M P ort , M Cont tij . M IP denotes the exposed IP
Mij
address for providing blockchain service. M P ort is the set of
ports for multiple types of blockchain service, and the M Cont
is the set of containers for running multiple smart contracts.
The multiple logic nodes can be deployed in one physical node,
t
to denote the attack surface of pij
denoted by Ltij . We use ASij
t
t
in time t, where the ASij = Mij
, Ltij .
The action in proposed DQN-based MTD is the change of
t
t
as the time sequentially, including the change of Mij
, Ltij
ASij
or both of them. The state is changed by defense strategy as time
grows according to DQN results, the state change from t to Δt
t+Δt
t
, Ltij ⇒ Mij
, Lt+Δt
. The specific
can be denoted as Mij
ij

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

Fig. 3.

DNN workflow for training.

transition process is shown in (16).
⎧ t
t+Δt
t+Δt
t
Mij moved, Lij unchanged
⎨Mij = Mij , Lij = Lij
t+Δt
t
t
Mij = Mij , Lij = Lt+Δt
Mij unchanged, Lij moved
ij
⎩ t
t+Δt
t+Δt
t
Mij = Mij , Lij = Lij
Mij moved, Lij moved
(16)
3) Reward Function: We evaluate the DDoS effect in node
pij by Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), the rate arriving
obeys the Poisson distribution, and the queue model is denoted
as M/M/1. The probability density function of the Poisson
distribution is defined as (17).
λk −λ
e ,k ∈ N
(17)
k!
The λ denotes the number of malicious packets arriving in the
unit time. The expectation of Poisson distribution is λ, which
can be used as the evaluation of DDoS effect in each node. The
λij denotes the DDoS attack strength to pij .
According to MLE, the sample of the last β time units about
malicious traffics are denoted by {X1 , X2 . . .Xβ }, the likelihood
function is shown in (18).
P (X = k) =

L(λ|X1 , X2 . . .Xβ ) = fλ (X1 , X2 . . .Xβ )

(18)

The value of λ that makes the maximum fλ is the target value
for estimating the traffic in node pij . The fλ is also denoted in
probability format, which is shown in (18).
fλ (X1 , X2 . . .Xβ ) = P (X1 , X2 . . .Xβ |λ)

(19)

Defense reward of defender Ok is the expected value of all
nodes in Ok , which is shown in (20).
n

Rk =

1 1
.
n j=1 λkj

(20)

B. Workflow of Deep-Q-Network Learning
The DNN is used for performing the Deep-Q-Network
Learning process, which generates the MTD method for the
specified blockchain node in organization. The interaction between the DQN agent and environment is shown in Fig. 4.
DQN agent includes Target Q-network and Main Q-network,
the Loss Function is used for approaching the optimal action.
The environment includes malicious traffics monitoring and the
t+1
current logic nodes of ptij . The reward of changing state to Sij

4369

comes from the current environment evolving with persistent
malicious traffic.
The agent does not have action experience in the first epoch,
but the malicious traffics are distributed to attack different nodes.
One physical consortium blockchain node may play multiple
roles at the beginning of DDoS attack, the MTD action could be
selected randomly because there is no experience with malicious
traffics. After the first action is taken, the environment can obtain
t+1
are
the action reward. Finally, the reward and the new state Sij
sent simultaneously to Main Q-network and the Replay memory
D. With the continuous changes in the defense environment, the
persistent malicious attacks aimed at maximizing profits are also
constantly adjusting their attack strategies, achieving a Nash
equilibrium between defense and attack strategies. When the
attack cost exceeds the attack benefit, the multi-round optimized
MTD strategy can successfully counter persistent malicious
traffic.
The DNN architecture is used to train the state information
and generate the value of every output action in epoch t. The
actor-network needs to take the exploration for obtaining the
next state by the probability p = . The experience replay
and target network are also applied to make learning process
more stable. The experience replay is called D for storing the
history state transition, which will be extracted as a minibatch
to train our MTD DNN. Each transition can be expressed by
At , Rt , S t , S t+1 in transition set. The correlation between the
continuous malicious attack samples is reduced, alleviating the
influence of continuous DDoS attack. The target network is
copied by main Q-network each C steps, which reduces the
loss value and approaches the optimal solution.
Fig. 3 shows the DNN workflow for training. The state parameters need to be extracted as the DNN input. The parameters of
t
are concatenated as the format for DNN processing.
ptij and rij
We used the ReLU as the activation function for building the
hidden layers. The outputs of DNN are the Q value of each
state-changing action, which is also the probability of subsequent action. In addition, the following action with the most
Q value will be selected and taken in the related blockchain
node, like changing the endorsement port of peer node pij . The
change of pij attack surface influences the node state, the cost
of attacking to the pij endorsement service is increased and
the DDoS attack type is changed due to the port changing.
In the case where internal DDoS attackers disrupt the normal operation of the consortium blockchain driven by external
interests, the attack will terminate when the cost of launching the attack and the benefits obtained are unequal or even
less.
Detailed training workflow is shown in Algorithm 1, which
is the process of one learning episode. There are a number of
MAX_STEPS in each episode and the episode ends if IsEnd
is True. The loss function is shown in (21).

m

L(ω) =

1 
(yk − Q∗ (φ(Sk ), Ak , ω))2
m
k=1

(21)

4370

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

The DQN workflow with the blockchain node states.

TABLE I
DDOS ATTACK PARAMETERS

TABLE II
EXPERIMENT SETTINGS (INS: INITIAL NODE STATES; SO: SINGLE
ORGANIZATION; MO: MULTIPLE ORGANIZATIONS; NN: THE NUMNER OF
NODES)

There are m number of samples randomly selected from Replay
memory D. The yk is denoted in (22).

Rk If terminates in next step
(22)
yk =
Rk + γ maxA Q∗ (φ(Sk ), Ak , ω ∗ )Otherwise.
The ω and ω ∗ denote the parameters in DNN network. Specifically, the ω ∗ denotes the target network parameter, which will
be updated to decrease the loss function value.
V. EVALUATION AND THE RESULTS
A. Experiment Configuration
Evaluations were carried out under Python 3.10.4 version and
PyTorch 1.10.2 version. Simulation environment included an
Intel Core i5-7200 U CPU, a Windows 11 operation system
with an 8.0 GB main memory. We compared our approach
with Bayesian Q-Learning Game Approach [32], MOTAG [33],
DSEOM mechanism [15], and the theoretically optimal results
(Up Bound). Our experiment used 100 nodes, distributed in
10 different organizations, to communicate over the Internet to
simulate the actual situation of cross-regional operations. Each
node is equipped with a 4-core CPU, 4 GB of memory, and
100 GB of SSD storage. Experiment settings were summarized
in Table II. Evaluations of single organization and multiple organizations were separately processed. All of these evaluations
are conducted on the Hyperledger Fabric v2.4.0 platform.
In addition, we used BoNeSi to generate flood attacks (including ICMP, UDP and TCP), the parameters such as attack
intensity, bots scale, target address and attack duration can be
configured through options. The the parameters of the DDoS
attacks are shown in Table I. We also adopted the HULK [34]
attack as one of the DDoS attack methods, randomly generating
forged parameter names and values.

Each attacker will choose one of the payload types and methods in attack round, and the attack intensity will be limited in
corresponding range. We set the attack duration to 60 seconds.
1) Internet DDoS Defense: To evaluate whether the Internet
DDoS defense can successfully intercept malicious traffic, we
monitored the device status of the target node under attack and
set the average CPU utilization, network bandwidth, maximum
TCP connections and attack time as parameters. We launched
DDoS attacks from the beginning and initiated normal block
transactions after the 14th second.
As shown in Fig. 5, the performance of the target device
has not changed specifically before the normal transaction
is launched, which indicates that the DDoS malicious traffic
launched by the attacker will be intercepted by the Internet DDoS
defense.
Meanwhile, in order to prove the practicability of DDoS attacks on blockchain nodes after DDoS protection on the Internet,
we mainly evaluated two different DDoS attacks launched by
attackers inside and outside the consortium blockchain. We set
the transaction number and block time as parameters. In the two
scenarios of internal and external DDoS attacks, the normal node
initiates block transactions according to the transaction number,
and the corresponding time of the block reflects the service

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

Fig. 5.

4371

Performance of the attacked target device.

Fig. 7. The impact of different types of DDoS attacks on the rewards of Single
Organization (SO) and Multiple organizations (MO) defenders.

Fig. 6.

Effects of different attack modes under Internet DDoS defense.

quality of the consortium blockchain, indirectly reflecting the
defense effect of the DDoS protection method on the Internet
against internal and external DDoS attacks.
After 100 transactions, the average block generation time
for the three attack scenarios is 0.18 s, 0.21 s, and 0.24 s.
The results of the Fig. 6 showed that DDoS attacks initiated
by internal attackers have a greater negative impact on consortium blockchain than external attacks. DDoS attacks launched
by external attackers have a weak impact on the consortium
blockchain, and external malicious traffic will be identified
and discarded by the Internet DDoS defense. However, DDoS
attacks initiated by internal attackers can have a negative impact
on consortium blockchain services. The main reason is that
although the frequency of invalid transaction DDoS generated
by internal attackers is lower than that of external attackers,
the computing power resources of the consortium blockchain

nodes are limited, and the throughput is low. Continuously
processing block transactions in a short period of time can cause
consensus pressure, resulting in increased block generation time
and decreased service quality. The experimental results show
that Internet DDoS defense can properly deal with external
attackers, but it is powerless to deal with DDoS attacks launched
by internal attackers.
As shown in Fig. 7, regardless of whether in single organization or multiple organizations, the rewards of defender increased
as episodes progress. It indicated that defenders are capable of
effectively countering DDoS attacks of varying types, methods,
and intensities launched by attackers.
2) Single Organization: In a single organization, we mainly
evaluated the relationship between the attacker’s and defender’s
benefits with DQN learning episode. We set the number of
nodes and the number of bots as parameters. Rational DDoS
attackers terminate attacks as long as reaching the requirement
of (2). Equation (2) is an episode-stopping signal, which means
an episode of DQN would stop only when reaching a DDoS
termination condition.

4372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

Fig. 8. Defender’s rewards and attacker’s profits inside one organization by
each episode.

Fig. 9. Learning steps in each episode with the different number of bots (100,
500 and 1000).

There are four MTD attributes of blockchain node state,
including IP moving times (MjIP , maximum value is 100), port
moving times (MjP ort , maximum value is 100), the number
of developed containers (Njcont , minimum value is 1), and the
number of logic nodes (Njlon , minimum value is 1). The initial
state of nodes is shown in Setting #1.1. The profit of DDoS
attacker is the difference between the benefit and attacking cost
of the blockchain node; the benefit of attacked organization is
the sum of benefits of attacked nodes.
The attacker adopted the optimal DDoS attack method, which
selected nodes with the most benefit as targets in sequence (See
Setting #1.1). Memory pool size was 200 and minibatch size
was 16 (refer to Fig. 8).
We also evaluated the relationship between the number of bots
and the DQN efficiency. Our evaluation reflected the defense
efficiency in different scales of botnet; practicability of the
proposed DQN-based defense could be reflected. We set the
number of bots as a variable of the experiment; the experiment
data was the same as the last experiment. The number of steps
in each episode was evaluation metric in this evaluation. We
carried out three times of experiments with different numbers of
bots. The settings are given in Settings #1.2-#1.4, refer to Fig. 9.

Algorithm 1: The MTD Action Selection Method.
Require: The initialized replay memory D, the initialized
main Q network and target Q network with ω and ω ∗ , the
existing unhealthy states caused by DDoS.
Ensure: {S  , ω ∗ , ω}
1: procedure Deep Q-learning EpisodeD, ω, ω ∗ , S
2: for step = 1 → M AX_ST EP S do
3:
Initializing the first state S = p0 , r0 as φ(S).
4:
IsEnd ← F alse
5:
Input the φ(S) to main Q-network and obtain the
output actions, selecting the action A according to
-greedy method.
6:
Execute action A (defined in Section IV-A3), the
new state S  , φ(S  ) and reward R are obtained.
7:
if R ≤ 0 then
8:
IsEnd ← T rue.
9:
end if
10:
Put the tuple φ(S), A, R, φ(S  ), IsEnd into
replay memory D.
11:
Renew the current state for the node, S ← S  .
12:
The number of m samples are selected randomly
from D φ(Sk ), Ak , Rk , φ(Sk ), IsEnd k ,
computing the target Q value of yk according to
(22).
13:
Computing and minimizing the loss function (21)
and updating ω in each step.
14:
Update the ω ∗ by ω ← ω ∗ in each C steps.
15:
if step mod C == 0 then
16:
ω ← ω∗
17:
end if
18:
if IsEnd == T rue then
19:
return
20:
end if
21: end for
22: end procedure

Next, we evaluate the effect of sharing frequency of attack
information is shared on defense reward. This experiment was
carried out in a single organization. We set the sharing intervals are 100 ms, 500 ms, 1000 ms, 5000 ms, and 10000 ms
respectively. The Settings#1.2 contains other parameters. The
expectation of this evaluation is defender’s reward will increase
with the increment of sharing frequency of malicious traffics, but
the defense reward will decrease after reaching a certain value.
The specific results are shown in Fig. 15.
Finally, we conducted defense performance under different
attack intensities. We used simulated malicious clients to generate malicious traffics with different attack intensity and recorded
the number of saved nodes in each round. We conducted four
experiments with different attack traffic rates, the traffic rates
of each malicious client were 2000 pps, 3000 pps, 4000 pps
and 5000 pps. Other configuration parameters are #1.4 in the
Table II. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 14.
3) Multiple Organizations: DDoS defense efficiency in different numbers of organizations (m) was also researched. Based

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

Fig. 11.

4373

Reward of defender with the different number of nodes.

considered the impact of increasing both the number of organizations and the number of nodes within the organization on defense
effectiveness. The evaluation results are shown in Fig. 11.
Average value of interception rate for each node is denoted
by α , which is shown in (23).
α =

Fig. 10. Rewards of defender in episode with the different number of
organization.

on the proposed theory, the defense mechanism in this paper
can achieve better defense effects in the case of multiple organizations, because each defender can obtain more malicious
traffics information. Therefore, defenders can directly filter out
more malicious traffics and train a more accurate deep reinforcement learning model based on these traffic data. In addition,
the defender can obtain various types of attack information,
which can improve the elasticity and scalability of the defense
model. The difference between the collaborative situation and
the single organization situation was the scale of training data.
The collaborative situation obtained more malicious traffics than
a single situation, which made the MTD defense results of each
organization converge to the stable value quickly. Similarly, we
judged the defense effect of an organization by the number of
steps in each episode and the defender’s benefits. We set up
five situations to study the number of steps in each episode and
the defender’s benefits, settings are given in Settings #2.1-#2.5.
The evaluation results are shown in Fig. 10. In addition, we
set up eight situations to analyze the correlation between node
quantity and defender benefits, settings are given in Settings
#3.1-#3.8. The first four situations explored the impact of increasing node diversity within organizations while maintaining
a constant number of organizations. The remaining situations

m m
1  
α
n ∗ m i=1 j=1 ij

1 ≤ i ≤ m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n

(23)

Next, we evaluated changes of the expected value of αij
(defined as α) and α in blockchain node (in Section II-B). The
relationship between α and α reflected DDoS duration time to
victims in organization. According to Section II-B, the sooner α
was greater than α (α ≥ α ), the better of DDoS defense effect.
See Settings #2.1, #2.3, and #2.5.
Finally, evaluations also considered the case of multiple organizations. We set MTD action of defenders as a defense round,
the number of total saved nodes was the evaluation measurement.
The evaluations set three groups for different ms (Settings #2.1,
#2.3, and #2.5), see Fig. 12.
B. Experiment Results
Fig. 8 depicted that the increment of episodes had a negative relationship with learning steps, which implied that it was
quicker for the defender to terminat DDoS attack at the end
of DQN learning than at the beginning of DQN learning. The
defenders could prevent DDoS attacks within 200 steps when an
episode at 200. Efficiency was 96.22% higher than the situation
when episode = 1. In addition, the number of steps and the
attacker’s profit were converged to 198 and -5 at 70 episodes,
respectively.
In Fig. 9, the statistical data were the average value of the
number of steps in the period of episodes. For example, the value
in episode = 400 was the average number of steps from episode
200 to episode 400. Learning duration of bots=100 was less than
500 and 1000 number of bots when the episode was below 200.
Except for the above situation, the learning duration was almost
close in different scales of bots. In addition, the learning steps
were stable at around 180 after 1000 episodes, which meant the
defense model could converge to a high-efficiency state quickly.
Fig. 10 depicted that defenders received more rewards with
increased collaboration among organizations. We evaluated the
defense mechanism by setting all blockchain nodes under attack,
using the number of execution rounds as the primary metric.

4374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

Fig. 12. The number of attacked nodes decreased as the number of defense MTD rounds increased. The total number of nodes was 20 in (a), 60 in
(b), and 100 in (c).

Fig. 13.

Value of α and α changed with episodes.

The results indicate that collaboration between multiple organizations improved defense efficiency. The defense effectiveness
increased with the number of episodes. In addition, Fig. 11
depicted the defenders received more rewards with more nodes.
We found that it was difficult to fully leverage the advantages of
collaborative defense when the number of collaborative nodes
in two groups was at a lower-level. However, as the number of
nodes increased, there arose a problem of diminishing returns
in benefits. Compared to the previous stage, the growth rate of
benefits decreased from 240% to 40% and from 140% to 30%.
Only an appropriate number of nodes could effectively exploit
the defensive advantage. The evaluation results depicted that the
increase in the number of nodes enhanced the defense reward;
the defense effect also increased with increase of the number of
organizations.
We extracted the accumulated data by ten rounds of defense
MTD in Fig. 12. The data of Up Bound was the theoretical
optimal approach for comparing other approaches. The results
in Fig. 12 showed the proposed DQN-based could successfully
filter all malicious traffics and the efficiency could be upon
94.95% of the up bound. In addition, considering the efficiency,
the proposed approach saved all blockchain nodes faster than
other approaches and the efficiency of the proposed approach
performed well when a large scale of defenders were employed.
The results demonstrated that the proposed approach could
efficiently defend DDoS attacks in consortium blockchain. In the
evaluation of α and α , condition of α equal to α was arrived
about episode = 900, episode = 400 and episode = 300 in
Fig. 13(a), (b), and (c) respectively. The three evaluation results
intuitively reflected the increase of the number of organizations

Fig. 14.

The number of saved nodes in episode 1000.

can help victims terminate DDoS attacks in less duration time.
Episodes in Fig. 13(c) was 66.67% fewer than that of Fig. 13(a).
Fig. 14 depicted that the number of safe blockchain nodes
gradually increased with more defense rounds. In each round,
defenders could quickly save all nodes at low attack intensities,
but as intensity increased, mitigation speed slowed, though most
nodes were saved within 50 rounds. Overall, under an attack
intensity of 2000 pps, the mitigation efficiency was 42.9%, 50%,
and 150% higher than under intensities of 3000 pps, 4000 pps,
and 5000 pps, respectively. Fig. 15 demonstrated that attackers
failed to obtain maximum benefits when the frequency of sharing
malicious traffic was high, such as once every 500 ms, as this
concurrently lowered training efficiency. The attack return also

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

4375

Theorem V.1, we have demonstrated the effectiveness of our
method to the threat.
Theorem V.1: Let the filtering capabilities of those nodes

and those nodes
without deploying our defense method be αij
0


using our defense method as αij
. There exist that the total
1

filtering capability with adopting our defense method is greater
than those of without adopting our defense method. The mathematical expression is given in (25).
m 
n


Fig. 15. Defender’s reward in each episode with the different frequency of
sharing DDoS messages (200 ms, 500 ms, 1000 ms, 5000 ms and 10000 ms).

decreased with sustained high sharing frequencies. Our experiments found that defenders achieved a maximum benefit when
the malicious information-sharing frequency was approximately
1000 ms.
The results showed two advantages of our approach. One
merit is that the efficiency of our DQN-based approach could be
enhanced when the volume of the malicious traffics was stored.
The other merit is that our approach could successfully filter the
persistent malicious traffics by adopting our MTD method.
To measure the maximum rate at which consortium
blockchain nodes process invalid transactions or empty blocks,
we submited a series of invalid transactions and generated empty
blocks to the system, while monitoring and recording the speed
at which each node processes these blocks. The experimental
results showed that during our testing process, an average of
990 invalid transactions were intercepted per second, and the
processing speed for empty block transactions was 17394 TPS.
In summary, in this work we assumed that rational attackers would adjust the optimal DDoS attack strategy to select
suitable nodes and obtain the maximum profits in real-time
when updating MTD strategies. A multi-stage game was formulated to abstract the attack-defend interactions, such that a
Nash equilibrium would be reached. The experiment results had
demonstrated that rational attackers would eventually terminate
attacks when the attack profit became negative. The limitation
of our method was that the accuracy of DDoS attack predictions
still needed an improvement, which would be explored in our
future work.
C. Security Analysis
In line with the threat model defined in Section II-A, we
provided a brief security analysis in this section. The analysis
would be given from the perspective of MTD that defended the
proposed threats. There were four key MTD parameters involved
in our experiment evaluations, which played vital roles in the
defense.
On one hand, considering threats to executor nodes, we
have proposed an MTD method supporting the moves of smart
contract containers. The increment of the MTD rounds will
decrease the total attack profit Ptotal . Results shown in Fig. 8
have depicted that the attack profit will be converged to a stable
minimum value along with the growth of the training times,
when the attack cost will be at a maximum point. In the following


αij
>

i=1 j=1 1

m 
n



αij

i=1 j=1 0

1 ≤ i ≤ m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n

(24)

Proof: Equation (25) is obtained from (4) showing the computation of the total filtering capability.
m 
n



αij
=

i=1 j=1 1

m 
n

apro
ij
i=1 j=1

kacost
ij

(25)

cost
For an acost
ij , there is a value aic , c ∈ [1, n] making (26)
existed.
pro
m
m n
n

1  pro   aij
a
=
(26)
ij
kacost
kacost
ic
ij
i=1
j=1
i=1 j=1

Deriving from (6), we can have following computation, shown
in (27).
⎡
⎤
m
m
n


1
1 ⎣ 
αij + γVi (s )⎦
cost Vi (s) =
cost
ka
ka
ic
ic
i=1
i=1
j=1 0
=

m


m
n

1  
1

α
+
ij
cost
cost γVi (s )
ka
ka
ic
ic
i=1
j=1 0
i=1

(27)
m

1
γVi (s ) > 0, we can have a conclusion
Since
i=1 kacost
ic
shown in (28) such that the Theorem V.1 has been proved.
n
m 



αij
>

i=1 j=1 1

n
m 



αij

i=1 j=1 0

1 ≤ i ≤ m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n

(28)


On the other hand, our scheme moves logic nodes to reduce
those threats to consensus nodes. Fig. 12 have depicted that our
method could successfully decrease the number of the attacked
nodes in a gradual manner. Our method allowed the consensus
to remain functional even with a few malfunction nodes in the
system. Fig. 12 exhibited that our method could guarantee a
maximum amount of recovered nodes at each round of MTD
moves; thus, consensus was primarily recovered. Theorem V.2
described the effectiveness of the defense method to the consensus threat.
Theorem V.2: Assume that the maximum amount of the malfunction nodes in a consensus is m . The number of consensus
nodes being attacked is v  . A certain a time spot is denoted by
t . Thus, there exist a v  < m when t > t .
Proof: Deriving from demonstrations in Section II-B, we can
obtain (29).
be
cost
apro
ij = aij − aij

4376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

cont
lon
IP
P ort
= (Nij
+ Nij
) − (Mij
+ Mij
)

where,

1 ≤ i ≤ m, 1 ≤ j ≤ n

(29)

According to demonstrations in Section IV, there exists a
cont
lon
IP
P ort
, Nij
, Mij
, Mij
), which makes apro
set (Nij
ij < 0, such



that v ← (v − 1). Thus, ∃t there exists v  < m when t > t .
Theorem V.2 has been proved.

VI. RELATED WORK
As a new research direction, defense of DDoS attack in
blockchain has been explored in recent years. Perez et al. [35]
leveraged Ethereum’s metering mechanism and developed a
genetic algorithm to generate low-throughput contracts that
could gradually exhaust nodes’ resources. Li et al. [36] proposed
a DDoS method to Ethereum, called DETER, which used a
low-cost DDoS rate to attack the txpool in Ethereum node and
disrupted the normal processing of transactions. Compared
with [36], the DETER attack mainly targeted the txpool of
Ethereum node and also utilized the metering mechanism
of Ethereum. On the basis of the huge cost of mining-based
DDoS attacks [37], [38], [39], Mirkin et al. [40] proposed a
scheme called BDoS, in which attackers are driven by external
incentives to prevent the normal operation of the blockchain.
With only small resources invested, BDoS can motivate other
miners to stop mining.
As a severe threat using bots to send malicious traffics for
blocking services or essential links, the internal clients were
used for launching DDoS attacks and the identity authentication
was bypassed in the consortium blockchain [10]. A group of
DDoS defense methods has been explored by prior studies,
such as MTD-based defense, filtering, SDN-based defense,
collaboration-based methods, and reinforcement learning-based
defense methods.
Even though DDoS threats to consortium blockchains are
observable, constructing effective defense methods was still
encountering challenges [26]. One of challenges was that nodes
in consortium blockchain were internally public so that this
setting provided attackers with attack chances by attacking at
public nodes’ addresses. In general, attack features are hardly to
be detected when they derive from internal nodes [33].
The collaborative DDoS defense assembled resources from
multiple defenders to detect/defend against DDoS attacks, in
order to guarantee the system security in a large scale. Sivaramakrishnan et al. [20] proposed a method, called SENSS, to
assist victims to request DDoS defense resources from ISPs.
In another exploration, Daniel et al. [41] developed a distributed attack mitigation platform for mitigating amplification
attacks and dropping additional malicious traffics. Similarly, a
DDoS mitigation platform was proposed in [41] that exchanged
DDoS rate information within internal nodes. The collaboration
in [41] was designed among multiple defenders (e.g., Internet
Exchange Points, IXP) rather than providing defense power for
victims [20], which appeared a higher-level adaptability in multiple application scenarios in a large scale of the system. Rashidi
et al. [17] proposed a NFV-based domain network, called
CoFence, to construct a collaboration network for mitigating
the large volume of DDoS attacks through resource sharing.

CoFence performed better in flexibility and hardware resource
saving than [41] but brought an extra exchanging overhead. In
our approach, the organizations were enabled to share malicious
traffics with one another via implementing smart contracts in
consortium blockchain, which meant that the historical attack
records were stored in the distributed ledger, such that reliability
could be ensured [17], [20], [41].
Reinforcement Learning (RL) was another option for facilitating DDoS attacks mitigation. Li et al. [42] proposed an
RL-based DDoS mitigation in Internet of Vehicles (IoV), named
FAST, that applied the Kalman filter and historical data analytic;
however, this method was passive in analyzing and responding to
the bots’ actions. [43] has introduced RL-based MTD to proactively change IoV configuration for mitigating DDoS. Compared
with [42], the dynamic defense environment proposed in [43]
improved the DDoS defense efficiency. Rather than addressing
efficiency, Zhou et al. [44], [45] proposed a shuffling method
that used a multi-objective Markov decision process to model
behaviors of attackers/defenders and balance resource costs and
defense effects. Differing from prior work, our approach further
synchronized the malicious traffics among multiple defenders
to make RL implementations more efficient.
Furthermore, MTD is an alternative for mitigating DDoS
attacks in consortium blockchain, due to its proactive defense
mechanism and dynamic attacking strategy [44], [46]. In most
cases, MTD relied on itself rather than using third-party tools.
For instance, combining MTD with greedy shuffle algorithms
had been examined in DDoS defense [33], [47], [48]. The
mechanism implemented a greedy client-server nodes shuffle
to continuously adjust connections of client-server nodes and
distinguish malicious clients. Such a greedy-based shuffle algorithm had two drawbacks. On one hand, efficiency would be
dramatically lowered down when a large number of nodes were
involved, as operations were sequentially executed. On the other
hand, this sort of methods had a lower performance in predictions
due to lack of historical network states data.
SDN-based method also was explored for defending DDoS
attacks, because of its flexibility and efficiency [22], [49]. One
of features of SDN was decoupling network’s data plane and
control plane [50]. The work [22] designed a SDN-based defense
method, called Bohatei, which combined SDN with NFV to
lower down the defender’s costs. Administrators could flexibly
deploy a variety of different software on common servers, while
NFV improved defenders’ flexibility. Yang et al. [51] proposed
a machine learning-based SDN solution to mitigating DDoS
attacks. The method used Support Vector Machine (SVM) to
detect malicious traffics, which represented a better robust than
other DDoS detection methods, e.g., [22]. Unlike [51], Xu et
al. [49] utilized the traffic monitoring function of SDN to detect
DDoS attacks, which accurately found potential attackers as
well as occupied servers. Another work [52] tried adopting a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) in SDN-based solutions, by
which the optimal traffic process strategies could be generated
for preventing DDoS attacks.
In our approach, we assumed the attacker controls sufficient
internal nodes to launch DDoS attacks, posing hazards equivalent to insider threats. Dissimilar to SDN-based DDoS defense
methods, our approach lacks a centralized controller, instead

GAI et al.: MOVING TARGET DDOS DEFENSE APPROACH IN CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN

relying on adaptable defense actions at each organization. Our
work explores a different dimension from others by emphasizing
two key aspects. First, our approach enhances malicious traffic
filtering efficiency through collaboration between defenders.
This collaboration also improves the refinement performance
of RL in detecting malicious traffic rates. Second, we introduce
a moving defense strategy to adapt to diverse DDoS attacks
from both external and internal bots, highlighting our approach’s
capability to defend against internal threats. Additionally, our
approach leverages historical data by utilizing a DQN-based
MTD method, which fully exploits records of prior DDoS attacks to enhance MTD performance.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we had proposed a collaborative approach for
mitigating DDoS attacks while emphasizing internal threats
of consortium blockchain systems, through combining MTD
with DQN. First of all, the collaborative working mode enabled
multiple organizations to share data of malicious records within
a trustworthy environment, thanks to the distributed ledger.
The mode contributed to both training and efficiency of traffic
filtering. Moreover, our approach improved the effectiveness
of the MTD decision making due to the implementation of
DQN. The decision was updated along with the state update
of bots-defenders of each round. With the increasing records of
the malicious traffics, we found that the efficiency of decision
making could be enhanced. Our experiment evaluations had
demonstrated that the proposed approach could successfully
defend DDoS attacks by organizing multiple organizations in
blockchain. The main finding was that the amount of participant
organizations or episodes had a positive relationship with the
defending performance.
In our future work, we will fully consider the impact of MTD’s
latency on DDoS defense and improve the performance of our
defense approach while considering various constraints, such as
timing limit. A scalable size of participant organizations will
be explored in order to demonstrate the impact of a dynamic
organization setting on defending varied types of DDoS attacks.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Mirsky and M. Guri, “DDoS attacks on 9–1-1 emergency services,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 2767–2786,
Nov./Dec. 2021.
[2] B. Rodrigues and B. Stiller, “Cooperative signaling of DDoS attacks in
a blockchain-based network,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Posters
Demos, 2019, pp. 39–41.
[3] A. Bremler-Barr, E. Brosh, and M. Sides, “DDoS attack on cloud autoscaling mechanisms,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun., 2017,
pp. 1–9.
[4] P. Thakkar, S. Nathan, and B. Viswanathan, “Performance benchmarking
and optimizing hyperledger fabric blockchain platform,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Model. Anal. Simul. Comput. Telecommun. Syst., 2018, pp. 264–276.
[5] K. Li, J. Chen, X. Liu, Y. R. Tang, X. Wang, and X. Luo, “As strong as its
weakest link: How to break blockchain DApps at RPC service,” in Proc.
28th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
[6] M. Mirkin et al., “BDoS: Blockchain denial-of-service,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2020, pp. 601–619.
[7] K. Baqer, D. Y. Huang, D. McCoy, and N. Weaver, “Stressing out: Bitcoin
“stress testing””,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Financial Cryptogr. Data Secur.,
Springer, 2016, pp. 3–18.

4377

[8] Hyperledger, “Performance considerations: Hyperledger fabric docs main
documentation,” (n.d.), 2020. Accessed: Mar. 27, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://hyperledger-fabric.readthedocs.io
[9] R. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Tripathi, G. Gupta, S. Garg, and M. Hassan,
“A distributed intrusion detection system to detect DDoS attacks in
blockchain-enabled IoT network,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 164,
pp. 55–68, 2022.
[10] E. Androulaki et al., “Hyperledger fabric: A distributed operating system for permissioned blockchains,” in Proc. 13th EuroSys Conf., 2018,
pp. 30:1–30:15.
[11] M. Saad et al., “Exploring the attack surface of blockchain: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1977–2008,
Third Quarter, 2020.
[12] Z. Lv and W. Xiu, “Interaction of edge-cloud computing based on SDN
and NFV for next generation IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
pp. 5706–5712, Jul. 2020.
[13] J. Pei, P. Hong, M. Pan, J. Liu, and J. Zhou, “Optimal VNF placement
via deep reinforcement learning in SDN/NFV-Enabled networks,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 263–278, Feb. 2020.
[14] C. Lei et al., “Incomplete information Markov game theoretic approach
to strategy generation for moving target defense,” Comput. Commun.,
vol. 116, pp. 184–199, 2018.
[15] H. Jin, Z. Li, D. Zou, and B. Yuan, “DSEOM: A framework for dynamic
security evaluation and optimization of MTD in container-based cloud,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1125–1136,
May/Jun. 2021.
[16] J. Tan, C. Lei, H. Zhang, and Y. Cheng, “Optimal strategy selection approach to moving target defense based on Markov robust game,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 85, pp. 63–76, 2019.
[17] B. Rashidi, C. Fung, and E. Bertino, “A collaborative DDoS defence framework using network function virtualization,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 2483–2497, Oct. 2017.
[18] K. Xu, Y. Zheng, S. Yao, B. Wu, and X. Xu, “NetSpirit: A smart collaborative learning framework for DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35,
no. 6, pp. 140–147, Nov./Dec. 2021.
[19] X. Chen, L. Xiao, W. Feng, N. Ge, and X. Wang, “DDoS defense for IoT: A
Stackelberg game model enabled collaborative framework,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9659–9674, Jun. 2022.
[20] S. Ramanathan, J. Mirkovic, M. Yu, and Y. Zhang, “SENSS against
volumetric DDoS attacks,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf.,
2018, pp. 266–277.
[21] A. Shaghaghi, M. A. Kaafar, and S. Jha, “WedgeTail: An intrusion prevention system for the data plane of software defined networks,” in Proc.
ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 849–861.
[22] S. K. Fayaz, Y. Tobioka, V. Sekar, and M. Bailey, “Bohatei: Flexible and
elastic DDoS defense,” in Proc. 24th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2015, pp. 817–
832.
[23] J. Yun, Y. Goh, and J.-M. Chung, “DQN-based optimization framework
for secure sharded Blockchain systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8,
no. 2, pp. 708–722, Jan. 2021.
[24] C. Badertscher, Y. Lu, and V. Zikas, “A rational protocol treatment of 51%
attacks,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Int. Cryptol. Conf., Springer, 2021, pp. 3–32.
[25] R. Feichtinger, R. Fritsch, L. Heimbach, Y. Vonlanthen, and R. Wattenhofer, “SoK: Attacks on DAOs,” in Proc. 6th Conf. Adv. Financial Technol.,
2024, pp. 28:1–28:27.
[26] Y. Amir, B. Coan, J. Kirsch, and J. Lane, “Prime: Byzantine replication
under attack,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 564–577, Jul./Aug. 2011.
[27] J. F. Nash, “Equilibrium points in N-person games,” in Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 48–49, 1950.
[28] D. Monderer and L. Shapley, “Potential games,” Games Econ. Behav.,
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 124–143, 1996.
[29] C.-T. Huang, M. N. Sakib, C. A. Kamhoua, K. A. Kwiat, and L. Njilla, “A
Bayesian game theoretic approach for inspecting web-based malvertising,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268,
Nov./Dec. 2020.
[30] Y. Miao, K. Gai, L. Zhu, K. R. Choo, and J. Vaidya, “Blockchain-based
shared data integrity auditing and deduplication,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3688–3703, Jul./Aug. 2024.
[31] Y. Miao, K. Gai, J. Yu, Y. Tan, L. Zhu, and W. Meng, “Blockchainempowered keyword searchable provable data possession for large similar data,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 1374–1389,
2025.
[32] J. Liu, X. Wang, S. Shen, G. Yue, S. Yu, and M. Li, “A Bayesian Q-learning
game for dependable task offloading against DDoS attacks in sensor edge
cloud,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 7546–7561, May 2021.

4378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

[33] Q. Jia, K. Sun, and A. Stavrou, “MOTAG: Moving target defense against
internet denial of service attacks,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Comput.
Commun. Netw., 2013, pp. 1–9.
[34] W. Alcorn, “HULK (HTTP Unbearable Load King),” 2012. Accessed: Feb.
13, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/R3DHULK/HULK
[35] D. Perez and B. Livshits, “Broken metre: Attacking resource metering in
EVM,” 2019, arXiv: 1909.07220.
[36] K. Li, Y. Wang, and Y. Tang, “DETER: Denial of Ethereum Txpool
services,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021,
pp. 1645–1667.
[37] J. Bonneau, “Why buy when you can rent? - Bribery attacks on Bitcoinstyle consensus,” in Proc. Int. Workshops Financial Cryptogr. Data Secur.,
Springer, 2016, pp. 19–26.
[38] J. Bonneau, “Hostile blockchain takeovers (short paper),” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Financial Cryptogr. Data Secur., Springer, 2019, pp. 92–100.
[39] J. A. Kroll, I. C. Davey, and E. W. Felten, “The economics of Bitcoin
mining, or Bitcoin in the presence of adversaries,” in Proc. Workshop
Econ. Inf. Secur., 2013, pp. 1–21.
[40] M. Mirkin, Y. Ji, J. Pang, A. Klages-Mundt, I. Eyal, and A. Juels, “BDOS:
Blockchain denial-of-service,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., 2020, pp. 601–619.
[41] D. Wagner et al., “United we stand: Collaborative detection and mitigation
of amplification DDoS attacks at scale,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 970–987.
[42] Z. Li, Y. Kong, C. Wang, and C. Jiang, “DDoS mitigation based on spacetime flow regularities in IoV: A feature adaption reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 2262–2278,
Mar. 2022.
[43] T. Zhang et al., “How to mitigate DDoS intelligently in SD-IoV: A
moving target defense approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 1097–1106, Jan. 2023.
[44] Y. Zhou et al., “A cost-effective shuffling method against DDoS attacks
using moving target defense,” in Proc. 6th ACM Workshop Moving Target
Defense, 2019, pp. 57–66.
[45] Y. Zhou et al., “Cost-effective moving target defense against DDoS attacks
using trilateral game and multi-objective Markov decision processes,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 97, 2020, Art. no. 101976.
[46] S. Debroy et al., “Frequency-minimal utility-maximal moving target defense against DDoS in SDN-based systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 890–903, Jun. 2020.
[47] H. Wang et al., “A moving target DDoS defense mechanism,” Comput.
Commun., vol. 46, pp. 10–21, 2014.
[48] Q. Jia et al., “Catch me if you can: A cloud-enabled DDoS defense,” in
Proc. 44th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., 2014,
pp. 264–275.
[49] Y. Xu and Y. Liu, “DDoS attack detection under SDN context,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun., 2016, pp. 1–9.
[50] J. Hu, M. Reed, N. Thomos, M. F. AI-Naday, and K. Yang, “Securing
SDN-controlled IoT networks through edge blockchain,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2102–2115, Feb. 2021.
[51] L. Yang and H. Zhao, “DDoS attack identification and defense using SDN
based on machine learning method,” in Proc. 15th Int. Symp. Pervasive
Syst. Algorithms Netw., 2018, pp. 174–178.
[52] J. Zheng and A. S. Namin, “Defending SDN-based IoT networks against
DDoS attacks using Markov decision process,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Big Data, 2018, pp. 4589–4592.
Keke Gai received the PhD degree in computer science from Pace University, New York, NY, USA.
He is currently a professor with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute
of Technology, Beijing, China. He has published five
books, more than 200 peer-reviewed papers, & 10+
best paper awards. He serves as an editor-in-chief of
the journal Blockchains and associate editors for a
few journals, including IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing, etc. He also serves as a
co-chair of IEEE Technology and Engineering Management Society’s Technical
Committee on Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Technologies, a standing
committee member at China Computer Federation-Blockchain Committee. His
research interests include cybersecurity, blockchain, privacy-preserving computation, and decentralized identity.

Guolei Zhang received the master’s degree in computer science from the School of Computer Science
and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China. His research interests include blockchain,
cybersecurity, and cloud computing.

Peng Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
from the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, in 2017. She is an associate professor
with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing. She
has edited three book/book chapters and published
more than 40 refereed papers in international journals and conferences. Her research interests include
cryptography, information security, and blockchain
technology. She has served as an associated editor of
the Computer Standards & Interfaces, a guest editor
for many journals, and a program committee member of many conferences.

Liehuang Zhu (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently a
full professor with the School of Cyberspace Science
and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology. He
is selected into the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University from Ministry of Education,
China. He has published more than 260 SCI-indexed
research articles in these areas, and a book published
by Springer. He serves on the editorial boards of three
international journals, including the IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, and IEEE Network Magazine. He won
the Best Paper Award at IEEE/ACM IWQoS 2017 and IEEE TrustCom 2018.
His research interests include the Internet of Things, cloud computing security,
internet, and mobile security.

Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo (Senior Member,
IEEE) received the PhD degree in information security from the Queensland University of Technology,
Australia, in 2006. He currently holds the Cloud Technology Endowed professorship with the University of
Texas at San Antonio. He is the founding co-editorin-chief of the ACM Distributed Ledger Technologies: Research & Practice, and the founding chair of
the IEEE Technology and Engineering Management
Society Technical Committee (TC) on Blockchain
and Distributed Ledger Technologies. He is also the
recipient of the 2022 IEEE Hyper-Intelligence TC Award for Excellence in
Hyper-Intelligence Systems (Technical Achievement award), the 2022 IEEE
TC on Homeland Security Research and Innovation Award, the 2022 IEEE
TC on Secure and Dependable Measurement Mid-Career Award, and the 2019
IEEE TC on Scalable Computing Award for Excellence in Scalable Computing
(Middle Career Researcher).