4508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

A Resource-Efficient Federated Learning
Framework for Intrusion Detection
in IoMT Networks
Md. Fahim-Ul-Islam , Amitabha Chakrabarty , Md. Golam Rabiul Alam , Member, IEEE,
and Siti Sarah Binti Maidin

Abstract—The emergence of medical sensors in Smart
Healthcare Systems (SHS) has enabled the development of
sophisticated Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) networks which
is crucial for tracking vital physiological parameters in consumer electronics. These networks are progressively incorporated
into consumer devices allowing users to monitor their health
parameters effortlessly. Nonetheless, they encounter considerable
security and privacy issues stemming from weaknesses in data
transfer. Despite the potential of Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS), there is a critical need for a real-time, highly precise
attack detection system optimized for the edge-centric Internet
of Medical Things (IoMT) environment in consumer sensor
devices. Therefore, we introduce the federated kolmogorovarnold network (FedIoMT), an advanced federated learning
framework that utilizes meta-learning along with an advanced
clustering method to achieve robust model aggregation. Our
FedIoMT acts as both an adaptive personalized updating mechanism and a shared global classifier. In addition, we propose a
novel intrusion detection model that uses the kolmogorov-arnold
convolutional network (KANConvNet) as its local classifier,
which improves scalability and interpretability in the FL framework updates. Our FedIoMT model demonstrates superior
performance compared to other existing FL-based methods,
achieving validation accuracies of 99.38%, 99.23%, 99.26%, and
99.2% across four benchmark IoMT datasets under the IID setting. FedIoMT utilizes significantly more floating point operations
per second (FLOP) counts up to 2.8 times more than other models
and also excels in memory efficiency, consuming up to 93% less
peak memory across devices compared to the alternatives. We
thoroughly evaluated FedIoMT on embedded consumer devices,
demonstrating its resource-efficient characteristics.
Index Terms—Internet of Medical Things, intrusion detection,
federated learning, Kolmogorov–Arnold networks. FedIoMT.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) connects smart
medical devices such as blood pressure monitors and
glucose meters to consumer electronics found in wearables and

T

Received 13 October 2024; revised 26 December 2024 and 2 February
2025; accepted 8 February 2025. Date of publication 21 February 2025;
date of current version 14 August 2025. (Corresponding author:
Amitabha Chakrabarty.)
Md. Fahim-Ul-Islam, Amitabha Chakrabarty, and Md. Golam Rabiul Alam
are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, BRAC
University, Dhaka 1212, Bangladesh (e-mail: fahim.islam@bracu.ac.bd;
amitabha@bracu.ac.bd; rabiul.alam@bracu.ac.bd).
Siti Sarah Binti Maidin is with the Faculty of Data Science and Information
Technology, INTI International University, Nilai 71800, Malaysia (e-mail:
sitisarah.maidin@newinti.edu.my).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3544885

home healthcare goods. Because of the sensitivity of the data
being communicated, these devices, which account for a 100
billion market, require secure connection. [1], [2], [3]. With
the increasing use of Wi-Fi, 5G, and NB-IoT in consumer
electronics for data transmission, stronger security measures
are essential to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability [4], [5]. Data storage on cloud gateways within these
consumer-driven healthcare ecosystems further emphasizes
the need for robust protection mechanisms [6]. The rapid
expansion of IoMT in consumer electronics, combined with
resource constraints and data diversity, makes it a prime target
for attacks, compromising the security of sensitive medical
information and threatening patient safety [7], [8], [9], [10],
[11], [12].
Recent research indicate that 53% of Internet of Medical
Things (IoMT) devices integrated into consumer electronics
exhibit substantial susceptibility to hackers, hence presenting considerable threats to interconnected healthcare
systems [9], [13]. An examination of 40 IoMT-enabled
consumer products identified 18 unique attack vectors, highlighting the diverse risks aimed at healthcare technology
in consumer electronics [14]. Ransomware assaults have
increased by more than 50%, resulting in significant operational disruptions in consumer-integrated healthcare devices
and jeopardizing patient safety [15]. Prevalent cyber threats,
such as DoS, DDoS, MitM, and Ransomware, threaten the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of critical medical consumer products like pacemakers, insulin pumps, and
smart wearables. These vulnerabilities have a substantial
influence on healthcare delivery in consumer electronics environments [16], [17], [18], [19]. Figure 1 depicts prevalent
threats to IoMT devices, including Denial of Service (DoS),
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Man in the Middle
(MitM), and Ransomware.
To improve network security in consumer electronics, particularly IoMT devices, intrusion detection systems (IDS),
alongside machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)
techniques, are widely employed. IDS leverages heuristic
methods and fuzzy logic to thwart attackers and safeguard IoMT networks [19]. Sajid et al. [20] proposed a
hybrid model combining XGBoost and CNN for feature
extraction, with LSTM optimized for security. Turukmane
and Devendiran [21] introduced M-MultiSVM with Mud
Ring optimization for hyperparameter tuning in IoMT-based

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS

4509

Fig. 1.
Examples of security threats (a) DoS (b) DDoS (c) MitM
(d) Ransomware to IoMT.

security systems. Talukder et al. [22] integrated ML with
SMOTE-TomekLink for more effective intrusion detection.
Goswami et al. [23] developed a Cu-BLSTM-based IDS to
detect various attacks in IoMT. Chen et al. [24] proposed
a hybrid feature selection model combining chi-square and
information gain with ML/DL algorithms for enhanced protection. Despite these advancements, IoMT devices still encounter
challenges like limited processing power, diverse environments, and inadequate labeled data [24].
From a data privacy perspective, sharing network data
containing sensitive patient information is challenging for
data owners, such as hospitals [25]. This makes developing effective IDS schemes difficult. Federated learning (FL),
proposed by Google in 2016, addresses this by enabling ML
on distributed data without sharing sensitive information [26].
FL enhances IoMT security by improving threat detection
and resilience against cyber-attacks through decentralized
model training, preserving privacy while maintaining high
accuracy [27].
In federated learning, FedAvg and FedProx have different
implications for model performance at the local and global
levels [28], [29]. FedAvg works well in IID settings but
struggles with non-IID data, as it averages local model updates
without accounting for data heterogeneity, leading to slower
convergence and potential bias in the global model. In contrast,
FedProx introduces a regularization term that stabilizes local
updates, improving convergence and robustness in non-IID
environments by preventing local models from deviating too
far from the global model. This makes FedProx more effective
in heterogeneous data scenarios, resulting in more accurate
and stable global model performances [30].
However, these FL architectures are vulnerable to security
threats, especially with heterogeneous data, as adversarial
clients can degrade global model performance through attacks
like A Little Is Enough (ALIE) attack and Inner Product
Manipulation (IPM) [27], [31], [32]. While robust aggregation methods exist, they suffer against sophisticated attacks,
particularly in Non-IID consumer devices. Defense measures often discover threats too late and some, like FLTrust,
undermine privacy by demanding server access to sensitive
data [31], [34], [35].
The study presents FedIoMT, a Federated Learning (FL)
methodology tailored for IoMT devices in consumer electronics, tackling issues including data heterogeneity and model
modification via multi-center clusters and similarity analysis. FedIoMT utilizes meta-learning to enhance the global

Fig. 2. On the left (a) the activations as they progress through the network. On
the right (b) the activation function is represented using a B-spline, enabling
the adjustment between coarse-grained and fine-grained grids.

model and facilitates individualized sharing with individual devices. We introduce KANConvNet, derived from the
Kolmogorov–Arnold Network (KAN), which customizes activation functions to accommodate the distinct data of each
IoMT device, as depicted in Figure 2. Integrating KAN layers
into a CNN framework, KANConvNet effectively captures
intricate data patterns, enhancing efficiency and robustness
within the FedIoMT architecture. Therefore our system model
is crucial for consumer electronics and healthcare. Therefore
the main contributions are listed as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we introduce the
KANConvNet model first time within the FedIoMT
framework, which uses the Kolmogorov-Arnold theorem and tailored activation functions in a convolutional
structure to improve scalability, robustness and feature
interaction in intrusion detection.
• Our FedIoMT model incorporates a meta-learning phase
to enhance security and counter adversarial clients using
the TOPSIS method. This approach leverages clustered
local models and ensures KRUM’s robust aggregation of
similar models tailored to various consumer electronics
devices. Additionally, we evaluate the performance using
the Multi-Krum aggregation strategy for comparative
analysis, achieving improved computational efficiency
and enhanced robustness.
• We perform a comprehensive design space search with
a genetic algorithm (GA) to optimize hyperparameters
and improve model performance though fine tuning the
process.
• FedIoMT achieves high efficiency, reducing peak memory
usage by 73.3% to 93.8% while maintaining a high
accuracy of 99.37%, making it suitable for consumer
devices with limited memory.
Following is a synopsis of the remainder of this paper.
In Section II, we introduce our connected work with the
previous studies comparing our proposed technique in this
domain. In Section III, we address the approach we discuss
our data collection, preprocessing methods. In Section IV, we
describe our proposed method defining system initaization In
Section V, we mainly focus our optimization process using
selected hyperparameter design exploration through genetic

4510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

algorithm. In Section VI, we define our experiment setup and
result analysis defining state of the art with our proposed
model. In Section VII. we finally conclude our work defining
contributions and limitations of our work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Given the limited research on intrusion detection in IoMT
within consumer electronics, this section mainly provides a
concise overview of relevant studies focused on intrusion
detection, emphasizing Federated Learning (FL)-based methods and Personalized Federated Learning (PFL).
A. Intrusion Detection Schemes
Intrusion detection is crucial for network security, especially
in smart healthcare and IoMT. Shambharkar and Sharma [36]
developed a deep learning model combining CNN and
LSTM with attention mechanisms to detect intrusions by
processing 100-dimensional feature vectors. Bouke et al. [37]
improved IoMT intrusion detection using the WUSTL EHMS
2020 dataset, employing SMOTE-ENN for data balancing
and a sequential deep learning model for high accuracy.
Faruqui et al. [38] proposed a hybrid CNN-LSTM model using
CIC-IDS2017 and Malimg datasets for feature extraction and
data normalization. Shambharkar and Sharma [36] introduced
LinSVM, ConvSVM, and CatEmb models for networkbased attack detection, utilizing feature scaling and SMOTE.
Anjelin and Kumar [39] optimized intrusion detection with
an Enhanced Elephant Herding Optimization (EHO) algorithm
and CNN, achieving high accuracy for IoMT environments.
B. Federated Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Methods
FL has been widely utilized across several domains to
address the challenges of data isolation and privacy protection in consumer eletronics. When applied to intrusion
detection in practical circumstances, FL has demonstrated
promising results. Javeed et al. [40] proposed a hybrid FL
model combining CNN and BiLSTM for intrusion detection,
leveraging spatial and temporal features while maintaining
data privacy through a zero-trust approach. Olanrewaju-George
and Pranggono [41] developed an FL-based IDS for IoT,
utilizing both unsupervised and supervised deep learning
models, with the FL AutoEncoder outperforming non-FL
models. Alazab et al. [42] introduced a privacy-preserving
IDS using FL with the FedAvg method, enabling collaborative
model training without data sharing. Rashid et al. [43] used a
hybrid FL model with Stacked CNN and BiLSTM to detect
complex threats in WSNs, enhancing privacy. Sarhan et al. [44]
proposed a FL-based CTI sharing scheme for NIDS, allowing collaborative model training across organizations without
exposing sensitive data.
However all existing studies mostly employ the FedAvg
algorithm to improve intrusion detection models, but frequently neglect the difficulties posed by non-IID intrusion
data in real-world situations. Moreover, these FL frameworks
are susceptible to model poisoning assaults that undermine
performance. Existing models have challenges when using a
method that calculates global averages. In order to tackle these

problems, our FL system incorporates a multi-center server
that facilitates customizable model sharing. Additionally, we
utilize the KANConvNet model to enhance generalization and
reliability on consumer driven devices.
The principal obstacles in the distributed systems in ensuring accurate weight updates in decentralized models are
data heterogeneity. Besides, it often face problems with
restricted computational resource. The FedIoMT architecture
tackles these difficulties through multiple techniques. It utilizes
TOPSIS to mitigate the influence of low-scoring clients during
meta-learning, ensuring that contributions from less dependable clients do not compromise the integrity of the global
model. Besides, our Krum-based aggregation guarantees reliable model updates by identifying the most trustworthy client
models and excluding those with poor performance or anomalous data. These solutions collectively enhance the efficiency,
robustness, and accuracy of decentralized weight updates,
hence improving the overall performance of FedIoMT.
III. DATA C OLLECTION AND P REPROCESSING
This section discusses the dataset, preprocessing steps, data
splitting, normalization, and feature selection. The WUSTLEHMS-2020 dataset [45] was used, containing 16,318 samples
with 87.5% normal and 12.5% attack data. Additional datasets,
including ECU-IoHT [46], BlueTrack [47], and RT-IoT [48],
were employed for benchmarking. The data was split into 60%
for training, 20% for local testing, and 20% for global testing,
with the global test data containing unknown attack types.
To enhance model convergence and reduce training time,
min-max normalization was applied. Due to class imbalance,
SMOTE-ENN [50] was utilized for data balancing, generating
synthetic samples to improve model validation and training
without losing data through undersampling. Feature selection
was based on information gain [49], with features reducing
uncertainty in the target variable being retained, and a threshold value of 0.05 was used.
IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
In this section, we explain our FL system, designed specifically for IoMT to enable safe and fast learning across
distributed consumer devices. Our FedIoMT model trains
locally using KANConvNet within convolutional layers for
better local optimization. Furthermore, in the case of dimensionality reduction and ranking, we utilize the TOPSIS method
for ranking and clustering for similarity analysis along with
outlier reduction of the updated gradients for the aggregation.
Afterward, we implement a robust aggregation approach based
on using Krum to protect against adversarial threats. The
proposed workflow is depicted in Figure 4. Finally, we show
the KANConvNet intrusion detection model as local model for
different consumer sensor based devices for IoMT.
A. System Initialization
The FL process starts with setting up the server and IoMT
devices as clients, involving model initialization, communication setup, and security protocols to ensure data privacy and
integrity.

FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS

Fig. 3.

Construction Phases of the IDS based on our Proposed FedIoMT Model Architecture.

Fig. 4.

Our Proposed FedIoMT Model Workflow.

1) Model Initialization: The central server initializes the
(0)
global model MG with pre-trained weights, which is distributed to all IoMT devices Di for i = 1, 2, . . . , N:
(0)

MG → Di ,

∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N},

(1)

2) Communication Setup: A secure communication protocol Secure_Channel(Server, Di ) is established for each IoMT
device Di , ensuring protected exchange of model updates and
preventing unauthorized access:
Secure_Channel(Server, Di ),

∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N},

(2)

B. Global Model Update
Local model updates are aggregated into multi-center clusters using a resilient mechanism to form the new global model
(t)
MG :


(t)
(t)
MG = Aggregate {Mi }N
(3)
i=1 ,
This process accounts for potential adversarial updates
and is robust against attacks. The updated global model is
then distributed to all IoMT devices, ensuring synchronous
communication and coordinated learning across the network.

4511

C. Local Optimization
Each IoMT device Di optimizes the global model locally
(t)
by minimizing its objective function Li (Mi ), defined as:





1
(t)
(t)
 f (x; Mi ), y ,
(4)
Li M i =
|Di |
(x,y) ∈Di

where (·, ·) is the loss function, f (x; M(t)
i ) is the model’s
prediction for input x, and |Di | is the size of the local dataset.
1) Gradient Descent-Based Optimization: The local
optimization phase fine-tunes the global model to each IoMT
device’s specific data using gradient descent:


(t)
(t−1)
(t−1)
,
(5)
Mi ← Mi
− η∇Li Mi
(t−1)

where η is the learning rate and ∇Li (Mi
) is the gradient
of the local loss.
2) Personalization and Regularization: To address data
variability among IoMT devices, each device applies L2 regularization to avoid overfitting and leverage prior knowledge.
The regularized objective function is:






reg
(t)
(t)
(t)
(6)
Li Mi = Li Mi + λ Mi ,

4512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

where λ is the regularization parameter and (·) represents
the regularization term.
D. Local to Global Model Transmission
After local optimization, each IoMT device sends its
(t)
updated model Mi to the multi-center servers.
The personalized update algorithm in our FL framework
consists of two main phases: Dimensionality Reduction using
TOPSIS and Robust Aggregation using Krum. These phases
ensure tailored updates for each device while maintaining
resilience against adversarial attacks.
1) Dimensionality Reduction Using TOPSIS: We utilize the
TOPSIS approach [55] that is mainly employed by the central
server to minimize the dimensionality of the model updates
received from the IoMT devices. This stage is critical for
addressing the high dimensionality and variety of data across
different devices. The procedure involves the following steps:
a) Normalization: The server first normalizes the model
(t)
updates Mi from each IoMT device Di . The normalization
ensures that the models are comparable across different scales.
Mathematically, the normalized value m(t)
ij for each model
parameter j of device Di at round t is calculated as:
m(t)
ij = 

(t)

mij
,
N  (t) 2
i=1 mij

(7)
Si− =

where m(t)
ij is the j-th parameter of the model update from
device Di at round t, and N is the total number of devices.
b) Weighted normalization: After normalization, the
server applies a weighted normalization to account for the
relative importance of different model accuracy values as
(t)
parameters. The weighted normalized value wij is computed
as:
(t)

(t)

wij = wj · mij ,

(8)

where wj is the weight assigned to the j-th parameter. These
weights are determined based on the relevance of each parameter to the overall model performance.
c) Ideal and anti-ideal solution identification: The server
identifies the ideal solution A+ and the anti-ideal solution A− .
The ideal solution represents the most desirable set of model
parameters, while the anti-ideal solution represents the least
desirable set. These are calculated as:


(t)
(9)
A+ = max wij | j = 1, 2, . . . , d ,
i


(10)
A− = min w(t)
ij | j = 1, 2, . . . , d ,
i

where d is the total number of parameters in the model.
d) Similarity calculation: The server computes the similarity of each model update to both the ideal and anti-ideal
solutions. The distance of each model updates Di to the ideal
solution A+ and the anti-ideal solution A− is given by:
Si+ =

d 
2

(t)
wij − A+
,
j
j=1

Fig. 5. TOPSIS-based process for IoMT device model update selection. The
process begins with normalizing device-provided accuracy values, followed
by identifying ideal and worst solutions. Distances to these solutions are
calculated, and a closeness coefficient (Ci ) is computed for ranking devices.
The top-ranked updates are aggregated to form the global model, ensuring
contributions from the most reliable devices.
d 
2

(t)
wij − A−
.
j

(12)

j=1

The relative closeness Ci of each model update to the ideal
solution is then calculated as:
S−
(13)
Ci = + i − .
Si + Si
The closer Ci is to 1, the more desirable the model update is.
The whole process is described in Figure 5.
In the context of similarity assessment, the optimal solution
is defined as the highest normalized performance metric (e.g.,
accuracy) for each client across all devices, indicating the
best-performing model, whereas the suboptimal solution is
characterized by the lowest normalized performance metric,
signifying the worst-performing model. The normalized numbers are utilized to compute the deviation of each device’s
performance from both the optimal and suboptimal solutions.
The closeness coefficient, based on these distances, assesses
the degree to which a device’s performance corresponds with
the ideal standard. This guarantees that the optimization of the
global model prioritizes inputs from high-performing devices,
hence augmenting the robustness and efficacy of the entire
system.
e) Clustering based on similarity: The server clusters the
model updates into groups based on their similarity Ci values.
The clustering process helps in identifying the most similar
models, which are then considered for aggregation in the next
phase.
E. Outlier Reduction

(11)

The calculation of similarity to the ideal solution A+ and
(t)
anti-ideal solution A− directly identifies model updates Mi

FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS

4513

Algorithm 1 Federated Learning With TOPSIS and
Personalized Updates for IoMT
(0)

Require: N IoMT devices, initial global model MG , number
of communication rounds T, learning rate η
(T)
Ensure: MG
(0)
1: Init: MG , secure channels
2: for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} do
3:
M(0)
G → Di
4: end for
5: for t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T} do
6:
for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} in parallel do
(t−1)
7:
MG
→ Di
reg
(t)
8:
Mi ← min Li
(t)
9:
wi → Server
10:
end for
(t)
wi
(t),norm
11:
wi
=

2
N

12:
13:

(t)

wj
(t),norm
wbest = maxi w
, wworst = mini w(t),norm
i
i

2
d
(t),norm
+
Si
=
− wbest , Si−
j=1 wi
j=1


d 

(t),norm

j=1 wi

− wworst

=

2

S−

i
Ci = S+ +S
−
i i
(t)
(t)
15:
MG = i∈top-rank αi wi
(t)
16:
MG → Di
17: end for
18: for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N} do
personal
personal
19:
Mi
← min Li
20: end for
personal N
(T)
21: return MG , {Mi
}i=1

14:

Fig. 6. KANConvNet model architecture for capturing non-linear interactions
and processing complex feature transformations in FL.

for the cluster, ensuring that the aggregation incorporates
contributions from multiple robust updates.
(t)
g) Aggregation: The global model MG is updated by
averaging the selected models from each cluster:
(t)

|C |

MG =

1  1  (t)
Mi ,
|C|
m
k=1

(14)

i∈Sk

where |C| is the number of clusters, Sk is the set of selected
(t)
indices for cluster Ck , and Mi represents the model updates
chosen by Multi-Krum for aggregation.
h) Personalized model updates: The final global model
is sent back to each device. Personalization is achieved by
combining the global model with the device’s previous local
model:
(t+1)

Mi

(t)

(t)

= αMG + (1 − α)Mi ,

(15)

where α ∈ [0, 1] controls the degree of personalization.
G. KANConvNet Intrusion Detection Model

that are consistent with the majority. Therefore outliers, having
greater distances and better performances in the client servers
Si+ to A+ and smaller distances with performance scores Si−
to A− , will result in lower similarity scores Ci . This allows
the system to effectively identify and separate outliers from
the rest of the data.
F. Robust Aggregation Using Multi-Krum
After dimensionality reduction and clustering, the server
employs the Multi-Krum algorithm [57] for robust aggregation
to handle adversarial updates while ensuring resilience and
reliability in federated learning.
f) Multi-Krum Selection: For each cluster Ck , MultiKrum evaluates model updates by calculating the pairwise
squared Euclidean distances between all client updates. The
distance between any two models is computed as the sum
of squared differences for each parameter across the model
state dictionaries. Using these distances, Multi-Krum assigns a
score to each model by summing the distances to its n−2f −2
closest neighbors, where n is the total number of models, and
f is the number of adversarial updates tolerated.
Instead of selecting just one model, Multi-Krum selects
the top m models with the smallest scores as representatives

The KANConvNet model is inspired by the requirement
for an efficient and interpretable architecture capable of
managing complicated feature interactions in image data,
particularly within a federated learning setting. Using the
Kolmogorov-Arnold representation theorem [56], the model
represents non-linear interactions with tailored activation
functions, improving resilience in decentralized training. Its
convolutional structure allows scalability and adaptability
while processing diverse, large-scale datasets in federated
systems. In the model architecture, KAN introduces a novel
architecture by relocating activation functions to the edges and
applying non-linearity before input summation, fundamentally
redefining learning dynamics. This approach enhances interpretability, precision.
The model begins by preprocessing the input vector x =
[x1 , x2 , . . . , x46 ] into z0 = Preprocess(x), using normalization or Fourier transforms. The Kolmogorov-Arnold mapping
is then applied, transforming the preprocessed data via a linear
transformation and Fourier Transform to z1 = W1 ·F(z0 ) +
b1 . A custom Kolmogorov-inspired activation function is
applied, producing z2 = σKolmogorov (z1 ). The network proceeds through multiple dense layers, refining features with
ReLU activations: z3 , z4 , and z5 , each applying distinct
weights and biases. The final transformation layer outputs z6 =

4514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

B. Search Algorithm
To efficiently navigate the extensive hyperparameter space,
we employ a genetic algorithm (GA) [58]. The search
algorithm iteratively evolves a population of candidate hyperparameter sets to optimize the performance metric f (θ ). All
the keyword descriptions are given in Table I. The process
involves several key steps: initialization, evolution through
crossover and mutations, and fitness evaluation. The search
algorithm is outlined as follows:
Fig. 7.

GA for Hyperparameter Design Space Exploration.

C. Genetic Algorithm

TABLE I
GA T ERMINOLOGY

1) Initialization: The initial population P0 of size N is
generated by sampling hyperparameter sets from the design
space H. Each individual i ∈ P0 is represented as θi :
P0 = {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN }

(17)

θi = {αi , βi , ei , μi , δi , ωi , λi , γi }

(18)

where
TABLE II
H YPERPARAMETER VALUES

2) Evolution Crossover: Crossover combines two parent
hyperparameter sets θp and θq to produce two offspring θc1 and
θc2 . The crossover operation is defined as follows:

W5 · σKolmogorov (z5 ) + b5 , culminating in the prediction ŷ =
SGD(z6 ). This architecture effectively captures complex data
patterns for accurate predictions.
V. H YPERPARAMETER D ESIGN S PACE E XPLORATION
A. Design Space Definition
In our FL-based system, hyperparameter tuning is crucial
for optimizing model performance. The design space for our
genetic algorithm-based hyperparameter optimization encompasses several key hyperparameters. Let θ represent the set
of hyperparameters we aim to optimize. The performance of
models is substantially influenced by hyperparameters like as
learning rate, batch size, and optimizer type. The learning
rate (α) sets the step size for weight updates during training
which smaller values provide consistent convergence but slow
training, whereas bigger values may produce instability or
divergence. Batch size (β) affects gradient estimation accuracy
and computational efficiency, where smaller batches introduce
noisier gradients that aid in generalization, while bigger
batches are computationally faster but may lead to overfitting.
The optimizer type (ω) regulates how gradients are applied,
effecting convergence speed and stability.
The main and primary hyperparameters included are:
Thus, the design space H is defined as:
H = {α, β, e, μ, δ, ω}

(16)

The values taken across 4 datasets are given in Table II.

θc1 = {θpk | k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8}}

(19)

θc2 = {θqk | k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8}}

(20)

where k indicates the position of each hyperparameter within
the set.
3) Evolution Mutations: Mutation introduces randomness
by altering hyperparameters in the offspring with a small
probability Pm . For each hyperparameter θik in θc1 and θc2 , the
mutation operation is:

random value from Hk with probability Pm
k
(21)
θi ←
θik
with probability 1 − Pm
where Hk represents the range of possible values for the k-th
hyperparameter.
4) Fitness Score: The fitness score f (θi ) evaluates the
performance of the federated learning model trained with
hyperparamete 3rs θi . The score is computed based on the
model’s accuracy, denoted as A:
f (θi ) = A(θi )

(22)

The mutation process promotes variation by periodically
adjusting hyperparameter values, helping to explore the search
space more fully and avoid local optima. It establishes a
balance between exploration and exploitation, enabling the
identification of better hyperparameter combinations that could
be missed by crossover alone. This finally boosts model
performance by fine-tuning important parameters and improving robustness across datasets.
5) Verification: The GA process is repeated for several
generations G, producing new populations Pt at each generation t. The population is updated as follows:
Pt+1 = {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN }

(23)

Our Algorithm 2 terminates when the improvement in the
fitness score falls below a threshold . We consider the fitness

FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS

Algorithm 2 GA Design for Hyperparameter Optimization
1: Initialize: Population size N, number of generations Gmax ,
mutation probability Pm
2: Generate initial population P0 = {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN } where
θi ∈ H
3: for t = 0 to Gmax − 1 do
4:
for each θi ∈ Pt do
5:
Evaluate fitness f (θi )
6:
end for
7:
Select top N/2 individuals from Pt to form Ptsel
8:
Crossover:
9:
Pt+1 ← ∅
10:
while |Pt+1 | < N do
11:
Randomly select θp , θq ∈ Ptsel
12:
Generate offspring θc1 , θc2 by:
13:
for each k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8} do
14:
θc1 [k] ← θp [k] or θq [k] (randomly chosen)
15:
θc2 [k] ← θp [k] or θq [k] (randomly chosen)
16:
end for
17:
Pt+1 ← Pt+1 ∪ {θc1 , θc2 }
18:
end while
19:
Mutation:
20:
for each θi ∈ Pt+1 do
21:
for each k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 8} do
22:
if random probability < Pm then
23:
θi [k] ← random value from Hk
24:
end if
25:
end for
26:
end for
27: end for
28: Output:
Best
hyperparameter
set
θ∗
=
arg maxθi ∈PGmax f (θi )
TABLE III
B EST H YPERPARAMETERS FOR D IFFERENT DATASETS

4515

FedProx [51] model. Besides, for the local testing of our
KANConvNet model, we compare it to the SOTA models such
as DNN, CNN [53] and SVM [54]. We evaluate our model on
the TPU v2, Raspberry Pi 4, TPU VM v3-8, and GPU A100 to
assess its performance across diverse hardware configurations.
B. Attack Methods
We assess our model’s robustness against various
attacks:
• ALIE: Injects undetected noise into updates, corrupting
them within (μi −zmax δi , μi +zmax δi ), where μi and δi are
the mean and standard deviation, respectively, and zmax
is from [59].
• SF Attack: Flips gradient signs to increase loss, with no
need for access to other clients’ updates [60].
• RN Attack: Adds Gaussian noise to model parameters to
degrade performance [61].
• LF Attack: Alters class labels in datasets to cause targeted
misclassification [62].
1) Attack Performance Analysis: In analyzing the robustness of our model with multiple attack types to alter the
gradients and labels, we apply those gradient manipulation
attacks. The ALIE attack injects noise, SF reverses gradient
signs, RN adds Gaussian noise, and LF modifies labels to
create misclassification. As demonstrated from Figure 13, the
performance with all models along the FedIoMT reduces a
little bit. But FedIoMT retains superior performance in validation accuracy in the global model along with another model
for handling different adversarial attacks. FedIoMT’s principal
contribution is in its implementation of the Krum aggregation
technique, which improves resilience to adversarial attacks
in federated learning. Krum identifies the most dependable
gradient updates by assessing the distance between one client’s
gradient and those of others, excluding outliers. This guarantees that only reliable updates are compiled, notably reducing
the effect of gradient manipulation attacks.
C. Impact of Hyperparameters

score threshold 98. The best hyperparameter set θ ∗ is selected
as:
θ ∗ = arg max f (θi )
θi ∈PG

Hyperparameters in Table III vary among datasets after
applying the GA design in our FedIoMT model. The learning
rates range from 0.032 to 0.079; batch sizes are 16, 32, or
64; epochs range from 35 to 60. Momentum values range
between 0.522 and 0.746. Dropout rates vary from 0.194 to
0.312. Optimizers include SGD, Adam, and RMSprop with
fitness scores best for RT-IoT (0.954) and lowest for EHCL
(0.936).

(24)

This GA-based hyperparameter optimization in the
FedIoMT framework effectively balances exploration and
exploitation, to achieve higher model performance with global
optima.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULT
A. Experimental Setup
For global testing with our FedIoMT model with our
existing works, we compare with FedAvg [51]. FedPer [52],

D. Superiority of FL Methods for Detecting Attacks
To validate the effectiveness of FedIoMT, we compare
it with several existing FL algorithms shown in Table V.
The FedIoMT model significantly beats FedPer, FedProx, and
FedAvg across all datasets, indicating a notable accuracy
increase across all four datasets. For instance, FedIoMT’s
local final accuracy on Wustl-EHMS is 99.36%, exceeding
FedPer by 0.48%, FedProx by 1.13%, and FedAvg by 0.91%.
Similar tendencies are observed in global situations, where
FedIoMT’s accuracy on Wustl-EHMS is 1.38% higher than

4516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR KANC ONV N ET, DNN, CNN, AND SVM M ODELS ACROSS FOUR DATASETS

TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR F ED I O MT, F ED P ER , F ED P ROX , AND F EDAVG M ODELS ACROSS F OUR DATASETS

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR F ED I O MT, F ED P ER , F ED P ROX , F EDAVG , AND SVM M ODELS ON IID AND N ON -IID DATA ACROSS F OUR DATASETS

TABLE VII
F INAL ACCURACY C OMPARISON FOR C LIENTS W ITH AND W ITHOUT TOPSIS ON T HE W USTL -EHMS DATASET

FedPer, 2.10% higher than FedProx, and 1.76% higher than
FedAvg. This pattern of higher performance is consistent
across the EHCL, BlueTrack, and RT-IoT datasets, with
FedIoMT excelling in precision, F1, and recall metrics as well.
Furthermore in Table VI, FedIoMT consistently surpasses
FedPer, FedProx, FedAvg, and SVM across the Wustl-EHMS,
EHCL, BlueTrack, and RT-IoT datasets on both IID and
Non-IID data. On IID data, FedIoMT achieves the maximum
accuracy of 99.38%, beating the other models by 0.50%
to 1.96%. In Non-IID circumstances, FedIoMT’s accuracy

reduces to 97.90% but still leads performance rise by 1.40% to
3.35% over the other models. Overall, FedIoMT retains superior performance, followed by FedPer, FedAvg, and FedProx
in different scenarios of global and local data distributions.
We have further assessed the validation accuracy curves
across four datasets, using all FL-based models, including
our FedIoMT architecture, as shown in Figure 11. FedIoMT
displays strong validation, with accuracy starting to grow
considerably after 20 communication rounds. Additionally, the
validation loss curve demonstrates good performance for our

FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS

4517

TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON OF K RUM AND M ULTI -K RUM R ESULTS

time, especially on the Wustl-EHMS dataset, where it is nearly
1.7 times slower than FedIoMT. This illustrates FedIoMT’s
efficiency in decreasing testing time across diverse datasets.
E. Ablation Study
Fig. 8. Measuring Testing Times of four Benchmark IoMT Datasets of our
Proposed FedIoMT Model.

Fig. 9. Measuring FLOP Counts of Different Accelerators along with Edge
Devices of our Proposed FedIoMT Model.

The ablation studies performed on our proposed FedIoMT
architecture indicate its robust performance and efficiency
across major components.
The first study shown in Table VII assesses the impact of
adding the TOPSIS algorithm for client-level feature ranking.
The results reveal consistent accuracy improvements across
most clients, with gains ranging from +0.0003 to +0.0004.
This emphasizes the effectiveness of TOPSIS in increasing
model performance by prioritizing essential features during
training.
The second study displayed in Table VIII examines the
Krum and Multi-Krum aggregation methods within the
FedIoMT framework. While both approaches reach the same
high-end accuracy of 0.9997, Multi-Krum far surpasses Krum
in computing efficiency. Multi-Krum lowers the aggregation
time by 50% and the evaluation time by approximately
30%, making it a scalable and low-latency alternative for
real-time or resource-constrained applications.Therefore, these
investigations provide the efficacy of the FedIoMT architecture
in boosting both accuracy and efficiency, revealing its promise
for secure and scalable federated learning.
F. Advantage of KANConvNet

Fig. 10. Measuring Peak Memory Usage of Different Accelerators along
with Edge Devices of our Proposed FedIoMT Model.

suggested FedIoMT model, with a very low error rate, as
represented in Figure 12.
In Figure 15, t-SNE plots for four distinct datasets, each
illustrating various network attack scenarios, to visualize
how feature vectors cluster in a two-dimensional space. The
FedIoMT model effectively captures low-dimensional data,
maintaining critical information in the aggregated updates
from local client models.
In terms of assessing the prediction testing time of all
the models across the four datasets in Table VIII, FedIoMT
consistently displays the shortest testing time, taking 3.10 to
4.35 seconds, which is around 1.5 to 2.3 times faster than
other models. In contrast, FedPer records the highest testing

We compare the performance of FedIoMT with different
DL models to investigate the effectiveness of KANConvNet
in Table IV. The performance measurements indicate that
CNN regularly surpasses the other models in local settings,
attaining the highest level of accuracy, reaching a peak
of 99.58% on Wustl-EHMS. KANConvNet closely follows,
exhibiting a marginal drop of 0.14% to 0.46% compared to
CNN, but generally surpassing the performance of DNN and
SVM models. The DNN model has a strong performance on
the Wustl-EHMS dataset, achieving an accuracy of 99.28%.
However, it falls slightly below the CNN model by approximately 0.30%. The Support Vector Machine (SVM) has
the lowest local accuracy, reaching a maximum of 98.89%,
which is a drop of around 0.69% compared to the CNN.
During global testing scenarios, all models exhibit a decrease
in accuracy. However, KANConvNet has a higher level of
performance (97.90% on Wustl-EHMS) compared to DNN
and SVM, which decrease to 96.67% and 96.51% respectively.
These variances among datasets emphasize the durability of
KANConvNet’s performance in both local and global scenarios, while DNN and SVM lag in global generalization, notably
in the RT-IoT dataset. Furthermore, in 3D t-SNE visualization,

4518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Fig. 11. Global Validation Accuracy of different algorithms along with FedIoMT model for (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RT-IoT Datasets.

Fig. 14. 3D t-SNE visualization of KANConvNet model as local classifier
along with other SOTA models.

Fig. 12. Global Validation Loss of different algorithms along with FedIoMT
model for (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RT-IoT Datasets.

Fig. 15. t-SNE plots of four datasets illustrating network attack scenarios,
showing how the FedIoMT model preserves critical low-dimensional data in
aggregated client updates (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RTIoT datasets.
Fig. 13. Global Validation Accuracy of different algorithms along with
FedIoMT model for (a) Wustl-EHMS (b) EHCL (c) BlueTrack (d) RT-IoT
Datasets after applying four attack types.

the KANConvNet model is shown independently and looks to
have a smoother accuracy curve than other models, indicating
that our KANConvNet model performs rather consistently
across communication rounds shown in Figure 14.

G. Training Efficiency on Hardware Accelerators
The FLOP mainly counts comparison across different
devices and models reveals notable variations in computational
efficiency. Overall, FedIoMT consistently shows superior computational efficiency across all devices, with value counts of
0.24-0.29 in Table IX. In those diverse configuration devices,
the Raspberry Pi shows the largest peak memory utilization,
up to 2.2 MB with FedPer, almost 1.8 times greater than the

FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS

TABLE IX
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH AVAILABLE W ORKS

GPU A100’s 1.5 MB. The TPU v2 has the lowest memory
use, nearly 2.9 times lower than the Raspberry Pi’s peak.
FedIoMT continuously utilizes the least RAM across all
devices showcasing its efficiency shown in Table IX.
H. Discussion
The performance of our proposed FedIoMT model is
compared with other state-of-the-art methods in Table IX,
highlighting its superiority in both accuracy and recall.
FedIoMT has an accuracy of 99.43% and a recall of
99.53%, outperforming the FedCNNMLP, FL-MGVN, and
Mamunur et al. models on both criteria. At the same time,
Priyanka et al. et al. and Farhan et al. models depict superior
performance in recall metrics than our FedIoMT model.
However, these existing studies have the disadvantage of securing efficient communication overhead throughout the detection
time of attack types. Furthermore, these works lack the
issue of maintaining an accurate weights update mechanism
whereas our proposed FedIoMT architecture overcomes the
issues of decentralized multi-center servers by using TOPSIS
similarity analysis to reduce data heterogeneity during localto-global transmission. Furthermore, in the local model, our
KANConvNet uses Kolmogorov activation functions at the
edges rather than the neuron’s core, which may alter the
learning dynamics and improve the overall interpretability of
the FedIoMT framework.
VII. C ONCLUSION
The IDS played a crucial role in securing IoMT devices
and networks within consumer electronics, addressing unique
challenges and high risks. However, many existing methodologies that relied on machine learning (ML) and deep learning
(DL) techniques were considered opaque by security analysts
and engineers. The proposed FedIoMT framework addressed
data heterogeneity and model adaptation through multi-center
clustering and meta-learning. The innovative KANConvNet
model, based on the KAN architecture, enhanced scalability, interpretability, and intrusion detection by capturing
spatial and hierarchical data. The FedIoMT system also
improved security through a meta-learning phase and TOPSISbased model aggregation, while optimizing hyperparameters
using Genetic Algorithms. Despite its advantages, FedIoMT
faced challenges in managing severe heterogeneity in realworld IoMT datasets, particularly when devices exhibited
significantly outlier data distributions. This issue reduced
performance, even with multi-center clusters and similarity
analysis. Additionally, the meta-learning step, while augmenting model robustness, imposed computational burdens due to
the need to evaluate inference times during training. Although

4519

the Kolmogorov-Arnold theorem proficiently supported specific functions like intrusion detection, its applicability to
various IoMT applications, including predictive maintenance
and real-time monitoring, required further evaluation. Future
work aimed to optimize computational efficiency for lowpower consumer devices, enhance scalability, improve privacy
protections, and refine dimensionality reduction techniques.
Efforts to prevent overfitting and ensure seamless deployment
across diverse IoMT devices were also essential.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. M. Mathkor et al., “Multirole of the Internet of Medical Things
(IoMT) in biomedical systems for managing smart healthcare systems:
An overview of current and future innovative trends,” J. Infect. Public
Health, vol. 17, pp. 559–572, Apr. 2024.
[2] S. Velmurugan, G. Shanthi, L. Raja, and D. Subitha, “Threat analysis
and security measures for the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): A
study,” in Computational Intelligence and Blockchain in Biomedical
and Health Informatics. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2024,
pp. 229–242.
[3] K. K. Baseer et al., “Healthcare diagnostics with an adaptive deep
learning model integrated with the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)
for predicting heart disease,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 92,
Jun. 2024, Art. no. 105988.
[4] L. Lu, G. Hu, J. Liu, and B. Yang, “5G NB-IoT system integrated
with high-performance fiber sensor inspired by cirrus and spider structures,” Adv. Sci., vol. 11, no. 18, 2024, Art. no. 2309894.
[5] L. Iiyambo, G. Hancke, and A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, “A survey on NB-IoT
random access: Approaches for uplink radio access network congestion
management,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 95487–95506, 2024.
[6] S. Ahmad, S. Mehfuz, S. Urooj, and N. Alsubaie, “Machine
learning-based intelligent security framework for secure cloud key
management,” Clust. Comput., vol. 27, pp. 5953–5979, Feb. 2024.
[7] B. Guembe, S. Misra, and A. Azeta, “Federated Bayesian optimization
XGBoost model for cyberattack detection in Internet of Medical
Things,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 193, Nov. 2024,
Art. no. 104964.
[8] S. Nithya, S. Palanisamy, and T. Nivethitha, “Achieving secured medical
network (SMN) through stateless mechanism and SkeyM in medicalInternet of Things (M-IoT),” J. Eng. Appl. Sci., vol. 71, no. 1, p. 128,
2024.
[9] S. F. Ahmed, M. S. B. Alam, S. Afrin, S. J. Rafa, N. Rafa, and A.
H. Gandomi, “Insights into Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): Data
fusion, security issues and potential solutions,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 102,
Feb. 2024, Art. no. 102060.
[10] A. A. El-Saleh, A. M. Sheikh, M. A. M. Albreem, and M. S.
Honnurvali, “The Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): Opportunities and
challenges,” Wireless Netw., vol. 31, pp. 327–344, May 2024.
[11] C. Rupa et al., “IoMT privacy preservation: A hash-based DCIWT
approach for detecting tampering in medical data,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
pp. 97298–97308, 2024.
[12] Y. Zhang et al., “A cooperative vehicle-road system for anomaly
detection on vehicle tracks with augmented intelligence of things,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 22, pp. 35975–35988, Nov. 2024.
[13] I. A. Khan et al., “Fed-Inforce-Fusion: A federated reinforcement-based
fusion model for security and privacy protection of IoMT networks
against cyber-attacks,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 101, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 102002.
[14] J. Areia, I. A. Bispo, L. Santos, and R. L. D. C. Costa, “IoMTTrafficData: Dataset and tools for benchmarking intrusion detection in
Internet of Medical Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 115370–115385,
2024.
[15] H. Halikias, “Business impacts of ransomware,” in Digital Shakedown:
The Complete Guide to Understanding and Combating Ransomware.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nat., 2024, pp. 25–47. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65438-1_3
[16] D. Javeed, T. Gao, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “An explainable and resilient
intrusion detection system for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1342–1350, Feb. 2024.
[17] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
“An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
Nov. 2023.
[18] J. Kabdjou and N. Shinomiya, “Improving quality of service and HTTPS
DDoS detection in MEC environment with a cyber deception-based
architecture,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 23490–23503, 2024.

4520

[19] W. Alhakami, “Evaluating modern intrusion detection methods in the
face of gen V multi-vector attacks with fuzzy AHP-TOPSIS,” Plos One,
vol. 19, no. 5, 2024, Art. no. e0302559.
[20] M. Sajid et al., “Enhancing intrusion detection: A hybrid machine and
deep learning approach,” J. Cloud Comput., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 123, 2024.
[21] A. V. Turukmane and R. Devendiran, “M-MultiSVM: An efficient
feature selection assisted network intrusion detection system using
machine learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103587.
[22] M. A. Talukder, S. Sharmin, M. A. Uddin, M. M. Islam, and S.
Aryal, “MLSTL-WSN: Machine learning-based intrusion detection
using SMOTETomek in WSNs,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 2139–2158, 2024.
[23] P. Goswami, R. Hazra, M. Prokysek, K. Choi, and M. Eider, “A
novel approach of efficient resource allocation in smart consumer
electronics device network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 3, pp. 5895–5902, Aug. 2024.
[24] X. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Yang, and M. Liu, “Resource-constraint deep
forest-based intrusion detection method in Internet of Things for
consumer electronic,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 2,
pp. 4976–4987, May 2024.
[25] H. Habibzadeh, B. H. Nussbaum, F. Anjomshoa, B. Kantarci, and T.
Soyata, “A survey on cybersecurity, data privacy, and policy issues in
cyber-physical system deployments in smart cities,” Sustain. Cities Soc.,
vol. 50, Oct. 2019, Art. no. 101660.
[26] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Stat., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[27] X. Su and G. Zhang, “APFed: Adaptive personalized federated
learning for intrusion detection in maritime meteorological sensor
networks,” Digit. Commun. Netw., to be published.
[28] S. Pandya et al., “Federated learning for smart cities: A comprehensive survey,” Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., vol. 55, Feb. 2023,
Art. no. 102987.
[29] R. Arul, Y. D. Al-Otaibi, W. S. Alnumay, U. Tariq, U. Shoaib, and M. D.
J. Piran, “Multi-modal secure healthcare data dissemination framework
using blockchain in IoMT,” Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 28, pp. 3–15,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-021-01527-2
[30] F. R. Mughal et al., “Resource management in multi-heterogeneous
cluster networks using intelligent intra-clustered federated learning,” Comput. Commun., vol. 213, pp. 236–245, Jan. 2024.
[31] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
“Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
[32] M. Guduri, C. Chakraborty, U. Maheswari, and M. Margala,
“Blockchain-based federated learning technique for privacy preservation
and security of smart electronic health records,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2608–2617, Feb. 2024.
[33] N. Franzese et al., “Robust and actively secure serverless collaborative
learning,” in Proc. 37th Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 1–25.
[34] M. Hao, H. Li, G. Xu, H. Chen, and T. Zhang, “Efficient, private and
robust federated learning,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl.
Conf., 2021, pp. 45–60.
[35] P. Verma, N. Bharot, J. G. Breslin, D. O’Shea, A. Vidyarthi, and D.
Gupta, “Zero-day guardian: A dual model enabled federated learning
framework for handling zero-day attacks in 5G enabled IIoT,” IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3856–3866, Feb. 2024.
[36] P. G. Shambharkar and N. Sharma, “Deep learning-empowered intrusion
detection framework for the Internet of Medical Things environment,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 66, pp. 6001–6050, Jun. 2024.
[37] M. A. Bouke, H. El Atigh, and A. Abdullah, “Towards
robust and efficient intrusion detection in IoMT: A deep
learning approach addressing data leakage and enhancing model
generalizability,” Multimedia Tools Appl., pp. 1–20, Jul. 2024. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-024-19916-z
[38] N. Faruqui et al., “SafetyMed: A novel IoMT intrusion detection system
using CNN-LSTM hybridization,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 17, p. 3541,
2023.
[39] D. P. Anjelin and S. G. Kumar, “An effective classification using
enhanced elephant herding optimization with convolution neural network
for intrusion detection in IoMT architecture,” Clust. Comput., vol. 27,
pp. 12341–12359, Jun. 2024.
[40] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, M. Adil, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “A federated
learning-based zero trust intrusion detection system for Internet of
Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 162, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 103540.
[41] B. Olanrewaju-George and B. Pranggono, “Federated learning-based
intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things using unsupervised
and supervised deep learning models,” Cyber Secur. Appl., vol. 3,
Dec. 2025, Art. no. 100068.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

[42] A. Alazab, A. Khraisat, S. Singh, and T. Jan, “Enhancing privacypreserving intrusion detection through federated learning,” Electronics,
vol. 12, no. 16, p. 3382, 2023.
[43] M. M. Rashid, S. U. Khan, F. Eusufzai, M. A. Redwan, S. R. Sabuj,
and M. Elsharief, “A federated learning-based approach for improving
intrusion detection in industrial Internet of Things networks,” Network,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 158–179, 20234.
[44] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Cyber threat
intelligence sharing scheme based on federated learning for network
intrusion detection,” J. Netw. Syst. Manag., vol. 31, no. 1, p. 3, 2023.
[45] A. A. Hady, A. Ghubaish, T. Salman, D. Unal, and R. Jain, “Intrusion
detection system for healthcare systems using medical and network data:
A comparison study,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 106576–106584, 2020.
[46] M. Ahmed, S. Byreddy, A. Nutakki, L. F. Sikos, and P. Haskell-Dowland,
“ECU-IoHT: A dataset for analyzing cyberattacks in Internet of Health
Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 122, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 102621.
[47] D. Unal, 2021, “BlueTack,” Dataset, IEEE Dataport. [Online]. Available:
https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/skhs-0b39
[48] B. S. Sharmila and R. Nagapadma, “Quantized autoencoder (QAE)
intrusion detection system for anomaly detection in resource-constrained
IoT devices using RT-IoT2022 dataset,” Cybersecurity, vol. 6, no. 1,
p. 41, 2023.
[49] A. Raza, S. Memon, M. A. Nizamani, and M. H. Shah, “Intrusion
detection system for smart industrial environments with ensemble feature
selection and deep convolutional neural networks,” Intell. Autom. Soft
Comput., vol. 39, no. 3, p. 545, 2024.
[50] F. O. Albasheer, R. R. Haibatti, M. Agarwal, and S. Y. Nam, “A
novel IDS based on Jaya optimizer and smote-ENN for cyberattacks
detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 101506–101527, 2024.
[51] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
“Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. Mach.
Learn. Syst., 2020, pp. 429–450.
[52] M. G. Arivazhagan, V. Aggarwal, A. K. Singh, and S.
Choudhary, “Federated learning with personalization layers,” 2019,
arXiv:1912.00818.
[53] A. Rosay, F. Carlier, and P. Leroux, “MLP4NIDS: An efficient MLPbased network intrusion detection for CICIDS2017 dataset,” in Proc. 2nd
IFIP TC 6 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Netw. (MLN), 2019, pp. 240–254.
[54] D. Jing and H.-B. Chen, “SVM based network intrusion detection for the
UNSW-NB15 dataset,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. ASIC (ASICON),
2019, pp. 1–4.
[55] T. Sahraneshin, R. Malekhosseini, F. Rad, and S. H. Yaghoubyan,
“Securing communications between things against wormhole attacks
using TOPSIS decision-making and hash-based cryptography techniques
in the IoT ecosystem,” Wireless Netw., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 969–983, 2023.
[56] Z. Liu et al., “KAN: Kolmogorov-arnold networks,” 2025,
arXiv:2404.19756.
[57] G. Damaskinos, E. M. El-Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, A. Guirguis, and
S. Rouault, “AGGREGATHOR: Byzantine machine learning via robust
gradient aggregation,” in Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst., 2019, pp. 81–106.
[58] N. Hansen, “The CMA evolution strategy: A comparing review,” in
Towards a New Evolutionary Computation: Advances on Estimation of
Distribution Algorithms. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2006, pp. 75–102.
[59] G. Baruch, M. Baruch, and Y. Goldberg, “A little is enough:
Circumventing defenses for distributed learning,” in Proc. 33rd Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–11.
[60] S. P. Karimireddy, L. He, and M. Jaggi, “Learning from history for
Byzantine robust optimization,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2021, pp. 5311–5319.
[61] L. Muñoz-González, K. T. Co, and E. C. Lupu, “Byzantine-robust
federated machine learning through adaptive model averaging,” 2019,
arXiv:1909.05125.
[62] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gursoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning
attacks against federated learning systems,” in Proc. 25th Eur. Symp.
Res. Comput. Secur. Comput. Secur. (ESORICs), 2020, pp. 480–501.
[63] W. Liu et al., “Intrusion detection for maritime transportation systems
with batch federated aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2503–2514, Feb. 2023.
[64] D. Wu, Y. Deng, and M. Li, “FL-MGVN: Federated learning for
anomaly detection using mixed gaussian variational self-encoding
network,” Inf. Process. Manag., vol. 59, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. 102839.
[65] F. Ullah, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, C.-M. Chen, and S.
Kumari, “Semantic-based federated defense for distributed malicious
attacks,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 49–58,
Mar. 2025.

FAHIM-UL-ISLAM et al.: RESOURCE-EFFICIENT FL FRAMEWORK FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOMT NETWORKS

Md. Fahim-Ul-Islam received the B.Sc. degree
in computer science and engineering from BRAC
University where he is currently pursuing the master’s degree and working as a Graduate Research
Assistant. His academic pursuits are complemented
by his active engagement in research. His research
interests cover multiple fields, with a particular focus
on multi-modal machine learning, computer vision,
and adversarial machine learning.

Amitabha Chakrabarty received the First M.Sc.
degree from the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Rajshahi, in 2004,
the Second M.Sc. degree in telecommunication engineering from Independent University, Bangladesh,
and the Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of
Engineering and Computing, Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland, in 2012. He is currently a Professor
with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, BRAC University, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
He is involved in active research having several
graduate and undergraduate research groups in different research projects.
He has published research papers in various national and international
conferences, journals, and book chapters. His research interests include the
IoT, machine learning, deep learning, vision transformers, embedded systems,
and switching theory. He is serving as a TCP member in various international
journals and conferences. He is also serving as a Senior Judge in various
national IT competitions.

4521

Md. Golam Rabiul Alam (Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in computer science and engineering, the M.S. degree in information technology
and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
from Kyung Hee University, South Korea, in 2017,
where he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the
Computer Science and Engineering Department
from March 2017 to February 2018. He is currently a Professor with the Computer Science
and Engineering Department, BRAC University,
Bangladesh. His research interests include healthcare
informatics, mobile cloud and Edge computing, ambient intelligence, and
persuasive technology. He received several best paper awards from prestigious conferences. He is a member of IEEE I NDUSTRIAL E LECTRONICS
S OCIETY, IEEE C ONSUMER T ECHNOLOGY S OCIETY, IEEE C OMPUTER
S OCIETY, IEEE S IGNAL P ROCESSING S OCIETY, IEEE C OMPUTATIONAL
I NTELLIGENCE S OCIETY, and IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S OCIETY.
Siti Sarah Binti Maidin received the B.Sc.
degree in computer science from University Teknikal
Malaysia Melaka, Malaysia, the M.Sc. degree in
information technology from University Teknologi
MARA, Malaysia, and the Ph.D. degree in
information and communication technology from
Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Malaysia. She is
currently a Professor with the Department of
Data Science and Information Technology, INTI
International University, Malaysia, holding post as
the Head of Programme and the Deputy Director.
She has supervised numerous undergraduate and postgraduates’ students. She
also has been appointed as the evaluator for the university level research
grant and Malaysian government research grant. She is also has been
appointed as auditor for Myra university ranking in Malaysia. In addition,
she is also involved in organizing local and international conferences. Her
research interests include software engineering, educational technology and
data science. She serves as an Editor for J OURNAL OF I NNOVATION AND
T ECHNOLOGY.