IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

1739

A Synthetic Data-Assisted Satellite Terrestrial
Integrated Network Intrusion
Detection Framework
Junpeng He , Xiong Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Xiaosong Zhang , Weina Niu , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Fagen Li , Member, IEEE

Abstract—The Satellite-Terrestrial Integrated Network (STIN)
is an emerging paradigm offering seamless network services
across geographical boundaries, yet it faces significant security
challenges, including limited intrusion prevention capabilities.
Federated learning (FL) provides a viable solution by aggregating traffic data from STIN clients (e.g., ground stations and
edge routers) to train models for network intrusion detection
systems (NIDS). However, satellite and terrestrial domain data’s
non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) nature
hinders training efficiency and performance. This paper proposes STINIDF, a novel STIN intrusion detection framework
leveraging FL-based data augmentation. STINIDF utilizes FL
to collaboratively train a conditional diffusion model across
STIN nodes while preserving privacy via differential privacy
mechanisms, generating global traffic data representative of
the STIN distribution. Each node then integrates global and
local traffic data to train a local model for NIDS, addressing non-IID challenges by balancing data distribution through
data augmentation. Using a simulation environment developed
with OMNeT++ and INET, a Satellite-Terrestrial Integrated
(STI) traffic dataset was created, including intrusion scenarios such as signal disruption, UDP flooding, and jamming
attacks. Experimental results indicate that STINIDF outperforms
existing data augmentation-based approaches under non-IID conditions, achieving 96.63%(2.41% ↑) accuracy, 96.71%(3.14% ↑)
precision, 96.54%(1.65% ↑) recall and 96.66%(2.7% ↑) F1
score. Furthermore, when compared to methods integrating
data augmentation with differential privacy, STINIDF demonstrates an effective balance between privacy preservation and
intrusion detection performance, attaining an accuracy of
96.14%(2.57% ↑) and a FID of 17.88(7.41 ↓).

Index Terms—Satellite-terrestrial integrated network, intrusion detection system, diffusion model, federated learning,
differential privacy.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE satellite-terrestrial integrated network (STIN) is
envisioned as a cornerstone of sixth-generation (6G)
networks, enabling heterogeneous services and global network
access by supporting extensive traffic transmission for both
space access and terrestrial communication [1]. However,
expanding satellite networks and rising traffic volumes present
critical challenges, including security vulnerabilities, cyber
threats, and privacy breaches [2]. To address these issues,
network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) have been proposed to monitor and detect malicious activities within satellite
and terrestrial traffic flows [3]. To extract features from traffic
data and adapt to dynamic environments [4], modern NIDS
increasingly leverage artificial intelligence (AI) techniques,
such as machine learning (ML) [5] and deep learning (DL)
[6]. In STIN, traffic monitors collect traffic data from various
infrastructures, such as ground stations (GSs), edge routers,
and user terminals. However, it is impractical to train a
centralized NIDS because aggregating locally recorded traffic
data may leak privacy, and attackers may be able to access
sensitive data of GSs in this process [7]. Unlike conventional
network environments, STINs serve large-scale commercial
and military applications. Therefore, ensuring data privacy
is crucial, as any violations could cause significant losses to
governments and businesses.
In practice, traffic samples in STIN are collected by the flow
monitor distributed across various infrastructures, including
GSs, edge routers, and user terminals. Directly training a
global NIDS by aggregating these traffic samples is infeasible,
as locally recorded data inherently risks privacy breaches.
Meanwhile, the intruders may launch adversarial attacks based
on personal devices during traffic aggregation to sniff sensitive
data in GSs [7]. Compared with other traffic environments
like the Internet of Things or industrial control systems, STIN
generally serves large-scale commercial or military usage.
Therefore, data privacy issues in STIN deserve attention,
and any data leakage may cause immeasurable losses to the
government and enterprises.

Received 14 June 2024; revised 27 November 2024; accepted 8 January
2025. Date of publication 16 January 2025; date of current version 11 February
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62332018 and Grant U2336204, in part by Sichuan
Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2025ZNSFSC0497, and
in part by the Open Foundation of Key Laboratory of Cyberspace Security,
Ministry of Education of China and Henan Key Laboratory of Network
Cryptography under Grant KLCS20240303. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Weizhi
Meng. (Corresponding author: Xiong Li.)
Junpeng He, Xiong Li, Weina Niu, and Fagen Li are with the
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail:
junpenghe@std.uestc.edu.cn; lixiong@uestc.edu.cn; niuweina1@126.com;
fagenli@uestc.edu.cn).
Xiaosong Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731,
China, and also with Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen 518000, China
(e-mail: johnsonzxs@uestc.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3530676
1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a privacy-aware
paradigm, allowing the training of a global AI model across
multiple untrusted clients using their local datasets without
exchanging data [8]. A representative FL-based algorithm is
Federated Averaging (FedAvg), where the parameter server
(PS) averagely aggregates client-uploaded model weights [9].
However, training an FL-based NIDS across STIN clients,
such as GSs and edge routers, poses two major challenges:
data heterogeneity and privacy concerns.
Data heterogeneity, marked by non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) data distributions across clients,
results in inconsistent local models and ineffective aggregation
[10]. In STIN, the traffic environment is divided into satellite
and terrestrial domains. The satellite domain encompasses
traffic exchanged between satellite constellations and GSs,
while the terrestrial domain includes flows between GSs,
edge routers, and user terminals. GSs record traffic from both
domains, whereas edge routers store only terrestrial domain
traffic. This imbalance in traffic distribution between GSs and
edge routers hinders the effectiveness of FL-based aggregation
across STIN clients. To mitigate this issue, data augmentation
[11], [12] is applied to synthesize data and balance local training distributions among STIN clients. However, the existing
literature fails to consider this approach in the context of
STIN-based intrusion detection.
Meanwhile, sensitive information in local traffic can be
exposed if intruders intentionally analyze exchanged model
parameters through data inversion [13]. To mitigate this risk,
differential privacy (DP) [14] is employed to obscure parameters and prevent data inversion. However, few studies have
explored the application of DP in real-world scenarios such as
STIN.
To tackle these challenges, we propose STINIDF, a novel
STIN intrusion detection framework with privacy protection
that employs a DP-based conditional diffusion model (DM)
[15] for data augmentation. Our contributions include:
• A novel dataset, termed Satellite-Terrestrial Integrated
(STI), representing STIN traffic distribution, is collected
within a designed simulation scenario using OMNET++
[16] and INET [17].
• A DP-based conditional diffusion model (DP-CDM)
is proposed for traffic augmentation with functionality
preservation, ensuring that the augmented traffic complies
with traffic generation constraints.
• A four-layer FL-based training algorithm, STIN-FedAvg,
is designed to train DP-CDM within the STIN environment, incorporating overlapping downloading and
multi-level aggregation/local-update properties. Meanwhile, DP is applied during local updates to strengthen
privacy protection and mitigate inference attacks.
• STINIDF employs STIN-FedAvg to aggregate DP-CDM,
which generates traffic data representing the STIN global
traffic distribution. Each STIN node then combines this
data with its local data to train a detection model for
NIDS, ensuring strong robustness and generalization even
in a STIN non-IID scenario.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that STINIDF outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both traffic generation

and detection. Specifically, in the generation aspect, the
traffic generated by DP-CDM achieves 17.88 fréchet
inception distance (FID), outperforming the second-best
method by 7.41. In the detection aspect, NIDS achieves
an accuracy of 96.63% in the STIN non-IID scenario,
exceeding the second-best method by 2.41%.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related
works in three domains. Section III outlines background and
the threat model. Section IV elaborates on the system design
of STINIDF. Section VI describes the collected dataset and
experiment setups. Section VII presents experimental results
and discussions. Section VIII concludes this paper.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
This section discusses related works on STINIDF from
multiple perspectives. Since STINIDF is designed to address
data heterogeneity challenges, works tackling FL-based nonIID issues are introduced first. As STINIDF incorporates
data augmentation within an FL-based system, synthetic
data-assisted approaches for privacy preservation are subsequently reviewed. Given that STINIDF is intended for STIN
cybersecurity, intrusion detection methods for satellite-related
environments are further explored. Finally, a comprehensive
comparison across six key issues highlights the distinctiveness
of STINIDF within its domain.
A. Non-IID Challenges in Federated Learning
A significant challenge in FL lies in the non-IID data
distribution, which disrupts the consistency of the aggregation
process across local models [18]. One common approach
addresses this by improving the aggregation process. For
example, Wang et al. [19] proposed a normalized averaging
algorithm to ensure objective consistency while achieving
rapid error convergence. Another approach focuses on correcting the local training process by accounting for model
deviations. For instance, Mu et al. [20] introduced global prototypes that guide local model training by balancing individual
objectives with global optima.
B. Synthetic Data-Assisted Privacy Preservation
Data augmentation is a viable approach to mitigating nonIID challenges by balancing data distribution in FL-based
systems [11]. This method shares the model parameters
instead of the real data to achieve privacy preservation. For
example, FedDPGAN [21] leverages a global generative adversarial network (GAN) [22] trained across distributed nodes
to output synthetic data, which are subsequently used to
enhance a detection model. However, the training process
of GAN often involves frequent data exchanges, leading
to significant communication costs. Li et al. [12] proposed
a GAN-based framework to generate differentially private
synthetic data, which are then labeled by using an iterative
pseudo mechanism. While this framework improves consistency and aggregation in their proposed FL-based system, the
pseudo-labeling method lacks persuasiveness as it relies on
a predefined threshold rather than the intrinsic characteristics

HE et al.: SYNTHETIC DATA-ASSISTED STI NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK

1741

TABLE I
C OMPARISON W ITH R ELATED W ORKS IN N ETWORK I NTRUSION D ETECTION

of the data. Moreover, these studies predominantly address
image classification or medical diagnosis, rather than network
intrusion detection, particularly in STINs.
C. Intrusion Detection for Satellite-Related Networks
Li et al. [2] proposed a distributed NIDS on STINs,
incorporating an FL-adapted algorithm to optimize recognition rates, packet loss rates, and CPU utilization. However,
the non-IID nature of traffic in STINs was not considered.
Sitouah et al. [23] explored various deep learning algorithms
for detecting attacks in low earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks, focusing on interruption categories such as DoS/DDoS,
jamming, and meteorological disturbances. Despite their contributions, the LEO traffic environment is indeed different
from STINs, where the satellites are prohibitive to communicate with user terminals or edge routers without GSs.
Additionally, DFSat [24] was proposed for intrusion detection
on IoT-integrated distributed satellite networks, leveraging an
FL-based deep learning framework to achieve higher performance with fewer communication rounds. Nonetheless,
the datasets used in their experiments, ToN IoT [25] and
UNSW-NB 15 [26], were generated from terrestrial simulated
platforms rather than satellite-related platforms, some key features like signal-to-interference-plus-noise radio (SINR) [27]
are not included, and the data distribution is distinct. Furthermore, Azar et al. [3] developed SAT-IDS, a hybrid intrusion
detection system for satellite-terrestrial systems, employing
AI-based methods with sequential forward feature selection.
However, their system is isolated and challenging to deploy in
realistic distributed environments like STINs.

III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Federated Learning
It is a distributed ML-based training strategy with data
privacy preservation. One of the most representative FLs
is FedAvg [9], where updated local model parameters are
averagely aggregated. Concretely, for each communication
round t ∈ T , every client k ∈ K first updates its local model
weights wkt by its local dataset Dk via stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) optimizer [34]. Then, all trained local weights
wkt+1 are transferred to PS for global weight aggregation:
PK
wt+1 ← k=1
wkt+1 . wt+1 is also downloaded by each client
for its next local training phase. Overall, FL is designed to
solve the following risk minimization problem:
(
)
K
X
∆ 1
min f (w) =
Fk (w)
(1)
w
K
k=1

∆

where Fk (w) = E x∼Dk [Fk (w, x)] is the loss function for local
update. After T times, the trained global weights contain the
knowledge from each Dk without data exchange.
B. Differential Privacy
Considering that the exchanged model weight can still be
divulged by some existing analyzing tools, bringing information leakage problems, DP is designed by adding artificial
noise to entail concealing sensitive instances within the dataset
[13]. Given a randomized mechanism M, it satisfies (, δ)-DP
when any possible output set Ω and any two adjacent databases
D, D0 hold the following inequality:
Pr(M(D) ∈ Ω) ≤ e Pr(M(D0 ) ∈ Ω) + δ

D. Work Comparison
Except for the aforementioned review, Table I provides a
comparison with other relevant works in network intrusion
detection, addressing various issues concerning STINs and
related environments. Specifically, I1 represents the focus
on STIN-specific environments; I2 indicates support for distributed deployment; I3 reflects consideration of the non-IID
challenge; I4 pertains to the application of data augmentation; I5 highlights privacy preservation measures; I6 refers to
manual traffic simulation and dataset collection. Our STINIDF
aims to comprehensively cover all six issues.

(2)

 is the pre-defined privacy budget to balance the strength
of DP. Smaller  means stronger privacy protection and
worse data utility, and vice versa. δ represents the risk
probability of condition that  can not bound D and D0 . In
this paper, we utilize the Gaussian mechanism to guarantee
(, δ)-DP for the traffic data, where artificial Gaussian noises
z ∼ N (0, σ2 I) are added to the exchanged model
weights.
√
The noise scale σ should satisfies σ ≥ S 2ln(1.25/δ)/
where S is the sensitivity of the model function fw (·) given by
S = maxD,D0 || fw (D) − fw (D0 )||. For Gaussian-based DP in DL,
the differential private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD)

1742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[35] with (, δ)-DP requires a single model update clipped to
C (i.e., the gradient norm bound) with noise Cz addition (In
this paper, S is equals to C for single sample update), defined
as follow:
!


M
η X dLw (xi )
dLw (xi )
w←w−
min 1, C/||
||2 + Cz
M
dw
dw
i=1
(3)
where η is the learning rate, M is the sample amount and Lw (·)
is the loss function of the model.

C. Diffusion Model
DM [15] is famous for generating stable features for constructing new instances with high quality such as multi-media
materials. Denoted as pw , DM generally includes forward and
backward processes. The forward process gradually converts
x0 , sampled from real data distribution q(x), into Gaussian
noise vectors xN = N (0, I) in each step n ∈ [1, 2, . . . , N]. This
process is also known as posterior probabilities: q(xn |xn−1 ).
N
Given a variance schedule {βn ∈ (0, 1)}n=0
, it is fixed into a
Markov chain for x0 → xN :
p
(4)
q(xn |xn−1 ) = N (xn ; 1 − βn xn−1 , βn I)
This formula can be optimized by the Gaussian noise
reparameterization technique, where xN is directly calculated
from x0 . As a result, Equation
P4N is converted into Equation 5
given αn = 1 − βn and α¯N = n=1
αn :
q(xN |x0 ) = N (xN ;

√

α¯N x0 , (1 − α¯N )I)

(5)

The reverse process samples xN and converts this Gaussian
vector back to a new vector x0 with pw . This step is known
as conditional probabilities: pw (xn−1 |xn ). It is also fixed into a
Markov chain for xN → x0 :


X
pw (xn−1 |xn ) = N xn−1 ; µw (xn , n),
(xn , n)
(6)
w

where µw predicts the forward process posterior mean and
P
w (xn , n) equals βn I, which is the variance. µw can also be
parameterized as:


√
βn
µw = xn − √
zw (xn , n) / αn
(7)
1 − ᾱn
where zw is an approximator that requires gradient learning for
approaching Gaussian vector z given xn . Finally, the reverse
process from xn to xn−1 is specified as:


√
βn
xn−1 = xn − √
zw (xn , n) / αn + βn z
(8)
1 − ᾱn
Conclusively, training a DM is to foster reverse approximator zw to predict n-step z, its empirical loss function Lw is
defined as a denoising score that matches over multiple noise
scales indexed by n with the expectation of x:
p
√
Lw = E x,n,z ||z − zw ( α¯n x + 1 − α¯n z, n)||2
(9)

Fig. 1. Overall threat model that includes space, ground, and user segments.
The space segment possesses satellite nodes that send messages by ISL with
each other; the ground segment symbolizes GS nodes that are responsible for
satellite-ground communications, each satellite covers several GSs in a fixed
coverage, and the user segment refers to all kinds of terminals that send service
requests to GSs. Long-distance communication between two terminals will
bypass two GSs and several satellites. Intruders may attack satellites or GSs
by infecting the terminals or interfering with satellite-ground communications.

D. Threat Model
The threat model outlined in Figure 1 provides a comprehensive overview of the distributed architecture inherent in
a typical STIN, encompassing satellites, GSs, edge routers,
and user terminals. The satellites are strategically positioned
in intended orbits, facilitating dynamic coverage and communication with GSs, while also establishing inter-satellite
links (ISLs) to interact with each other. When two GSs in
different areas require a data exchange, these satellites are
supposed to work as transponders to transfer information in
space. The GSs play a pivotal role in traffic intersections
and achieving telecommunication with satellites, ensuring
seamless connectivity. They are responsible for summarizing
incoming traffic in distinct areas from their connected edge
routers. The edge routers in this model are responsible for
collecting satellite-based telecommunication from the user
terminals. The user terminals refer to various devices like
enterprise servers, computers, and telephones. When one of
them launches a telecommunication with a terminal in another
area, a satellite-terrestrial integrated communication occurs.
The communication path will traverse two edge routers, two
GSs, and multiple satellites interconnected by ISLs.
Assumptions underpinning the threat model include the
prohibition of direct communication between the satellites
and non-GS nodes, including the user terminals and the
edge routers. This is for improving the leverage of the GSs
and mitigating security risks associated with the satellites.
Considering that intruders are almost unfeasible to launch an
in-space attack that directly interferes with satellites or ISL
links in STIN, while every GS is configured with cybersecurity
administrators and multiple network protections, the integrity

HE et al.: SYNTHETIC DATA-ASSISTED STI NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK

1743

Fig. 2. The system design of STINIDF. After dataset collection and functional feature determination, the model training requires all extracted features to be
scattered over a four-layer STIN system. This system aggregates a conditional DP-based diffusion model named DP-CDM based on FL with two properties:
overlapping downloading and multi-level aggregation/local update. DP-CDM is supposed to generate non-functional features to form a global dataset together
with the functional features in PS. DP is applied in its local update algorithm by gradient clipping and noise adding for higher privacy protection. The edge
router, GS, and satellite nodes download and utilize this dataset and the local dataset to train distinctive detection models for online malicious packet detection.

of the satellites, GSs, and ISL-based connections is consequently assumed. However, it is available and effortless for
intruders to control any edge routers, user terminals, or infect
non-ISL links, as they are trivial and with lower safeguards.
Therefore, these nodes and links are deemed untrusted. With
the untrusted nature of the edge routers, user terminals, and
non-ISL links susceptible to malicious activities, intruders
may exploit vulnerabilities and launch cyber attacks on GSs
from terrestrial devices or target GS-satellite communications
through nefarious means. To safeguard against these cyber
attacks within STIN, it is necessary to develop a robust and
distributed intrusion detection mechanism. This mechanism is
required to achieve both satellite and terrestrial domain traffic
detection, together with deployment in each STIN traffic pivot,
including satellite, GS, and edge router nodes.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
The system design of the proposed method is shown in
Figure 2. It includes four steps: data collection, functional
feature determination, model training, and online detection.
The data collection step generates STI traffic instances with
benign and attack labels by a simulated STIN-based platform
with OMNET++ and INET. These labeled instances are then
utilized for the following experimental validation.
The functional feature determination step meets the requirement in the domain of traffic generation, it determines which
part of the features can be transformed by the generative
model.
The model training step possesses a STIN-FL-based traffic
generation part and a synthetic data-assisted detection model
training part. These two parts are implemented under a STIN
environment. The first part trains a DP-based conditional DM,
named DP-CDM, based on FL across STIN clients with overlapping downloading and multi-level aggregation/local update.
DP is applied in every local update process based on gradient

TABLE II
L IST OF M AIN S YMBOLS FOR P ROPOSED M ETHOD

clipping and noise adding for higher privacy protection. After
weight aggregation into a PS, this DM synthesizes a traffic
dataset that reflects the global data distribution of this STIN.
In the second part, this synthesized dataset is downloaded by
each edge router, local GS and satellite to train its detection
model, together with its own local recorded traffic.
The online detection step illustrates the detection process in
STIN, where each edge router, local GS and satellite applies
its trained detection model as a part of NIDS to monitor the
passed traffic with a firewall and a flow collector.
The main symbols in this section are collected in Table II
for quick reference.
A. Dataset Collection
A data collection platform is designed to generate a dataset
that simulates STIN traffic distribution. This platform is implemented by OMNET++ [16] and INET [17]. OMNeT++ is a
distributed network simulator, whereas INET is its inner model
suite for simulating traffic packet configuration and delivery.
One scenario is designed to collect benign traffic based on
Figure 1 without intruders, whereas extra four attack scenarios
are appended in Figure 3 to capture attack traffic.

1744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE III
G ENERATED F EATURES IN STI T RAFFIC DATASET

Fig. 3. Four attack scenarios for dataset collection. The first one is the signal
disruptions between partial GSs and satellites due to third-party objects; the
second one is the UDP flooding launched from terminals to paralyze satellites;
the third one is the noise signals with the same radio frequencies sent from
third-party objects to directly disturb the satellites; the fourth is the traditional
terrestrial attacks based on a local area environment without using satellites.

The first three scenarios focus on attacks under the satellite
domain. Due to a higher level of security in GSs and satellites,
most terrestrial intrusions are hard to enter and pollute traffic in
the satellite domain [2]. However, signal disruption, jamming,
and DoS/DDoS attacks are more changeable and flexible.
With similar protocols utilized as STIN benign traffic, these
attacks can still affect STIN infrastructures by improving
communication losses, interfering with the radio signals, and
exhausting target resources. On the other hand, intrusions like
Bruteforce and Infiltration are not flexible to intrude on the
satellite domain as they depend on the concrete payloads. Their
terrestrial versions cannot be applied directly in the satellite
domain. Concretely, attack scenario 1 concentrates on the
malicious signals that disrupt partial GS-satellite connections.
Such attacks are launched by third-party objects, such as
drones. As a result, the traffic sent by impacted satellites or
GSs possess a huge communication loss rate. Attack scenario
2 generates DDoS attacks from several user terminals to
first infect the GSs by sending massive, large and useless
packets, then these infected GSs attempt to paralyze satellites
based on UDP flooding. Attack scenario 3 contains Jamming
attacks that directly interfere with ground-satellite transmission. These attacks are also from third-party objects, escaping
the examination from the GSs. The last scenario concentrates
on terrestrial intrusions based on a terrestrial environment
within a local area. This scenario does not require satellite
telecommunication, and is supposed to simulate ground-based
attacks including Bruteforce, Infiltration, and DoS/DDoS to
intrude the target GSs. Notably, the UDP flooding and terrestrial DoS/DDoS simulated in these scenarios are all based on
the bandwidth consumption under the network layer, where the
intruders deliberately send massive bogus messages to exhaust
the limited bandwidth resources of target infrastructures.
After the scenario establishment, <PcapRecorder> [36]
module in OMNeT++ is utilized to record the past traffic in
each communication node, whereas <tshark> [37] command
is applied to convert <pcap> files into <csv> for training
AI-based models. Based on the <PcapRecorder> module, a

series of packet features are generated for each captured
instance. Due to their characteristics, these features are then
classified into six categories, which are five-tuple, intrinsic,
content, time-based, packet, and random, respectively. The
features and the labels form the new STI dataset, described
in Table III.
B. Functional Feature Determination
The functional feature determination process ensures compliance with one constraint in the traffic generation domain:
only non-functional features that do not violate the traffic
functionality are allowed to be generated [38]. One generated
instance x̄ by a generative function fw (·) is described as:
x̄ = x f unc ⊕ fw (xnon f )

(10)

where x f unc is functional features, xnon f is non-functional
features, and ⊕ is the concatenation. Applying fw (·) on x f unc is
not allowed as the traffic functionality may change. Different
labels may possess different functional features as different
attack types are launched with different means and objectives.
These means and objectives make an attack label own its distinct functionality-related features. For example, DoS/DDoS
are generated to use multiple causal packets to paralyze
targets whereas Infiltration concentrates on achieving concrete
objectives with several operations. Consequently, the statistical
features like traffic duration and packet sizes have huge values
in DoS/DDoS whereas they are generally small in both Infiltration and benign instances. Consequently, these two features
are functionality-related for DoS/DDoS but non-functional
for Infiltration. Therefore, it is essential to determine the
functional and non-functional features of each STI label to
achieve functionality-preservation traffic generation. Following
the feature categories in Table III, the functional features
for different labels are decided in Table IV: five-tuple and
intrinsic features reflect the basic traffic packet information,
important for all traffic samples; time-based features are highly
associated to classify long-time persistent threats like UDP
flooding, Jamming, and DoS/DDoS; content-related features

HE et al.: SYNTHETIC DATA-ASSISTED STI NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK

TABLE IV
F UNCTIONAL F EATURE D ETERMINATION IN STI DATASET

are functional for terrestrial Bruteforce and Infiltration as they
are related to traffic payload, launched with a fixed objective
on subsequent calls; packet-related features are related with the
attacks caused by packet loss or massive packet utilization like
Signal Disruption and Bruteforce; random feature, the DNS
query ID, is non-functional due to its distinctiveness and label
independence.
C. Model Training
1) STIN-FL-Based Traffic Generation: Step 3-1 in Figure 2
includes a four-layer FL-based framework to train DP-CDM
in a simulated STIN environment. The edge layer includes
the edge routers that connect the user terminals. These edge
routers act as clients to contribute their calculating power and
local recorded traffic. The local layer contains the local GSs
for both edge aggregation and higher-level local updates. The
satellite layer involves the satellites that work as information
transponders. These satellites transmit the model weights
between the local GSs and a special GS that is responsible
for acting as a PS in the FL-based process. This PS belongs
to the global layer for the overall aggregation.
In this step, a new algorithm is designed to train DP-CDM,
named STIN-FedAvg in Algorithm 1. Let G = {1, 2, · · · , G}
be the set of local GSs, and each GS, symbolized as g, covers
a subset of edge routers Rg ∈ R with |Rg | = Rg . Rg can be
called coverage g. Let Gr ⊆ G be the local GS subset that
edge routers r can communicate with, given Gr = |Gr |. First,
the weight w0 is initialized in each local GS. Second, for each
communication round t, R0 edge routers download weights wt
from their connected local GSs at line 1 ∼ 9. If one edge
router r connects with multiple GSs, the downloaded weights
are then averaged as:
1 X
wt
(11)
wtr =
g∈Gr g
Gr
Third, the edge routers locally update the weights by their
recorded traffic and upload them to local GSs for aggregation
at line 10 ∼ 12. The details of the local update are illustrated
in Algorithm 2, whereas the aggregation in local GSs is:
ηg X
wtg =
wt
(12)
r∈Rg r
Rg
where ηg is the learning rate. Thus, the loss function fg (w) for
coverage g is:
1 X
fg (w) =
Fr (w)
(13)
r∈Rg
Rg
where Fr (w) is the loss function of covered edge routers.

1745

Algorithm 1 STIN-FedAvg Training Algorithm
Input: Initialize weight w0 to each GS g; communication
round T; batch epoch E/E 0 /E 00 ; GS local update interval tg ;
overall aggregation interval tc ;
1: for t = 1 : T do
2:
Random select R0 edge routers R0 from R. (R0 < R)
3:
for g = 1 : G do
4:
for r = 1 : R0 do
5:
if edge router r is in non-overlapping area then
6:
wtr = wtg // Downloading to edge routers
7:
else
P
8:
wtr = G1r g∈Gr wtg // Downloading to edge
routers
9:
end if
10:
wtr ← LocalU pdate(E, wtr ) // Algorithm 2 by
edge routers
η P
11:
wtg = Rgg r∈Rg wtr // Aggregation to local GSs
12:
end for
13:
if Mod(t, tg ) = 0 then
14:
wtg ← LocalU pdate(E 0 , wtg ) // Algorithm 2 by
local GSs
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
if Mod(t, tc )P
= 0 then
18:
W t = ηGo g∈G wtg // Overall aggregation
19:
W t ← LocalU pdate(E 00 , W t ) // Algorithm 2 by PS
20:
for g = 1 : G do
21:
wtg = W t // Downloading to local GSs
22:
end for
23:
end if
24:
t =t+1
25: end for

Fourth, for each tg communication round interval, local GSs
also apply their local traffic to train the model at line 13 ∼ 16.
Finally, for each tc communication round interval, the weights
are uploaded from local GSs to PS through satellites for overall
aggregation and highest-level local update with its local traffic
at line 17 ∼ 19. The overall aggregation in PS is described as:
1X
(14)
Wt =
wt
g∈G g
G
while the overall loss function f (w) is described as:
1X
f (w) =
fg (w)
g∈G
G
X
X
1
=
Fr (w)
g∈G
r∈Rg
GRg

(15)
(16)

In addition, each local GS downloads the aggregated weight
for the next turn at line 20 ∼ 22.
After training DP-CDM, PS utilizes this model to synthesize
a dataset that contains the global distribution. The details of
DP-CDM generation are described in Algorithm 3. Notably, its
structure is different from traditional conditional DM. Shown
at Figure 4, it includes a functional and non-functional feature
division part before the forward process, where this division
is dynamic based on the given label. Consequently, for every

1746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

edge router, local GS and satellite nodes train their own D
by both D0 and their local data D with the learning rate ηD .
Given (x, y) ∼ D and (x0 , y0 ) ∼ D0 , the objective of D in each
node is minimizing a cross-entropy loss LD :
1 X
y log D(x)
LD = −
MD
MD
X
1
−
y0 log D(x0 ) + Ψ
(17)
MD0
M D0
where MD and MD0 are the sampled amount from datasets D
and D0 , respectively. We also define Γ = MD0 /(MD + MD0 ) to
describe the ratio of data augmentation. Γ = 0 refers that the
training data are all from the local data, whereas Γ = 1 notifies
that only D0 are applied. Ψ is a L p −norm regularization for
robustness to noisy labels and overfitting alleviation [40]:
X
1/p
X
1/p
Ψ = λ1
|D(x)| p
+ λ2
|D(x0 )| p
(18)
MD

M D0

where λ1 and λ2 are two predefined hyperparameters.
D. Online Detection
Fig. 4. The structure details of DP-CDM. For each input sample, its
features are first divided into functional and non-functional ones. Then,
non-functional features are fed into a U-Net-like structure including linear,
leaky-relu, batchnorm1d layers together with the concatenation of the timestep
positional embeddings for feature generation. Next, the generated features
are concatenated with the divided functional features to form a sample. The
feature division is dynamic based on the labels throughout the training and
generation processes.

input instance, its features are separated into feature categories
listed in Table III, which are five-tuple, intrinsic, time-based
content, packet and random. Considering that the IP and
port features are dropped in the preprocessing step, only the
protocol feature in the five-tuple category is retained. Then,
these features are judged based on Table IV: the protocol
feature and intrinsic category are treated as fully functional,
as they are functional for all labels; the time-based, content,
and packet categories are treated as partially functional, as the
given labels decide whether they are functional or not; the
random category is treated as non-functional. Next, its inner
neural network is fed by the features judged as non-functional.
The network structure is based on U-Net [39], where linear
and batchnorm1d layers are applied. To achieve DM-based
generation, this network also concatenates the input timestep
that is positional embedded after each linear layer. Finally,
the output features from this network are connected with
the features judged as functional to form a newly generated
instance.
This part trains a new DL-based model D that is supposed to
work as NIDS in every edge router, local GS and satellite node.
To maximize the detection performance of D, it is trained with
both the synthesized dataset and local recorded traffic, where
the former represents global STIN traffic distribution while the
latter denotes the traffic distribution of the current node. After
downloading the synthesized dataset from PS, denoted as D0 ,
0 Protocol*: IP and port information in the five-tuple feature category are
dropped in the preprocessing step. Only protocol feature in five-tuple is used.
Synthetic data-assisted detection model training.

The trained D is then deployed in each edge router, GS
and satellite to work as a part of NIDS for online detection in
STIN. Deployment on these nodes can reflect the whole flow
circumstance of STIN as these nodes are indeed traffic pivots
in STIN. For each node, when traffic packets come in, they
are first checked by a firewall filter, which can directly block
obvious attacks with a set of defined rules. Then, the passed
packets are detected by a NIDS module consisting of a flowbased feature collector, a preprocessing part, and D. If this
module found an abnormal packet, it would raise an alert and
launch follow-up analysis and mitigation modules based on
the classified attack types. Otherwise, the packet is dropped.
Additionally, the satellite nodes may be restricted with
computing resources, but they just participate in training and
prediction processes of D instead of DP-CDM, which is
less time-consuming. Moreover, the training process of D
is implemented only once per tc communication rounds. In
most cases, these traffic pivots only execute intrusion detection
tasks. Therefore, the resource consumption on these satellite
nodes is indeed acceptable.
V. A NALYSIS OF THE P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
The proposed STINIDF is analyzed in security and time
complexity theoretically in this section.
A. Security Analysis
This part analyzes the potential threats that affect the STINbased training process in STINIDF and its privacy issues,
including inference attacks, injection attacks, and data privacy.
1) Inference Attack on Edge Router: Considering that
GSs and satellites are configured with higher level safety
protection, the intruders may apply an inference attack on
any edge routers for deducing the original traffic data based
on the weight and gradient information of DP-CDM. To
against it, DP is utilized for local updating where Gaussian
noise N (0, σ2C 2 I) in line 10 of Algorithm 2 is added

HE et al.: SYNTHETIC DATA-ASSISTED STI NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK

to each gradient. Meanwhile, DP-CDM is only fed with
non-functional traffic features, not highly associated with
the functionality of raw data. The functional features do not
participate in the federated training. Even if the intruders
successfully deduce the obtained weight and gradient, the
original traffic instances can not be completely reconstructed
due to the lack of their functional elements. Thus, STINIDF
is secure when facing inference attacks.
2) Injection Attack for Model Corruption: The intruders
may infect and control several edge routers to launch injection
attacks by uploading malicious weight information. This may
lower the performance of the global aggregated DP-CDM and
make it unreliable. STINIDF alleviates this risk mainly based
on multi-level aggregation/local updating, where the local GSs
instead of PS aggregate the uploaded weights in advance. Then
these GSs utilize their local traffic to further update the aggregated weights before uploading to PS. Moreover, the recorded
traffic in local GSs is generally more massive and informative,
lessening the training participation degree of the edge routers.
Conclusively, the model corruption risk is significantly reduced
because of the multi-level factors in STINIDF.
3) Data Privacy for Local Raw Traffic: In the federated
process of step 3-1, each edge router or local GS applies
its own recorded raw traffic to train individual DP-CDM,
which is then uploaded for weight aggregation. In the detection
model training process of step 3-2, only the dataset generated
by PS is downloaded by each node for training D. Overall,
the raw traffic recorded by each node does not exchange
during STINIDF training process. Hence, its privacy can be
guaranteed.
B. Time Complexity Analysis
The computation and communication costs of STINIDF are
given for each edge router, satellite, local GS and PS.
1) Computation Cost: For edge routers, they include two
parts: 1) locally updating DP-CDM in every communication
round, the cost is O(E(B|wr |+ld p )), where clipping the sample
gradients and adding noise into gradient in Algorithm 2 require
O(ld p ) operations; 2) training D once per tc communication
rounds, the cost is O(E ∗ ((MD0 + MD )|wD | + lre )), where lre
denotes consumption of Ψ. Therefore, the total computation
consumption for one edge router is O(T (E(B|wr | + ld p ) +
E ∗ ((MD0 + MD )|wD | + lre ))). For each satellite node, it only
trains D after downloading the synthetic dataset per tc communication rounds. Its cost is O(T (E ∗ ((MD0 + MD )|wD |+lre ))).
For local GSs, they include three parts: 1) locally updating
DP-CDM per tg communication rounds, the cost is
O(E 0 (B|wg | + ld p )); 2) aggregating the uploaded weights
from edge routers per tg communication rounds, the cost is
O(R0 |wr |); 3) training D once per tc communication rounds.
Thus, the total computation consumption for single local GS
is O(T (E 0 (B|wg | + ld p ) + R0 |wr | + E ∗ ((MD0 + MD )|wD | + lre ))).
For PS, it includes three parts: 1) local updating DP-CDM
per tc communication rounds, the cost is O(E 00 (B|W| + ld p ));
2) aggregating the uploaded weights from local GSs per tc
communication rounds, the cost is O(G|wg |); 3) generating
the synthetic dataset by aggregated DP-CDM, the cost is

1747

O(N|D0 ||W|). Hence, the total computation consumption for
PS is O(T (E 00 (B|W| + ld p ) + G|wg | + N|D0 ||W|)).
2) Communication Cost: For edge routers, 1) R0 of them
upload updated DP-CDM in every communication round,
the cost is O(|wr |); 2) they download the synthetic dataset
after global aggregation, the cost is O(|D0 |). Therefore, the
communication cost for one edge router is O(T (|wr | + |D0 |)).
For each satellite, it only downloads the synthetic dataset,
the cost is O(T |D0 |). For local GSs, 1) they receive uploaded
DP-CDM weights from edge routers per tg communication
rounds, the cost is O(R0 |wr |); 2) they upload updated
DP-CDM weights to PS, the cost is O(|wg |); 3) they
download the synthetic dataset from PS, the cost is O(|D0 |);
4) they forward the synthetic dataset to each edge router,
the cost is O(R0 |D0 |). Thus, the communication cost for
local GS is O(T (R0 |wr | + |wg | + (R0 + 1)|D0 |)). For PS, 1)
it receives DP-CDM weight from local GSs, the cost is
O(G|wg |); 2) it sends the synthetic dataset to each local GS,
the cost is O(G|D0 |). Hence, its total communication cost is
O(T (G|wg | + |W| + G|D0 |)).
Meanwhile, the complexity and scale of D are generally
much less than DP-CDM, leading that the computational term
E ∗ ((MD0 + MD )|wD | + lre ) in edge router and local GS nodes
can be omitted. Also, the size of DP-CDM in different nodes
is the same (i.e., |wr | = |wg | = |W|). Consequently, all costs
are simplified and concluded in Table V. The costs of FedAvg
[9] and CIDIoT [33] are recomputed for the STIN scenario
and listed as references. Conclusively, the costs of STINIDF
mainly depend on the size of DP-CDM (i.e., |W|) and the
amount of the synthetic dataset (i.e., |D0 |). As for |W|, its size
is based on the inner U-Net. Compared with the federated DM
work for image generation [41] and federated U-Net works
for medical segmentation [42], [43], the scalability of this
U-Net is indeed acceptable in communication contexts as it
generates traffic instances mainly by linear and batchnorm1d
layers, whose parameters are much fewer than convolutional
and batchnorm2d layers in image-related usage.
It is worth noting that STINIDF is indeed designed for high
intrusion detection performance in STIN instead of pursuing
low time consumption. Based on Table V, it has paid extra
resources on achieving multi-level aggregation/local-updating
for smoothing the federated process and DP operations for
weight privacy protection compared with other FLs. Nevertheless, the extra resource consumption is acceptable. Because
the local GSs, commonly configured with sufficient computing
resources, play the main role of multi-level aggregation/localupdating, whereas DP operations are applied only on the local
data, whose amount is limited in single node like edge routers.
VI. DATASET C OLLECTION AND E XPERIMENT D ESIGN
This section describes the collected STI dataset, followed
by the experiment setups for the proposed STINIDF.
A. STI Dataset Formulation
OMNeT++5.6.2 and INET 4.2.5 are utilized to achieve STI
dataset formulation. Based on the different attack scenarios
in Figure 3, seven attack labels under terrestrial and satellite
domains are collected. OMNeT++ has spent 3430 seconds to

1748

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE V
C OMPUTATION AND C OMMUNICATION C OSTS OF R ELATED M ETHODS

TABLE VI
L ABEL S IMULATION T IME AND A MOUNT IN STI T RAFFIC DATASET

Fig. 6. Node scenario setting for simulating FL-based training in a STIN
environment. GS 3 is the PS that is responsible for overall aggregation for
DP-CDM and synthesizing global dataset.

Fig. 5. Low-dimensional visualization for partial STI dataset. They show that
the label distributions in STI present clear differences in statistical level.

simulate benign and malicious traffic. The information about
this simulation process are recorded in Table VI.
Then this dataset is pre-processed by feature selection and
normalization. The IP and port information features are treated
as redundant features and dropped. For features that vary
sharply, a min-max normalization is applied to scale them
within a range [0, 1]. Then, the normalized STI dataset with
20 features are obtained, public at https://github.com/hjp007/
STI.
Moreover, this pre-processed dataset is visualized by
2-dimensional T-SNE [45] in Figure 5(a) and 3-dimensional
PCA [46] in Figure 5(b) with partial samples, illustrating that
each STI malicious traffic label possesses a difference to some
extent in statistical distribution compared with other labels.
B. Experiment Setups
The experiment setups include environment settings, a
default node scenario configuration, hyper-parameter details,
evaluation metrics, and baseline settings.

1) Experimental Environment: A computer with Intel Core
i9-10700K CPU, 32 GB DDR3, and GeForce RTX 3060Ti
GPU is utilized. Jupyter Notebook 7.1.3 platform is applied
to train and test the related DL-based models. These models
are programmed by PyTorch 1.13.1 with Python 3.10.8.
2) Default Node Scenario Configuration: To train
DP-CDM in step 3-1 in Figure 2, a default node scenario
is pre-defined to simulate the STIN environment, shown
in Figure 6. It includes 6 satellite nodes, 4 GS nodes,
7 edge routers, and 8 user terminals. GS 3 is set as PS,
and other GS nodes are local GSs. Thus, G is 3 and R
is 7. Considering the overlapping downloading factor, one
edge router may connect multiple GSs (i.e., EdgeRouter 2
and EdgeRouter 6). One edge router may also connect
multiple users (i.e., EdgeRouter 2). Meanwhile, the data
distribution in each node that participates in Algorithm 1
(i.e., all edge routers and GSs) is set into two conditions,
which are IID and non-IID scenarios. The IID scenario
requires that the malicious traffic in the satellite domain is
averagely distributed in GS nodes, while the terrestrial attack
samples are equally scattered in edge routers and GSs. The
non-IID scenario refers to the fact that the distributions in
both domains are skewed and imbalanced. In both scenarios,
the satellite domain traffic never exists on edge routers.
3) Hyper-Parameter Details: The STI dataset is divided
into a 70% training set and a 30% testing set. The training
set is utilized to train DP-CDM where the communication
round T is set as 30 and the batch epochs E/E 0 /E 00 are 5, 5, 5.
Moreover, the batch size B, the partial edge router amount

HE et al.: SYNTHETIC DATA-ASSISTED STI NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK

R0 , the local update interval tg , and the overall aggregation
interval tc are set as 32, 3, 3, 5, respectively. The learning
rates ηw , ηg , ηo are all 0.001. In the structure of DP-CDM,
the time step N is 50 and βn changes from 0.001 to 0.02
in these N steps. To evaluate DP effectiveness in DP-CDM,
subsection VII-E studies the performance impact under the
different privacy budgets , where  is set as 0.1, 1, 10, ∞,
respectively and the risk probability δ is 0.001 ( = ∞ refers
no DP usage).
For each edge router, local GS, and satellite, its deployed
detection model D is trained by the downloaded synthetic
dataset from PS and local training dataset for every overall
aggregation round interval tc with 20 epochs (i.e., E ∗ = 20),
then evaluated by the local testing dataset. Learning rate
ηD is 0.001. As for regularization terms, we chose L2 -norm
where p = 2, the hyperparameters λ1 , λ2 are both set as 0.1.
The data augmentation ratio Γ is set as 0.75 for the IID
scenario and 0.25 for the non-IID scenario, as observed in
subsection VII-C. Besides, the structure of D uses a linear
deep neural network, including four fully-connected layers,
three batchnorm1d layers, and one softmax output layer to
achieve intrusion multi-classification.
4) Evaluation Metrics: Based on true positive (TP), true
negative (TN), false positive (FP), and false negative (FN),
the following evaluation metrics are selected to measure the
detection performance of trained D and other methods:
TP + TN
TP + TN + FN + FP
TP
Precision =
TP + FP
TP
Recall =
TP + FN
Precision × Recall
F1 = 2 ×
Precision + Recall

Accuracy =

(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)

To evaluate the generated instances, FID [47] is adopted,
where a smaller value implies better instance quality. FID
utilization requires a pre-trained calculating workflow from our
previous work [38] to adapt the domain of traffic generation.
5) Baseline Methods: Several state-of-the-art studies based
on FL are implemented for performance comparison. Some of
them are not designed for the intrusion detection domain but
are retrained over the STI dataset in our experiments.
• FedAvg [9]: the basic FL that averages the model weights
from the local clients to achieve global model training.
• FedProx [48]: a FL based on FedAvg that adds a proximal
term to mitigate the statistical data heterogeneity.
• SDA-FL [12]: a FL with confident pseudo labeling to
solve the non-IID challenge by sharing the synthetic data
from GAN. DP is also utilized for privacy protection.
• FedDPGAN [21]: a FL that privately generates diverse
instances by GAN in local clients for diagnosing
COVID-19. DP is also utilized for privacy protection.
• CIDIoT [33]: a FL with a loss sensitive GAN and a robust
aggregation process for IoT-environment-adapted intrusion detection. DP is also utilized for privacy protection.

1749

• STIN-NIDS [2]: a distributed FL-adapted NIDS to properly allocate resources in NIDS domain to analyze and
block malicious traffic with complexity optimization.
Meanwhile, random forest (RF) [49] and multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [50] are also adopted to play the role of D, trained
with local data in each edge router, local GS, and satellite.
VII. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
The evaluation results for STINIDF are categorized into
seven key aspects. First, a direct comparison with SOTA
methods is provided. Second, the concrete classification performance of STINIDF on each label is examined. Third, results
under varying Γ are presented to identify the optimal data
augmentation degree. Fourth, the evaluation for different node
types is conducted. Fifth, the impact of varying privacy budget
settings is examined to determine the optimal trade-off for DP
usage. The sixth and seventh aspects encompass a scalability
study and an ablation study. Each aspect is accompanied by a
corresponding discussion. Finally, the limitations of STINIDF
are critically addressed.
A. Comparison With SOTA
The proposed STINIDF is evaluated against the aforementioned baseline methods on detection performance in both IID
scenario and non-IID scenario. The experiment is conducted
five times for every method to get the average accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score, along with their standard deviations.
The results, summarized in Table VII, clearly demonstrate that
STINIDF gets the best performance among all methods in both
scenarios across these four metrics. It achieves performance
improvements compared with the second-best method, which
are 0.2% accuracy, 0.13% precision, 0.38% recall, 0.24%
F1 score in the IID scenario, and 2.41% accuracy, 3.14%
precision, 1.65% recall, and 2.7% F1 in the non-IID scenario.
Discussion: Non-FL-based methods, such as RF and MLP,
exhibit poor performance in both scenarios. Without sharing
the model weights that contain global traffic information, these
models are trained solely with limited local data, resulting
in incomplete convergence and instability. Consequently, their
performance shows significantly higher deviations (e.g., MLP
in the non-IID scenario even gets 24.51% deviations in precision). For FL-based methods that are not designed for solving
the non-IID challenge, FedAvg and STIN-NIDS, they reveal
more evident performance degradation from the IID scenario
to the non-IID scenario than others. For instance, FedAvg
and STIN-NIDS get 7.22%, 10.85% lower accuracy whereas
3.04% in STINIDF. This illustrates that the strategies like data
augmentation or adding the proximal term do improve the
detection performance in the non-IID scenario.
Meanwhile, STINIDF outperforms FedProx, SDA-FL, FedDPGAN and CIDIoT with 96.63% accuracy, 96.71% precision, 96.54% recall and 96.66% F1 score in the non-IID
scenario. It shows that the data augmentation strategy utilized
in STINIDF has balanced the distribution of the local traffic in
each deployed node, whose D can then effectively detect its
passed intrusions. In conclusion, STINIDF is able to model the
traffic representations inherent in STI dataset under unbalanced
data scenario and outperforms other SOTA methods.

1750

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE VII
OVERALL T ESTING ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE W ITH C OMPARED S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS (%)

Fig. 7. Confusion matrices of STINIDF on STI dataset in both IID and
non-IID scenarios. S is “Signal Disruption”, U is “UDP flood”.

B. Classification Performance for Intrusion Detection
To further assess the classification performance of the proposed method, confusion matrices detailing the results on each
label are displayed in Figure 7, with evaluations conducted
under both IID and non-IID scenarios.
Discussion: In the IID scenario, STINIDF achieves over
99% accuracy on all labels. In the non-IID scenario, STINIDF
exhibits slight performance degradation on Benign, UDP
Flood, Jamming, and DoS traffic. The accuracy is reduced
by approximately 3%, 7%, 6%, 2%, respectively. A plausible
explanation for this lies in the shared functional feature
components, time-based and packet-related features, among
UDP Flood, Jamming, and DoS based on Table IV. These
similarities result in closely resembling characteristics to each
other. When the training process becomes sophisticated like
the non-IID scenario, the classification task on them becomes
tough in the first place, causing a declined detection result.
Besides, the performance on benign instances is also declined
as their distribution is more diverse in feature space, shown
in Figure 5. This diversity causes some benign instances
to share characteristics with certain attack instances, further
complicating classification.
C. Data Augmentation Degree
For synthetic data-assisted detection model training, it is
essential to verify the effectiveness of the data augmentation
and figure out an appropriate degree. For STINIDF, this factor
is highly correlated to the data augmentation ratio Γ. To find
the best Γ, it is set into 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1 for both IID and
non-IID scenarios. Γ = 0 refers no data augmentation usage

Fig. 8. Overall testing accuracy for STINIDF under different data augmentation ratio Γ. Γ = 0 refers no global synthetic dataset (i.e., no data augmentation
usage) while Γ = 1 refers training without local dataset.

whereas Γ = 1 implies no local data usage. Figure 8 shows
the overall testing accuracy during each communication round
T under these Γ. As a consequence, STINIDF gets the best
performance when T = 30 in different Γ settings. Concretely,
it achieves 95.43%, 98.94%, 99.32%, 99.67%, 99.58% overall
testing accuracy in the IID scenario and 94.69%, 96.63%,
95.21%, 93.85%, 90.1% in the non-IID scenario.
Discussion: In Figure 8, STINIDF possesses the best performance 99.67% when Γ = 0.75 in the IID scenario and 96.63%
when Γ = 0.25 in the non-IID scenario.
In the IID scenario, Γ = 0 achieves 95.43% accuracy,
significantly lower than other Γ conditions. One reason is the
lack of training instances. Γ = 0 can only utilize local training
data, whereas other Γ conditions can download the generated
instances that contain the traffic information from other nodes.
Meanwhile, Γ = 0.75 performs slightly better than Γ = 1. It
shows that the local data is still required as it represents the
original data distribution.
In the non-IID scenario, Γ = 1 gets 90.1% accuracy, even
worse than Γ = 0. One reason is that only the local training
set, instead of the global synthetic dataset, shares the same
data distribution as the local testing set in this scenario. Thus,
local training data is more important than global data for D.
On the other hand, Γ = 0.25, 0.5 still works better than Γ = 0,
illustrating that data augmentation with an appropriate degree
can obtain a higher accuracy than no data augmentation.
Conclusively, STINIDF utilizes a data augmentation strategy by applying the synthetic dataset symbolizing global traffic
distribution without dropping local data in each deployed
node. The synthetic dataset contributes to D with stronger

HE et al.: SYNTHETIC DATA-ASSISTED STI NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK

1751

Fig. 9. Average testing accuracy on each type of nodes and overall condition
for STINIDF. The performance is different because different types of nodes
possess distinctive local datasets in different domains.

robustness and generalization, whereas local data guarantees
D to maintain prediction capability for its current node traffic
distribution. The results have confirmed that this strategy is
effective for D to obtain higher performance in both scenarios.
D. Detection Performance in Each Node Types
Three types of nodes, edge routers, local GSs and satellites,
host D for final online detection, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Given that D in different node types is trained with distinct
local data distributions, an experiment is implemented to
inspect the performance differences in these node types. The
results, summarized in Figure 9, show that D achieves 99.27%,
99.64%, 99.83%, 99.67% on local GSs, edge routers, satellites and overall in the IID scenario, while 95.38%, 97.39%,
97.54%, 96.63% in the non-IID scenario.
Discussion: In both IID and non-IID scenarios, the performance of D on local GS is slightly lower than that on the other
two node types. This can be attributed to the complexity of the
traffic composition. The local malicious data in the satellites
and edge routers is from a single domain, i.e., the satellite or
the terrestrial domain in Figure VI. Besides, the local data in
the local GS is from both domains, as the local GS plays the
role of the convergence center, handling all kinds of traffic in
the STIN environment. D in the local GS is required to classify
all the labels in both domains, which increases complexity and
slightly reduces performance.
Meanwhile, D in the satellite node slightly outperforms D
in the edge router node, indicating that the traffic complexity
in the terrestrial domain is marginally higher than the satellite
domain. One possible interpretation, based on Table IV, is
that the functionality of the malicious traffic in the satellite
domain is correlated with the packet or time features, whereas
the terrestrial intrusions also have a relationship to the contentrelated features, leading to a harder classification task for D
to detect the terrestrial intrusions.
E. Trade-off Between the Privacy Budgets and Performance
To prevent privacy leakage during weight exchange in
Algorithm 1 for DP-CDM, (, δ)-DP is utilized where privacy budget  is set into several values, including ∞, to
determine an optimal balance for final performance.  = ∞
refers no DP usage. The smaller  indicates stronger privacy
protection but huger fuzziness in the exchanged weight. The

Fig. 10. Overall testing accuracy and FID under different privacy budgets 
by STINIDF and other methods in non-IID scenario.  = ∞ refers to no usage
of differential privacy, while smaller  symbolizes stronger privacy protection.

final performance is assessed based on the quality of the
instances generated by DP-CDM and the detection capability
of the augmented D. Besides, SDA-FL and FedDPGAN are
chosen as references as they also apply data augmentation
and DP. Consequently, Figure 10 presents corresponding FIDs
and overall testing accuracy under these  in the non-IID
scenario. Basically, for different  settings, STINIDF achieves
the highest testing accuracy set (95.26% ∼ 96.67%) whereas it
generates the instances with the lowest FID set (25.67 ∼ 11.54)
compared to the other methods.
Discussion: Compared to the absence of DP, a smaller 
increases the noise scale σ, thereby expanding the variance
of the added noise N (0, σ2C 2 I) to DP-CDM in line 10 of
Algorithm 2. While this enhances privacy protection during
weight exchange in Algorithm 1, it makes trained DP-CDM
with slight deviation, causing the generated instances with
lower quality by 14.13, 6.34, 2.15 higher FIDs. Naturally,
training D with these instances decreases its performance by
1.41%, 0.53%, 0.22% lower accuracy on original traffic data.
Notably, this performance degradation compared with no
DP usage is not significant when  = 1, 10 (i.e., 0.53%,
0.22%), whereas it is more evident when  = 0.1 (i.e., 1.41%).
Therefore,  = 1 is a suitable trade-off between privacy
protection and model performance.
F. Scalability Study
To investigate the impact of varying number of local GSs
and edge routers on STINIDF performance, additional G and
R values are examined beyond the default node configuration
(i.e., G = 3, R = 7). By the experiment, the final testing
accuracy with G of 0 ∼ 4 and R of 1 ∼ 9 in the nonIID scenario is examined and recorded in Figure 11. G = 0
symbolizes single PS usage with no local GS setting.
Discussion: First, the model possesses significantly higher
accuracy (i.e., 98.1 ∼ 99.71%) when G = 0 compared with
G = 1 ∼ 4. This is because no local GS exists, which is a
special condition. It causes the model training process in Algorithm 1 to degrade into a single-level many-to-one aggregation
(i.e., the edge routers are directly connected to PS), lowering
the training difficulty. Second, the accuracy drops with larger

1752

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 11. Overall testing accuracy under different numbers of local GSs (G)
and edge routers R in the non-IID scenario. Generally, larger G and R cause
a lower accuracy, while this trend becomes slower when G ≥ 3 and R ≥ 7.

G and R, indicating that the node scenario with a larger scale
lowers the aggregation and final performance. The reason is
that more G and R make the local traffic instances stored in
each STIN node become fewer under the fixed amount of STI
dataset. Consequently, the larger scale of STIN nodes without appending total training instances inevitably impedes the
performance of FL-based aggregation. Moreover, fewer local
instances in each STIN node make D hard to learn the traffic
distribution in its own node. However, in a real-world scenario,
each STIN node is supposed to collect its passed traffic, which
is then stored as its local data. In this case, a larger scale of
STIN nodes, together with informative local instances may
not lower the aggregation and final performance. Third, the
performance decreasing degree between R = 7 and R = 9 (i.e.,
0.45% ↓, 0.59% ↓, 0.07% ↓, 0.08% ↓, 0.05% ↓) is roughly
smaller than the one between R = 3 and R = 5 (i.e., 0.44% ↓,
0.28% ↓, 0.11% ↑, 0.32% ↓, 0.18% ↓). This is the same for
G variation, where the decreasing degree between G = 3 and
G = 4 (i.e., 0.31% ↓, 0.22% ↓, 0.08% ↓, 0.13% ↓, 0.1% ↓) is
generally smaller than the one between G = 1 and G = 2 (i.e.,
0.39% ↓, 1.1% ↓, 0.71% ↓, 0.71% ↓, 0.29% ↓). It illustrates
that the impact of the node amount setting becomes weaker
with the scale of the STIN going up. In reality, the deployed
STIN systems are generally with thousands of edge routers
and hundreds of GSs and satellites. Thus, the impact of small
node variation numbers on these systems can be ignored.
G. Ablation Study
To access the effectiveness of the independent modules in
STINIDF, an ablation experiment is implemented in the nonIID scenario, examining five conditions: no data augmentation
usage (i.e., Γ = 0), no multi-level update/aggregation in
Algorithm 1, no functional feature division in Table IV, and no
regularization (i.e., no Ψ in Eq (17)). The accuracy, precision,
recall and F1 score on these conditions compared to the
original method are collected in Figure 12. Consequently, the
proposed STINIDF outperforms all conditions and gets 1.94%,
0.8%, 0.69%, 2.34%, 0.39% higher accuracy, respectively.
Discussion: First, compared with no data augmentation
usage (i.e., no DP-CDM usage), the absence of multi-

Fig. 12. Overall accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score under different ablation conditions in the non-IID scenario, showing that the data augmentation,
the multi-level update/aggregation, the functional feature division, and the
regularization do improve the performance.

level updates in DP-CDM training improves 1.14% accuracy,
whereas the absence of multi-level aggregation improves
1.25% accuracy. This indicates that both multi-level characteristics enhance performance, while the multi-level update
possesses a slightly larger degree. One reason is that the multilevel update does utilize more local data (i.e., the data in
local GSs), which is more important than the optimization of
the aggregation process. Second, omitting functional feature
division results in the worst performance across four metrics,
even worse than no data augmentation. On the one hand,
no division step before traffic generation is illegal, as the
generated traffic may violate its functionalities due to the
functional feature modification. On the other hand, no division
may let DP-CDM generate instances with unseen functional
features. Compared with the ones with unmodified functional
features, these instances are more diverse and may be misleading for training D, as the performance of D is evaluated
by the original test data with unmodified functional features.
Meanwhile, the amount of features that require generation
also improves, causing a harder DP-CDM training process.
Third, no regularization gets 0.39% lower accuracy, indicating
that regularization does assign D with a certain degree of
generalization capability improvement.
H. Limitations
Three limitations exist in STINIDF, which are the potential
leakage of the synthetic data, fixed positions of the satellite
constellation, and labeled data restriction.
First, while our proposed method avoids sharing the raw
data, the synthetic dataset generated by DP-CDM in PS is
inevitably transferred to the local GS, satellite and edge router
nodes. Although this transfer does not cause data leakage
directly, it still contains the original functional features cut
from the local data in PS. Intruders can backtrack these data to
reproduce the original traffic recorded by PS. To make matters
worse, they may infer the data from other nodes based on this
traffic by exploring the distribution relationship. Basically, the
data in PS is inevitably unsafe due to the exposure of the
synthetic dataset. However, the data leakage in other nodes can

HE et al.: SYNTHETIC DATA-ASSISTED STI NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK

be avoided, where one available mitigating solution is selecting
the real samples with an evidently different data distribution
compared with the local data in PS. These samples can
be designated as public, making it challenging for intruders
to infer other local data based on them. By adopting this
approach, data leakage in nodes except PS is prevented by
tackling the non-IID challenge in STIN intrusion detection.
Another limitation is that the dynamic topology nature of
the STIN is not considered in STINIDF training. The satellite
constellation in Figure 2 is indeed rotating around the earth in
regular, each satellite is running on different designated orbits
and possesses a dynamical connection condition with GSs.
When the weight of DP-CDM in each local GS is uploaded
to PS for overall aggregation through ISL-based satellites, its
arriving order becomes extremely complicated and causes an
asynchronous weight aggregation in PS. This asynchronous
aggregation may make final aggregated DP-CDM unstable,
lowering the final detection performance in the end.
Finally, the performance of STINIDF relies heavily on STI
dataset, a labeled dataset collected in a designated simulation
scenario. In real-world STIN scenarios, traffic collectors generally obtain massive unlabeled instances, unable to be applied
in NIDS training. In this case, several unsupervised strategies
like clustering and association are recommended to analyze
data characteristics, behavior pattern, and feature distribution.
Based on these information, a rule-based labeling mechanism
can be designed to label the malicious and benign ones as the
ground truth for the following supervised strategies.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, a satellite terrestrial integrated (STI) traffic
dataset is collected to simulate the skewed data distribution
in STIN, whereas a satellite terrestrial integrated network
intrusion detection framework (STINIDF) is proposed to detect
malicious traffic over this dataset. Based on federated learning
with diffusion privacy, STINIDF first aggregates a conditional
diffusion model that contains the global traffic information
of STIN based on the local ground station and the edge
router nodes. Then, it utilizes this model to aid the training process of the detection model in each node through
data augmentation. The implemented experiments illustrate
that STINIDF possesses 96.63% accuracy, 96.71% precision,
96.54% recall, and 96.66% F1 score in the designed non-IID
STIN node scenario, which outperforms other state-of-the-art
methods. With a privacy budget that equals 1, STINIDF can
get 96.14% accuracy and generate instances with 17.88 FID,
which also outperforms other synthetic data-assisted methods.
In the future, two aspects are taken into consideration. First
is the achievement of the dynamic topology for the satellite
constellation, mentioned in the limitation section. Second is
to enable NIDS with the capability on detecting L7-based
DoS/DDoS. Compared with the ones based on the network
layer, L7-based DoS/DDoS can falsify legitimate requests
under the protocols like HTTP and HTTPS, causing a huger
damage on target applications and servers with a small scale.
Designing a detection strategy to prevent them is able to
further improve the security of STIN.

1753

A PPENDIX
Algorithm 2 locally update DP-CDM in edge routers, local
GSs, and PS with E/E 0 /E 00 batch epochs. Based on Equation (9), line 6 defines a conditional loss function L given
label y. Line 8 clips the gradient and line 10 adds the noise
for (, δ)-DP utilization, corresponding to Equation (3).
Algorithm 2 DP-CDM Local Update Algorithm
Input: Local data distribution p(x, y); DP-CDM zw ; batch size
B; batch epoch E/E 0 /E 00 ; time step N; Clip C; DP scale σ;
1: for e = 1 : E/E 0 /E 00 do
B
2:
{x, y}b=1
∼ p(x, y)
f unc non f
B
B
3:
{x , x
, y}b=1
← {x, y}b=1
// Functional features
division
4:
for every {xnon f,(b) , y(b) } do
5:
n ∼ Uniform({1,
N}), z ∼ N
√ (0, I)
√. . . ,non
f,(b)
α
¯
x
+
1 − α¯n z, n, y(b) )||2
6:
L(b)
=
||z
−
z
(
w
n
w
(b)
(b)
7:
g = dLw /dw
g(b) = g(b) / max(1, ||g(b) ||2 /C) // Clip gradient
8:
9:
end for
P
10:
e
g = ( B g(b) + N (0, σ2C 2 I))/B // Add noise
11:
w = w − ηwe
g // Model update
12: end for
Algorithm 3 uses DP-CDM to generates traffic based on
local data p(x, y) in PS. In line 5 ∼ 9, it reverses Gaussian
f
vector xnon
back to x0non f for non-functional feature generation
N
like a N-step DM-based backward process. Line 8 is based
on Equation (8) while zw requires label y for conditional
generation.
Algorithm 3 DP-CDM Generation Algorithm
Input: Local data distribution p(x, y); DP-CDM zw ; generation
amount |D0 |; time step N;
1: Create newList
2: for m = 1 : |D0 | do
3:
{x, y} ∼ p(x, y)
4:
{x f unc , xnon f , y} ← {x, y} // Functional features division
f
5:
xnon
∼ N (0, I)
N
6:
for n = N : 1 do
7:
z ∼ N (0, I) if n > 1, else z = 0
non f
n
8:
xn−1
= √1αn (xnnon f − √1−α
z (xnon f , n, y)) + βn z
1−α¯n w n
9:
end for
10:
x̄ = x f unc ⊕ x0non f , ȳ = y
11:
newList.append( x̄, ȳ)
12: end for
13: Return newList

R EFERENCES
[1] X. Zhu and C. Jiang, “Integrated satellite-terrestrial networks toward
6G: Architectures, applications, and challenges,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 437–461, Jan. 2022.
[2] K. Li, H. Zhou, Z. Tu, W. Wang, and H. Zhang, “Distributed network
intrusion detection system in satellite-terrestrial integrated networks
using federated learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 214852–214865,
2020.

1754

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[3] A. T. Azar, E. Shehab, A. M. Mattar, I. A. Hameed, and S. A. Elsaid,
“Deep learning based hybrid intrusion detection systems to protect
satellite networks,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage., vol. 31, no. 4, p. 82, Oct.
2023.
[4] T. Sowmya and E. A. Mary Anita, “A comprehensive review of AI
based intrusion detection system,” Meas., Sensors, vol. 28, Aug. 2023,
Art. no. 100827.
[5] U. S. Musa, M. Chhabra, A. Ali, and M. Kaur, “Intrusion detection
system using machine learning techniques: A review,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Smart Electron. Commun. (ICOSEC), Sep. 2020, pp. 149–155.
[6] L. Ashiku and C. Dagli, “Network intrusion detection system using deep
learning,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 185, no. 1, pp. 239–247, 2021.
[7] H. Wang et al., “Attack of the tails: Yes, you really can backdoor
federated learning,” in Proc. NIPS, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Dec. 2020,
pp. 16070–16084.
[8] C. Zhang, Y. Xie, H. Bai, B. Yu, W. Li, and Y. Gao, “A survey on
federated learning,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 216, Jan. 2021, Art. no.
106775.
[9] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, A. Singh
and J. Zhu. Eds., Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[10] H. Zhu, J. Xu, S. Liu, and Y. Jin, “Federated learning on non-IID data:
A survey,” Neurocomputing, vol. 465, pp. 371–390, Nov. 2021.
[11] N. Yoshida, T. Nishio, M. Morikura, K. Yamamoto, and R. Yonetani,
“Hybrid-FL for wireless networks: Cooperative learning mechanism
using non-IID data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun.
2020, pp. 1–7.
[12] Z. Li, J. Shao, Y. Mao, J. H. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Federated learning
with GAN-based data synthesis for non-IID clients,” in Proc. Int.
Workshop Trustworthy Federated Learn., Jan. 2022, pp. 17–32.
[13] K. Wei et al., “Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms
and performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15,
pp. 3454–3469, 2020.
[14] Z. Ji, Z. C. Lipton, and C. Elkan, “Differential privacy and machine
learning: A survey and review,” 2014, arXiv:1412.7584.
[15] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33. Vancouver, BC, Canada: Curran Associates,
2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[16] A. Varga, “OMNeT++,” in Modeling and Tools for Network Simulation.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2010, pp. 35–59.
[17] L. Mészáros, A. Varga, and M. Kirsche, “INET framework,” in Recent
Advances in Network Simulation. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan.
2019, pp. 55–106.
[18] X.-C. Li and D.-C. Zhan, “FedRS: Federated learning with
restricted softmax for label distribution non-IID data,” in Proc. 27th
ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
pp. 995–1005.
[19] J. Wang, Q. Liu, H. Liang, G. Joshi, and V. H. Poor, “Tackling the objective inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization,” in
Proc. NIPS, 2020, pp. 7611–7623.
[20] X. Mu et al., “FedProc: Prototypical contrastive federated learning on
non-IID data,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 143, pp. 93–104, Jun.
2023.
[21] L. Zhang, B. Shen, A. Barnawi, S. Xi, N. Kumar, and Y. Wu,
“FedDPGAN: Federated differentially private generative adversarial networks framework for the detection of COVID-19 pneumonia,” Inf. Syst.
Frontiers, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1403–1415, Dec. 2021.
[22] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020.
[23] N. Sitouah, F. Merazka, and A. Hedjazi, “Deep learning approach
for interruption attacks detection in LEO satellite networks,” 2022,
arXiv:2301.03998.
[24] N. Moustafa et al., “DFSat: Deep federated learning for identifying cyber
threats in IoT-based satellite networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
early access, Oct. 20, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TII.2022.3214652. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9925589
[25] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
“TON IoT telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and
IIoT for data-driven intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 165130–165150, 2020.
[26] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.

[27] D. R. Jeske and A. Sampath, “Signal-to-interference-plus-noise
ratio estimation for wireless communication systems: Methods and
analysis,” Nav. Res. Logistics (NRL), vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 720–740,
Aug. 2004.
[28] P. M. S. Sánchez et al., “Studying the robustness of anti-adversarial federated learning models detecting cyberattacks in IoT spectrum sensors,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 573–584,
2024, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3204535.
[29] W. Huang, T. Tiropanis, and G. Konstantinidis, “Federated learningbased IoT intrusion detection on non-IID data,” in Internet
of Things, A. González-Vidal, A. M. Abdelgawad, E. Sabir,
S. Ziegler, and L. Ladid, Eds., Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
pp. 326–337.
[30] Y. Zhang and Q. Liu, “On IoT intrusion detection based
on data augmentation for enhancing learning on unbalanced
samples,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 133, pp. 213–227,
Aug. 2022.
[31] M. Al-Hawawreh and M. S. Hossain, “Federated learning-assisted
distributed intrusion detection using mesh satellite nets for autonomous
vehicle protection,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 854–862, Feb. 2024.
[32] R. Uddin and S. A. P. Kumar, “SDN-based federated learning approach
for satellite-IoT framework to enhance data security and privacy in space
communication,” IEEE J. Radio Freq. Identificat., vol. 7, pp. 424–440,
2023.
[33] W. Yao, H. Zhao, and H. Shi, “Privacy-preserving collaborative intrusion
detection in edge of Internet of Things: A robust and efficient deep
generative learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 9,
pp. 15704–15722, May 2024.
[34] L. Bottou, “Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient
descent,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Comput. Statist., Paris, France, 2010,
pp. 177–186.
[35] M. Abadi et al., “Deep learning with differential privacy,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2016,
pp. 308–318.
[36] Pcap Recording. Accessed: Jun. 26, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://
inet.omnetpp.org/docs/showcases/general/pcaprecording/doc/index.html
[37] M. Tsoukalos, “Using tshark to watch and inspect network traffic,” Linux
J., vol. 2015, no. 254, p. 1, 2015.
[38] J. He et al., “Model-agnostic generation-enhanced technology for fewshot intrusion detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 3181–3204,
Feb. 2024.
[39] G. Du, X. Cao, J. Liang, X. Chen, and Y. Zhan, “Medical image
segmentation based on U-Net: A review,” J. Imag. Sci. Technol., vol. 64,
no. 2, Mar. 2020, Art. no. 020508.
[40] X. Zhou, X. Liu, C. Wang, D. Zhai, J. Jiang, and X. Ji, “Learning with
noisy labels via sparse regularization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 72–81.
[41] M. de Goede, B. Cox, and J. Decouchant, “Training diffusion models
with federated learning,” 2024, arXiv:2406.12575.
[42] V. S. Parekh et al., “Cross-domain federated learning in medical
imaging,” 2021, arXiv:2112.10001.
[43] S. Ambesange, B. Annappa, and S. G. Koolagudi, “Simulating
federated transfer learning for lung segmentation using modified UNet model,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 218, pp. 1485–1496,
Jan. 2023.
[44] A. Shamir, “How to share a secret,” Commun. ACM, vol. 22, no. 11,
pp. 612–613, Nov. 1979.
[45] L. Van der Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using
t-SNE,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605,
Jan. 2008.
[46] H. Abdi and L. J. Williams, “Principal component analysis,” WIREs
Comput. Statistic, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 433–459, Jul./Aug. 2010.
[47] Y. Yu, W. Zhang, and Y. Deng, “Frechet inception distance (FID)
for evaluating GANs,” Beijing Graduate School, China Univ. Mining
Technol., Beijing, China, 2021, vol. 3.
[48] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
“Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. Mach.
Learn. Syst., vol. 2, 2020, pp. 429–450.
[49] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, Oct.
2001.
[50] M. Riedmiller and A. Lernen, “Multi layer perceptron,” Mach. Learn.
Lab Special Lect., Univ. Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany, 2014,
vol. 24.