IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

2514512

A Time Series Self-Supervised Contrastive
Pretraining Method With Data Augmentation Using
Discrepancy of Reconstruction Information Loss
Zhen Zhang , Yongming Han , Member, IEEE, Bo Ma , and Zhiqiang Geng
Abstract— Self-supervised pretraining has shown considerable
advantages in multiple time series tasks. A widely used class of
methods is based on contrastive learning and a key problem
is how to construct augmented samples. At present, explicit
augmentation approaches are the mainstream for constructing
positive pairs with similar features. However, explicitly augmented samples may deviate from the original data space and
have aliasing features. Therefore, this article designs an end-toend time series self-supervised contrastive pretraining network
with implicit data augmentation using discrepancy of reconstruction information loss (CLR-DRL). Specifically, augmented
positive pairs with discrepancies and inherent features of the
original series can be generated automatically using different
autoencoders (AE) due to different information loss in their
hidden spaces. Combined with the joint constraint, inherent features can be extracted and the aliasing impact existing in explicit
augmented approaches could be mitigated. Moreover, theoretical
analysis is provided using gradient flow calculation, which can
also be confirmed by experiment analysis. Experimentally, the
CLR-DRL achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance compared to current baselines on in- and cross-domain settings
on nine real-world benchmarks for both time series anomaly
detection (AD) and classification tasks. An actual pipeline
transportation status monitoring case is provided to verify the
effectiveness.
Index Terms— Autoencoder (AE), data augmentation, industrial process, self-supervised learning (SSL), time series.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

IME series are widely existed in real-world scenarios,
including human activity recognition (HAR) [1], industrial anomaly detection (AD) [2], and energy consumption
prediction [3]. The key to successfully handling these tasks
is to achieve effective modeling of time series and to identify
inherent features implicit in data. In recent years, research
on achieving high-precision deep learning-based time series
Received 14 August 2024; revised 21 November 2024; accepted 2 December
2024. Date of publication 5 March 2025; date of current version 20 March
2025. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62373035 and Grant 62203038. The Associate Editor
coordinating the review process was Dr. Ferdinanda Ponci. (Corresponding
authors: Yongming Han; Zhiqiang Geng.)
Zhen Zhang, Yongming Han, and Zhiqiang Geng are with the College
of Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing 100029, China, and also with the Engineering Research
Center of Intelligent Process System Engineering (PSE), Ministry of Education of China, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: zhang_zhen@buct.edu.cn;
hanym@mail.buct.edu.cn; gengzhiqiang@mail.buct.edu.cn).
Bo Ma is with the College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering,
Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail:
mabo@mail.buct.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3548177

modeling using massive amounts of data with labels has
shown a promising progress [4]. However, in a real-world
industrial scenario, there are some problems using the above
approach: 1) the data for a new industrial scenario is scarce and
2) labeling a large number of time series is difficult, and only
a few samples in real-world scenarios have been labeled [5].
To solve the problem of scarcity of labeled samples,
researchers introduced the self-supervised learning (SSL) [6],
which extracts inherent representations in the data through
training on an upstream task without labeling samples, and
uses them for target tasks. In recent years, self-supervised
pretraining of time series using the contrastive learning framework with data augmentation has gained widespread attention
and achieved a promising progress. The basic principle is
that the sample representation is obtained through the contrastive constraint after generating two different augmented
samples. Chen et al. [7] proposed a simple contrastive learning
framework for visual representation (SimCLR), for the first
time showing that the combination of data augmentations
played a key role in representations by contrastive learning.
Subsequently, Ian Tang et al. [8] introduced the SimCLR
into the time series field and Eldele et al. [9] innovated the
framework through cross-view forecasting tasks. In addition,
the researchers further extended the modeling process by
fusing the frequency domain information. Zhang et al. [6]
designed a time–frequency consistency (TF-C) module and
data augmentation approaches for frequency domain data to
extract the representation of time series by pulling closer
the time- and frequency-domain representations of the hidden
space.
Although the above methods have achieved good performance in extracting time series representations, the data
augmentation approaches they used are all explicit approaches,
such as random flipping, jittering, and scaling, which are also
widely used in the image processing field. However, different
from discrete image data, which tends to contain more explicit
and complete information, continuous time series data tends to
contain more complex information. For example, as shown in
Fig. 1(a), a sample labeled cat can still be considered a cat after
being flipped. But for the time series shown in Fig. 1(b), after
random flipping, a rising sample becomes a falling sample,
which usually indicates two completely opposite working conditions in an actual industrial process. Therefore, augmenting
samples through explicit augmentation approaches may not
be appropriate in time series tasks. Specifically, the possible

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2514512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1.
Augmented samples by flipping operation of an (a) image and
(b) industrial time series.

category aliasing of augmented samples has a large impact on
industrial time-series classification and AD tasks.
In addition to the contrastive learning, the autoencoder (AE)
is also an effective SSL method, which maps the times series
to a hidden space to generate the effective representation. The
training process of the AE is to minimize the error between the
reconstructed and input time series. In this process, although
there is information loss in the extracted representation, the
reconstructed series can still be close to the original series [10].
Moreover, for different AEs, different reconstructed series
can be obtained although the optimization objective is the
same, which suggests that the representation obtained by
the AE contains both the inherent feature and discrepant
information. Therefore, it is natural to use the property of the
AE that there is information loss in the reconstruction process
to automatically generate augmentation samples required for
contrastive learning.
Inspired by the above insights, this article incorporates the
properties of the AE in the contrastive learning and proposes
a time series self-supervised contrastive pretraining method
with data augmentation using discrepancy of reconstruction
information loss (CLR-DRL). Specifically, the CLR-DRL utilizes the discrepancies of the information loss in the hidden
space of different AEs to obtain reconstructed series with
discrepancies, and considers them as augmented samples
needed for contrastive learning. Technically, the CLR-DRL
does not use explicit augmentation technologies, but directly
uses different AEs to obtain implicit augmented samples. Since
both augmented samples come from the reconstruction process
of the time series, the common features contained in the two
augmented samples can be regarded as inherent representations. The CLR-DRL uses the contrastive loss to constrain
the representations extracted from the two augmented samples
to obtain the inherent representation of time series. Benefiting from the above design, the CLR-DRL can mitigate the
categories aliasing problem caused by explicit augmentation
approaches and obtain the inherent representation, making it
achieving well performances in two target tasks with time
series classification and AD.
Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows.
1) Inspired by the discrepancies of the information loss in
the reconstruction process of different AEs, a novel time
series self-supervised contrastive pretraining method is
proposed, which uses carefully designed AEs to generate

explicit augmented samples and extracts inherent representation.
2) Technically, the CLR-DRL is a simple but effective
method, which generates samples and extracts inherent representations by a joint constraint covering the
reconstructed and contrastive loss. Theoretically, the
effectiveness of the CL-DRL is verified by gradient flow
calculation of the joint constraint.
3) Experimentally, the CLR-DRL achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance in two typical time series tasks
with classification and AD, covering multiple domains
of experimental settings. And extensive analysis experiments verify the proposed method.
Section II reviews the related work. Section III introduces
the proposed CLR-DRL method. Section IV analyzes and
discusses the performance of the CLR-DRL through extensive
experiments. Section V verifies the application effect of the
CLR-DRL using an actual industrial case. Section VI draws
the conclusion of this article.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Self-Supervised Contrastive Pretraining for Time Series
Currently, self-supervised pretraining has achieved great
success in the fields of computer vision [11] and natural
language processing [12]. Moreover, researchers have begun
to study self-supervised pretraining methods for time series.
Contrastive learning-based methods have made promising
progress, which realizes time series representation by classifying positive and negative samples, and one of the keys is
how to construct high-quality positive and negative pairs [6].
Franceschi et al. [13] considered subseries close or not close
to the reference subseries as positive and negative samples,
and used triplet loss for training to extract the representation.
Yue et al. [14] called the above idea subseries consistency,
and believed that it would cause the augmented samples to
be susceptible to the “level shifts,” which could result in
false positive pairs. To solve this problem, they proposed
the time series to vector method (TS2Vec), which utilized
context consistency to construct positive samples, arguing that
only subseries with identical timestamps can be considered as
positive pairs.
Different from the above method of using subseries to
achieve negative sampling, inspired by the SimCLR [7],
Ian Tang et al. [8] regarded the samples augmented by different explicit techniques in the entire series as positive
samples, and other time series in a small batch as negative
samples. They designed eight explicit time series augmented
approaches, including random noise addition, scaling, and
inverting. Recently, under the framework of the SimCLR,
many methods with good performance have been proposed.
Eldele et al. [9] designed a temporal and contextual contrastive
module to implement time series modeling (TS-TCC) through
cross-view prediction tasks, and achieved well performance in
the time series classification and cross-domain transfer tasks.
Furthermore, combining the frequency domain information of
the time series, Yang and Hong [15] proposed the bilinear
temporal–spectral fusion method (BTSF), which generated

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD

instance-level positive samples in the time domain by random
dropout and selected any one other series as a negative
sample. And when modeling, the time- and frequency-domain
features of the series were extracted through two encoders,
and fused through a carefully designed fusion algorithm.
Similarly, Woo et al. [16] also performed data augmentation in the time domain using explicit approaches, and then
modeled the series by contrastive learning of disentangled
seasonal-trend representations in time- and frequency-domain
[contrastive learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations (CoST)]. However, although the BTSF and the CoST
incorporate frequency domain information in the modeling
process, their data augmentation technologies are still oriented
to time domain representation.
In order to directly utilize frequency domain information,
Zhang et al. [6] proposed the TF-C method, which directly
implemented data augmentation on the frequency domain, and
designed three types of frequency domain augmentation techniques by artificially adding frequency domain perturbations.
And the TF-C considered that the hidden representations in the
time and frequency domain are close, so as to achieve a well
representation. However, for the above contrastive learning
methods, both time- and frequency-domain augmentations are
all implemented by explicit approaches, making the augmented
samples potentially category aliasing, which will lead to the
representation that is, difficult to characterize the inherent
features of the series.
B. Data Augmentation for Time Series
In current self-supervised contrastive pretraining methods,
explicit augmentation methods are usually used to obtain
the required augmented samples. For continuous time series
data, explicit augmentation methods usually include jittering,
scaling, inverting, reversing, shuffling, scrambling, and warping [17]. These methods are often randomly applied in time
series. In addition to explicit methods, some works used neural
network methods to implicitly implement data augmentation [18]. Shi et al. [19] used a temporal generative adversarial
network (GAN) with a gradient penalty to generate samples
to solve the data imbalance problem. Li et al. [20] proposed a
bidirectional variational AE equipped with diffusion, denoise,
and disentanglement for time series augmentation.
Compared with explicit augmentation methods, the method
using neural networks for data augmentation can obtain richer
sample types [18], and the samples are more closely related to
the original sample due to the presence of a training process.
Meanwhile, compared to the GAN and the diffusion methods
that are more focused on generating new samples [21], the
reconstructed series obtained by the compression and reconstruction of the AE will be more closely related to the original
time series.
Based on the above review, the CLR-DLR naturally utilizes
AEs to generate augmented samples required for contrastive
learning. Specifically, since the contrastive learning method
requires pairs of augmented series, the CLR-DRL uses two
different AEs to generate the required samples. Meanwhile,
since there are discrepancies in the samples reconstructed by
different AEs, the common feature contained in two aug-

2514512

mented samples can be regarded as the inherent feature of the
original series, which can be well extracted and characterized
under the constraints of the contrastive loss.
III. M ETHOD
A. Problem Formulation
Refer to the definition of transfer learning [22] to formulate the problem. Given a source-domain dataset D Source =
{xiSource |i = 1, 2, . . . , U } and a target-domain dataset D Target =
Target
, yi )|i = 1, 2, . . . , V }, D Source and D Target consists of
{(xi
unlabeled and labeled time series, respectively. And for time
series x ∈ RC×T in D Source and D Target , C and T refer to the
dimension and length of the time series, respectively. The label
y in D Target is different according to target tasks. Specifically,
for the two application scenarios of classification and AD in
this article, y can be defined as y ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Y }, where
Y represents the number of categories in the classification
scenario, and Y is 1 in the AD scenario, in which Y = 1 is
marked as an anomaly.
The goal of self-supervised pretraining is that fine-tuning
parameters of the model Fpre (·, 2) on D Target containing V
samples to obtain the model Ftune (·, 8), where Fpre (·, 2) is the
pretrained model obtained on D Source containing U samples,
Target
Target
and then obtaining the representation z i
= Ftune (xi
, 8)
used for the target task, where V ≪ U . Among the parameters,
2 and 8 are the parameters obtained through pretraining and
fine-tuning, respectively. And for the model F(·), the process
of 2 → 8 is fine-tuning.
B. Overall Architecture
The overall architecture of the CLR-DRL is shown in
Fig. 2. First, the CLR-DRL utilizes two different AEs to
generate two augmented series of the input series, and both
of which could contain the inherent feature of the input
series while differing under the reconstructed constraint. Then,
the CLR-DRL performs feature extraction on two augmented
samples through a shared weight feature extraction module.
A joint constraint covering reconstruction and contrastive
loss is imposed on the augmented samples and affine results
of the two features, which leads the sample augmentation
process and the representation extraction process to promote
each other and makes the extracted representation can reflect
the inherent feature of the input series. Specifically, two
AEs and the feature extraction module of the CLR-DRL are
carefully designed and implemented based on a graph neural
network (GNN), a fully connected neural network (FNN), and
a three-layer convolutional residual network (ResNet), which
are shown in Fig. 2(c)–(e), respectively. The above process is
self-supervised contrastive pretraining of the CLR-DRL and is
performed in the source domain as shown in Fig. 2(a). After
that, the pretrained model will be fine-tuned with the target
domain data to conduct target tasks. During the fine-tuning
process as shown in Fig. 2(b), time series is input into the
pretrained CRL-DRL to extract the representation, which is
then fed into the target model to realize the target task.
C. Data Augmentation
Given a time series x, the contrastive learning method first
generates two augmented samples, xs and xw , through the

2514512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

transmission so that it can only be propagated forward. Each
element of A can be calculated by
Ai, j = 1i≤ j

(2)

where 1i≤ j is an indicator function that equals to 1 when
i ≤ j, and otherwise 0. Then, for each layer of the strong AE,
the temporal feature is modeled through the message-passing
mechanism of the GNN. And each layer is connected by
the residual connection. For the nodes of each layer, the
calculation process is as follows:


X
A j,i · H jn−1  + Hin−1
Hin = ReLUW1n · Hin−1 + W2n ·
j∈N (i)

(3)
Fig. 2. Overall architecture of the CLR-DRL. (a) Contrastive pretraining
process of the CLR-DRL on the source domain. (b) Fine-tuning process of
the CLR-DRL on the target domain. (c) Strong AE. (d) Weak AE. (e) Feature
extraction module.

augmentation approach. Then, in a small batch, contrastive
learning attempts to maximize the similarity between xs and
xw from the same sample, while minimizing the similarity
between them and other samples. Therefore, two suitable augmentation samples play an important role in the performance
of contrastive learning.
The properties of the AE in terms of the information loss
and forcing the reconstructed series to tend toward the input
series provide ideas for data augmentation. Therefore, two
different AEs are used to obtain the augmented samples xs
and xw in the CLR-DRL. Specifically, the input time series
are reconstructed by a strong and a weak AE with different
architectures to generate strong and weak augmented samples.
In particular, a simple FNN is used as the weak AE, while a
GNN is utilized to carefully design a strong AE that is, more
suitable for temporal information. Following the convention in
contrastive learning, the “strong” and “weak” are only used to
distinguish between two enhancement approaches and do not
indicate the reconstruction performance of the AE itself.
1) Weak AE: The weak AE is a simple three-layer FNN as
shown in Fig. 2(d) which contains an input layer, an output
layer, and a hidden layer. Given a time series x ∈ RC×T ,
it is first mapped to a space with Dw dimension (Dw ≪ T )
and then reconstructed to the original space. In the hidden
layer, it is transformed nonlinearly using a linear rectification
function ReLU(·). So, the weak sample xw can be calculated
by
xw = ReLU(x · Ww1 ) · Ww2

(1)

where Ww1 ∈ RT ×Dw and Ww2 ∈ R Dw ×T are the connection
weight matrices between the input layer and the hidden layer,
and the hidden layer and the output layer, respectively.
2) Strong AE: The strong AE is implemented by a unidirectional GNN as shown in Fig. 2(c). Referring to the forward
propagation approach of time series information, a forwardconnected graph structure is constructed. Specifically, the
graph structure matrix A ∈ RT ×T is fixed as an upper
triangular matrix to constrain the direction of information

where W1 , W2 , and Hin denote the weight matrices and the
output of the node in the GNN layer, and j ∈ N (i) denotes
the neighbor nodes of the node i. Specifically, H 0 ∈ RC×T
is the input time series x and Hi0 ∈ RC×1 is the vector of
the node i. The dimension of the weight matrices W10 and
W20 is R Ds ×C , so the first layer will project the series to the
space R Ds ×T and the reminding layers encode in this space.
Therefore, when n > 1, W1n , and W2n belong to R Ds ×Ds and
H n belongs to R Ds ×T .
After n-layer stacking, the strong sample xs can be obtained
by an affine transformation of the encoded output
xs = Ws1 · H n

(4)

where Ws1 ∈ RC×Ds denotes the parameter matrix of the strong
AE.
The above process of augmenting samples can be formulated by
xs = AEs (x, θ As ),

xw = AEw (x, θ Aw )

(5)

where AEs (·) and AEw (·) denote the strong and weak AE,
respectively. θ As and θ Aw are the parameters of them. The L2
loss is imposed between the augmented samples and the input
time series to achieve the training of the AEs. Specifically, for
a time series x, the loss function of the sample augmentation
is
1
(6)
LossA = (∥xs − x∥2 + ∥xw − x∥2 )
T
where ∥·∥ denotes the norm.
D. Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning
With the discrepancy in information loss between different
AEs, the strong and weak samples are differentiated from
each other while containing the shared (inherent) feature. The
CLR-DRL extracts the inherent representation of the time
series by capturing the shared features of the augmentation
samples through self-supervised comparative learning.
The features of the two augmented samples are extracted by
a ResNet with shared weights as the representations, which is
calculated by
z ∗ = F(x∗ , θ F )

(7)

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD

where F(·) is the representation extraction operation of the
ResNet and θ F denotes the shared parameters. The z ∗ ∈
R Dr ×1 = {z s , z w } is the representation vector of the samples
x∗ = {xs , xw } and Dr denotes the dimension of z ∗ . For the
F(·), the calculation of every residual block can be calculated
by

(8)
z ∗n = MaxPool BN Conv z ∗n−1 + z ∗n−1
where MaxPool(·), BN(·), and Conv(·) denote the max pooling operation, batch normalization operation, and convolution
operation, respectively. And when n = 1, z ∗0 = x∗ . The
representation z ∗ is obtained by flattening the z ∗n . Then, the
representations z s and z w are concatenated to obtain the
representation z of the input time series. For a sample x
z = concat(z s , z w )
= [F(AEs (x, θ As ), θ F ); F(AEw (x, θ Aw ), θ F )]

(9)

where concat(·) denote the concatenation function.
Furthermore, the representation z ∗ is projected into the
contrastive loss space via a shared-weight projection head.
Current research has shown that it is more beneficial to
perform contrastive loss calculations in this space [7]. This
calculation can be formulated by
h ∗ = G(z ∗ , θG ) = Wg2 · ReLU(BN(Wg1 · z ∗ ))

(10)

where h ∗ is the projection of z ∗ , θG is the shared parameters
of the projection head, and Wg1 and Wg2 are the weight
matrices of two linear transformations. In order to maximize
the similarity of positive pairs and minimize the similarity
of negative pairs, the normalized temperature-scaled crossentropy loss (NT-Xent) [7] is used as the contrastive loss
constrain. Specifically, the loss function of the sample xi in a
small batch can be defined as
!
 

exp S h is , h iw /τ
i
i
 
LossC h s , h w = − log P
i
i
j
h ∗ ∈D batch 1i̸= j exp S h s , h w /τ
(11)
where S(·) and 1 denote the cosine similarity and the indicator
function, respectively. h is and h iw are the augmented samples of
j
the sample xi , and the h ∗ represents other augmented samples
in a small batch. And τ is a temporal parameter.
In summary, the objective function of the CLR-DRL is
shown in the following equation:
L = LossA + LossC.

(12)

E. Effectiveness of the CLR-DRL
The pretraining process includes the sample augmentation
and self-supervised contrastive learning processes. And the
two processes are combined for simultaneous training, making
the CLR-DRL as an end-to-end method, which is beneficial in
fully utilizing the AE to generate augmentation samples while
learning the inherent representation of the time series. In order
to illustrate the effectiveness of the CLR-DRL in extracting the
inherent representation of the input time series, it is analyzed
from the deduction of the gradient flow.

2514512

First, the objective function of the CLR-DRL is shown
in (12). Then, based on the current work [23], the contrast
loss constraint in (11) can be simplified as
X


LossCsimple (xi ) = −S h is , h iw +
S h i∗ , h i∗ .
(13)
j

h ∗ ∈D batch

For the two terms contained in (13), there is only a
difference in sign. The negative term means maximizing the
similarity within positive pairs, and the positive term means
minimizing the similarity within negative pairs. Therefore,
here only the gradient of the negative term is calculated and
analyzed, and the gradient of the positive term can be obtained
by a similar approach. Ignoring the positive term in (13),
letting LossC = LossCsimple and substituting it into (12), the
gradients of L with respect to the parameters θG , θ F , θ As , and
θ Aw can be calculated by the chain rule
∂LossC ∂ S ∂h s
∂LossC ∂ S ∂h w
∂L
=
+
∂θG
∂ S ∂h s ∂θG
∂ S ∂h w ∂θG
∂LossC ∂h s
∂LossC ∂h w
=−
hw
hs
−
∂S
∂θG
∂S
∂θ

 G
∂LossC
∂h s
∂h w
=−
hw
+ hs
(14)
∂S
∂θG
∂θG
∂LossC ∂ S ∂h s ∂z s
∂LossC ∂ S ∂h w ∂z w
∂L
=
+
∂θ F
∂ S ∂h s ∂z s ∂θ F
∂ S ∂h w ∂z w ∂θ F
∂LossC ∂h s ∂z s
∂LossC ∂h w ∂z w
=−
hw
hs
−
∂S
∂z s ∂θ F
∂S
∂z w ∂θ F


∂LossC
∂h s ∂z s
∂h w ∂z w
=−
hw
+ hs
(15)
∂S
∂z s ∂θ F
∂z w ∂θ F
∂L
∂LossC ∂ S ∂h s ∂z s ∂ xs
∂LossA ∂ xs
=
+
∂θ As
∂ S ∂h s ∂z s ∂ xs ∂θ As
∂ xs ∂θ As
∂LossC ∂h s ∂z s ∂ xs
∂LossA ∂ xs
=−
hw
+
∂S
∂z s ∂ xs ∂θ As
∂ xs ∂θ As


∂ xs
∂LossC ∂h s ∂z s
xs − x
= −
hw +
(16)
∂ S ∂z s ∂ xs
T ∥xs − x∥2 ∂θ As
∂L
∂LossC ∂ S ∂h w ∂z w ∂ xw
∂LossA ∂ xw
=
+
∂θ Aw
∂ S ∂h w ∂z w ∂ xw ∂θ Aw
∂ xw ∂θ Aw
∂LossC ∂h w ∂z w ∂ xw
∂LossA ∂ xw
hs
+
=−
∂S
∂z w ∂ xw ∂θ Aw
∂ xw ∂θ Aw


∂LossC ∂h w ∂z w
xw − x
∂ xw
= −
hs +
.
∂ S ∂z w ∂ xw
T ∥xw − x∥2 ∂θ Aw
(17)
From (14) and (15), the gradient of the shared parameters
θG and θ F includes the gradient of two branches of strong
and weak augmented samples. Each of them has a strong
connection with the projection term h ∗ of the other augmented
sample, since h ∗ serves as the weight coefficient of the other
term multiplied directly on the gradient. Therefore, according
to the purpose of pulling similar samples closer and the
updating process of the shared parameter θ F , the representation
vector z ∗ of the augmented samples x∗ extracted by F(x∗ , θ F )
gradually converges to their common representation, i.e., to the
inherent representation of the input time series.
Furthermore, from (16) and (17), it is known that in the endto-end training process, in addition to the constraints of the

2514512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

AE reconstruction process, the contrast loss term LossC will
impose an additional constraint on the augmentation process.
With this constraint, an augmented sample will be affected
by the projection term of the representation vector of the
other sample, since h ∗ also serves as the weight coefficient of
the gradient term. This will cause the common representation
between the two augmented samples to gradually increase with
the training process, while gradually reducing the differential
representation between the two samples.
The above analysis is also proven in this Section on ablation
study and representation analysis using alignment and uniformity in Sections IV-F and IV-G, that is, the representation
of the positive pair shows well alignment and uniformity.
Therefore, it is proved that the CLR-DRL can achieve good
extraction of the inherent representation of the input time
series.
F. Working on Target Tasks
After pretraining, all parameters 2 = {θ As , θ Aw , θ F , θG } can
be obtained. Among them, θG is only used to project the
representation z ∗ into the contrastive loss space. Therefore,
the parameters of the pretrained model used to extract the
representation vector are 2 = {θ As , θ Aw , θ F }. Then, combined
with the target task, the obtained pretrained model and the
target model are combined into a complete model, which
is fine-tuned on the target domain to obtain the parameters
8 = {φ As , φ Aw , φ F } as well as the parameter φT of the target
task model Ftarget . Therefore, given the input time series x, the
prediction result ŷ of the target task is
ŷ = Ftarget (z, φT ) = Ftarget (Ftune (x, 8), φT ).

(18)

IV. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS ON B ENCHMARKS
In order to fully evaluate the CLR-DRL, experiments are
conducted on two typical time series tasks: classification and
AD. In an actual industrial, the number of labeled samples
required for both tasks is often scarce. Furthermore, these two
tasks are suitable choices in terms of validating the motivation
of the proposed method and validating its improvement in
the class aliasing problem of augmented samples. For each
task, experiments are performed in both in- and cross-domain
settings, and results are reported in detail.
A. Benchmarks
The CLR-DRL is validated on nine real-world datasets of
two typical time series tasks and the details are shown in
Table I. Among them, the SleepEEG, the HAR, and the ECG
are only used as pretraining datasets and are not segmented.
The remaining datasets are split into training, validation,
and test sets following the current protocol. Specifically, for
classification datasets, the settings remained consistent with
the TF-C [6]. For the AD datasets, the settings of the server
machine dataset (SMD) are consistent with the literature [24].
The datasets [25] mars science laboratory (MSL) and soil
moisture active passive (SMAP) are 27 and 55 channels of
telemetry and command data of the two spacecraft, respectively, in which only telemetry dimension data are considered,
that is, using them as univariate AD datasets.

B. Baselines
The CLR-DRL is compared with eight competitive pretraining methods, including six contrastive pretraining methods
including the TF-C [6], the CoST [16], the TS2Vec [14],
the Mixing-up [26], the TS-TCC [9], and the TS-TAC [27],
and two mask pretraining methods the TimeMAE [28] and
the SimMTM [29]. Mask pretraining is another widely used
method, so here two new mask pretraining method is considered for comparison. Among the eight methods, the TF-C is
the previous SOTA contrastive pretraining method.
C. Setup
For the time series classification task, settings remained
consistent with the TF-C, which is followed by many followed
works. Specifically, the scenario Epilepsy → Epilepsy is set
as an in-domain setting and for cross-domain settings, there
are four scenarios including SleepEEG → Epilepsy, SleepEEG
→ EMG, HAR → Gesture, and ECG → electromyography
(EMG). The cross-entropy loss is used as a constraint on the
classification task to update parameters during fine-tuning.
For the AD task, the following in-domain scenarios are set
up: MSL-A-4 → All, SMAP-P-1 → All, and SMD-2-1 →
All, which means the pretraining is conducted on a certain
entity or telemetry channel, and fine-tuning as well as AD
are conducted on all entities and telemetry channels in the
same dataset. Under the cross-domain setting, the following
scenarios are set up: MSL-A-4 → SMAP and SMAP-P-1 →
MSL. In addition, the widely used AD approach is used, which
is that a time series reconstruction model is modeled and AD
is achieved using the reconstruction error and a predefined
threshold [24]. Regarding the selection of the predefined
threshold, the best threshold is selected through grid search,
and the best performance is reported for all experiments [30].
For all experimental settings, following the current protocol [6], the target task model Ftarget is implemented
using a linear classifier. The experiment results are evaluated using standard evaluation metrics including accuracy
(Acc = ((TP + TN)/(TP + FP + TN + FN))), precision
(P = (TP/(TP + FP))), recall (R = (TP/(TP + FN))), and
F1 score (F1 = ((2 × P × R)/(P + R))), where TP and FP
denote correctly and incorrectly detected anomalies, respectively. And TN and FN denote correctly and incorrectly labeled
normal, respectively.
D. Implementation Details
The CLR-DRL, its variants, and all baselines are implemented in PyTorch version 1.8.2 with CUDA 10.2. All
experiments are conducted on a server with Intel1 Xeon1 Silver
4210 CPU at 2.20 GHz and a single NVIDIA TITAN V 12 GB
GPU. Benefiting from the simplicity of the design of the CLRDRL, only four hyper-parameters need to be set, which are the
hidden dimensions Ds and Dw of the strong and weak AEs, the
encode layer n of the AEs and the temperature coefficient τ in
the contrast loss. For all experimental scenarios and settings,
the Ds , Dw , n, and τ are set to 16, half the sequence length
1 Registered trademark.

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD

2514512

TABLE I
D ETAILS OF B ENCHMARKS

TABLE II
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE (%) OF I N -D OMAIN AND C ROSS -D OMAIN S ETTINGS

(T /2), 2, and 0.2, respectively. In addition, for fairness, the
parameter settings of the three-layer ResNet are kept consistent
with current work [6] to verify the effectiveness of the motivation and architecture of the CLR-DRL. All models are trained
using the Adam optimizer with the learning rate 2 × 10−3 ,
L2 regularization penalty coefficient weight 3 × 10−3 and the
exponential decay rates hyperparameters β1 and β2 for the
moment estimates as 0.9 and 0.999. For the classification task,
pretraining iterations 100 times and fine-tuning 100 times. For
the AD task, pretraining iterations 30 times and fine-tuning
30 times. The batch size of pretraining and fine-tuning for all
experiments are set to 128 and 60, respectively. The model and
evaluation metrics corresponding to the best F1 are recorded
and reported.
In addition, for fairness, a unified target task model Ftarget
is used for all experiments. Specifically, a two-layer FNN
is used to implement target tasks, in which the output of
the first layer is active by sigmoid function, and the second
layer is the output layer. For classification and AD tasks, the
number of neurons in the first layer is 64 and 512, respectively.
The number of neurons in the second layer is the number of
categories and the length of the input sequence, respectively.
Furthermore, all baselines are implemented by their official
code, and hyper-parameters are set as they recommended.
E. Results and Discussion
This section reports the main comparison results of two
tasks. Experiment results of fine-tuning parameters with random initialization (Random init.) directly on the target dataset
without pretraining are also reported.

1) Classification: The classification performance for all
settings is reported in Table II. Compared with all baselines,
the CLR-DRL achieves the best performance on 22 out of
24 metrics. In particular, in all settings, the performance of the
CLR-DRL exceeds that of the randomly initialized fine-tuned
model, indicating that the proposed model does not suffer from
a negative transfer phenomenon, further illustrating that the
inherent representation learned by the CLR-DRL during the
pretraining is valuable for target tasks. Specifically, under an
in-domain setting, compared with the previous SOTA method
with the SimMTM, the CLR-DRL achieves a performance
improvement of 1.76% on F1. From cross-domain settings
results, even though there is a large domain gap between the
source and target dataset, the CLR-DRL still achieves well
classification accuracy compared to baselines. Particularly,
in the SleepEEG → EMG scenario, the CLR-DRL achieves an
improvement of 21.31% on the F1 compared with the previous
SOTA contrastive learning-based method TF-C. It can be
found that when the series length and knowledge of the target
domain and the source domain are close, the CLR-DRL can
obtain better classification performance. Specifically, in the
ECG → EMG scenario, the series lengths of two datasets
are the same, and the CLR-DRL achieves completely accurate
classification performance.
2) Anomaly Detection: The AD performance for all settings is reported in Table III. Compared with all baselines,
the CLR-DRL achieves the best performance on 18 out of
20 metrics. Similar to the classification task, all metrics of
the CLR-DRL outperform the Random init. In in-domain
settings, the CLR-DRL achieves significant improvements in

2514512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE III
AD P ERFORMANCE (%) OF I N -D OMAIN AND C ROSS -D OMAIN S ETTINGS

Fig. 3. Performance (F1 metric) in classification (↑) and AD (↑) tasks under
in-domain and cross-domain settings.

3) Summary: The F1 metrics of four scenarios in the
in- and cross-domain settings are summarized in Fig. 3 and
the visualization of the critical difference diagram based on
the Wilcoxon pair-wised signed-rank test after rejecting the
null hypothesis using the Friedman test of the metric F1 is
shown in Fig. 4. In all these settings, the CLR-DRL exhibits
good performance, which shows that previous methods cannot
simultaneously handle classification and AD tasks in multiple
settings, further highlighting the advantages of the CLR-DRL.
All in all, the high performance in the in-domain setting
demonstrates the positive effect of extracting time series inherent representation based on the CLR-DRL for target tasks.
The high performance in cross-domain settings demonstrates
its advantage in achieving high-quality target tasks through
cross-domain transfer in scenarios where real-world labeled
samples are scarce.
F. Ablation Study

Fig. 4.

Critical difference diagram (F1) of AD and classification tasks.

both multivariate and univariate AD tasks compared with
previous SOTA results. On the F1 metric, the CLR-DRL
improved by 7.11% on MSL-A-4 → All, 5.58% on SMAPP-1 → All, and 3.98% on SMD-2-1 → All. In addition,
the CLR-DRL also achieves significant improvements in the
cross-domain transfer tasks: 3.99% on MSL-A-4 → SMAP
and 8.91% on SMAP-P-1 → MSL.
From the methodological and technical perspective, the well
AD performance of the CLR-DRL can be attributed to the
following two reasons. First, the CLR-DRL does not use
an explicit augmentation approach. Instead, it uses the AEs
to automatically obtain augmented samples, which mitigates
the impact of category aliasing on the performance of target
tasks. Particularly, AD is sensitive to category aliasing and
sample changes, and the design of the CLR-DRL is more
suitable for such a task. Second, the augmentation samples
of the CLR-DRL are the series reconstructed by AEs, so the
representation of the series extracted by the CLR-DRL is relatively suitable for the reconstruction task, which has inherent
advantages for the reconstruction error-based AD method used
by the CLR-DRL.

The motivation of the CLR-DRL is investigated through
three different ablations, and the high-quality inherent representation of the time series can be extracted by contrastive
pretraining with sample augmentation from AE. Specifically,
three widely used time series explicit augmentation approaches
including jittering, scaling, and permutation are used to replace
the AE of the CLR-DRL to construct three variants W/o AEs
(replace AEs ), W/o AEw (replace AEw ), and W/o AE (replace
AEs , and AEw ). Ablation experiments are conducted on four
scenarios including in- and cross-domain settings, and the best
performance of the variants under three explicit augmentation
approaches are reported in Fig. 5. In addition, Random init.
is also considered as a method of ablation and included for
comparison.
It can be seen from the results that after replacing any AE
with explicit approach, the F1 will decline to varying degrees.
This is because the correlation between the two augmented
samples is weakened, which is detrimental to extracting the
inherent representation of the series. This result further supports the theoretical analysis in Section III-E. Furthermore,
it is worth noting that after completely replacing the AE with
an explicit augmented approach, negative transfer occurs in
the in-domain setting. And for the SleepEEG → Epilepsy
scenario, its performance remains consistent with Random
init., which shows that when AEs are not used to augment

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD

2514512

Fig. 7. L2 distance distribution of aligned positive-pair representations. A low
mean value indicates well alignment.

Fig. 5.

Ablation results of the CLR-DRL in two tasks and two settings.
Fig. 8. Average pairwise Gaussian potential of positive-pair representations.
A low mean value indicates well uniformity.

Fig. 6. Performance comparison on fine-tuning with limited data in AD task
under in-domain setting.

samples, the variants are difficult to obtain effective domain
knowledge and extract representation through pretraining, and
cannot provide a positive effect for target tasks. In addition,
it is found that in four scenarios, removing strong AE will
produce more performance degradation than removing weak
AE, which shows that the reconstruction performance of the
AE has an impact on the target task performance of the CLRDRL. This phenomenon will be discussed in Section IV-G.
The above results and analysis prove the correctness of the
motivation of the CLR-DRL.
G. Model Analysis
1) Fine-Tune With Limited Data: In real-world industrial
scenarios, due to the scarcity of labeled samples, transferring pretrained models to limited data scenarios is a key
application. Particularly, for typical unsupervised AD tasks,
monitoring newly used industrial devices is crucial. In order
to verify the performance of the CLR-DRL in fine-tuning
on limited data, experiments are conducted in three AD
scenarios. As shown in Fig. 6, in the univariate AD task, the
performance of the CLR-DRL has been significantly improved
compared with baselines under different amounts of data. And
the CLR-DRL only needs 10% of the data to obtain more
than 90% of F1. For multivariable detection tasks, although
the CLR-DRL and baselines have similar performance under
10% of the data, as the ratio increases, the CLR-DRL shows
obviously rapid performance improvement. At a data ratio of
25%, the CLR-DRL can achieve an AD performance of more
than 85% on F1, which fully validates the advantages of the
CLR-DRL.
2) Representation Analysis: In order to intuitively evaluate
the representation capabilities of the CLR-DRL, the alignment,

and uniformity of representation are used to analyze it.
According to Wang and Isola [31], alignment means that
the representations of positive pairs should be close to each
other and therefore, invariant to noise. Uniformity means
that the representation of all samples should be uniformly
distributed on the hypersphere, which allows it to retain
more data information. For a good representation, it should
have both good alignment and uniformity, and they have a
direct relationship with the performance of target tasks. The
quantitative metrics proposed by Wang and Isola [31] are used
to evaluate the representation extracted by the CLR-DRL,
and quantitative results of alignment and uniformity in the
SleepEEG → Epilepsy scenario are provided in Figs. 7 and 8.
For alignment, compared with the TF-C and the variant
W/o AE, the CLR-DRL has the minimal mean L2 distance
of the positive pair representation, which indicates that the
representation obtained by the CLR-DRL has good alignment.
Meanwhile, although the representation of the TF-C is closer
to the CLR-DRL in terms of the mean value (0.16 versus
0.24), the representation distribution of the CLR-DRL is
more concentrated on short distances in terms of distance
distribution. The variant W/o AE has a larger mean distance
of 0.44, which shows that generating positive pairs through
AEs can lead to better alignment of the representation. For
uniformity, the CLR-DRL obtained the minimal mean of the
average pairwise Gaussian potential among the three models
(0.59 versus 0.82 and 0.84), which shows that it achieves
better uniformity and retains the information of the data to
the greatest extent while extracting the inherent representation
vector of the time series. Therefore, from the perspective of
representation analysis, it is clearly shown why the CLR-DRL
achieves advantages in target tasks. The small alignment
further verifies the conclusion in Section III-E that the two
augmented samples are closely related.
3) Efficiency Analysis: The number of parameters and the
floating point operations (FLOPs) [32] are used to evaluate
the memory and computation cost of the CLR-DRL. Specifically, the above metrics are calculated using the experiment
settings on the SMD dataset detailed in Sections IV-A and
IV-D, and results are shown in Fig. 9. A higher F1 score

2514512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 9.
Relationships between the AD performance (F1 ↑) and model
efficiency (FLOPs↓ or parameters↓).
TABLE IV
PARAMETERS OF THE NAPHTHA AND LPG P IPELINES

TABLE V
D ETAILS OF PSM DATASET

means a better AD performance, a lower FLOPs means the
less amount of computation required by the model (better
computation efficiency) and fewer parameters means better
memory cost. It is notable that the CLR-DRL achieves the best
AD performance and the lowest memory cost. Although the
TF-C achieves the best computation efficiency, it cannot detect
anomalies well. Instead, the CLR-DRL can take into account
both good computation efficiency (rank 2) and model performance. In addition, all models can predict a single sample in
less than 1 ms, which is fully sufficient for actual industrial
applications. Therefore, The CLR-DRL can achieve the target
task efficiently and quickly in a real-world application.
V. VALIDATION ON A R EAL -W ORLD S CENARIO
Pipeline transportation is a widely used transportation
approach for petrochemical materials and products, and plays
an important role in a country’s petrochemical industry. However, due to aging, corrosion, man-made damage, and other
factors, pipeline leakage accidents occur frequently. Therefore,
real-time and accurate pipeline status monitoring (PSM) is
of great significance. For long-distance pipelines, pressure
or acoustic wave detection instruments are usually installed
on upstream and downstream of the pipeline to collect the
transportation signal, which is used to monitor the pipeline.
In order to verify the effectiveness of the CLR-DRL in a
practical industrial application, monitoring on two pipelines
of naphtha and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) under different
working conditions as shown in Fig. 10 is conducted. The data
are the upstream and downstream infrasound signals collected
by the remote terminal unit (RTU) through the infrasound
acoustic transducer. The signal is sampled at a frequency
of 50 Hz, for which a 1:10 extraction is conducted and the

Fig. 10.

PSM and experiment settings.

signal is segmented through a time window of length 16.
Following the above operation, four consecutive hours of data
are used to compose the PSM dataset. In particular, the naphtha
pipeline simulated leaks 11 times by opening valves during
this period.
The PSM experiment is conducted on two pipelines with
different working conditions as shown in Table IV. In experimental settings, the data collected from upstream of the
two pipelines are used to pretrain the model and then are
transferred to the naphtha pipeline to monitor. The tasks
of transferring from one pipeline to another are considered
as cross-domain setting and four scenarios containing inand cross-domain settings shown in Table V are set up as:
RTU03 → RTU03, RTU03 → RTU04, RTU05 → RTU03,
and RTU05 → RTU04. Among them, for typical AD tasks,
modeling is conducted on the data under normal working
conditions. For the classification task, two leaked data and a
small number of normal samples are used to form a fine-tuning
dataset to fine-tune the pretrained model and test it on the
remaining data. The implementation details are the same as
Section IV-D.
The experiment results of AD and classification tasks on the
PSM are shown in Tables VI and VII, respectively. It can be
seen that the CLR-DRL exceeds the baselines in all settings.
Especially in scenario RTU03 → RTU04 of the AD task,
the CLR-DRL achieves completely accurate AD results and
an improvement of 6.64% (93.36 → 100.00) is achieved
compared to the previous SOTA results. In addition, on the
classification task, the CLR-DRL achieves significant improvements in four scenarios. Especially in the two cross-domain
scenarios, an improvement of more than 10% is achieved
(71.68 → 81.98 and 80.67 → 90.97).
Furthermore, for actual application scenarios, the monitoring experiments on newly used devices are simulated.
In cross-domain scenarios, the AD models are fine-tuned on
different proportions of data to monitor the pipeline. As shown
in the results in Fig. 11, even if only 10% of the data is used
for fine-tuning, more than 85% of the monitoring performance
can be achieved. And as data from new devices continues to
increase, monitoring performance continues to improve. This
shows that the CLR-DRL has a well transfer capability and can
play an important role in monitoring new devices in real-world
industrial scenarios.
In summary, according to the actual application of the
CLR-DRL on PSM, the proposed method has practical
significance in ensuring the stable operation of the device and
avoiding economic losses and personal injuries.

ZHANG et al.: TIME SERIES SELF-SUPERVISED CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINING METHOD

2514512

TABLE VI
AD P ERFORMANCE (%) ON PSM DATASET

TABLE VII
C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE (%) ON PSM DATASET

application effect of the CLR-DRL. Further analysis proves the
correctness of the idea of the CLR-DRL.
However, as a deep learning-based method, the CLR-DRL
has poor interpretability, which is also significant in real-world
applications. Therefore, in the future, we will conduct research
on interpretable machine learning for time series. Meanwhile,
we will focus on the correlation between mask modeling and
contrastive modeling of time series and conduct research on
robust series representation.
Fig. 11. Performance of the CLR-DRL fine-tuning with limited data in AD
task on PSM.

VI. C ONCLUSION
This article proposes a new contrastive pretraining method
with the CLR-DRL. In order to solve the problem of augmented samples category aliasing that exists in explicit data
augmentation approaches, the CLR-DRL uses two different
AEs to automatically generate augmented samples and obtain
the positive and negative pairs required for contrastive learning. In turn, the reconstruction discrepancies of different AEs
as well as the contrastive constraint are utilized to achieve the
extraction of inherent representation vectors of the time series,
which is explained by the theory analysis using gradient flow
calculation. Experiments on nine real-world benchmarks of
two typical time series tasks show that the CLR-DRL outperforms the current SOTA baselines on Acc and F1 metrics.
In addition, an actual PSM case is provided to verify the actual

R EFERENCES
[1] A. Tank, I. Covert, N. Foti, A. Shojaie, and E. B. Fox, “Neural Granger
causality,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8,
pp. 4267–4279, Aug. 2022.
[2] Z. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Graph structure change-based anomaly
detection in multivariate time series of industrial processes,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6457–6466, Apr. 2024.
[3] Z. Zhang, Y. Han, B. Ma, M. Liu, and Z. Geng, “Temporal chain network
with intuitive attention mechanism for long-term series forecasting,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[4] X. Hu, T. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Noise adaptive filtering model
integrating spatio-temporal feature for soft sensor,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 239, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 122453.
[5] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and X. Li,
“Label-efficient time series representation learning: A review,” 2023,
arXiv:2302.06433.
[6] X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Žitnik, “Self-supervised
contrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consistency,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeuraIPS), Jan. 2022,
pp. 3988–4003.
[7] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jan. 2020, pp. 1–23.

2514512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[8] C. Ian Tang, I. Perez-Pozuelo, D. Spathis, and C. Mascolo, “Exploring
contrastive learning in human activity recognition for healthcare,” 2020,
arXiv:2011.11542.
[9] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.
(IJCAI), 2021, pp. 2352–2359.
[10] H. El-Fiqi, M. Wang, K. Kasmarik, A. Bezerianos, K. C. Tan,
and H. A. Abbass, “Weighted gate layer autoencoders,” IEEE Trans.
Cybern., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 7242–7253, Aug. 2022.
[11] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988.
[12] T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc.
NIPS, 2020, pp. 1877–1901.
[13] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. (NeuraIPS), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–23.
[14] Z. Yue et al., “Ts2vec: Towards universal representation of time series,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 8, 2022, pp. 8980–8987.
[15] L. Yang and S. Hong, “Unsupervised time-series representation learning
with iterative bilinear temporal-spectral fusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 25038–25054.
[16] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. C. H. Hoi, “CoST:
Contrastive learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations for
time series forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, Jan. 2022, pp. 1–14.
[17] T. T. Um et al., “Data augmentation of wearable sensor data for Parkinson’s disease monitoring using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
19th ACM Int. Conf. Multimodal Interact., Nov. 2017, pp. 216–220.
[18] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A
survey,” in Proc. Thirtieth Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021,
pp. 4653–4660.
[19] Y. Shi, J. Li, H. Li, and B. Yang, “An imbalanced data augmentation
and assessment method for industrial process fault classification with
application in air compressors,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–10, 2023.
[20] Y. Li, X. Lu, Y. Wang, and D. Dou, “Generative time series forecasting
with diffusion, denoise, and disentanglement,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeuraIPS), Jan. 2023, pp. 23009–23022.
[21] L. Lin, Z. Li, R. Li, X. Li, and J. Gao, “Diffusion models for time series
applications: A survey,” 2023, arXiv:2305.00624.
[22] P. Yan et al., “A comprehensive survey of deep transfer learning for
anomaly detection in industrial time series: Methods, applications, and
directions,” 2023, arXiv:2307.05638.
[23] F. Wang and H. Liu, “Understanding the behaviour of contrastive loss,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2021, pp. 2495–2504.
[24] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[25] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[26] K. Wickstrøm, M. Kampffmeyer, K. Ø. Mikalsen, and R. Jenssen,
“Mixing up contrastive learning: Self-supervised representation learning
for time series,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 155, pp. 54–61, Mar. 2022.
[27] Y. Wang et al., “Graph-aware contrasting for multivariate time-series
classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Mar. 2024, vol. 38,
no. 14, pp. 15725–15734.
[28] M. Cheng, Q. Liu, Z. Liu, H. Zhang, R. Zhang, and E. Chen,
“TimeMAE: Self-supervised representations of time series with decoupled masked autoencoders,” 2023, arXiv:2303.00320.
[29] J. Dong, H. Wu, H. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Wang, and M. Long, “SimMTM:
A simple pre-training framework for masked time-series modeling,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2023, pp. 29996–30025.
[30] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.
[31] T. Wang and P. Isola, “Understanding contrastive representation learning
through alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere,” in Proc. 37th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, Jul. 2020, pp. 9929–9939.

[32] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning
convolutional neural networks for resource efficient inference,” in Proc.
5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2016, pp. 1–12.

Zhen Zhang received the B.S. degree in
measurement and control technology and
instrumentation and the M.S. degree in control
science and engineering from Beijing University
of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China, in
2018 and 2021, respectively, where he is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in control science and
engineering.
His research interests include time series anomaly
detection, forecasting, and industrial process
monitoring.

Yongming Han (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China, in 2009 and 2014,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the College of
Information Science and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His current research
interests include power system modeling, neural
networks, intelligent computing, data mining, and
intrusion detection.

Bo Ma received the B.S. degree in mechatronic
engineering from Taiyuan University of Technology,
Taiyuan, China, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in
power engineering and engineering thermophysics
from Beijing University of Chemical Technology
(BUCT), Beijing, China, in 2006.
He is currently a Professor with the Diagnosis and
Self-Recovery Engineering Research Center, BUCT.
His research interests include fault diagnosis, transfer learning, and health monitoring.

Zhiqiang Geng received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
degrees from Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
China, in 1997 and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree from the College of Information Science
and Technology, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing, China, in 2005.
He is currently a Professor with the College
of Information Science and Technology, Beijing
University of Chemical Technology. His research
interests include neural networks, intelligent computing, data mining, knowledge management, and
process modeling.