IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

8331

Adaptive Memory Broad Learning System
for Unsupervised Time Series
Anomaly Detection
Zhijie Zhong , Zhiwen Yu , Senior Member, IEEE, Ziwei Fan , C. L. Philip Chen , Fellow, IEEE,
and Kaixiang Yang , Member, IEEE
Abstract— Time series anomaly detection is the process of
identifying anomalies within time series data. The primary
challenge of this task lies in the necessity for the model to comprehend the characteristics of time-independent and abnormal
data patterns. In this study, a novel algorithm called adaptive
memory broad learning system (AdaMemBLS) is proposed for
time series anomaly detection. This algorithm leverages the rapid
inference capabilities of the broad learning algorithm and the
memory bank’s capacity to differentiate between normal and
abnormal data. Furthermore, an incremental algorithm based
on multiple data augmentation techniques is introduced and
applied to multiple ensemble learners, thereby enhancing the
model’s effectiveness in learning the characteristics of time series
data. To bolster the model’s anomaly detection capabilities,
a more diverse ensemble approach and a discriminative anomaly
score are recommended. Extensive experiments conducted on
various real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method exhibits superior inference speed and more accurate
anomaly detection compared to the existing competitors.
A detailed experimental investigation is presented to elucidate the
effectiveness of the proposed method and the underlying reasons
for its efficacy.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, broad learning, ensemble
learning, memory bank, time series.

I. I NTRODUCTION
IME series anomaly detection is a critical task that has
garnered significant attention from both academia and
industry [1]. Time series data is ubiquitous in various domains
such as server runtime data, real-time data from information
technology (IT) systems, and health monitoring data [2], [3],
[4], [5]. In system monitoring, experts establish anomaly
score evaluation and anomaly evaluation thresholds for system
runtimes. When the anomaly score surpasses the established

T

Manuscript received 20 February 2023; revised 17 December
2023 and 13 March 2024; accepted 11 June 2024. Date of publication
26 June 2024; date of current version 5 May 2025. This work was
supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant
2023YFA1011601; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62106224 and Grant U21A20478; in part by the
Major Key Project of PCL, China, under Grant PCL2023AS7-1; and
in part by the Guangzhou Science and Technology Plan Project under
Grant 2024A04J3749. (Corresponding author: Kaixiang Yang.)
Zhijie Zhong, Zhiwen Yu, C. L. Philip Chen, and Kaixiang Yang are with
the School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University
of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510650, China, and also with
the Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518066, China (e-mail:
zhwyu@scut.edu.cn; yangkx@scut.edu.cn).
Ziwei Fan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510650, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3415621

threshold, it indicates an abnormality, prompting corrective
actions. The escalating complexity of modern machine systems
has led to a rapid increase in generated data, rendering
traditional anomaly detection systems unreliable and laborintensive [6]. Consequently, there is a growing need for
automated anomaly detection systems.
Anomaly detection for multivariate time series has
been extensively researched. Traditional methods include
prediction-based autoregressive integrated moving average
(ARIMA), distance-based methods such as k-nearest neighbor
(KNN) and principal component analysis (PCA), and
classification-based methods like one-class support vector
machine (OCSVM) and support vector data description
(SVDD). However, the complexity of contemporary systems
poses challenges for the timely and cost-effective implementation of these methods. The continuous growth in data volume
and dimensionality further complicates their optimization for
high-dimensional data, presenting a primary challenge for
traditional approaches. In recent years, unsupervised anomaly
detection methods have been proposed, often relying on
learning the correlation of time series data and the lowdimensional features of the data, garnering significant attention
in the research community [7].
Deep learning algorithms for learning features from time
series data often employ recurrent neural network (RNN) or
its variants such as gated recurrent unit (GRU) and long shortterm memory (LSTM). However, these models are associated
with drawbacks such as slow training speed and challenges in
scaling model complexity. Autoencoder (AE)-based methods,
such as LSTM-ED [8] and DeepAnT [9], are trained using
normal data for detection purposes. However, these methods
do not account for the potential presence of abnormal data
within the training dataset, leading to a potential overfitting
issue. Some deep learning approaches have incorporated
the generative adversarial network (GAN) architecture for
anomaly detection. However, the training of these methods
is often unstable and challenging. In contrast, USAD [10]
and FGANomaly [11] construct a model directly from the
perspective of data feature modeling and employ a more
advanced adversarial training network structure to mitigate
the occurrence of the aforementioned issues. Nonetheless, the
training time for these methods is typically relatively lengthy.
The memory module has found extensive application
in natural language processing [12], [13]. Its fundamental

2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

8332

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

structure includes a query and multiple memory units. The
query operation involves computing the similarity between
the query and the memory units to obtain the query score,
while the read operation retrieves the query result based on
this score. This capability compensates for the limitations of
models such as RNN, which are constrained by sequence
length and unable to effectively learn information from
excessively long sequences. Owing to the potent recording
capability of the memory module, it has been utilized in
diverse domains, including image anomaly detection [14],
video object detection [15], and video anomaly detection [16].
In the realm of broad learning, the BLS has proven effective
in areas such as image recognition [17], [18], language
processing [19], and biology [20]. BLS is particularly noted
for its rapid training speed and strong generalization ability.
Time series forecasting methods, such as those in [21]
and [22], have leveraged BLS for tasks like forecasting chaotic
time series. However, these methods, particularly [21], are
more complex than the original BLS, and [22] employs
backpropagation training, not utilizing BLS’s rapid training
speed. These aspects pose challenges in applying BLS to time
series anomaly detection. In this context, three challenges are
evident: 1) applying BLS to learn features from time series
data is challenging; 2) detecting anomalous patterns within
time series data is complex; and 3) the intricate nature of
time series data complicates the enhancement of BLS with
incremental algorithms.
We propose a BLS framework that matches traditional
techniques in training speed but rivals or surpasses deep
learning in performance. Prior work has not fully addressed
enhancing BLS’s information retention, crucial for anomaly
detection. Therefore, we introduce the adaptive memory broad
learning system (AdaMemBLS), initially adopting a broad
learning framework and integrating a memory module [23]
to learn normal patterns in time series data. This integration
is supplemented with advanced data augmentation techniques
and a streamlined broad learning incremental algorithm.
Furthermore, to address single model limitations and enhance
local abnormal data learning, we implement an advanced
adaptive ensemble algorithm.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
1) The advanced memory module is integrated with the
broad learning algorithm to establish the foundational
memory BLS (MemBLS) model.
2) A more streamlined and efficient incremental learning
algorithm, based on newly designed data augmentation
methods, is proposed to enhance the performance of
MemBLS.
3) A novel AdaMemBLS is developed based on the
proposed global MemBLS and local sliced MemBLS.
The structure of this article is as follows: Section II reviews
related literature on anomaly detection, BLS, and memory
banks. Section III introduces basic definitions and an overview
of our framework. Section IV details the proposed method.
Section V presents comparative experiments and analyses
against state-of-the-art (SOTA) anomaly detection algorithms.
Finally, Section VI concludes the study.

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Time Series Anomaly Detection Approaches
Unsupervised multivariate time series anomaly detection is
a highly challenging task due to the lack of labels, rendering
many supervised methods ineffective [7].
1) Traditional Approaches: Traditional anomaly detection
methods, such as ARIMA, utilize historical data to predict
future data and compare the difference between predicted
and actual values to identify anomalies. Other traditional
methods, such as KNN and PCA, are based on distance
metrics. For instance, KNN calculates the distance of k data
samples around a data sample as an abnormal criterion, while
PCA computes the distance between the sample and the
feature vector of the data as an abnormal score. However,
these traditional methods are limited in their ability to model
temporal information, leading to suboptimal performance in
anomaly detection.
2) Deep Learning Model: Deep learning algorithms
have been employed for anomaly detection, with LSTMED [8] utilizing LSTM’s temporal feature learning and
AE’s reconstruction ability for improved generalization.
DAGMM [24] combines deep autoencoders with Gaussian
mixture models, utilizing end-to-end training. SISVAE [25]
introduces a variational smoothness regularizer for robust
anomaly identification. LSTM-OC [26] integrates LSTM and
OC-SVM for learning temporal features and anomaly scoring.
Notably, these methods may require lengthy training periods
and could underperform in large-scale datasets.
3) Generative Adversarial-Based Model: Some models
integrate GAN concepts with AEs to enhance anomaly
detection capabilities. USAD [10] employs GAN with
dual AE structures for efficient feature representation.
FGANomaly [11] introduces a filter GAN structure and
a novel AE for adversarial training, along with dynamic
weighted reconstruction loss, aiding smoother model training.
It is noteworthy that these approaches often demand extended
training times for optimal convergence.

B. BLS and Incremental Learning
BLS is a three-layer, flat-structured network characterized
by feature nodes, enhancement nodes, and an output layer [27].
With random initialization, the feature and enhancement nodes
remain unchanged, with only the output layer parameters
requiring updates via the pseudo inverse. Su et al. [22]
developed a multihead attention BLS for chaotic time series
prediction. However, this method employs backpropagation
for updates, not fully exploiting BLS’s inherent advantages.
Xu et al. [21] integrated RNN with BLS to create RBLS,
surpassing deep learning models in chaotic time series
prediction. However, this integration complicates training and
reduces the original BLS’s training speed. BLS includes
three incremental learning algorithms [27], each designed to
increase the number of feature or enhancement nodes, thereby
improving model generalization. Yet, these algorithms might
not be optimally suited for time series data.

ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 1.

8333

Proposed AdaMemBLS for unsupervised time series anomaly detection.

C. Memory Module
The memory module, used for memorizing prototype
features, is prevalent in deep learning applications such
as video anomaly detection and time series anomaly
detection [16], [28], [29], [30]. Lv et al. [16] introduced a
memory-based prototype learning approach with an attention
mechanism for unsupervised anomaly detection. Sun et al. [15]
proposed a multilevel aggregation structure with a lightweight
memory bank for video object detection. In anomaly detection,
memory integration helps record various patterns of normal
data, thus improving BLS’s ability to distinguish between
normal and abnormal data.
III. P RELIMINARIES AND F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW
In this section, we present fundamental definitions and
provide an overview of our proposed framework.
A. Problem Statement
Definition 1 (Multivariate Time Series): A
multivariate
time series is defined as X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xt ], where
X ∈ RT ×V . Here, T denotes the length of the sequences,
and xi represents the sample at a single time point, with a
dimensionality of V . The corresponding labels are represented
by Y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yt ]. In this notation, yi = 0 signifies a
normal time point, whereas yi = 1 indicates an anomalous
time point. For a given X , the algorithm is required to
produce the predicted label.
Definition 2 (Time Window): Assuming that the length of
the time window is denoted by L, and the data is advanced
by S steps each time, the original data X can be expressed
as X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , x N ], where N = ((T − L)/S). Here, N
represents the number of time windows, and X is an element
of R N ×L×V .

Definition 3 (Data Preprocess): In the domain of time
series data, significant scale differences often exist between
data points. To address this, preprocessing methods such as
MinMax and Z -scale are commonly employed, as evidenced
in numerous studies. In our experiments, all datasets are
preprocessed using the MinMax method. This approach
is formulated as X = (X − min(X ))/(max(X ) − min(X )),
effectively normalizing the data.
B. Framework
In this article, we introduce a novel AdaMemBLS algorithm
for unsupervised time series anomaly detection. The novel
BLS, featuring a special cascade, serves as our fundamental
AE network, representing an enhancement over the original
BLS. Its key advantages include rapid processing speed and
robust generalization ability. Our algorithm comprises four
key components, as illustrated in Fig. 1: 1) global MemBLS
(GMemBLS) module; 2) new incremental optimization
algorithm; 3) local sliced MemBLS module (LMemBLS); and
4) adaptive ensemble mechanism.
The AdaMemBLS algorithm is implemented through a
series of steps: first, a GMemBLS is trained end-to-end
to establish an initialized network. Subsequently, the time
series data is sliced multiple times to construct LMemBLS.
Following this, the GMemBLS and LMemBLS undergo
optimization using a new incremental algorithm, thereby
enhancing the learning capabilities of both the BLS and
memory module. Finally, the adaptive ensemble mechanism
is employed to dynamically fuse the output of the GMemBLS
with the outputs of multiple LMemBLS, culminating in the
final output of AdaMemBLS.
Further details regarding the AdaMemBLS algorithm are
expounded upon in subsequent proposed approach sections.

8334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

The process for computing the output of a single feature node
is delineated subsequently. The computation of the output for
a single feature node is described as follows:
(
ξ(X
j
 W f j + β f j ),  where j = 1
Fi =
j
j
j−1
ξ Fi Wcfi + βcf j , where j = 2, 3, . . . , Ncf
(1)

Fig. 2.

Structural diagram of MemBLS.

IV. P ROPOSED A PPROACH
This section elaborates on the architecture of the AdaMemBLS, which integrates a GMemBLS and multiple LMemBLS
for learning global and local time series features. These models
are then combined through an adaptive ensemble mechanism
to produce the final output. The learning process of MemBLS
is detailed in Algorithm 1.
A. GMemBLS
The presence of anomalous data within training sets often
challenges algorithms [10]. To counter this, GMemBLS
employs memory to record normal data patterns, thus
enhancing the reconstruction error for abnormal data in the test
set and aiding in anomaly detection. However, the application
of broad learning to time series anomaly detection, and the
integration of memory modules within it, remains largely
unexplored.
This section outlines the construction of MemBLS and
explains the integration of the memory module with BLS.
In practice, MemBLS utilizes all available data for training and
is thus termed GMemBLS, differentiating it from LMemBLS.
1) MemBLS AE: The MemBLS encoder includes feature
and enhancement nodes from the BLS, known as the BLSencoder. The decoder part consists of the BLS output
layer, the BLS-decoder, with the memory module integrated
between these two components. The BLS-encoder is utilized
for representing temporal features, while the BLS-decoder
analyzes anomalies. Both are indispensable components in
the process. After initialization, the feature and enhancement
nodes of the BLS-encoder remain fixed, while the BLSdecoder, a simple linear network, has parameters represented
by Wd .
Considering input data X , where X ∈ R N ×L×V with N ,
L, and V being the number of time windows, length of each
time window, and number of feature channels, respectively,
X is first reshaped into a 2-D form, transforming from
R N ×L×V to R N ×L·V . The BLS-encoder then uses its feature
and enhancement nodes to calculate the latent layer’s output.

where W fi and β fi are the weight and bias of the ith group
of feature node. The activation function is denoted by ξ , and
Ncf represents the number of cascade feature layers. To obtain
the collective output of the feature nodes, we concatenate
them, resulting in F = [F1 , F2 , . . . , Fm ], where m represents
the number of feature node groups. Following the approach
of [32], cascade feature layers are integrated with the original
feature layer to generate features more suited to time series
data. The parameter for the jth cascade layer of the ith
j
feature node is represented as Wcfi , where j = 0 indicates
a noncascaded feature node. These cascaded layers can be
practically implemented in multiple stacks.
Additionally, the sparse AE (SAE), as referenced in [33],
is employed to extract features that are both more sparse and
representative.
The computation of a single enhancement node can be
articulated through the following formula:
(
ξ(X
j
 We j + βe j ),  where j = 1
Ei =
j−1
ξ E i Wcej i + βcej j , where j = 2, 3, . . . , Nce
(2)
where Wei and βei are the weight and bias of the ith
group of enhancement node. The collective output of the
enhancement nodes is obtained by concatenation, yielding
E = [E 1 , E 2 , . . . , E n ], where n denotes the number of
enhancement node groups. The process of constructing an
enhancement node is analogous to that of a feature node.
To minimize the mutual information between features
derived from the enhancement nodes, Schmidt orthogonalization is employed to constrain these nodes. Therefore, the
constraint E i E j = I is incorporated into (2).
Subsequently, concatenating the outputs of the feature and
enhancement layers is straightforward, resulting in the output
of the BLS-encoder, SBLS = [F|E], where [·|·] represents
the concatenation operator (this description corresponds to
lines 1–11 of Algorithm 1).
The MemBLS framework seamlessly integrates a memory
module, enabling it to memorize normal data patterns within
the hidden layer
U = f Mem (SBLS )

(3)

where f Mem is the read function of memory module, and U
is the feature read from it. The functioning of the memory
module is elucidated in the subsequent section (this pertains
to lines 12 and 13 of Algorithm 1).
The BLS-decoder of MemBLS processes U to generate its
output
OMemBLS = U Wd

(4)

ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

where U represents the final output of the BLS-encoder,
obtained by combining SBLS with SMem (see Section IV-A2),
and Wd is the weight of the BLS-decoder (this represents the
explanation of line 15 of Algorithm 1). The final loss function
of MemBLS is expressed as follows:
L MemBLS = ∥X − U Wd ∥22 + λ∥Wd ∥22

(5)

where λ is a hyperparameter employed for regularizing the
scale of Wd , the BLS-decoder’s weight. It is important to note
that MemBLS does not utilize backpropagation for updating
the output of the memory module and BLS. Instead, the value
of Wd is determined by taking the partial derivative of (5)
and employing the pseudo-inverse method, as illustrated in
Line 15 of Algorithm 1
Wd = (U ⊤ U + λI)−1 U ⊤ X.

(6)

Fig. 2 illustrates the structure of MemBLS. In this
representation, the cascading feature operations within the
feature nodes are denoted by pink arrows, while the
cascade enhancement operations in the enhancement nodes are
highlighted by blue arrows.
2) Memory Module: The traditional AE may overly
effectively reconstruct abnormal inputs, leading to suboptimal
performance in anomaly detection, as highlighted in [29].
To mitigate this issue, a memory module is integrated into
MemBLS, designed to capture and retain normal data patterns.
The incorporation of a memory module plays a pivotal
role in facilitating the comprehensive learning from normal
samples within the model, a critical component in the domain
of anomaly detection. This module consists of M memory
units, each representing prototype features in a d-dimensional
space, which corresponds to the output dimension of the
BLS-encoder. The memory module operates primarily in two
modes: Read and Update.
The output from the BLS-encoder, denoted as SBLS where
SBLS ∈ R N ×d , acts as the input to the memory module.
In this context, N indicates the size of the data, and d is
the dimensionality of the BLS-encoder’s output. The aim is
to enable the memory module to learn features dependent
on time. Following this, the module merges the output from
the BLS-encoder with its output, transitioning from R N ×d to
R N ×2d .
a) Read: The output of the memory module, denoted as
SMem , is computed as follows. Subsequently, the input for the
BLS-decoder is obtained by utilizing U = [SBLS |SMem ]
SMem = W̃ M ⊤

(7)

where W̃ represents the normalized memory score matrix. This
matrix is derived based on the output of the BLS-encoder and
the memory units, as detailed in the following equation:
exp(W j )
.
W̃ j = P M
i exp(Wi )

(8)

The memory score is computed using cosine similarity
W (s j , mi ) =

s j · mi⊤
∥s j ∥∥mi ∥

(9)

8335

where s j represents a query item from SBLS and mi signifies
the ith item of memory units.
During the training phase, MemBLS utilizes both the output
of the memory module and the output of the BLS-encoder
for data reconstruction. This process enables MemBLS to
capture and retain the features of normal data. In the testing
phase, MemBLS requires reading from all memory units
to reconstruct data. This approach leverages the expression
patterns of normal data previously recorded in the memory
module.
b) Update: The Update and Read processes of the memory module exhibit some similarities, notably in the
requirement to calculate the memory score. However, the
Update process involves selecting a subset of memory units
that most closely resemble the query data SBLS , based on
their memory scores. For the records most relevant to the
query data, Fig. 2 distinguishes these memory units using two
different colors. The indices of these subsets can be expressed
as follows:
Wpos = argmax j∈M (W̃ j )

(10)

where W̃ retains the same definition as earlier, representing
the normalized memory score matrix.
Subsequently, the memory module updates all units using
an exponential moving weighted method, aligning with the
incremental algorithm proposed in the subsequent section. The
update of each unit is defined as follows:
X
p
p
mi = (1 − β) · mi + β
W̃ ′norm
· SBLS
(11)
p∈Wpos
′p
W̃ norm

p

where
is a subset of W̃ norm , and the coefficient β
smooths the update of new and historical memory units. The
memory units M are normalized using the L2 norm to facilitate
the learning of sparse features by the memory module. The
′p
normalization of W̃ norm is computed based on the subset of
all query units’ scores and their maximum value, as shown in
the following equation”
p

p
W̃ ′norm
=

W̃ norm
.
p
max p∈Wpos W̃ norm

(12)

p

W̃ norm is computed by applying the softmax function to the
second dimension of the memory score, as defined in the
following equation:
 
p
exp W j
p
W̃ norm, j = P M
.
(13)
p
i exp Wi
This update operation is employed in both the training and
testing phases of MemBLS, facilitating the learning of normal
data patterns by the memory. Despite the potential presence
of abnormal data in the test set, the similarity between such
abnormal data and the memory units is typically low, thereby
exerting minimal impact on the memory update process.
c) Adaptive score: The computation of the adaptive score
for ensemble and anomaly detection in MemBLS is bifurcated
into the feature reconstruction score and the diversity score.
Analogous to the Update and Read processes, it is necessary to
initially calculate the standardized memory score. The feature

8336

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

reconstruction score is determined by computing the memory
units most similar to the query s j , with s j ∈ SBLS .
The feature reconstruction score is formulated as follows:
Sfeature =

|S
pos |
BLS | |W
X
X
j

∥s j − m p ∥22

(14)

p

where |·| is the number of rows of the matrix.
To account for a broader range of memory units and enhance
the memory’s capacity to detect anomalies, a diversity score is
incorporated into the anomaly score. It is calculated as follows:
Sdiversity =

|S
pos | |Wdiv |
BLS | |W
X
X
X



∥s j − m p ∥22 − ∥s j − md ∥22

j

p

(15)

d

where Wdiv is derived using the topk function
Wdiv = topkd∈M (W̃ d ),

k = 2.

(16)

Here, the memory computes d sets of query items similar
to the memory units, excluding the second most similar
group (k = 2).
Both feature reconstruction and diversity scores are
integrated into the final anomaly score computation, thereby
enhancing the model’s ability to comprehensively identify
abnormal data.
B. Incremental Optimization
MemBLS, which employs pseudo inverse for simultaneous
parameter updating and allows only a single complete training
phase for the memory module, diverges notably from typical
deep learning models that often require multiple epochs for
optimization. While the original BLS includes at least three
incremental learning algorithms, their direct application to
MemBLS is challenged by the following: 1) an inability to
update the memory module; 2) inefficient generation of diverse
base models for integration; and 3) potential enlargement
of the final model size and decreased inference speed with
large volumes of time series data. To overcome these issues
and improve MemBLS’s performance, we propose a new
incremental optimization algorithm.
Inspired by data augmentation techniques in deep learning
for image data [34], our model’s incremental optimization
incorporates five time series data augmentation strategies.
1) Noise: Adapting the concept of adding noise in image
augmentation, Gaussian noise is introduced to the time
series data to enhance the model’s robustness.
2) Modify: A specific noise type where selected data points
are forcibly changed to predetermined values (0 and 1 in
our algorithm).
3) Scale: Similar to image zooming, this alters the data’s
scale. Our model randomly applies four scales: (0.2, 0.5,
0.9, 1.5), enabling the learning of features at different
scales.
4) Reverse: This inverts the time series data along the time
dimension, resulting in a reversed temporal direction.
5) Negate: A special scaling form that allows learning of
features resembling a mirror flip.

Applying these methods generates new training data,
enabling the memory module to capture more robust features.
However, when considering previous incremental algorithms
for BLS-encoder, which involve expanding feature and
enhancement nodes, two issues arise: 1) potential model
expansion, leading to slower inference and 2) additional feature channels possibly rendering the existing memory module
incompatible. Therefore, a novel incremental optimization
technique for MemBLS is necessary.
Assuming Wd′ is the original BLS-decoder parameter, the
updated output layer parameter Wd is defined as follows:
Wd = (1 − αinc )Wd′ + αinc Wcur

(17)

where Wcur is the parameter calculated for the current
augmented data, still utilizing the pseudo-inverse method as
per (6). This incremental optimization algorithm is simple
yet effective, allowing adaptation to different augmented data
without modifying the network structure.

C. Adaptive MemBLS
Section IV-A describes the implementation of GMemBLS
for processing all time series data. However, relying solely on a
single GMemBLS confines the detection process to capturing
only global temporal information. To facilitate local feature
learning and minimize computational complexity, we employ
multiple distinct MemBLS instances, each dedicated to
learning local features of the temporal data and optimizing
the use of the memory module’s records.
1) Local Sliced MemBLS: Inspired by the concept of a
time series multiresolution decoder [35], we propose the
LMemBLS approach for efficient processing of time series
data. This method is designed to learn local temporal
features more effectively while requiring less training time
and conserving computational and storage resources. Each
LMemBLS, characterized by smaller parameters and a subset
of the time series data, is tailored for this purpose.
The LMemBLS strategy is both simple and effective.
By segmenting the input time series data and allocating it
among various MemBLS units, LMemBLS rapidly acquires
local temporal features. This technique not only reduces the
learning duration for each LMemBLS but also offers a diverse
array of base models for the AdaMemBLS. Additionally,
training on smaller datasets results in a reduced parameter
size for each LMemBLS unit. The parameters for the output
layer of each LMemBLS slice are calculated as follows:
−1 ⊤
⊤
Wlocali = Ulocal
Ulocali + λI Ulocal
X slicei
i
i
X slicei = [xi·k , xi·k+1 , . . . , xi·k+k−1 ],

k=

N
NLMB

(18)

where k = (N /NLMB ). Here, X slicei represents the dataset of
the ith slice, Wlocali is the parameter of the BLS-decoder for the
ith LMemBLS, Ulocali denotes the hidden layer feature formed
by combining the memory and BLS-encoder features of the
ith LMemBLS, and NLMB indicates the number of LMemBLS
units.

ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

8337

Algorithm 1 Learning Process of MemBLS
Input: The time series data, X, X ∈ R N ×L·V ; Memory size of MemBLS; Regularization parameter, λ;
Output: The data O Mem B L S reconstructed by MemBLS;
1: Randomly generate the parameters of m groups of feature node and cascade feature nodes of the feature layer;
2: for i in 1, . . . , m do
3:
Calculate the output of the feature node using (1);
4: end for
5: Connect the feature nodes F = [F1 , F2 , . . . , Fm ];
6: Randomly generate the parameters of n groups of enhancement nodes and cascade enhancement nodes of the enhancement
layer;
7: for j in 1, . . . , n do
8:
Use (2) to calculate the output of the enhancement node;
9: end for
10: Connect the enhancement nodes E = [E 1 , E 2 , . . . , E n ];
11: Combine F and E to get the input of memory module, S B L S = [F|E];
12: Use (11) and corresponding (10) and (12) to update memory and calculate the intermediate process of the update process;
13: To

get the output U and the intermediate process of the calculation and read process, use (7) and the
corresponding (8) and (9);
14: Feed U to BLS-decoder and calculate the BLS-decoder weight Wd by (6);
15: Obtain the reconstruct O Mem B L S by (4);
16: return O Mem B L S ;

2) Adaptive Ensemble Mechanism: In anomaly detection, effectively utilizing both the global information from
GMemBLS and the local information from LMemBLS
necessitates a sophisticated mechanism for information
aggregation. Furthermore, fully leveraging both global and
local information is also a key component in anomaly
detection.
Both GMemBLS and LMemBLS possess their independent
memory modules, which adeptly describe normal data patterns. Hence, when integrating multiple LMemBLS units, the
performance of their memory modules should be thoroughly
considered. It is hypothesized that a higher quality memory
module is more proficient in distinguishing between normal
and abnormal data. Thus, the more pronounced the variance
in the memory module’s response to different data, the more
significant its contribution should be considered. Conversely,
if the memory module’s output features remain uniform across
varying input data, it can be classified as exhibiting lazy
memory behavior. To quantify this variance, methodologies
such as JS divergence, KL divergence, or Wasserstein
distance [36] can be utilized.
Nonetheless, to expedite the weight computation, the
adaptive ensemble mechanism employs the following formula
to calculate weights:
exp(vi )
AdaWi = P NLMB
exp(v j )
j




i
i
i
i
vi = max Sfeat
− min Sfeat
· max Sdiv
− min Sdiv
.
(19)
i
i
Here, for i = 0, Sfeat
and Sdiv
denote the feature reconstruction
score and feature diversity score of GMemBLS. For i > 0,
these scores correspond to the ith LMemBLS.

Ultimately, the final output of AdaMemBLS is derived as
follows:
OAdaMemBLS = OGMB · AdaW0
+

N
LMB
X

(OLMBi · AdaWi )

(20)

i=1

where GMB and LMB represent GMemBLS and LMemBLS,
respectively.
D. Training and Inference
1) Training: The training process of AdaMemBLS can
be approached from two perspectives. For the overall
AdaMemBLS training, it involves training one GMemBLS
and several LMemBLS units, followed by incremental learning
using data augmented from AdaMemBLS. Subsequently, the
weights of each model are adaptively computed and integrated.
From the perspective of an individual MemBLS, the process
entails initial training of the memory module, followed by
training the BLS autoencoder.
The detailed training procedure of AdaMemBLS is outlined
in Algorithm 2.
2) Inference: In autoencoder-based algorithms, it is generally assumed that the training dataset comprises only normal
samples, while the test set includes abnormal samples [30],
[37]. AdaMemBLS refines the anomaly score expression by
combining memory-based and reconstruction scores. Initially,
the final output of AdaMemBLS is computed using (20).
In the inference phase, the focus of AdaMemBLS is
accentuated on distinguishing between abnormal and normal
samples. The feature reconstruction score during testing
is considered more indicative of the discrepancy between
these two categories, partially substituting for the diversity

8338

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Algorithm 2 Training Process of AdaMemBLS
Input: The time series data, X, X ∈ R N ×L·V ; Memory
size of all MemBLS; The number of LMemBLS, N L M B ;
GMemBLS and each LMemBL regularization parameters,
λg and {λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λ N L M B ; A list of Augmentation
function, [Aug1 , Aug2 , . . . , Augn ];
Output: The data O Ada Mem B L S reconstructed by AdaMemBLS;
1: To train GMemBLS, send X and λg to the Algorithm 1;
2: for i in 1, . . . , N L M B do
3:
Divide X equally into N L M B slices to get X slicei
4:
Send X slicei and λi to the Algorithm 1 to train the ith
LMemBLS;
5: end for
6: for Aug in [Aug1 , Aug2 , . . . , Augn ] do
7:
Calculate augmented X ′ = Aug(X ) and feed it to train
GMemBLS and all LMemBLS via (17) and (11);
8: end for
9: Calculate the adaptive weight of each MemBLS via (19)
and obtain the output of AdaMemBLS via (20);
10: return O Ada Mem B L S

TABLE I
DATASETS D ETAIL

dataset, comprising 26 dimensions, was internally collected
from various application server nodes at eBay. The secure
water treatment (SWAT) dataset is derived from 51 sensors
of a critical infrastructure system operating continuously.
Additionally, the server machine dataset (SMD) is a recent
dataset spanning five weeks, obtained and shared by a
prominent Internet corporation [11]. To enable a more effective
comparison of different algorithms, subsets SMD-1-2, SMD1-6, SMD-2-9, and SMD-3-4 are selected, given their varied
anomaly rates in the test set. The statistical details of these
datasets are presented in Table I.
A. Baselines, Metrics, and Setups

score. Consequently, the diversity score is utilized solely for
calculating the weights of individual submodels during the
training phase. The anomaly score’s second component for
AdaMemBLS is calculated as follows:
AdaMemBLS
GMB
Sfeat
= Sfeat
· AdaW0
N
LMB 

X
LMBi
+
Sfeat
· AdaWi

(21)

i=1

where Sfeat signifies the feature reconstruction score, and
AdaWi denotes the adaptive weight of each submodel,
as per (19).
The mean squared error (MSE) score and the feature reconstruction score together constitute AdaMemBLS’s anomaly
score
AS =

C
X

c
X c − OAdaMemBLS

2

c=1

+

C
X

AdaMemBLS
MinMax Sfeat



(22)

c=1

where C indicates the feature channel of the time series data.
To thoroughly account for scale differences across various
AdaMemBLSf
features, Sfeat
is first normalized using MinMax before
being incorporated into the final anomaly score computation.
V. E XPERIMENTS
In all our investigations, we utilized eight datasets. The Mars
Science Laboratory (MSL) rover dataset and the soil moisture
active passive (SMAP) satellite dataset can be obtained from
the GitHub repository [38]. MSL and SMAP datasets were
acquired from NASA, and anomalies in the testing subsets
are expert-labeled. Each dataset has been partitioned into
training and testing subsets. The pooled server metrics (PSM)

1) Baselines: AdaMemBLS will be compared with the
following algorithms: Classic methods: PCA and LOF;
Reconstruction-based methods: AE, TCN-ED, LSTM-ED,
MSCRED [39], Omni [40], UAE [41], and SISVAE [25];
Clustering-based methods: DAGMM [24] and LSTMOC [26]; and GAN-based methods: FGANomaly [11] and
USAD [10].
2) Metrics: Anomaly detection is often viewed as an
imbalanced classification problem. Thus, precision (P), recall
(R), and F1 score (F1), commonly used in anomaly detection,
are adopted as evaluation metrics [10], [11], [42]. Given
the variations in detection due to different thresholds [25],
we compute the area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUROC), the area under the precision–recall curve
(AUPRC), and the best F1 score. As Li et al. [25] discusses,
AUPRC is preferred over AUROC for its better discriminative
ability; thus, this article primarily focuses on the best F1
and AUPRC scores. Considering that anomalies in realworld scenarios often manifest as time-continuous segment
anomalies (event anomalies) [43], point adjustment, widely
used in prior studies [10], [11], [40], [41], is also employed
in our methodology for practical applicability.
3) Implementation Details: PCA and LOF are implemented
using well-developed scikit-learn code. AE, TCN-ED, and
LSTM-ED are built in PyTorch. The DAGMM1 code
is sourced from GitHub, as are FGANomaly,2 USAD,3
MSCRED, Omni, and UAE, following their respective
literatures. LSTM-OC and SISVAE are replicated from their
papers. All tests are conducted on a computer with an Intel
Core i7-8700K CPU, NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080ti graphics
card, 16 GB RAM, and Ubuntu 5.4.0, using PyTorch [44].
1 https://github.com/danieltan07/dagmm
2 https://github.com/sxxmason/FGANomaly
3 https://github.com/manigalati/usad

ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

8339

Fig. 3. Sensitivity of the proposed MemBLS with respect to parameter variations on the MSL dataset is illustrated. In each subfigure, the x-axis represents
different parameters, while the y-axis corresponds to the F1, precision, and recall scores. Notably, the x-axis of the third subfigure employs a logarithmic
scale with base 2. (a) Window size. (b) Memory size. (c) Output regularization. (d) Output incremental αinc . (e) Memory’s beta β.

B. Effect of Parameters
This section explores the impact of various parameters and
factors on the performance of single MemBLS, using the MSL
dataset (Fig. 3).
First, the effect of time window length is analyzed
[Fig. 3(a)]. The optimal performance is observed with a time
window of 3, indicating that MemBLS requires a smaller time
window compared to general deep learning methods, likely
due to its utilization of both global and local information.
Second, the influence of memory capacity is examined
[Fig. 3(b)]. Optimal performance is noted when the model
has 50–100 memory units. Insufficient memory impacts
performance negatively, while excessive memory may lead
to recording too much abnormal data, hindering anomaly
detection.
Third, the output layer regularization coefficient in the BLSdecoder is investigated, with coefficients ranging from 2−10
to 22 . MemBLS shows relative insensitivity to this parameter,
though certain coefficients perform better for the MSL dataset,
such as 2−7 and 2−3 [Fig. 3(c)].
Then, the incremental learning coefficient αinc of the
BLS-decoder, crucial for controlling the incremental learning
algorithm, is considered. An αinc of 0.5 typically yields the
highest F1 score. Lowering this factor increases the model’s
precision but may lead to more false positives. Thus, αinc can
serve as a safety factor for machine runtime monitoring, with
a smaller value indicating a higher detection rate.
Finally, the memory’s coefficient, β, is used to smooth
historical data in memory. As shown in Fig. 3(e), when
β ≤ 0.1, the memory has difficulty in improving model
performance. On the other hand, when β ≥ 0.7, the model
converges well, with lower feature reconstruction scores and
higher F1 scores. Therefore, we set the default value of this
coefficient to 0.9.
C. Comparisons and Analysis
The performance metrics, including F1, precision, recall,
AUROC, and AUPRC, of our proposed AdaMemBLS
algorithm and other baselines are presented for eight datasets
in Table I. F1 and AUPRC scores are selected as primary
comparison metrics due to their effectiveness in distinguishing
between different algorithms [25]. Table II displays the
performance of various algorithms. The bolded numbers
indicate that the algorithm achieved the highest score, while
underlined numbers denote the second-highest score.
The AdaMemBLS algorithm demonstrates superior performance across seven datasets, achieving the highest F1
scores (bolded numbers) and ranking second-best (underlined

numbers) in terms of AUPRC in six datasets. Quantitatively,
AdaMemBLS shows a significant improvement over existing
SOTA models. Compared to the FGANormal (GAN-based),
AdaMemBLS exhibits an overall relative increase of 4.57%
in F1 and 2.98% in AUPRC. Against the top-performing
reconstruction-based model (SISVAE), AdaMemBLS achieves
an improvement of 7.78% in F1 and 1.97% in AUPRC.
In comparison to the best clustering-based model (LSTM-OC),
AdaMemBLS records a notable relative increment of 12.77%
in F1 and 10.85% in AUPRC. Finally, compared to the classic
model PCA, there is an impressive overall relative increase of
20.92% in F1 and 17.15% in AUPRC.
PCA and LOF, the least effective algorithms in our study,
highlight the limitations of classifying data in raw space
for anomaly detection. In contrast, AdaMemBLS, through
its BLS-encoder and memory module, maps data to a highdimensional space, effectively learning normal data features
unattainable by traditional methods. Moreover, PCA and LOF
are constrained by kernel function or density distribution selection, often requiring excessive prior knowledge. AdaMemBLS,
with its randomly initialized, expressively connected (cascade
of feature and enhancement nodes) BLS-encoder, overcomes
tuning difficulties, and achieves better performance than
classic algorithms.
Reconstruction-based unsupervised anomaly detection techniques like AE, TCN-ED, LSTM-ED, and MSCRED, though
capable of effectively reconstructing anomalous data, do not
excel in anomaly identification due to their exceptional
reconstruction abilities. Their dependency on time window
transformation affects their capacity to capture temporal information, altering anomaly detection outcomes. AdaMemBLS
reduces this dependency, allowing more representative feature
learning of normal data. Omni performs well on smaller
datasets but struggles with larger ones like SMAP, PSM, and
SWAT, likely due to the VAE module’s inability to learn
long feature dependencies. SISVAE faces similar challenges
with large-scale datasets due to strict smoothing constraints.
UAE, while generally effective, shows limitations in SWAT,
possibly due to its constrained cross-variable modeling
capability.
AdaMemBLS consistently excels across all datasets, indicating its proficiency in handling various scales and efficiently
learning both global and local data features. GAN-based
models like FGANomaly and USAD show varied adaptability,
with FGANomaly performing better across multiple datasets.
USAD’s inconsistent performance is likely due to the
network’s simplicity. UASD and FGANormaly underperform
on the SMAP dataset compared to AdaMemBLS, potentially
due to the adversarial objective functions not enhancing model

8340

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

TABLE II
C OMPARISONS OF F 1, R, P, AUROC, AND AUPRC OF O URS AND OTHER BASELINES W ITH P OINT A DJUSTMENT ON E IGHT DATASETS

convergence. In contrast, our objective function exhibits more
favorable convergence properties.

TABLE III
A BLATION R ESULTS ON S IX DATASETS

D. Ablation Study
In this section, we examine the influence of the memory
module, data augmentation module, and the AdaMemBLS
components. Experiments are conducted using six datasets,
with the results presented in Table III. Here, “Mem” represents
the Memory module, “Aug” indicates data augmentation, and
“Mul” denotes the utilization of multiple local MemBLS.
The baseline BLS, devoid of any enhancements, exhibits
the lowest performance. However, incorporating either Mem
or Aug independently results in significant improvements. The
combination of BLS with both memory and augmentation
(BLS + Aug + Mem) outperforms the individual additions of
BLS + Aug and BLS + Mem. This enhanced performance is
attributed to the BLS-encoder’s static nature postinitialization,
with only the memory module undergoing updates. Direct
application of augmented data to MemBLS is suboptimal,
highlighting that a solely global MemBLS is insufficient
for effective anomaly detection. The introduction of multiple
local sliced MemBLS (BLS + Mul + Mem) to extract local
temporal features further enhances performance over BLS +
Mem and standalone BLS, with improvements in F1 scores
observed in five out of six datasets, barring SMD-1-6.
AdaMemBLS, which integrates multiple local MemBLS
with an adaptive ensemble mechanism into BLS + Aug +
Mem, outshines BLS + Aug + Mem due to its effective
extraction and fusion of local features. This indicates that
augmenting BLS + Mul + Mem with incremental learning
enhances performance. In certain cases, both BLS + Aug +
Mem and BLS + Ada + Mem exhibit lower AUPRCs
compared to BLS, BLS + Mem, and BLS + Aug,
suggesting that while adding augmented data or multiple local

MemBLS increases diversity, it does not fully leverage the
additional information. This underscores the significance of the
adaptive ensemble mechanism in AdaMemBLS. In conclusion,
AdaMemBLS surpasses all other variant algorithms, affirming
the superior efficacy of our proposed design.
E. Detailed Analysis
1) Visualization Analysis:
a) Adaptive anomaly score: Fig. 4(a) and (b) illustrates
the performance of the AdaMemBLS algorithm on the
SMD-1-6 dataset, depicting point anomalies and segment
anomalies commonly encountered in time series anomaly
monitoring. The first five rows in each figure represent the first
five metrics of the SMD-1-6 dataset. The sixth row displays
the anomaly score and threshold (denoted by a black dashed
line) of AdaMemBLS. The seventh and eighth rows indicate
the model’s anomaly detection results and the actual labels,
respectively.
In Fig. 4(a), AdaMemBLS assigns high anomaly scores
to points in the [600, 700] range, while some points in the
[200, 300] range receive lower scores, potentially serving as
system alerts for monitoring experts.

ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 4.

Visual representation of anomaly detection conducted on the SMD-1-6 dataset. (a) Point anomaly. (b) Segment anomaly.

Fig. 5.

Visualization of the memory module, as applied to the SMD-1-6 dataset, is presented. (a) Sequence length = 5. (b) Sequence length = 10.

Fig. 4(b) shows AdaMemBLS detecting multiple anomalies
within a prolonged anomalous interval, providing repeated
alerts.
Overall, the adaptive anomaly score of AdaMemBLS
effectively distinguishes abnormal data from normal data.
b) Memory record: This section conducts a visual
analysis of the memory in AdaMemBLS, exploring the
features it learns. Fig. 5 contains two subfigures illustrating
the normal data patterns in the time series data recorded
by the memory module for time windows of 5 and 10.
Each row (labeled m 0 , m 1 , . . . , m 4 ) corresponds to the
temporal information recorded by different memory units
(M0 , M1 , . . . , M4 ) for each metric of the SMD-1-6 dataset.
Fig. 5(a) and (b) displays the features recorded by
AdaMemBLS with sequence lengths of 5 and 10, respectively.
The first row’s images capture the time series characteristics
of different memory units at metric m 0 , typically representing a
pattern of an initial rise followed by a fall or a small increase
then decrease. The most distinctive feature, as observed in
m 4 of Fig. 4(a), is characterized by a sharp rise and fall or
a quick drop followed by a rapid increase. This pattern is
evident in the final line of Fig. 5, where M3 and M4 record
such information. These results demonstrate AdaMemBLS’s
robust capability to record normal features.

8341

2) Augmentation Analysis: To investigate the impact of various augmentation functions on AdaMemBLS, we conducted
experiments using two distinct augmentation techniques,
applied sequentially prior to the data’s introduction into
the model for incremental learning. Fig. 6 illustrates
AdaMemBLS’s adaptability to different augmented data types.
The F1 scores, represented in percentiles, are indicated
within the squares: higher scores are shown in brighter blue,
while lower scores are depicted in darker black. The operation
listed on the left denotes the first batch of data processed and
fed into the model, while the operation on the top represents
the second batch.
Key observations include that the model consistently
performs better when the same augmentation function is used
in both the first and second processing stages. However, the
results vary when different functions are used successively
for incremental learning. For instance, model performance
declines when the reverse, modify, or noise operations precede
the scale or negate operations. This can be attributed to
the model’s inability to cope with such augmented data
without undergoing multiple rounds of incremental learning.
Conversely, prioritizing scale and negate operations for initial
incremental learning generally yields better outcomes, likely
because scaling provides a simpler and more stabilizing

8342

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Fig. 6. Impact of various data augmentation techniques on the algorithm is
analyzed using the SMD-1-6 dataset.

time consumption and incurs a higher time cost compared to
earlier reconstruction-based deep learning methods. The use
of an RNN model as its encoder and decoder contributes to
FGANormaly having one of the longest inference times among
the baselines.
4) Complexity Analysis: In this section, we analyze the
computational complexity of MemBLS and AdaMemBLS.
Assuming the data is X, X ∈ R N ×L×V , the primary
computational burden for MemBLS lies in generating feature
and enhancement nodes, and performing the Update and Read
operations of the memory module, along with the pseudoinverse computation.
a) MemBLS complexity analysis: For a straightforward
analysis, we consider n1 and d1 as the number and dimension
of feature nodes, and n2 and d2 as those for enhancement
nodes. The computational complexity of generating feature
nodes is denoted as T F = O(N · L · V · n1 · d1), while
for enhancement nodes, it is T E = O(N · n1 · d1 · n2 · d2).
The overall complexity for node generation, combining both
feature and enhancement nodes, can be expressed as follows:
TFE = T F + T E
= O(N · L · V · n1 · d1) + O(N · n1 · d1 · n2 · d2)
= O(N · max{L · V, n2 · d2} · n1 · d1).
(23)

Fig. 7. Training and testing times of our algorithm, compared with other
algorithms on the MSL dataset.

method of augmentation. Therefore, an optimal approach
involves initially employing different scaling methods for the
model’s incremental learning, followed by the integration of
other augmentation functions. Such a strategy enhances the
performance of AdaMemBLS, making it more effective and
adaptable to varying data scenarios.
3) Time Cost: In this section, Fig. 7 presents a comparison
of the training and testing times required by various algorithms
to achieve optimal performance. “Our5” and “Our10” denote
AdaMemBLS configurations with 5 and 10 local MemBLS
units, respectively. Our algorithm demonstrates faster training
times compared to other nonclassic baselines and outperforms
most baselines in testing time, with the exception of PCA
and USAD. Compared to deep learning methods, the training
speed of “Our5” has been improved by at least 58.44×, and
even up to 221.7× faster than FGANormaly. The testing speed
has been enhanced by at least 2.21×, and can be as much as
27.39× faster than UAE.
This efficiency stems from the BLS approach, which
utilizes pseudo inverse for weight updates during training,
thereby simplifying the process and ensuring fast execution
while maintaining performance on par with deep learning
approaches.
FGANormaly, while exhibiting commendable performance,
does not significantly deviate from other methods in terms of

The computational complexity of the memory module’s
Read and Update operations in MemBLS is analyzed as
follows. We begin with the assumption that the memory
module consists of M memory cells, each with d dimensions,
and that its input, SBLS , is of the same dimension. Focusing on
the Read operation, the primary computational tasks involve
calculating the memory score and generating the memory
module output SMem . The complexity of this operation can
be expressed as follows:
TRead = Tscore + Toutput
= O(N · d · M) + O(N · M · d)
= O(N · M · d).

(24)

The computational complexity of the Update operation in
MemBLS primarily involves calculating the memory score and
updating the memory units. This complexity is delineated as
follows:
TUpdate = Tscore + Tupdate
= O(N · d · M) + M · O(M · log M)
= O(N · M · d)

(25)

where Tupdate includes the execution of the topk(·) operation
on each memory unit mi to determine the subset of queries
associated with that memory unit.
Finally, for the computation of the pseudo inverse of
SMemBLS in MemBLS, as per (6), the computational complexity
is detailed as follows:
TW = O(max{N , 2d} · min{N , 2d}2 )
= O(N · (2d)2 )
= O(N · d 2 ).

(26)

ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

Hence, the overall time complexity of MemBLS can be
approximated as
TMemBLS = TFE + TRead + TUpdate + TW
= O(N · max{L · V, n2 · d2} · n1 · d1)
+ O(N · M · d) + O(N · d 2 ).

(27)

In scenarios where d ≫ M, this complexity simplifies to
TMemBLS = O(N · d 2 ), providing a comprehensive view of
the computational demands of the MemBLS system.
b) AdaMemBLS complexity analysis: Algorithm 2 details
the AdaMemBLS workflow, whose main computational
complexity is akin to the sum of that for a global MemBLS
and NLMB LMemBLS. In this approach, the original data X is
divided into NLMB consecutive segments, X slicei , each segment
being processed by the corresponding ith LMemBLS. For
the calculation of the LMemBLS’s computational complexity,
we substitute N in TMemBLS with k = (N /NLMB ).
The computational complexity of AdaMemBLS can be
expressed as follows:
TAdaMemBLS = TGMemBLS + NLMB · TLMemBLS
= O(N · d 2 ) + NLMB · O(k · d 2 )
= O(2 · N · d 2 ).

(28)

Consequently, the computational complexity of AdaMemBLS
is approximately twice that of MemBLS. This factor makes
AdaMemBLS highly efficient, considering the additional
functionalities and improved performance it offers.
5) Optimal Convergence Analysis: Assuming that the
dataset predominantly contains normal (positive) samples,
represented as X pos , and a minimal number of anomalous
(negative) samples, symbolized as X neg , the objective in
anomaly detection is to refine the methodology such that the
anomaly scores for negative samples exceed those of positive
samples. This approach indicates that the model is converging
toward an optimal trajectory. Hence, it should eventually
satisfy
ASpos >= ASneg .

(29)

By applying (22) and streamlining the description, a simplified
representation of (29) can be achieved
∥Upos Wd − X ∥22 <= ∥Uneg Wd − X ∥22 .

(30)

Given that the majority of the dataset comprises positive
samples, it is sufficient to concentrate on deriving an
approximate solution, which is articulated as follows:
∥Upos Wd − X pos ∥22 <= ∥Uneg Wd − X pos ∥22 .

(31)

Furthermore, according to the notion of information loss [45],
it is plausible to hypothesize the presence of
Upos Wd < X pos
Uneg Wd < X pos .

(32)

Furthermore, given that Wd is determined through the
application of the pseudo inverse and the solution process
entails convex optimization [27], the optimal Wd can

8343

invariably be identified. To ensure convergence, it is merely
required to ascertain that Upos > Uneg .
In the iterative process, the (i + 1)th iteration of U can be
represented as Ui+1 = [SBLS |SMem ], that is,



T
Mi+1 .
(33)
Ui+1 = SBLS | softmax SBLS Mi+1
When optimization has not started, the similarity between
SBLS,pos and SBLS,neg with M is close, as follows:
0
0
SBLS,pos
M0T ≃ SBLS,neg
M0T .

(34)

According to (11), optimization increases the similarity
between M and SBLS,pos by using only positive samples during
the update process, as follows:
i+1
T
i
SBLS,pos
Mi+1
>= SBLS,pos
MiT .

(35)

Upon integrating (34) with (35), it can be deduced that
i+1
T
0
0
SBLS,pos
Mi+1
> SBLS,pos
M0T ≃ SBLS,neg
M0T
i+1
T
i
0
SBLS,neg
Mi+1
<= SBLS,neg
MiT ≃ SBLS,neg
M0T .

(36)

The second line in the equation indicates that the similarity
between SBLS,neg and M is decreasing or approaching
closeness, as the update is only based on positive samples.
Drawing upon this equation alongside (33), the update
mechanisms for Upos and Uneg can be elucidated



T
Ui+1,pos = SBLS,pos | softmax SBLS,pos Mi+1
Mi+1



T
Ui+1,neg = SBLS,neg | softmax SBLS,neg Mi+1
Mi+1 .
(37)
Integrating the previously mentioned equation with the
optimization process equation, (36), it can be established that
Ui+1,pos > Ui+1,neg .
Thus far, evidence has been presented to support the
proposed methodology’s optimal convergence performance.
When memory updates are performed in the correct direction,
the method is observed to converge to an optimal state. This
observation is consistent with the insights from the “Effect
of Parameters” section, which emphasizes the importance of
maintaining a memory coefficient greater than zero to achieve
the desired results. Nonetheless, given practical convergence
constraints such as smoothness, a coefficient value of greater
than or equal to 0.7 is considered adequate. This threshold
allows for a balance between the rate of convergence and
the model’s generalization ability, ensuring both efficiency and
effectiveness in the optimization process.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we introduce a novel anomaly detection
algorithm, AdaMemBLS, which integrates broad learning
and memory bank to effectively discern abnormal data
patterns. To enhance the model’s ability to learn time
series characteristics, a novel broad learning incremental
algorithm, coupled with data augmentation, is incorporated
into AdaMemBLS to bolster its performance and robustness.
Additionally, a more diverse ensemble algorithm and a
discriminative anomaly evaluation score are employed in
AdaMemBLS for anomaly detection. Extensive empirical
studies on various real-world datasets demonstrate that

8344

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

AdaMemBLS outperforms SOTA methods while reducing
training and testing time costs.
In the future, we shall migrate AdaMemBLS to unsupervised anomaly detection in images and videos, further optimize
the network structure, and pursue the theoretical analysis of
our method.
R EFERENCES
[1] G. Li, Z. Yu, K. Yang, M. Lin, and C. L. P. Chen, “Exploring
feature selection with limited labels: A comprehensive survey of semisupervised and unsupervised approaches,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., pp. 1–20, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3397878.
[2] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
[3] Z. Zhong, Z. Yu, Y. Yang, W. Wang, and K. Yang, “PatchAD: A
lightweight patch-based MLP-mixer for time series anomaly detection,”
2024, arXiv:2401.09793.
[4] Z. Zhong, Z. Yu, X. Xi, Y. Xu, J. Chen, and K. Yang, “SimAD: A
simple dissimilarity-based approach for time series anomaly detection,”
2024, arXiv:2405.11238.
[5] W. Chen, K. Yang, Z. Yu, Y. Shi, and C. L. P. Chen, “A survey on
imbalanced learning: Latest research, applications and future directions,”
Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1–51, May 2024.
[6] Y. Fu and F. Xue, “MAD: Self-supervised masked anomaly detection
task for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.
(IJCNN), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[7] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
[8] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly
detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
[9] M. Munir, S. A. Siddiqui, A. Dengel, and S. Ahmed, “DeepAnT: A deep
learning approach for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 1991–2005, 2019.
[10] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.
[11] B. Du, X. Sun, J. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Wang, and L. Sun, “AN-based
anomaly detection for multivariate time series using polluted training
set,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12208–12219,
2021.
[12] C. Fan, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, W. Wang, C. Zhang, and H. Huang,
“Heterogeneous memory enhanced multimodal attention model for video
question answering,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 1999–2007.
[13] A. Kumar et al., “Ask me anything: Dynamic memory networks for
natural language processing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2016, pp. 1378–1387. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.
mlr.press/v48/kumar16.html
[14] Z. Zhong, K. Yang, Z. Yu, Y. Shi, and C. L. Philip Chen, “Towards
efficient anomaly detection using memory broad learning system,” in
Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Control Sci. Syst. Eng. (ICCSSE), Jun. 2023,
pp. 252–257.
[15] G. Sun, Y. Hua, G. Hu, and N. Robertson, “MAMBA: Multi-level
aggregation via memory bank for video object detection,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., May 2021, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2620–2627.
[16] H. Lv, C. Chen, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Li, and J. Yang, “Learning
normal dynamics in videos with meta prototype network,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 15420–15429.
[17] L. Yang, S. Song, and C. L. P. Chen, “Transductive transfer learning
based on broad learning system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man,
Cybern. (SMC), Oct. 2018, pp. 912–917.
[18] R. Xie, C.-M. Vong, C. L. P. Chen, and S. Wang, “Dynamic network
structure: Doubly stacking broad learning systems with residuals and
simpler linear model transmission,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
Intell., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1378–1395, Dec. 2022.
[19] J. Du, C.-M. Vong, and C. L. P. Chen, “Novel efficient RNN and LSTMlike architectures: Recurrent and gated broad learning systems and their
applications for text classification,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 3,
pp. 1586–1597, Mar. 2021.

[20] X.-N. Fan and S.-W. Zhang, “LPI-BLS: Predicting lncRNA–protein
interactions with a broad learning system-based stacked ensemble
classifier,” Neurocomputing, vol. 370, pp. 88–93, Dec. 2019.
[21] M. Xu, M. Han, C. L. P. Chen, and T. Qiu, “Recurrent broad learning
systems for time series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 4,
pp. 1405–1417, Apr. 2020.
[22] L. Su, L. Xiong, and J. Yang, “Multi-Attn BLS: Multi-head attention
mechanism with broad learning system for chaotic time series
prediction,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 132, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 109831.
[23] J. Weston, S. Chopra, and A. Bordes, “Memory networks,” 2014,
arXiv:1410.3916.
[24] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for
unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
2018, pp. 1–19.
[25] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time
series with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1177–1191,
Mar. 2021.
[26] T. Ergen and S. S. Kozat, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with
LSTM neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 3127–3141, Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8836638
[27] C. L. P. Chen and Z. Liu, “Broad learning system: An effective
and efficient incremental learning system without the need for deep
architecture,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1,
pp. 10–24, Jan. 2018.
[28] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly
detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349.
[29] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
pp. 1705–1714.
[30] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory
networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–
12080, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3139916.
[31] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning
via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3733–3742.
[32] C. L. P. Chen, Z. Liu, and S. Feng, “Universal approximation
capability of broad learning system and its structural variations,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1191–1204,
Apr. 2019.
[33] B. A. Olshausen and D. J. Field, “Sparse coding with an overcomplete
basis set: A strategy employed by v1?” Vis. Res., vol. 37, no. 23,
pp. 3311–3325, Dec. 1997.
[34] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervision-augmented deep autoencoder for
unsupervised visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 13834–13847, Dec. 2022.
[35] L. Shen, Z. Yu, Q. Ma, and J. T. Kwok, “Time series anomaly detection
with multiresolution ensemble decoding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 35, 2021, pp. 9567–9575.
[36] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein generative
adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017,
pp. 214–223.
[37] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and
K. Veeramachaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using
generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data,
Dec. 2020, pp. 33–43.
[38] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and
nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[39] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[40] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[41] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An
evaluation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time
series,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2508–2517, Jun. 2022.

ZHONG et al.: AdaMemBLS FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

[42] N. Laptev, S. Amizadeh, and I. Flint, “Generic and scalable framework
for automated time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. 21th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2015,
pp. 1939–1947.
[43] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
[44] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019.
[45] Y. Yu et al., “White-box transformers via sparse rate reduction,” in Proc.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2024.

Zhijie Zhong received the B.S. degree from Harbin
Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2022.
He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
His research interests include data mining,
machine learning, time series analysis, anomaly
detection, and large language model (LLM).

Zhiwen Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the City University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, in 2008.
He is a Professor with the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, South China University of
Technology, Guangzhou, China. He has authored or
coauthored more than 150 refereed journal articles
and international conference papers, including 50
IEEE T RANSACTIONS papers.
Dr. Yu is an Associate Editor of IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND
C YBERNETICS : S YSTEMS.

Ziwei Fan received the B.S. degree in natural sciences from the University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
U.K., in 2011. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou, China.
Her research interests include machine learning
and AI-based imaging diagnosis.

8345

C. L. Philip Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.S.
degree in electrical engineering from the University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 1985, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 1988.
He is the Chair Professor and the Dean of the
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South
China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
Being a Program Evaluator of the Accreditation
Board of Engineering and Technology Education
(ABET) in USA, for computer engineering, electrical engineering, and software engineering programs, he successfully architects
the University of Macau’s Engineering and Computer Science programs
receiving accreditations from Washington/Seoul Accord through Hong Kong
Institute of Engineers (HKIE), which is considered as his utmost contribution
in engineering/computer science education for Macau as the former Dean of
the Faculty of Science and Technology. His current research interests include
cybernetics, systems, and computational intelligence.
Dr. Chen is a fellow of AAAS, IAPR, CAA, and HKIE, and a member
of the Academia Europaea (AE), the European Academy of Sciences and
Arts (EASA), and the International Academy of Systems and Cybernetics
Science (IASCYS). He received IEEE Norbert Wiener Award in 2018 for
his contribution in systems and cybernetics, and machine learnings. He is
also a highly cited researcher by Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019.
He was a recipient of the 2016 Outstanding Electrical and Computer Engineers
Award from his alma mater, Purdue University, in 1988. He was the Chair
of TC 9.1 Economic and Business Systems of International Federation of
Automatic Control from 2015 to 2017 and currently is a Vice President of
Chinese Association of Automation (CAA). He was the IEEE Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics Society President from 2012 to 2013, the Editor-in-Chief
for the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND C YBERNETICS :
S YSTEMS from 2014 to 2019, and currently, he is the Editor-in-Chief for the
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, and an Associate Editor of IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON A RTIFICIAL I NTELLIGENCE and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON F UZZY S YSTEMS .

Kaixiang Yang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from the University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2012, the
M.S. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, China, in 2015, and the Ph.D. degree from
the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
China, in 2020.
He has been a Research Engineer with the 7th
Research Institute, China Electronics Technology
Group Corporation, Guangzhou, from 2015 to 2017,
and has been a Postdoctoral Researcher with Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China, from 2020 to 2021. He is now with the School of Computer Science
and Engineering, South China University of Technology. His research interests
include pattern recognition, machine learning, and industrial data intelligence.