1038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks via
Multiview and Multiscale Contrastive Learning
Shuxin Qin , Yongcan Luo , Student Member, IEEE, Jing Zhu , Gaofeng Tao ,
Jingya Zheng , and Zhongjun Ma

Abstract—Detecting abnormal nodes from attributed networks
plays an important role in various applications, including cybersecurity, finance, and social networks. Most existing methods
focus on learning different scales of graphs or using augmented
data to improve the quality of feature representation. However,
the performance is limited due to two critical problems. First, the
high sensitivity of attributed networks makes it uncontrollable
and uncertain to use conventional methods for data augmentation, leading to limited improvement in representation and generalization capabilities. Second, under the unsupervised paradigm,
anomalous nodes mixed in the training data may interfere with
the learning of normal patterns and weaken the discrimination
ability. In this work, we propose a novel multiview and multiscale
contrastive learning framework to address these two issues.
Specifically, a network augmentation method based on parameter
perturbation is introduced to generate augmented views for both
node–node and node–subgraph level contrast branches. Then,
cross-view graph contrastive learning is employed to improve
the representation without the need for augmented data. We
also provide a cycle training strategy where normal samples
detected in the former step are collected for an additional
training step. In this way, the ability to learn normal patterns
is enhanced. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our method outperforms the existing stateof-the-art baselines.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, attributed networks, contrastive learning, parameter perturbation.

I. INTRODUCTION

R

ECENT years have experienced rapid advancements in
real-world scenarios leveraging attributed networks, e.g.,
social networks [1], IoT networks [2], infrastructure networks [3], and financial transaction networks [4]. Anomaly
detection from attributed networks holds great importance as
Received 24 February 2024; revised 26 October 2024 and 28 November
2024; accepted 5 December 2024. Date of publication 17 December 2024;
date of current version 2 June 2025. This work was supported in part by the
internal research program of Purple Mountain Laboratories. (Corresponding
authors: Shuxin Qin; Gaofeng Tao.)
Shuxin Qin and Jing Zhu are with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing
211111, China (e-mail: qinshuxin@pmlabs.com.cn).
Yongcan Luo is with the Department of Computer Science, City University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 999077, China.
Gaofeng Tao is with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China,
and also with Shandong Future Network Research Institute, Jinan 250003,
China (e-mail: taogaofeng@pmlabs.com.cn).
Jingya Zheng and Zhongjun Ma are with Shandong Future Network
Research Institute, Jinan 250003, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSS.2024.3514148

it plays a key role in minimizing risks and preventing adverse
events. As we know, an attributed network can be defined as a
graph in which nodes and/or edges have attributes. Therefore,
anomaly detection on attributed networks is also known as
graph anomaly detection (GAD) in most security-related scenarios, such as fraud detection [5], cybersecurity [6], and social
spam detection [7]. Generally, GAD aims to identify anomalous
nodes whose behaviors significantly differ from those of the
majority in attributed networks. Given the intricate topological structure and characteristics of the nodes, the anomalies
can be classified into different categories: structural anomalies
and contextual anomalies [8]. For example, in social networks,
unexpected social activities indicated by node relationships
represent structural anomalies, whereas malicious users whose
attributes markedly differ from those of their neighbors are
contextual anomalies.
GAD is a challenging task due to the complex graph structure, the lack of positive samples, and the high cost of annotations. In the past few years, a considerable number of works
[9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] have been presented to
solve the problem in an unsupervised manner. Earlier research
[17], [18], [19] mainly resorts to shallow learning methods to
learn graph structures and measure the anomalies. For example, in [18], a learning framework is proposed to characterize
attribute reconstruction residuals and correlational patterns with
network structure information. Residual errors generated by
a regression function are used to detect anomalies. Similarly,
attribute and network structure information are used together for
simultaneous attribute selection and anomaly detection in [19].
Despite the simplicity of these shallow methods, they cannot
capture the complex correlational patterns in the graph data.
Thanks to the rapid development of deep neural networks,
recent deep GAD methods have made impressive progress [20],
[21]. Graph neural networks (GNNs) and deep graph representation have become indispensable to deal with the highdimensional and complex correlated graph data [22]. Generally,
GNNs learn the representations of a node by aggregating information from its neighboring nodes in the graph. Therefore,
both the attributes of the individual nodes and the structure
of the entire graph can be easily captured by GNNs. CoLA
[8] employs a GNN-based contrastive learning framework to
model the relationship between each node and its partial neighboring substructure (node–subgraph contrast). To improve the
representation capability and capture the anomalous patterns

2329-924X © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

from different perspectives, ANEMONE [11] adds a node–node
contrast branch to detect anomalies in multiple graph scales.
GRADATE [23] further improves the representation of local
features and structure for subgraphs through contrastive learning from different perspectives. The view is generated by data
augmentation, which is an efficient strategy to improve generalization and self-adaption ability. AugAN [24] enhances the
model generalization ability of GAD through a well-designed
data augmentation method, which improves the quantity of
labeled anomalies and enhances the diversity of normal backgrounds. In summary, most existing methods focus on learning
different scales of graphs or using augmented data to improve
the quality of node embeddings and structure representations.
Despite the remarkable progress in GAD, its performance is
still limited due to two critical problems. First, due to the high
sensitivity of attributed networks, it is uncontrollable and uncertain to directly apply conventional data augmentation methods,
resulting in limited improvement in representation and generalization capabilities. In practice, we usually have to try different
data augmentation strategies, which is inefficient and unreliable. Even worse, data augmentation is not always effective.
Second, under the unsupervised paradigm, anomalous nodes
mixed in the training data may interfere with the learning of
normal patterns and thus weaken the discrimination capability
to some extent. Considering that anomalies are the nodes deviating from the normal patterns, the performance is limited by
the mixed training data.
To solve the above challenges, in this article, we propose
a multiview and multiscale contrastive learning framework for
graph anomaly detection (MMGAD). It is a multitask learning
framework in which the multiview graph contrastive learning
(GCL) task is designed as an auxiliary task to the multiscale
learning task. Specifically, the multiscale task is used to capture
anomalous patterns at the node level and subgraph level by
performing node–node and node–subgraph contrasts in parallel.
Each contrast branch employs a GNN-based network to learn
the latent patterns. The multiview task is designed to improve
the representation of the two branches by cross-view GCL. In
contrast to existing methods, MMGAD generates augmented
views for both node–node and node–subgraph contrasts using
a novel network augmentation method. The method is based on
parameter perturbation, which avoids modifying the sensitive
training data. With the augmented views, GCL can enforce the
agreement between positive pairs compared to negative pairs
at the cross-view level, resulting in a better representation. We
also provide a novel cycle training strategy to enhance the
learning of normal patterns and thus improve the discrimination
capability. Normal samples recognized with high confidence in
the former step are collected as training data for an additional
training step. After a certain number of steps, reliable normal
samples can be picked out without the help of ground truth
labels, and the model can be further refined step by step with
the relatively pure training samples.
In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows.
1) We develop a novel multiview and multiscale contrastive
learning framework, MMGAD, for anomaly detection
on attributed networks. It is an unsupervised multitask

1039

learning framework that learns latent patterns at different
views and scales.
2) We utilize a network augmentation technique to create
correlated views for cross-view contrast. In contrast to
existing approaches that directly augment graph data,
our method relies on parameter perturbation. The crossview GCL enhances both node–node and node–subgraph
branches.
3) We propose a cycle training strategy in which normal
samples detected in the former step are collected for
an additional training step. It is an online sampling and
training strategy that can refine the model in a circular
manner.
4) The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on six public datasets. Ablation study and detailed
analysis are provided.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II presents a brief overview of related work. Section III
outlines the problem formulation. Section IV details the proposed method. Section V presents the experimental results.
Finally, Section VI offers the conclusions.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we briefly review previous work: anomaly
detection on attributed networks, graph representation learning,
and contrastive learning. Finally, we provide a summary of
comparisons between the proposed method and its related work.
A. Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks
Detecting anomalies from attributed networks is of great
importance as it has a vital function in mitigating risks.
Attributed networks can be defined as graphs with attributed
nodes and edges. So, the task is also referred to as GAD, which
is different from other kind of tasks (e.g., time series [25] and
videos [26]). Before the era of deep learning, traditional methods of shallow learning are often used for GAD. Perozzi and
Akoglu [17] proposed a quality measure strategy for attributed
neighborhoods that uses structure and attributes together to
quantify both internal consistency and external separability.
Li et al. [18] characterized the residuals of attribute reconstruction and their correlational features to detect anomalies. Peng
et al. [19] improved GAD performance by jointly considering
CUR decomposition (C, U, and R stand for the three matrices
into which this decomposition can break a matrix.) and residual
analysis results. The performance of these methods is limited
by their shallow mechanisms.
Recently, deep neural networks have shown tremendous potential in mining latent patterns from high-dimensional graph
data [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33]. Contrastive learning
method is frequently employed for deep GAD. In [8], the node–
subgraph contrast method is first proposed to learn the representative information from the previously sampled node–subgraph
instance pairs. This method has been widely used due to its simple and effective contrastive learning mechanism. To improve
the feature representation, node–node and subgraph–subgraph
contrasts are proposed by [11] and [23], respectively. Utilizing

1040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

a multiscale learning strategy can further explore the latent
patterns to achieve better performance. The reconstruction strategy is another viable choice for GAD. In [9], an autoencoder
framework is employed to reconstruct the original graph with
the learned node embeddings from GNN. Anomalies are then
flagged by reconstruction errors. Similarly, Zhang et al. [13]
provided a masked autoencoder-based reconstruction module
to identify the nodes with large reconstruction errors. In [34],
attribute reconstruction based on generative learning schema
is proposed to identify the distances between nodes and their
neighbors in the attribute space. In contrast to the methods
mentioned above, Ding et al. [35] used a generative adversarial
training strategy to improve the generalization ability of the
model on newly added data. In [36], anomalies are distinguished by a learned hypersphere with normal nodes clustered
around the center.
B. Graph Representation Learning
GNN is a powerful tool for graph representation learning.
Nodes from attributed networks are richly related to each other,
which can be well captured by graph learning. Many different
types of GNNs have been developed and used for graph representation, e.g., graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [37],
graph attention network (GAT) [38], and GraphSage [39]. In
[27], graph learning is combined with Transformer [40] to better
represent the roles of nodes in an evolving graph space. Similarly, graph structure learning module [41] based on Gumbelsoftmax sampling is integrated into the encoding blocks of the
Transformer. To improve graph learning of normal patterns,
hierarchical memory blocks are developed in [16] to record
prototypical patterns of normal samples and prevent unexpected
generalization to abnormal samples. In [42], graph representation learning is enhanced through local and global regularization techniques. In [43], a Haar-type graph framelet network
is introduced for multiscale learning on heterophilous graphs.
In [44], quantum walk kernels are introduced to better capture
complex inherent features of graphs for classification purposes.
In [45], an adaptive multifrequency GNN framework is designed to capture both low- and high-frequency information
of neighboring nodes. This approach allows for the creation
of more distinct representations. In general, GNNs are widely
employed to model graph data and to learn the relationships
between nodes.

between the nodes. To deal with graph data, researchers have
developed different augmentation strategies that target either
node attributes or the structure of the graph. Ding et al. [48]
presented a structured survey of graph data augmentation. You
et al. [10] designed four types of graph data augmentations
[node dropping, edge perturbation, attribute masking (AM), and
subgraph]. The views generated by these strategies are then
used to maximize mutual information. In [49], graph views
are generated by an adaptive augmentation method that can
preserve intrinsic structures and attributes. In contrast to the
predefined view generation methods, adaptive augmentation
strategies can provide more informative contrastive views, leading to better performance. In [50], graph views are generated by
perturbing the node embeddings instead of introducing complex
operations over graphs. Then, a neighbor-oriented contrastive
loss is developed for training. In the GAD task, the views are
usually generated by AM or subgraph extraction. Different contrastive learning methods (node–node [8], node–subgraph [11],
and subgraph–subgraph [23]) have been developed to improve
the performance. Unlike the above methods based on graph
data augmentation, in [51], the GNN encoder is perturbed to
generate an augmented branch for learning. Such methods can
maintain the semantics of highly sensitive graph data while producing a qualified view for contrast. In general, augmentation
is designed to generate different views for contrastive learning.
The objective of contrastive learning is to develop an embedding space where similar sample pairs are positioned close
together, while dissimilar pairs are located farther apart. With
the limited training data, contrastive learning can maximize the
utilization of training data to improve pattern representation and
generalization capabilities.
In this article, we present MMGAD that uses node–node
and node–subgraph contrasts as a foundation and utilizes GCL
to improve representation learning. The parameter perturbation method [51] is employed to create views for cross-view
contrast. We also provide a cycle training strategy to refine
the model. To summarize, MMGAD differs from the related
work [23] in three main aspects: 1) MMGAD utilizes a network
view augmentation method based on parameter perturbation for
cross-view GCL; 2) MMGAD performs additional graph-level
GCL for both node–node and node–subgraph branches; and 3)
MMGAD introduces a new cycle training strategy to improve
performance.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION

C. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning aims to improve performance by matching representations under appropriate transformations [10]. A
comprehensive overview of mainstream contrastive learning
approaches in various domains is provided in [46]. Typically,
data augmentation techniques are employed initially to create
various views for learning. For time series or visual data, Gaussian noise and random/adaptive masking [47] are commonly
utilized for data augmentation and view generation. However,
the attributed networks are more complex due to the correlations

In this article, we focus on the problem of detecting anomalies from the attributed graph. Let G = (V, E, X) be an attributed graph. It is an undirected graph with a node set V =
{v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } and an edge set E. X ∈ Rn×d denotes the attribute matrix. There are n nodes, each of which has an attribute
vector with length d. Thus, the attributes for the node vi can be
defined as xi ∈ Rd , 1 ⩽ i ⩽ n. The edge set E is based on an
adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n , which represents the underlying
graph structure of G. Specifically, Ai,j = 1 indicates that there
is an edge between nodes vi and vj , otherwise Ai,j = 0.

QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF THE NOTATIONS
Notations

Definitions

G = (V, E, X)
V
E
X ∈ Rn×d
A ∈ Rn×n
x i ∈ Rd
vi
Gi
Xi ∈ Rm×d
S : (·)
n
d
m

An undirected attributed graph
The node set of G
The edge set of G
The attribute matrix of G
The adjacency matrix of G
The attribute vector for the ith node in G
The ith node in V
The subgraph of the target node vi
The attribute matrix of subgraph Gi with m nodes
Learned anomaly score function for G.
The number of nodes in G
The dimension of node attributes in G
The size of subgraph

f (·, θ)
Hinn , Ĥinn
Hins , Ĥins
hinn
hins
einn , eins

The GNN module with weight parameters θ
Graph representations of Gi at node–node level
Graph representations of Gi at node–subgraph level
Node embedding of vi by GNN at node–node level
Graph embedding of vi by GNN at node–subgraph level
Node embeddings of vi by MLPs

The goal of anomaly detection on attributed networks is to
identify anomalous nodes in the graph. Due to the unsupervised
manner, there is no ground truth indicating which nodes are
positive. That is to say, the graph data mixed with anomalous
nodes as rare categories are directly used for training any annotation. Generally, given an attributed graph G = (V, E, X), the
target is to learn a score function S : (·), which takes the graph
G as input and assigns an anomaly score to each node in G. A
larger score indicates that the corresponding node is of higher
abnormality. With a proper threshold, anomalous nodes can be
flagged easily. For convenience, the main notations used in this
article are summarized in Table I.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Overall Framework
The overall architecture of the proposed framework,
MMGAD, is shown in Fig. 1. It is an unsupervised and multitask framework that partially follows the mainstream workflow:
sampling, contrastive learning, and scoring. In the sampling
stage, target node vi and its subgraph Gi are first generated.
Then, they are fed into the proposed model for contrastive
learning. The subgraphs around the target nodes are sampled
using the popular random walk with restart (RWR) method
[52], which has also been used in many previous works.
The proposed model consists of two parallel branches for
multiscale learning: node–node contrast and node–subgraph
contrast. Each branch uses GNN-based networks to learn the
latent patterns from the input subgraph data. To improve the
representation and generalization capabilities, we provide a
multiview GCL method as an auxiliary task for the multiscale
learning task. Unlike existing methods that generate views by
data augmentation, we directly augment the GNN modules by
perturbing the training parameters to generate new views for
graph-level contrastive learning. More specifically, a new view

1041

is generated in each branch by perturbing the parameters of the
corresponding GNN module. For example, the GNN module
f (·, θns ) for node–subgraph contrast is perturbed to generate

). We consider this as a
a new module defined as f (·, θns
new view from the perspective of networks (GNN function).
With the same input data Gi , the two views then output two
representations, denoted as Hins and Ĥins . Finally, contrastive
learning is used at the graph level to maximize the agreement
of the two representations. In the scoring stage, the results
from the two branches are combined by a weighted sum. We
also develop a cycle training strategy that selects nodes with a
high likelihood of being normal for an additional training step.
This is an online sampling and training method that allows for
continuous refinement of the model in an iterative process.
B. Multiscale Contrastive Learning
Multiscale contrastive learning is used to capture anomalous patterns at different scales. The task consists of two levels: node–node and node–subgraph contrasts. The node–node
contrast mainly focuses on contextual anomalies, whereas the
node–subgraph contrast captures the abnormal patterns of structural anomalies. The input for multiscale contrastive learning
consists of the target nodes along with their subgraphs. To avoid
information leakage, the target nodes within the corresponding
subgraphs are masked using zero vectors. For contrast, we must
first establish the positive and negative pairs. More precisely, a
node and its subgraph form a positive pair. In contrast, a node
and a subgraph of the other nodes form a negative pair.
1) Node–Node Contrast: Given a node vi with attributes
xi and its subgraph Gi , the goal of node–node contrast is to
maximize the agreement between the embedding of vi and the
embedding of the corresponding masked node in Gi . Specifically, the embedding of the masked node is aggregated from the
other nodes of Gi . First, a single-layer GNN module f (·, θnn )
with weight parameters θnn is used to learn the representation
Hinn for the subgraph Gi
Hinn = f (Gi , θnn )
i
= σ(D

− 12

i D
i
A

− 12

Xi θnn )

(1)

i = Ai + I is the adjacency matrix with self-loop
where A

added, Di represents the degree of Gi , Xi is the attribute matrix of Gi , and σ(·) refers to the PReLU activation function.
Although the target node in Gi is masked, the GNN module
can easily aggregate messages for the target node from its
neighbors. The target node embedding hinn is selected from the
learned subgraph representation Hinn .
For contrast, we should also learn an embedding of the original node vi . In addition, the node features should be mapped
in the same hidden space. Therefore, the weight parameters
should be shared with hinn . Given the attribute vector xi of vi ,
a multilayer perceptron (MLP) module is used to compute the
node embedding einn
einn = MLP(xi ) = σ(xi θnn ).

(2)

1042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed MMGAD. It consists of three main components: sampling, contrastive learning, and scoring. In the sampling phase,
target node vi and its subgraph Gi are generated for training and inference. In the contrastive learning stage, there are two parallel branches for node–node
contrast and node–subgraph contrast, respectively. In each branch, a new GNN view is generated by parameter perturbation-based network augmentation.
Then, graph-level contrastive learning is used to maximize the agreement of the two views. For scoring, the results from two branches are merged for both
cycle training and anomaly detection. It is worth noting that the processes associated with the green line are only activated in the training phase.

With hinn and einn , we can conduct contrast learning by
maximizing the agreement. In detail, we use a bilinear layer
to measure their similarity

need to define a new MLP module. Similarly, the node features
are mapped in the same hidden space as the subgraph features.
The node embedding eins can be calculated as follows:
eins = MLP(xi ) = σ(xi θns ).

sinn = Bilinear(hinn , einn )
= Sigmoid(hinn Wnn (einn ) )

(3)

where Wnn is the weight matrix of the discriminator for node–
node contrast. The aim of contrasting is to make the similarities
of positive pairs tend toward 1 and negative pairs toward 0.
Therefore, cross-entropy loss is used for contrastive learning
Lnn = −

n


(yi log(sinn ) + (1 − yi )log(1 − sinn ))

(4)

where the ground truth label yi is set to 1 for positive pairs and
0 for negative pairs.
2) Node–Subgraph Contrast: Given the same node vi with
attributes xi and its subgraph Gi , node–subgraph contrast aims
to maximize the agreement between the embedding of vi and
the embedding of Gi . Similarly, a single-layer GNN module
f (·, θns ) with weight parameters θns is used to learn the representation Hins for the subgraph Gi
Hins = f (Gi , θns )
i
= σ(D

− 12

i D
i
A

− 12

Xi θns ).

Before contrast, a Readout module is defined to further transform the learned representation Hins into a new embedding
vector hins . Specifically, the average pool function is employed
as the Readout function. It is defined as follows:
hins = Readout(Hins ) =

n
i −1
j=0

i=1

(5)

Here, the node–subgraph contrast shares the same input with
the node–node contrast. However, they are two independent and
parallel branches. To learn the embedding of node vi , we also

(6)

Hins [j, :]
ni

(7)

where ni is the number of the nodes in the subgraph Gi , and
Hins [j, :] is the jth row of the matrix Hins . In this way, the node
embedding eins and the subgraph embedding hins have the same
shape. Then, the bilinear layer is used again to measure their
similarity
sins = Bilinear(hins , eins )
= Sigmoid(hins Wns (eins ) ).

(8)

Here, Wnn is the weight matrix of the discriminator for node–
subgraph contrast. Likewise, the objective function of node–
subgraph contrasting learning is defined as
Lns = −

n

(yi log(sins ) + (1 − yi )log(1 − sins ))

(9)

i=1

where the ground truth label yi is set to 1 for positive pairs and
0 for negative pairs.

QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

C. Multiview Contrastive Learning
The two GNN modules for graph learning defined above
are key members of the multiscale contrast. To improve the
representation of graph learning, multiview contrastive learning
methods are often used. In general, a new view should first
be generated by graph augmentation. The principle is to learn
representations that are robust to data transformations [51].
However, the semantic patterns may be violated by the data
augmentation. Although many impressive strategies have been
proposed to mitigate the problem, such as adaptive augmentation [47] and the use of domain knowledge [53], the efficiency
and flexibility are still limited.
Unlike the existing methods that directly augment the graph
data, we simply perturb the GNN modules for multiview contrastive learning. The GNN modules are augmented by parameter perturbation to generate new GNN views. Specifically, we
perturb the GNN modules f (·, θnn ) and f (·, θns ) to generate


f (·, θnn
) and f (·, θns
), respectively. The functions of perturbation are defined as

= θnn + λ · Δθnn ,
θnn

2
Δθnn ∼ N (0, σnn
)

(10)


θns
= θns + λ · Δθns ,

2
Δθns ∼ N (0, σns
).

(11)

Here, λ is the coefficient that scales the magnitudes of the two
perturbations, and Δθnn and Δθns are randomly sampled from
2
and
Gaussian distributions with zero means and variances σnn
2
, respectively. With the perturbed modules, we can easily
σns
produce new learned representations. For node–node contrast
branch, a new learned representation Ĥinn is calculated by the

). Similarly, Ĥins is computed
augmented GNN view f (·, θnn

). It is worth noting that
by the augmented GNN view f (·, θns
the GNN module and its augmented view share the same input
graph data Gi . The GNN functions are defined as

)
Ĥinn = f (Gi , θnn

(12)


).
Ĥins = f (Gi , θns

(13)

Then, we use the normalized temperature-scaled crossentropy loss for multiview GCL. The loss is designed to enforce
the agreement between positive pairs compared to negative
pairs. Inspired by [51], we use graph-level contrastive learning
to improve context expression. To be specific, with batch representations H = {H0 , . . . , Hb−1 } and Ĥ = {Ĥ0 , . . . , Ĥb−1 },
(Hi , Ĥi ) is a positive pair and (Hi , Hj ) is a negative pair.
Here, b is the batch size for training and i ∈ [0, b − 1] , j ∈
[0, b − 1] , i = j. The basic loss function Lcl is defined as
exp(sim(Hi , Ĥi )/τ )
Lclb (Hi , Ĥi ) = −log b−1
i
j
j=0,j=i exp(sim(H , H )/τ )

(14)

1
Lclb (Hi , Ĥi ).
b

(15)

b−1

Lcl (H, Ĥ) =

i=0

Here, τ is the temperature parameter and sim(·, ·) is a cosine
similarity function defined as follows:
sim(Hi , Hj ) =

Hi · Hj
.
Hi  Hj 

(16)

1043

Finally, we can compute the cross-view contrastive loss at the
graph level for node–node and node–subgraph branches. The
total loss Lmv for multiview is obtained by adding the two
cross-view losses
Lmv = Lcl (Hnn , Ĥnn ) + Lcl (Hns , Ĥns )

(17)

where Hnn , Ĥnn , Hns , and Ĥns are batch features. For example, Hnn = {H0nn , . . . , Hb−1
nn }.
According to [54] and [55], alignment and uniformity are
two key metrics to measure the quality of contrastive learning.
When the positive pairs are sampled from the data space, the
two metrics can be defined as follows:


2
f (x, θ) − f (y, θ)2
(18)
Lalign (f, θ) 
E
(x,y)∼ppos

Luniform (f, θ)  log

E



e−2f (x,θ)−f (y,θ)2
2


(19)

i,i,d

x,y ∼ pdata

where ppos denotes the positive pairs and pdata refers to the data
distribution. Lalign is designed to measure the distance between
the positive samples in the hidden space. Luniform is employed
to indicate whether the random samples are uniformly distributed on the hypersphere of the hidden space. Traditional data
augmentation methods can generate different types of samples
for training. By using the basic loss function Lcl (Hx , Hy ) as
the learning objective, Lalign and Luniform can be improved
(lower is better), resulting in better representation capability.
However, due to the high sensitivity of graph structures,
augmentation from the data perspective may violate the latent
patterns. Moreover, it is difficult and tedious to find out the
optimal data augmentation strategies. We employ the parameter
perturbation method for contrastive learning to avoid tampering
with the original data. The augmented views are generated by
the perturbed module. In this way, the metric Lalign can be
defined as follows:


2
f (x, θ) − f (x, θ )2 .
(20)
Lalign (f, θ, θ )  E
x∼pdata



Here θ refers to the perturbed parameters of f . Similarly, the
loss function Lcl (Hx , Ĥx ) can also minimize Lalign to achieve
better representations. For Luniform , there is no difference in
the description of the formula. Since the perturbations of the
parameters are only sampled from Gaussian distributions with
very small magnitudes, the inherent patterns in the embeddings
can be preserved. Learning with Lcl , Luniform can also be improved well. To summarize, the parameter perturbation method
is theoretically effective for contrastive learning.
Our multiview contrastive learning method differs from the
existing parameter perturbation method [51] in three main aspects: 1) our method combines both node–node and node–edge
contrastive learning for the task of anomaly detection; 2) we
employ a cycle training approach to enhance the representation
capabilities, whereas [51] uses adversarial training to improve
them; and 3) for the parameter perturbation-based contrast part,
our method builds on [51] by adapting the parameters specifically for the anomaly detection task and running them in parallel
on both the node and edge branches.

1044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

D. Scoring and Training
1) Scoring: We use a similar scoring method as in [8], [11],
and [23]. In particular, positive pairs and negative pairs are
included in the sample in equal numbers. Since the similarities
of the positive pairs tend to 1 and those of the negative pairs
tend to 0, the score for the node–node contrast can be defined
as follows:
Snn (vi ) = sinn (−) − sinn (+)

(21)

where sinn (−) and sinn (+) are the similarities for negative and
positive pairs of the node–node contrast, respectively. Similarly,
the score for the node–subgraph contrast is as follows:
Sns (vi ) = sins (−) − sins (+).

(22)

The fused score is a weighted sum of the node–node and node–
subgraph scores
Ssum (vi ) = αSnn (vi ) + (1 − α)Sns (vi )

(23)

where α is a tradeoff factor. According to the previous works
[8], [11], [23], multiround scoring should be performed to calculate the anomaly score for each node. The final score S(vi )
for node vi is calculated by the mean and standard deviation

 R−1
1 
S(vi ) = S(vi ) +
(Sr (vi ) − S(vi ))2 .
(24)
R
r=0

Here, R is the number of scoring rounds,
R−1 Sr (vi ) is the score of
the rth round, and S(vi ) = (1/R) r=0 Sr (vi ) is the mean of
the R rounds scores.
2) Cycle Training: In the training phase, the multiscale
learning task and multiview GCL task are jointly trained. For
the multiscale learning task, the objective function is as follows:
Lms = αLnn + (1 − α)Lns

(25)

where α is shared with (23). Finally, the overall objective function is defined as
L = Lms + βLmv

Fig. 2. Training process. (a) Normal training process. (b) Proposed cycle
training strategy that selects normal nodes as new training data for online
model learning.

(26)

where β is a weight factor to balance the two losses.
With L, we can learn the model jointly. However, anomalous
nodes in the training data may affect the learning of normal
patterns and weaken the discrimination capability. To solve this
problem, we develop an online cycle training strategy as shown
in Fig. 2. Specifically, we first learn the model for a certain
rate (denoted as p) of the total steps through normal training so
that the model has a basic discrimination capability. Then, we
continue to learn the model by performing normal training and
cycle training simultaneously. The normal training is performed
and followed by a cycle training process that forms a new step
training.
The cycle training process consists of several operations.
First, we calculate the anomaly scores of the nodes in the graph
using the current model. Then, the nodes are ordered by their
scores to select nodes with low-anomaly scores. The selected
rate is defined as q. After selection, most of the anomalous

nodes are removed from the training data. Finally, the selected
training data are fed into the model for an additional training step.
E. Complexity Analysis
There are three main stages that might affect the time complexity of MMGAD: subgraph sampling, contrastive learning,
and scoring. In the inference phase, the time complexity of
subgraph sampling is determined by the RWR method. Given
the average node degree of the graph ε, the number of nodes n,
and the size of the subgraph m, the complexity of sampling
is O(mnε). The time complexity of contrastive learning is
mainly influenced by the GNN modules. The time complexity
can be defined as O(2m2 ) for each node and O(2m2 n) in
total. For scoring, the computational time complexity is very
low and can be considered negligible. Considering R rounds
of detection, the overall time complexity is O(mnR(2m + ε)).
In the training phase, the computation of the loss function and
gradient back propagation are required. The time complexity of
contrastive learning is doubled by the additional perturbed GNN
modules. The cost of parameter perturbation and normal nodes
selection can be neglected due to their constant complexity.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct extensive experiments on six
widely used benchmark datasets to prove the effectiveness of
our proposed MMGAD framework. Performance comparison
with the state-of-the-art methods, ablation study, sensitivity
analysis and limitations are presented in detail.
A. Datasets
The six benchmark datasets used in the experiments are listed
in Table II. BlogCatalog and Flickr [56] are social network
datasets collected from the blog website BlogCatalog and the
image website Flickr, respectively. Cora [57], CiteSeer [57],
and ACM [59] are citation graph datasets collected from the

QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

TABLE II
STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS
Datasets

Nodes

Edges

Attributes

Anomalies

BlogCatalog [56]
Flickr [56]
Cora [57]
CiteSeer [57]
UAI2010 [58]
ACM [59]

5196
7575
2708
3327
3067
16 484

171 743
239 738
5429
4732
28 311
71 980

8189
12 407
1433
3703
4973
8337

300
450
150
150
150
600

corresponding publication databases. UAI2010 [58] is a community detection dataset. Following previous works [8] and [9],
we inject contextual and structural anomalies into the original
graph datasets. For contextual anomalies, first a target node
vi and a candidate set with another 50 nodes are randomly
selected. Then, the attributes of vi are replaced by the attributes
of the most dissimilar node from the set. For structural anomalies, 15 nodes are randomly selected from the graph and fully
connected. Finally, we repeat the operations and inject the same
number of contextual and structural anomalies into the graphs.
The total number of anomalies is controlled according to the
size of each dataset.

1045

3) Settings: To be efficient, the size of the subgraphs is
set to 4. For each branch, only one GNN layer is stacked for
graph learning. The hidden dimension of the GNN modules
is set to 64. α is chosen from different settings α ∈ {0.2, 0.4,
0.6, 0.8}, and β is chosen from β ∈ {1, 0.1, 0.01, 0.001,
0.0001}. The coefficient of the parameter perturbation λ is
chosen from the set λ ∈ {0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}. The
normal training rate p is chosen from p ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}
to perform normal training for the first p × 100 percentage of
the total steps. The selection rate q is chosen from the set q ∈
{0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95}, which indicates the percentage of
normal nodes selection. The Adam optimizer is employed with
an initial learning rate of 0.002 for BlogCatalog, 0.001 for
Flickr, Cora, CiteSeer, UAI2010, and ACM. The number of
epochs is set to 600 for BlogCatalog and Flickr, 200 for Cora,
100 for CiteSeer and ACM, and 300 for UAI2010. The round
number R for scoring is set to 256. Our model is implemented
with PyTorch [60] and trained end-to-end. All experiments are
performed on a laptop with 32 GB dedicated memory, an Intel
Core i7 CPU, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 GPU. Our
code is available at https://github.com/shuxin-qin/MMGAD.
C. Performance Comparison

B. Experimental Setup
1) Baselines: We compare MMGAD with eight state-of-theart methods for GAD, given as follows.
a) Radar [18]: Radar models the residuals of node attributes
and their coherence with network information for GAD.
b) ANOMALOUS [19]: It is a joint learning framework that
selects attributes and detects anomalies based on CUR
decomposition and residuals.
c) DOMINANT [9]: It is a reconstruction-based method that
measures anomalies based on the reconstruction errors.
d) CoLA [8]: It is a contrastive unsupervised method that
detects anomalies based on node–subgraph contrast.
e) ANEMONE [11]: It is a multiscale method that uses both
node–node and node–subgraph contrasts.
f) SL-GAD [34]: It is a generative and contrastive framework that uses generative attribute regression and multiview contrastive learning for anomaly detection.
g) GRADATE [23]: It is a multiview method that adds
subgraph–subgraph contrast based on augmented view to
improve performance.
h) NLGAD [15]: It is a two-stage framework consisting of
normality selection and multilevel contrastive learning.
2) Metrics: To measure the performance and make a fair
comparison, we choose ROC-AUC as the metric. ROC-AUC is
also frequently used in the earlier works. The ROC curve shows
the performance of a binary classifier with different decision
thresholds. It plots the true-positive rate (TPR) against the falsepositive rate (FPR). The AUC value is the area under the ROC
curve. It summarizes how well a model can produce relative
values that differentiate between positive and negative samples
across all detection thresholds. The AUC value ranges from
0 to 1. A higher AUC value signifies better performance.

We compare MMGAD with the eight baseline methods mentioned above. The results of the AUC values are shown in
Table III, and the comparison of ROC curves is shown in
Fig. 3. According to the comparison, we can make the following
observations.
1) The proposed MMGAD outperforms all the baseline
methods on the six datasets. It yields 0.08%, 0.09%,
0.42%, 0.46%, 0.49%, and 1.44% absolute AUC value
promotions compared with the second-best values on
the six datasets, respectively. The average AUC gain is
1.05%. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed framework.
2) In general, deep learning methods achieve better results than shallow methods (Radar and ANOMALOUS),
whose performance is limited by the hand-crafted feature extraction and shallow learning capabilities. Deep
graph learning is a better choice to capture anomalous
patterns from graphs with complex structure and highdimensional features.
3) Based on graph learning, anomaly detection methods
such as reconstruction [9], [34], multilevel contrast [11],
multiview contrast [23], and normality learning [15]
have been proposed. They have improved the performance to a certain extent. Specifically, DONIMANT and
SL-GAD are based on attribute reconstruction. A decoder
is required for the reconstruction and anomaly ranking,
which incurs additional computational costs. By adding
contrastive learning, SL-GAD achieves better results than
DONIMANT. Moreover, SL-GAD achieves the secondbest results on BlogCatalog and Flickr, both of which
contain more edges. We argue that the reconstructionbased methods easily suffer from overfitting on small
datasets. Multilevel contrast has been shown to be an

1046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH BASELINES ON AUC VALUES
Methods

BlogCatalog

Flickr

Cora

CiteSeer

UAI2010

ACM

Average

Radar [18]
ANOMALOUS [19]

0.7401
0.7237

0.7399
0.7434

0.6587
0.5770

0.6709
0.6307

0.7132
0.7038

0.7047
0.7201

0.7046
0.6831

DONIMANT [9]
CoLA [8]
ANEMONE [11]
SL-GAD [34]
GRADATE [23]
NLGAD [15]

0.7468
0.7854
0.7992
0.8184
0.8037
0.8012

0.7442
0.7513
0.7712
0.7966
0.7796
0.7807

0.8155
0.8779
0.9057
0.9130
0.9237
0.9286

0.8251
0.8968
0.9189
0.9136
0.9311
0.9457

0.7736
0.8354
0.8913
0.8729
0.9262
0.9320

0.7601
0.8237
0.8462
0.8538
0.8546
0.8655

0.7776
0.8284
0.8554
0.8614
0.8698
0.8756

MMGAD

0.8192

0.7975

0.9328

0.9503

0.9369

0.8799

0.8861

Note: The best values are highlighted in bold and the second best are underlined.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Fig. 3. ROC curves comparison on six benchmark datasets: (a) BlogCatalog; (b) Flickr; (c) Cora; (d) CiteSeer; (e) UAI2010; and (f) ACM. The larger the
area under the curve, the better the anomaly detection performance.

effective strategy to improve anomaly detection performance. ANEMONE, GRADATE, NLGAD, and MMGAD are all based on the multilevel strategy. In detail,
ANEMONE uses only nodes and subgraphs for multilevel contrast. GRADATE provides subgraph–subgraph
contrast as a complement by using edge modification
(EM) to create a new view. In this way, the quality of
feature representations can be improved. However, direct
graph augmentation may limit the improvement due to
the high sensitivity of the original networks. In contrast,
NLGAD designs a normality learning module that selects

normal nodes for contrastive learning at each step. This
is an effective method to strengthen the discrimination
capability. As a result, it achieves the second-best performance on four datasets except BlogCatalog and Flickr.
Accordingly, we argue that there is still room for further
improvement in representation and discrimination capabilities, especially on large datasets.
4) After a comprehensive comparison, we propose a crossview GCL method based on network augmentation and
cycle training strategy to avoid modifying the sensitive training data and improve the learning of normal

QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

TABLE V
EFFECTIVENESS OF PARAMETER PERTURBATION ON AUC VALUES

TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY OF MULTIVIEW GCL W.R.T. AUC
Methods

BlogCatalog

Flickr

Cora

1047

CiteSeer UAI2010

ACM

Methods

BlogCatalog

using AM
using EM

0.8006
0.8079

MMGAD

0.8192

w/o M V
with M Vnn
with M Vns

0.8002
0.7998
0.8127

0.7758 0.9175
0.7839 0.9246
0.7918 0.9306

0.9214
0.9318
0.9462

0.9021
0.9163
0.9298

0.8522
0.8540
0.8648

MMGAD

0.8192

0.7975 0.9328

0.9503

0.9369

0.8799

Flickr

Cora

CiteSeer UAI2010

ACM

0.7787 0.9232
0.7814 0.9218

0.9267
0.9381

0.9184
0.9175

0.8492
0.8617

0.7975 0.9328

0.9503

0.9369

0.8799

Note: The best values are highlighted in bold.
Note: The best values are highlighted in bold.

patterns, respectively. Our method utilizes the advantages
of multiview GCL and normality learning and compensates for the weaknesses of the baseline methods. First,
network augmentation and graph-level contrastive learning force the node–node and node–subgraph branches to
become more representative and generalized. Second, the
proposed cycle training can further strengthen the discrimination capability by training with collected normal
samples for additional steps. Our cycle training is different from NLGAD in two aspects: 1) the cycle training is
fully integrated into the training phase in a circular manner, while NLGAD is a two-phase framework consisting
of normality selection and normality learning; and 2) we
provide a simple but efficient selection strategy which is
different from NLGAD. As a result, our method is more
efficient. For example, NLGAD requires 700 epochs of
total training on Cora, while MMGAD requires only 200
epochs with cycle training (which is equivalent to 300
epochs since we perform cycle training for the last half
of the total steps).
D. Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct an ablation study to clearly verify
the effectiveness of the main components of MGCLAD, including the multiview GCL, the parameter perturbation-based
augmentation, and the cycle training strategy.
1) Effectiveness of Multiview GCL: We add multiview GCL
for both node–node and node–subgraph branches to improve
graph representation. To verify the effectiveness, we run the
experiments with three different configurations: without multiview GCL (denoted as w/o M V ), only with multiview for node–
node branch (denoted as with M Vnn ), and only with multiview
for node–subgraph branch (denoted as with M Vns ). As shown
in Table IV, the proposed multiview GCL method achieves significant AUC improvements on the six datasets for both node–
node and node–subgraph branches. Moreover, using multiview
GCL for a single branch can also improve the performance.
In general, the proposed multiview GCL is a cross-view and
graph-level contrastive learning method that can improve the
graph representations for both node–node and node–subgraph
contrasts. With better graph representations, MMGAD achieves
higher AUC values.
2) Effectiveness of Parameter Perturbation: We use a network augmentation method based on parameter perturbation
to generate new views for GCL. Existing methods usually use

graph augmentation to generate views. Our method directly
augments the GNN networks to form two parallel GNNs with
the same input graph data, while the other methods put the
input graph data and its augmented version into the same GNN
networks. To verify the effectiveness of parameter perturbation,
commonly used graph augmentation methods are employed
for comparison, including AM and EM. AM is a contextual
augmentation method in which parts of the node attributes are
randomly masked. EM is a structural modification strategy in
which edges are randomly removed and added. As shown in
Table V, using AM and using EM indicate that our parameter perturbation-based network augmentation mechanism is
replaced by AM and EM, respectively. The proposed method
achieves better performance than the traditional graph augmentation methods. We argue that the modification of graph data
may destroy the inherent semantics due to the high sensitivity
of graph data, which limits the performance. The key of GCL
is to improve the alignment and uniformity of graph embeddings through contrastive learning. With the perturbed GNN
branches, our method can not only meet the requirements of
GCL naturally but also preserve the data semantics of the graph.
We also provide a visualization of the learning results based
on the Cora dataset. It is shown in Fig. 4, where each point
represents a node with its node–node and node–subgraph scores
as 2-D coordinate values. The normal nodes are blue, while the
abnormal nodes are red. For a better view, only the first 1000
nodes are visualized. There are four subfigures representing
the learning results under different settings: without multiview
GCL, using AM for graph augmentation, using EM for graph
augmentation, and the proposed MMGAD. The point with
higher node–node score and node–subgraph score indicates a
higher probability of being an abnormal node. Based on Fig. 4,
we can make the following observations: 1) most of the abnormal nodes are located in the upper right area of each subfigure.
However, there are also some red points scattered in the lowscore areas, which leads to an increase in the number of false
negatives. 2) MMGAD achieves a better learning result than
the other three settings [Fig. 4(d)]. The parameter perturbationbased GCL forces the node–node and node–subgraph branches
to become more representative and generalized. As a result, the
node–node and node–subgraph scores become more discriminative. 3) GCL methods based on traditional graph augmentation (AM and EM) fail to achieve significant improvement
[Fig. 4(b) and 4(c)]. Random data augmentation on highly sensitive graph networks is uncontrollable and uncertain, leading
to a limited improvement in representation and generalization
capabilities.

1048

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

(a)

(a)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 4. Visualization of learning results under different settings using the
Cora dataset: (a) without multiview; (b) using AM; (c) using EM; and
(d) MMGAD. We use the node–node score and node–subgraph score as the
2-D coordinate to draw the corresponding node. The normal nodes are blue,
while the abnormal nodes are red. For a better view, only the first 1000 nodes
are visualized.

TABLE VI
ABLATION STUDY OF CYCLE TRAINING W.R.T. AUC
Methods BlogCatalog

Flickr

CiteSeer UAI2010

ACM

w/o
p=1

0.8108
0.8127

0.7931 0.9247
0.7914 0.9255

Cora

0.9356
0.9428

0.9289
0.9326

0.8587
0.8691

p = 0.5

0.8192

0.7975 0.9328

0.9503

0.9369

0.8799

Note: The best values are highlighted in bold.

3) Effectiveness of Cycle Training: We design a cycle training strategy to improve the model’s learning of normal patterns
and discrimination ability. We compare the performance with
three different settings: without cycle training (denoted as w/o),
with cycle training starting from the first step (p = 1), and with
cycle training for the last half of the total steps (p = 0.5). As
shown in Table VI, cycle training can significantly improve the
performance of these datasets. Using cycle training from the
first step is not the best choice, because the selection results
have low credibility at the beginning of training. Therefore, we
set p = 0.5 in our experiments, considering the performance
and training time. We also provide the plots of the anomaly
score distributions with and without cycle training on Cora and
ACM datasets, as shown in Fig. 5. We first train models on
both datasets without the cycle training strategy. Then, the cycle
training is used in the training phase for comparison. From
the visualization results, the anomaly scores generated by the
models with cycle training are more discriminative than those
generated by the model without cycle training. Theoretically,
anomalies are the nodes that deviate from the normal patterns.

Fig. 5. Diagrams of the distribution of anomaly scores. (a) and (b) Results of
models training on Cora. (c) and (d) Results training on ACM. Without cycle
training means that the model is trained without the proposed cycle training
strategy, while with cycle training it means the proposed MMGAD. The
overlapping areas indicate the discrimination capability of the corresponding
model. (a) Without cycle training on Cora. (b) With cycle training on Cora.
(c) Without cycle training on ACM. (d) With cycle training on ACM.

Under the unsupervised paradigm, abnormal nodes mixed into
the training data may interfere with the learning of normal
patterns and thus weaken the discrimination capability to some
extent. To mitigate this problem, nodes with lower anomaly
scores (considered as normal nodes) are collected online for
an additional training step. In this way, the learning of normal
patterns can be improved. The experimental results mentioned
above have confirmed our analysis.
E. Sensitivity Analysis
In this subsection, we conduct several experiments to investigate the effects of the main hyperparameters on the performance
of MMGAD, including the weight factors α and β, the coefficient of parameter perturbation λ, the normal training rate p, the
selection rate q, the subgraph size, and the hidden dimension of
the GNN modules.
1) Weight Factors α and β: The weight factor α is used
to balance the node–node and node–subgraph branches in both
the training and inference phases. Fig. 6 shows the performance
of MMGAD under different settings of α ∈ {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8}.
For different datasets, the settings of α that lead to the best performances are also different. The best settings for BlogCatalog,
Flickr, Cora, CiteSeer, UAI2010, and ACM are 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 0.8,
0.4, and 0.6, respectively. The weight factor β is used to balance
the two learning tasks: multiscale learning and multiview GCL.
It is only used in the training phase. As shown in Fig. 7, the AUC
values change with different settings of β. The best settings of
β for these datasets are 0.0001, 0.001, 0.1, 0.01, 0.01, and 0.01,

QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

Fig. 8.
Fig. 6.

AUC values of MMGAD with different coefficient λ.

AUC values of MMGAD with different weight factor α.

(a)
Fig. 7.

1049

AUC values of MMGAD with different weight factor β.

respectively. The best settings of α and β are used in the other
experiments.
2) Coefficient of Parameter Perturbation λ: The coefficient of the parameter perturbation λ is used to control the
amplitude of the parameter perturbation. A large λ indicates
a large difference in the GNN functions, resulting in a large
gap between the two graph embeddings generated for contrast. In this case, the multiview loss Lmv becomes large. In
contrast, the distance between the embeddings for contrast is
short and the loss is small. To find out the best settings of λ
for these datasets, we compare the performance of MMGAD
under different λ ∈ {0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5}, as shown
in Fig. 8. When λ is set to 0, there is no difference between
the perturbed module and the original module. In this case,
the contrastive learning is completely ineffective. When λ is
greater than 0.2, the performance shows a gradual downward
trend as λ increases overall. We find that better performance
is obtained when λ is in the range of 0.05–0.2. Theoretically,
an appropriate λ forces MMGAD to capture latent patterns that
are invariant to perturbation by contrastive learning. In contrast,
excessive perturbations make it difficult to learn the globally
optimal representations due to the strong oscillations in their
gradients. Accordingly, we fixedly set λ = 0.1 for all datasets
in our experiments.
3) Normal Training Rate p and Selection Rate q: The
rate p for normal training is a hyperparameter that specifies the
proportion of total training steps dedicated to normal training.
This phase of training takes place prior to the cycle training,
ensuring the model develops a foundational level of discrimination. A higher value of p means that fewer steps are allocated
to cycle training. In contrast, a lower value of p implies that

(b)

Fig. 9. AUC values of MMGAD with different (a) normal training rate p
and (b) selection rate q.

the model has a weaker discrimination ability before cycle
training, which could influence the selection of normal nodes.
If the process of selecting normal nodes is unreliable, cycle
training will degrade into normal training. In this experiment,
p is chosen from p ∈ {0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1}. As illustrated in
Fig. 9(a), when p increases from 0 to 1, the AUC values
generally show a slight upward trend at first, followed by a
slight decline. Accordingly, we set p = 0.5 for all datasets in
other experiments. The selection rate q is a hyperparameter for
cycle training. We simply select q percent of the training nodes
according to their anomaly scores. A larger q indicates that more
samples are selected for an additional cycle training step. Since
a small percentage of the anomalous nodes in the samples are
mixed, we should set an appropriate q for each dataset to extract
as many normal samples as possible. Considering the small
percentage of anomalies and the basic discrimination capability
of the model with half of the total training steps (p = 0.5), we set
q ∈ {0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95}. As shown in Fig. 9(b), there
is a slight upward trend with the increase of q. In general, better
performance can be achieved when q increases to 0.9 or 0.95.
In practice, we set q = 0.9 for BlogCatalog and Flickr, and
q = 0.95 for Cora, CiteSeer, UAI2010, and ACM.
4) Subgraph Size and Hidden Dimension: We further explore the sensitivity of the subgraph size m and the hidden
dimension of the GNN modules. Fig. 10(a) shows the AUC
values with different subgraph sizes. The subgraph size is selected from the set m ∈ {2, 4, 6, 8, 10}. As can be seen in the
figure, m = 4 is a better choice for most of the datasets. If the
size is set to m = 2, the performance drops on most datasets. In
this case, there are only two nodes in a subgraph, which leads

1050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, JUNE 2025

anomalies on the edges. This method is not ideally suited for
evolving networks because of the dynamic changes in both the
network topology and the data flow. Integrating dynamic graph
representation with incremental learning techniques could serve
as a feasible solution.
VI. CONCLUSION
(a)

(b)

Fig. 10. AUC values of MMGAD with different (a) subgraph sizes and
(b) hidden dimensions.

to a lack of structural information. However, the performance
does not always improve with increasing size m. We argue that
redundant information contained in a subgraph with excessive
large size degrades the performance. The hidden dimension dh
is another parameter that affects the learning of graph representation. We compare the performance of MMGAD under different dh ∈ {16, 32, 64, 128, 256}, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The
performance improves with the increase of dh when dh ⩽ 64.
However, when dh is greater than 64, there is no improvement
in performance. In fact, a slight decrease in AUC values is
observed when dh increases from 64 to 256. In addition, a larger
dh increases the computational cost and the risk of overfitting.
In a comprehensive view, dh is set to 64 for all datasets.

In this work, we propose MMGAD, a multiscale and multiview contrastive learning framework for anomaly detection
on attributed networks. Unlike existing multiview methods that
directly augment graph data to generate new graph views, our
parameter perturbation-based network augmentation method
generates new GNN views for graph-level contrast at multiscale. It is a simple yet efficient mechanism that improves the
alignment and uniformity of graph embeddings without modifying the highly sensitive graph data. We also provide a cycle
training strategy to alleviate the problem of learning normal
patterns caused by the training data mixed with anomalous
samples. The model is refined by additional training steps using
selected normal samples in a circular manner. The experimental
results demonstrate that MMGAD outperforms the baseline
methods and that each designed module in MMGAD is effective. In the future, we plan to investigate the hypergraph learning
method for GAD and extend the framework to support edge
anomaly detection on attributed networks.
REFERENCES

F. Discussion
MMGAD fully exploits the methods of multiview GCL and
cycle training for node anomaly detection on attributed networks. Although the method has shown promising results, there
are still some limitations and challenges that need to be addressed further.
1) Limitations: There are several limitations. First, the
method introduces an additional graph-level contrastive learning branch and a cycle training stage, which leads to higher
computational complexity and may affect its application for
real-time or large-scale tasks. An area for future work will focus
on improving computational efficiency. Second, the reliance
on multiview contrastive learning and cycle training introduces
additional hyperparameters that must be manually tuned, potentially creating challenges in contexts where anomalies are
vaguely defined or extremely heterogeneous. Furthermore, the
representation learning is closely tied to the structures and
attributes, which could reduce its effectiveness in networks with
inadequate or misleading attributes. One possible avenue for
future research is to create a more streamlined and resilient
framework against perturbations and noise.
2) Opportunities: Although the method is developed for
node anomaly detection, it could potentially be adapted for edge
anomaly detection through upgrades and modifications. One
worthwhile approach is to replace the graph representation of
MMGAD with a hypergraph representation, allowing edges in
the network to be represented as nodes in the hypergraph. In
this manner, the method could potentially be adapted to detect

[1] W. Fan et al., “Graph neural networks for social recommendation,”
in Proc. ACM Web Conf. (WWW), New York, NY, USA, 2019,
pp. 417–426.
[2] M. Gao, L. Wu, Q. Li, and W. Chen, “Anomaly traffic detection in IoT
security using graph neural networks,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 76, 2023,
Art. no. 103532.
[3] S. I. Popoola, B. Adebisi, M. Hammoudeh, G. Gui, and H. Gacanin,
“Hybrid deep learning for botnet attack detection in the Internet-ofThings networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4944–4956,
Mar. 2021.
[4] A. Srivastava, A. Kundu, S. Sural, and A. Majumdar, “Credit card fraud
detection using hidden Markov model,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 37–48, Jan./Mar. 2008.
[5] J. Yu et al., “Group-based fraud detection network on e-commerce
platforms,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Min. (KDD), New York, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 5463–5475.
[6] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for
fast anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023.
[7] S. Rao, A. K. Verma, and T. Bhatia, “A review on social spam detection:
Challenges, open issues, and future directions,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
vol. 186, 2021, Art. no. 115742.
[8] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
Jun. 2022.
[9] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Inter. Conf. Data Mining (SDM),
2019, pp. 594–602.
[10] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph
contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc.,
2020, pp. 5812–5823.
[11] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Anemone: Graph
anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM
Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), New York, NY, USA, 2021,
pp. 3122–3126.

QIN et al.: ANOMALY DETECTION ON ATTRIBUTED NETWORKS VIA MULTIVIEW AND MULTISCALE CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

[12] C. Wang and H. Zhu, “Wrongdoing monitor: A graph-based behavioral
anomaly detection in cyber security,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.,
vol. 17, pp. 2703–2718, 2022.
[13] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 259–268.
[14] F. Liu et al., “DAGAD: Data augmentation for graph anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2022, pp. 259–268.
[15] J. Duan et al., “Normality learning-based graph anomaly detection via
multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
2023, pp. 7502–7511.
[16] C. Niu, G. Pang, and L. Chen, “Graph-level anomaly detection via
hierarchical memory networks,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn.
Knowl. Discovery Databases (ECML PKDD), D. Koutra, C. Plant,
M. Gomez Rodriguez, E. Baralis, and F. Bonchi, Eds., 2023,
pp. 201–218.
[17] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2016,
pp. 207–215.
[18] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.
(IJCAI), 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
[19] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “Anomalous: A joint
modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2018, pp. 3513–3519.
[20] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[21] M. Li et al., “Guest editorial: Deep neural networks for graphs: Theory,
models, algorithms, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4367–4372, Apr. 2024.
[22] C. Huang, M. Li, F. Cao, H. Fujita, Z. Li, and X. Wu, “Are graph
convolutional networks with random weights feasible?,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 2751–2768, Mar. 2023.
[23] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive
learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell. (AAAI), 2023, pp. 7459–7467.
[24] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, H. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and L.-K. Huang,
“Improving generalizability of graph anomaly detection models via
data augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12721–12735, Dec. 2023.
[25] S. Qin, L. Yongcan, and T. Gaofeng, “Memory-augmented u-transformer
for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust. Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5.
[26] Y. Lai, Y. Han, and Y. Wang, “Anomaly detection with prototype-guided
discriminative latent embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min.
(ICDM), 2021, pp. 300–309.
[27] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12081–12094,
Dec. 2023.
[28] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp.
1–38, 2021.
[29] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Min. (WSDM),
New York, NY, USA, 2022, pp. 657–665.
[30] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12249–
12263, Dec. 2023.
[31] L.-H. Chen et al., “AnomMAN: Detect anomalies on multi-view
attributed networks,” Inf. Sci., vol. 628, pp. 1–21, 2023.
[32] J. Liu, M. He, X. Shang, J. Shi, B. Cui, and H. Yin, “BOURNE: Bootstrapped self-supervised learning framework for unified graph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), 2024,
pp. 2820–2833.
[33] J. Kim, Y. In, K. Yoon, J. Lee, and C. Park, “Class label-aware graph
anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage.
(CIKM), 2023, pp. 4008–4012.
[34] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen,
“Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–
12233, Dec. 2023.
[35] K. Ding, J. Li, N. Agarwal, and H. Liu, “Inductive anomaly detection
on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI),
2020, pp. 1288–1294.

1051

[36] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-l. Chung, “Subtractive
aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM
Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
[37] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with
graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), 2017, pp. 1–14.
[38] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–12.
[39] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
[40] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[41] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.
[42] M. Li, L. Zhang, L. Cui, L. Bai, Z. Li, and X. Wu, “BLoG: Bootstrapped
graph representation learning with local and global regularization for
recommendation,” Pattern Recogn., vol. 144, no. C, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[43] J. Li, R. Zheng, H. Feng, M. Li, and X. Zhuang, “Permutation
equivariant graph framelets for heterophilous graph learning,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 11634–11648,
Sep. 2024.
[44] L. Bai et al., “HAQJSK: Hierarchical-aligned quantum Jensen-Shannon
kernels for graph classification,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 6370–6384, Nov. 2024.
[45] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks?,”
in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 1945–1951.
[46] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
[47] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multiview graph contrastive
learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023.
[48] K. Ding, Z. Xu, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Data augmentation for deep
graph learning: A survey,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 61–77, Dec. 2022.
[49] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph contrastive
learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf. (WWW),
2021, pp. 2069–2080.
[50] Y. Liu et al., “Simple contrastive graph clustering,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 13789–13800, Oct. 2024.
[51] J. Xia, L. Wu, J. Chen, B. Hu, and S. Z. Li, “SimGRACE: A simple
framework for graph contrastive learning without data augmentation,”
in Proc. ACM Web Conf. (WWW), 2022, pp. 1070–1079.
[52] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos, and J.-y. Pan, “Fast random walk with restart
and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2006,
pp. 613–622.
[53] M. Sun, J. Xing, H. Wang, B. Chen, and J. Zhou, “MoCL: Data-driven
molecular fingerprint via knowledge-aware contrastive learning from
molecular graph,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min.
(KDD), 2021, pp. 3585–3594.
[54] T. Wang and P. Isola, “Understanding contrastive representation learning
through alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2020, pp. 9929–9939.
[55] T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of
sentence embeddings,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang.
Process. (EMNLP), Nov. 2021, pp. 6894–6910.
[56] L. Tang and H. Liu, “Relational learning via latent social dimensions,”
in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min. (KDD), 2009,
pp. 817–826.
[57] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Gallagher, and T. EliassiRad, “Collective classification in network data articles,” AI Mag.,
vol. 29, pp. 93–106, Sep. 2008.
[58] W. Wang, X. Liu, P. Jiao, X. Chen, and D. Jin, “A unified weakly
supervised framework for community detection and semantic matching,” in Proc. Pacific-Asia Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2018,
pp. 218–230.
[59] J. Tang, J. Zhang, L. Yao, J. Li, L. Zhang, and Z. Su, “ArnetMiner: Extraction and mining of academic social networks,” in Proc.
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Min. (KDD), 2008,
pp. 990–998.
[60] A. Paszke et al., “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch,” in Proc.
NIPS-W, 2017, pp. 1–4.