IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5536217

Beyond Spatial Priors: Spectral-Aware
Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection Network via
Heterogeneous–Homogeneous Super-Band and
Quaternionic Sparse Representation
Xianyue Wang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yuli Sun , Tao Tang, and Lin Lei
Abstract—When incorporating spatial priors (such as sparsity
and low-occurrence frequency) to identify anomalies, existing
hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) methods typically operate on the original high-dimensional spectral bands or features
obtained through dimensionality-reduction techniques. However,
they often neglect the explicit modeling and exploitation of
the internal discriminative structure inherent in bands, consequently diluting the discriminative spectral information crucial
for effective anomaly-background separation. This limitation
becomes particularly pronounced when processing hyperspectral data, where the rich spectral heterogeneity could provide
valuable discriminative cues for HAD. To address this issue,
we propose a super-band quaternion-guided sparse network
(SuperB-QSNet), which explicitly encodes the spectral discriminant structure while retaining the advantage of spatial sparse
priorities. First, a heterogeneous–homogeneous super-band compression (HH-SBC) organizes spectral bands into meaningful
heterogroups. It naturally reduces redundancy and retains the
representative spectral information. Second, the quaternionic
sparse recovery (QSR) model encodes both spatial structures
and intragroup spectral correlations via hypercomplex algebra,
ensuring robust anomaly preservation and enhanced detection of
spectral variations. Third, we design a difference-guided
quaternionic convolution detector (DG-QCD) to maintain spectral coherence via group processing and enhance discriminative capability via intergroup difference operation. Extensive
experiments show that SuperB-QSNet enhances anomaly detection accuracy while ensuring computational efficiency across
real-world hyperspectral datasets.
Index Terms—Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD),
quaternion representation, spatial and spectral priors, superpixel
segmentation.

N OMENCLATURE
r×c×b

H∈R
H ∈ R s×b

Hyperspectral image (HSI).
Unfolding a 2-D matrix of HSI.

Received 14 June 2025; revised 30 October 2025; accepted 26 November 2025. Date of publication 3 December 2025; date of current version
22 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62401577 and in part by the
China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2024M754301 and Grant
2025T181178. (Corresponding author: Lin Lei.)
Xianyue Wang, Tao Tang, and Lin Lei are with the College of Electronic Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: alaleilin@163.com).
Yuli Sun is with the College of Aerospace Science and Engineering
and Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Image Measurement and Vision
Navigation, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073,
China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3639603

hi ∈ R s×1
p j ∈ Rb×1
M(m)
∈ Rb×σ
i
(m)
t i ∈ R1×n
t ∗ ∈ R1×n
B j ∈ R s×4
B j ∈ Rr×c×4
B j ∈ Qr×c
A j ∈ Qr×c
(µ, ν)
A j ∈ Rr×c×4
A ∈ Rr×c×4n
Gδ (·)
K ∈ R1×1×r×c

ith spectral vector in H.
Spectral observations of the jth pixel.
Spectral matrix for cross-segmentation.
Index sets of mutation points.
Final index set of mutation points.
Selected band set of the jth super-band.
Folding B j to conduct spatial recovery.
Quaternization matrix of B j .
Sparse anomaly part of B j .
Spatial position of any pixel.
Sparse anomaly part in the real-number
field.
Global sparse component.
Convolution function.
Anomaly score map.
I. I NTRODUCTION

I

N REMOTE sensing images, an anomaly typically refers to
a small spatial region that exhibits distinct characteristics
compared to its surrounding background [1]. These anomalies
can arise from natural phenomena (e.g., mineral leakage
and vegetation diseases) or artificial targets (e.g., camouflage
facilities and building ruins) and can be characterized by two
key features: 1) sparse spatial distribution, with occurrence
frequencies much lower than background pixels, and 2) subtle
spectral differences, making them challenging to detect [2],
[3], [4]. Anomaly detection aims to isolate these rare yet distinctive targets from complex and heterogeneous backgrounds
without prior category labels.
Hyperspectral images (HSIs), with their continuous narrow
spectral bands, provide significant advantages for anomaly
detection. HSIs capture detailed reflection characteristics of
various substances across spectral bands, enabling precise
identification of subtle spectral variations [4], [5]. They
enhance the detection of subtle anomalies by leveraging spatial
and spectral information, even those with minimal spectral
deviations or subpixel coverage [6], [7]. This multidimensional analysis combines local spatial distribution, global
contextual features, and fine-grained spectral characteristics,
significantly improving detection accuracy. Therefore, hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) has become indispensable
in numerous fields, such as ecological monitoring [8], mineral
exploration [9], and military reconnaissance [10]. It should

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5536217

be noted that HAD extends the capabilities beyond Earth,
facilitating interstellar exploration by identifying spectral
anomalies in planetary surfaces [9]. This broad applicability
underscores HAD’s significance as a powerful terrestrial and
extraterrestrial analysis tool.
HAD algorithms can be systematically categorized into
three primary groups based on their underlying mechanisms
[4]. First, statistical-based methods primarily depend on statistical models of spectral variance and covariance structures,
operating under the premise that anomalies exhibit significant
deviations from the statistical properties of the background.
A higher order adaptive cosine estimator-based detector
overcomes the limitations of the assumption of a normal
multivariate distribution of background in the Reed–Xiaoli
(RX) [11] detector. A fractional Fourier entropy-based model
(FrFE-RX) is also developed, incorporating the fractional
Fourier transform with RX [12]. Nevertheless, the detection
performance of these methods frequently degrades significantly in complex environments with diverse and nonuniform
background characteristics.
Second, representation-based methods [13], capitalizing on
the sparse spatial distribution of anomaly targets, typically
employ the principle that background pixels can be effectively represented by a learned low-rank dictionary, whereas
anomalies cannot. Qin et al. [14] developed a generalized
nonconvex low-rank tensor representation (GNLTR) for HAD,
which utilizes double low-rank recovery processing to obtain
the background and corresponding dictionary. Additionally,
SuperRPCA employs a superpixel-wise collaborative representation detector to reconstruct the background and a robust
principal component analysis (RPCA) to further separate the
background from anomaly pixels [15].
Finally, deep learning models based on low-occurrence
frequency typically analyze background reconstruction errors,
where more significant errors indicate a higher likelihood of
anomaly pixels. Traditional approaches focus on learning the
background distribution specific to individual datasets, which
limits their generalizability across different scenarios [16],
[17]. In contrast, Li et al. [4], [18], [19] proposed a novel
cross-modality anomaly detection framework that leverages a
consistent deviation metric for score ranking. This approach
shifts the paradigm from learning specific anomaly score
values to learning the relative ranking of scores, akin to
the transformation from parametric to nonparametric statistics
[20]. While this innovation enhances the intrinsic connection
between multimodal data, its underlying principle remains
rooted in the fundamental distinction between background and
anomaly characteristics and the low-occurrence frequency of
anomalies across multiple remote sensing images. Besides,
compared to statistical-based methods, representation- and
deep learning-based approaches demonstrate excessive dependence on the purity of background assumptions in their mask
configurations or dictionary constructions [21].
Although these algorithms have effectively leveraged the
fundamental spatial prior knowledge (sparse distribution and
low-occurrence frequency) of anomaly detection, they frequently fail to fully exploit the intrinsic spectral structure
of HSIs that complements these spatial assumptions. Specifically, most methods perform global processing operations that

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

treat the entire high-dimensional spectral band set uniformly
(e.g., computing global covariance matrices, applying
full-band low-rank decomposition, or processing all bands
as independent channels), thereby overlooking the physically driven organization of spectra into homogeneous groups
separated by heterogeneous boundaries [12], [14], [18].
Spectral homogeneity refers to the commonality among
correlated spectral bands, enabling natural dimensionality
reduction by identifying consistent spectral patterns [22],
[23], [24]. Meanwhile, spectral heterogeneity, characterized
by the discriminative variance among distinct band groups,
provides crucial information for material identification [25],
[26]. When these complementary structural properties are
not explicitly modeled, discriminative spectral features that
could aid anomaly-background separation become diluted
in global processing [27]. This limitation becomes particularly critical when processing hyperspectral data containing
rich homogeneous–heterogeneous spectral channels, where the
structural information could provide valuable discriminative
cues beyond spatial sparsity alone [18], [19].
To overcome the aforementioned issues, we propose
the
super-band
quaternion-guided
sparse
network
(SuperB-QSNet) composed of the following three modules.
First, to overcome the overlook of spectral priors, we design
a heterogeneous–homogeneous super-band compression
(HH-SBC), which groups bands based on their intrinsic
characteristics rather than arbitrary clustering metrics. The
method first applies a cross-segmentation algorithm that
extends superpixel concepts to the spectral domain. A parallel
quantile-based band selection obtains four representative bands
per group, reducing redundancy and enhancing discriminative
features for anomaly detection. Second, focusing on intragroup
relationships of homogeneous spectral bands rather than
employing global processing of all bands (which may disrupt
the original spectral structures and introduce unnecessary
interference), our quaternionic sparse recovery (QSR) model
encodes each super-band as a quaternion. It eliminates
the need for explicit background modeling and delivers a
refined sparse input to the subsequent networks, thereby
improving sensitivity to subtle spectral deviations. Finally,
to leverage the spectral–spatial features from the preceding
components, we design a difference-guided quaternionic
convolution detector (DG-QCD) that processes band groups
holistically. It further amplifies discriminative features by
computing differences between adjacent heterogeneous
groups, enhancing anomaly-background separation. The
framework is designed as a streamlined deep detection
pipeline that operates without supervision, though not strictly
end-to-end due to the nondifferentiable band grouping step.
The main contributions of this article can be summarized
as follows.
1) We propose a framework unifying spectral compression,
sparse recovery, and detection modules to develop a
complete data-mechanism co-driven paradigm for HAD.
2) Our framework maintains spectral structural integrity
throughout all processing stages by designing operations
that jointly preserve spatial arrangements and spectral
grouping in an inseparable manner.

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the proposed SuperB-QSNet: A HAD framework integrating (a) HH-SBC yielding optimized super-bands through heterogeneous edge
segmentation and parallel band selection, (b) QSR producing low-rank background and sparse components via quaternion transformation, and (c) DG-QCD
generating the final anomaly score map by exploiting intergroup spectral differences and multiscale convolution features.

3) We extend spatial algorithms to the spectral domain,
introducing heterogeneous–homogeneous super-bands
that explicitly model spectral structure.
4) We pioneer incorporating quaternion algebra with intrinsic spectral principles in HAD, providing a new sparse
representation approach for detection networks.
The subsequent sections are arranged as follows. Section II
reviews the related research and highlights our improvements.
Then, the detailed structure of the proposed SuperB-QSNet is
demonstrated in Section III. Section IV displays the experimental results and analysis. Section V summarizes the whole
article and looks forward to possible future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Dimensionality Reduction of Spectral Bands
As the resolution of spectral sensors improves, the volume
of HSI increases significantly, often involving hundreds of
spectral bands. While this enhanced resolution provides richer
information, it also introduces challenges such as high computational costs and degraded detector performance due to the
massive data volume (dimensionality curse) [4], [5], [6]. To
address these challenges, dimensionality reduction has become
a critical step in HAD [28], [29]. Despite its importance,
most studies rely on traditional algorithms, treating spectral
compression as an afterthought rather than a carefully designed
process. For instance, Wang et al. [28] integrated principal
component analysis (PCA) into a tensor low-rank and sparse
representation (TLRSR) model, extracting a subset of bands
to reduce dimensionality while preserving essential features.
Similarly, Li et al. [29] projected the original unfolded HSI
data into kernel space, retaining only the first k principal
components for subsequent processing. While these methods

achieve dimensionality reduction, they treat bands as independent entities, ignoring the intrinsic spectral mechanisms
of homogeneity and heterogeneity that can enable natural
spectrum compression [23], [27]. As a result, they risk discarding subtle spectral signatures critical for detecting minor
anomalies, which often occupy only a few pixels with minimal
spectral deviations [30], [31]. Identifying the anomalies is
challenging, and any loss of information during compression
can further obscure them, leading to missed detections or false
alarms. Although Yan et al. [32] selected the most relevant and
informative bands after a coarse-to-fine grouping process, they
still overlooked the correlations among these retained bands.
To address these limitations, we propose HH-SBC that
explicitly respects the spectral structure of HSI, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). The proposed method begins with a designed
heterogeneous–homogeneous cross-segmentation algorithm,
which extends the entropy rate-based superpixel segmentation technology [22] to the spectral domain and visually
demonstrates the segmentation results. This technique organizes spectral bands into meaningful heterogroups based on
their physical characterization rather than relying on simplistic clustering metrics [33]. As a result, bands within the
same super-band exhibit significantly similar characteristics,
ensuring alignment with the underlying spectral mechanisms. Subsequently, a parallel quantile-based band selection
selects four representative bands per group, naturally reducing
redundancy and retaining the representative spectral information for accurate anomaly detection.
B. Low-Rank Representation for HAD
While the obtained super-bands preserve spectral context,
spatial contextual information is also crucial for HAD. Most

5536217

HAD models are grounded in the spatial-domain assumption
that background pixels dominate the spatial scene statistically
[14], [15], [34], [35]. Based on this assumption, anomalies
are typically detected according to the deviations from the
background reconstructed by artificial dictionaries. However,
extracting a pure and comprehensive background dictionary is
inherently challenging. Many methods adopt complex strategies to approximate the low-rank background [34], [35] or
use global projecting approaches like PCA-based collaborative
representation [15] and RPCA [14], which risks embedding
anomalies into the background due to spectral similarity and
leads to false negatives. This issue may be worsened by
the loss of subtle spectral signatures during dimensionality reduction. Furthermore, these approaches fail to exploit
cross-channel correlations within homogeneous spectral
regions, which are the critical mechanisms for capturing consistent yet subtle spectral patterns and the unique advantages
of high-dimensional HSIs.
Quaternions, which extend the concept of complex numbers with one real part and three imaginary parts, can fully
encode the complex interspectral relationships while preserving the spatial structure of the original data. The quaternion
transformer network (QTN) embeds the algebraic properties of quaternions into the Transformer architecture after
band adaptive selection, simultaneously capturing long-range
spatial–spectral dependencies in a hypercomplex space [36].
In [37], a quaternion wavelet transform matrix is proposed for
HAD, combining an optimal clustering framework to reduce
dimensionality and eliminate spectral redundancy. To adapt to
the high-dimensional spectral characteristics of hyperspectral
imagery, these algorithms significantly reduce the data dimensionality before quaternion representation, resulting in the loss
of detailed high-resolution spectral information.
Therefore, we propose QSR, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In this
framework, each super-band is encoded as a quaternion signal
with one real and three imaginary components, inherently preserving the spatial structure and adapting to intragroup spectral
correlations through hypercomplex algebra [38]. It focuses on
intragroup relationships of homogeneous spectral bands rather
than employing global processing of all bands, which may
disrupt the original spectral structures and introduce unnecessary interference. While Tu et al. [39] combined quaternions
to implement the parallel Fourier transform, they did not
explore the domains of low rank and sparse decomposition.
Our model integrates quaternion theory with intrinsic spectral
principles into HAD for the first time. Moreover, it extracts
potential anomalies and directly discards low-rank parts. The
extracted sparse component does not need to be a pure or
comprehensive representation of anomalies; instead, it filters
out the majority of background pixels, providing a refined
input that facilitates subsequent detection networks. By jointly
leveraging intergroup heterogeneity and intragroup correlation,
QSR can achieve sensitivity to subtle anomalies.
C. Deep Learning Detectors of HAD
Current deep learning HAD models often fail to adequately exploit the intrinsic structural properties of spectral
data, primarily due to their inadequate modeling of spectral

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

homogeneity and heterogeneity information [21], [40], [41].
When incorporating spatial priors to identify anomalies,
existing methods typically process spectral bands as independent channels, neglecting the explicit modeling of internal
discriminative structures inherent in spectral data. This manifests in two ways: methods either apply spatial operations
independently to each spectral band without exploiting interband physical correlations or process all bands through global
neural network layers that do not distinguish between homogeneous groups requiring joint processing and heterogeneous
groups requiring differential treatment. For instance, while
PDBSNet determines spectral characteristics through spatial
neighborhood analysis and employs blind-spot reconstruction,
it fundamentally treats spectral bands independently rather
than exploiting their physical correlations and natural grouping
[21]. Similarly, RGAE processes spectral dimensions through
graph autoencoders but does not consider the complementary
relationships between homogeneous and heterogeneous spectral channels that reflect underlying material properties [40].
To overcome these limitations, we propose DG-QCD that
comprehensively leverages spatial and spectral structural priors, as shown in Fig. 1(c). In contrast to traditional networks
that process spectral bands independently, our detector utilizes quaternion-based group processing to explicitly model
cross-band interactions within homogeneous spectral groups
while maintaining discriminative boundaries between heterogeneous groups. The detector synergizes with our HH-SBC
and QSR components by consistently maintaining spectral grouping structure throughout the detection pipeline. It
also amplifies discriminative features by computing differences between adjacent heterogeneous groups. This integrated
framework guarantees continuous preservation of spectral
structural integrity from initial dimensionality reduction to
final detection through an efficient unsupervised approach.
III. P ROPOSED S UPER B-QSN ET
In this article, bold straight letters represent 3-D data cubes,
i.e., X, bold capital italic letters denote 2-D matrices, i.e., X,
bold lowercase italic letters indicate 1-D vectors, i.e., x, and
scalars are presented in italic letters, i.e., x. In addition, the
quaternion tensor and matrix are represented by capital and
bold capital Greek letters, i.e., X and X , respectively.
A. Heterogeneous–Homogeneous Super-Band Compression
Real-world objects in HSIs exhibit spatial continuity, forming clustered pixel groups rather than scattered distributions.
This makes superpixel segmentation ideal for remote sensing
as it: 1) groups similar pixels into homogeneous regions
and 2) preserves object boundaries through adaptive region
growing [42]. The entropy rate method enhances this by optimizing compactness and connectivity to generate more regular
and content-sensitive superpixels [22]. However, current superpixel methods have a limitation for high-dimensional data
[15]; they require reducing the hyperspectral data to grayscale,
which loses valuable spectral information. Critically, HSIs
exhibit an analogous coherence in the spectral dimension,
driven by the physical properties of materials that adjacent

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

bands often capture correlated reflectance patterns from the
same material. Just as superpixels exploit local pixel similarities to generate meaningful homogeneous regions (where each
region typically corresponds to a distinct object), this spectral
coherence suggests that the global spectral bands could be
segmented into homogeneous spectral units. Therefore, we can
partition the HSI cube into spectrally contiguous regions while
retaining the spatial structure, providing the foundation for
downstream tasks.
We extend the entropy rate superpixel segmentation [22]
to the spectral domain, yielding regular and content-sensitive
groups for natural spectral compression, preserving primary
spectral structure and reducing redundancy. It also enables
intuitive visualization and enhances the interpretability of
spectral variations. The critical challenge in extending this
methodology to the spectral dimension lies in two aspects
[42]. One is to minimize pixel quantity to emphasize spectral variations over spatial effects. The segmentation process
becomes compromised when incorporating multiple pixels,
as even two distinct pixels can distort heterogeneous band
segmentation. This occurs because the resulting edges can
capture both spectral differences and spatial variations, making
it challenging to distinguish spectral heterogeneity. The other
is that segmentation can only directly operate on a suitable 2-D
structural matrix, even if the spectrum lacks such attributes.
To
address
these
issues,
we
design
a
heterogeneous–homogeneous cross-segmentation algorithm
to generate robust super-bands. Assume that the original
HSI can be presented as a 3-D tensor H ∈ Rr×c×b where r,
c, and b are the numbers of spatial rows, spatial columns,
and spectral bands, respectively. By unfolding the 2-D
spatial structure, the 3-D tensor H can be reshaped as
H = [h1 , h2 , . . . , hi , . . . , h s ] ∈ R s×b , where s = r × c and
hi ∈ R s×1 is the ith (i = 1, 2, . . . , b) spectral vector and s
means the total number of pixels. Besides, the global band
vector of the jth pixel can be represented as p j ∈ Rb×1 . Thus,
the process of heterogeneous–homogeneous segmentation is
displayed as follows.
1) Segmentation on a Single Spectral Matrix: It begins with
randomly selecting an anchor pixel with the global band vector
pk . Through column-wise replication of this vector $ times,
we construct an operable 2-D spectral matrix M [27] as

where tr(·), R(·), and B(·) refer to the trace function, entropy
rate term, and balancing term with a balancing parameter α,
respectively. As a result, the obtained heterogeneous edges
can be directly located between adjacent bands, completely
segmenting heterogeneous band groups. We denote the initial
index of each super-band as the heterogeneous edge position.
Given the number n − 1 of heterogeneous edges and the initial
band index t1 = 1 of the first super-band, the boundary position
can be indicated as t = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tn }. However, segmentation
on a single spectral matrix has a noteworthy limitation. Its performance relies heavily on the random selection of the anchor
pixel and its spectral observation vector pk , which can result in
inconsistent spectral clustering outcomes across different executions. Therefore, we develop heterogeneous–homogeneous
cross-segmentation with double medians.
2) Cross-Segmentation With Double Median: In the
cross-segmentation, we employ a multitrial consensus strategy
to mitigate instability from random anchor pixel selection. The
position indexes of heterogeneous edges are first aggregated
within each trial via median filtering to suppress outlier effects,
followed by a second median filtering across all trials to
eliminate dependence on random initialization. Specifically,
we first conduct five independent trials to establish reliable
spectral boundaries, ensuring statistical reliability. For each
trial m (m = 1, 2, . . . , 5), we randomly select ten distinct
anchor pixels to construct corresponding spectral matrices
M(m)
∈ Rb×$ (i = 1, 2, . . . , 10) by (1). Then, the index sets
i
of heterogeneous edge positions t (m)
∈ Rn×1 are obtained by
i
conducting (2) on each spectral matrix. For each trial, the
within-trial median is computed position-wise across the ten
vectors


(m)
(m)
(3)
t (m) = median t (m)
1 , t 2 , . . . , t 10 .



M = pk , pk , . . . , pk ∈ Rb×$ .

Using the stabilized edge indexes c∗1 , c∗2 ,..., c∗n ,
we partition the original hyperspectral data into
heterogeneous–homogeneous super-bands as
n
o
S j = hc∗j , hc∗j +1 , . . . , hc∗j+1 −1 , j = 1, 2, . . . , n. (5)

(1)

The factor $ operates within a constrained parameter space
$ ∈ Z+ , where lower and upper bounds present distinct
tradeoffs. If $ = 1, the system degenerates to a 1-D configuration, while $  1 exponentially increases the partitioning
complexity. Our empirical analysis determined that $ = 2
represents the solution satisfying dimension requirements and
computational efficiency [27]. The reconstruction of M mitigates pixel-level differences and establishes the structural
framework for subsequent super-band generation. Then, we
employ entropy rate-based segmentation [15] on M to obtain
an edge subset t by
argmax (tr (R (t)) + αB (t))
t

(2)

Here, the jth ( j = 1, 2, . . . , n) element of t (m) is the median
of the jth boundary position across all ten anchor pixels in
trial m. After repeating the above for five trials and sorting the
position indices in ascending order, holding the arrangement
structure of n×5 to eliminate fluctuations and even significant
variations across different trials, the final heterogeneous edge
indexes are computed by taking the cross-trial median for each
position j across the five trials
 
T
t ∗ = median t (1) , t (2) , . . . , t (5) = c∗1 , c∗2 , . . . , c∗n . (4)

Here, each super-band S j represents a spectrally coherent
region, ensuring meaningful spectral grouping. The whole
procedure of heterogeneous–homogeneous cross-segmentation
is displayed in Algorithm 1.
Fig. 2 presents the cross-segmentation results before and
after each step of the double median filtering. The yellow
lines on each matrix mark the positions of heterogeneous
edges acquired by a single spectral matrix. The red line
within each trial and the blue line across trials represent
the median edge indices produced by the first intragroup

5536217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 2. Cross-segmentation results before and after each step of the double median approach.

Algorithm 1 Cross-Segmentation With Double Median
Input: H ∈ Rr×c×b , anchor pixel number per trial i, independent trial number m, target edge count n
Output: Super-bands {S j }nj=1
Initialize: Final edge indexes t ∗ = ∅ ∈ Rn×1
for m = 1 to 5 do
1: Randomly select 10 distinct anchor pixels
for i = 1 to 10 do
1.1: Construct matrices M(m)
∈ Rb×$ via (1)
i
(m)
n×1
1.2: Obtain edges t i ∈ R
via (2)
end for
2: Compute within-trial median t (m) via (3)
3: Sort and store: t ∗ [:, m] ← t (m)
end for
4: Compute cross-trial median t ∗ ← [c∗1 , c∗2 , . . . , c∗n ]T via
(4)
for the super-band number j = 1 to n do
5: Extract super-band S j via (5)
end for

and the second intergroup median filtering, respectively. As
shown in Fig. 2, the edges on individual 2-D spectral matrices
exhibit significant variations as the anchor points change. In
contrast, the within-trial median buffers this variability, and the
cross-trial median further enhances the robustness of the final
results.
Fig. 3 demonstrates the heterogeneous edges derived from
the segmentation of separate spectral matrices and independent
cross-segmentations, along with similarity curves in Pearson
correlation between adjacent spectral bands in the Cat Island
dataset. Notably, the edges from cross-segmentation are more
precise and align better with the similarity curve’s troughs
than those from individual spectral matrix segmentation. The
blue double arrow highlights areas (upper portion) where both
methods successfully detected spectral differences, reflecting
significant fluctuations in the correlation coefficient curve.
Conversely, the red double arrow (lower portion) indicates
the heterogeneous band edge not detected by the correlation coefficient curve on the right but detected by the

Fig. 3. (Left) Edges acquired by segmentation on distinct single spectral
matrices. (Middle) Edges acquired by distinct cross-segmentations. (Right)
Pearson correlation curve between adjacent spectral bands.

visual spectral matrix on the left. This is probably because
cross-segmentation enhances sensitivity to localized spectral
variations with anchor pixels. Moreover, this method enhances
the visual representation of spectral homogeneity and improves
interpretability by resolving fine-grained spectral transitions
that traditional metrics fail to detect.
3) Parallel Quantile-Based Band Selection: After
cross-segmentation, we use a parallel quantile-based band
selection technique to obtain four representative bands from
each super-band. On the jth super-band S j , the simplified
super-band is defined as
n
o
j
j
j
j
B j = q0.3
, q0.5
, q0.7
, q0.9
(

h = c∗j+1 − c∗j − 1 p + c∗j

s.t.
(6)
q pj = hbhc + (h − bhc) · hbhc+1 − hbhc .
Here, the spectral vector q pj corresponds to the pth quantile
of the band index within the jth super-band. bhc means to
round down the quantile position h to the nearest integer index.
The parallel quantile-based band selection achieves robust
spectral compression through synergistic processing. First, the

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

double median operation provides initialization invariance by
aggregating results from multiple independent trials, eliminating dependence on any random anchor point. Second, the
optimized quantile spacing ensures a comprehensive spectrum
representation, specifically the 0.3th, 0.5th, 0.7th, and 0.9th
quantiles. The median, i.e., 0.5th quantile, is a stable central
reference, while the 0.3th and 0.7th quantiles bound the characteristic distribution, and the 0.9th quantile preserves critical
boundary transitions. This synergistic approach, grounded in
nonparametric statistics, addresses the sensitivity to uncertain
random anchor pixels, reducing redundancy and enhancing
discriminative features for anomaly detection.

core optimization problem of QSR on B j ∈ Qr×c ( j =
1, 2, . . . , n) is formulated as follows:
min kA j k2,1 + λ j kN j k∗ ,

A j ,N j

s.t.

Bj = Aj + N j

(8)

where λ j , A j , and N j are the regularization parameters
referring to the jth component proportion, the anomaly quaternion, and the low-rank part derived from the jth super-band
B j , respectively. Besides, k · k2,1 is the `2,1 -norm for joint
sparsity
in a quaternionic complex space, and kN j k∗ =
P
σ(N j ) is the quaternion nuclear norm on N j with singular
value operation σ(·). The `2,1 -norm k · k2,1 on A j equals
Pr
Pc
j
2 1/2
, where | · | is the modulus operator
µ=1
ν=1 |A (µ, ν)|
and (µ, ν) is the spatial position of any pixel [38].

B. QSR Model
Quaternion representation provides an ideal framework
for hyperspectral data analysis by fundamentally preserving
multiband spectral relationships through its hypercomplex
algebraic structure. Unlike conventional real-valued methods
that process spectral bands independently, quaternion algebra
inherently maintains the natural coupling between spectrally
homogeneous bands via its 4-D representation [38]. The
hypercomplex domain provides a compact unified representation that processes multiple similar bands as single algebraic
entities, thereby eliminating spectral discontinuities introduced
by traditional band-wise processing while significantly reducing computational complexity. Our QSR model capitalizes
on this advantage by processing each spectrally homogeneous super-band as an indivisible quaternion unit rather
than isolated bands. This approach offers the critical benefits of eliminating artificial spectral distortions caused by
global band processing and removing the need for explicit
background modeling through built-in noise suppression. QSR
also retains the original characteristics of spectral homogeneity and heterogeneity for downstream analysis during the
input–output transformation, preventing the information loss
often associated with real-valued decomposition methods.
Through reasonable super-band quantity settings, we can
achieve that each simplified super-band B j ( j = 1, 2, . . . , n)
contains four spectral band vectors, creating conditions for
quaternion representation. By parallel folding each matrix
j
j
j
j
B j ∈ R s×4 to the tensor B j = fold(B j ) = {Q0.3
, Q0.5
, Q0.7
, Q0.9
}
following the spatial structure, the matching quaternion transformation q(B j ) can be presented as:

j
j
j
j
B j = q B j = Q0.3
+ Q0.5
φ + Q0.7
ϕ + Q0.9
γ

(7)

where B j ∈ Qr×c ( j = 1, 2, . . . , n) are generated quaternion
matrices and {1, φ, ϕ, γ} are the basis units of any quaternions
[27]. The quaternion framework provides an effective mechanism for joint spatial–spectral representation by inherently
preserving cross-channel correlations through its hypercomplex algebra structure. We implement a targeted quaternization
process for each super-band to leverage this property.
Unlike conventional detection methods [29] that depend on
artificially constructed background dictionaries, our approach
introduces a paradigm-shifting solution through quaternionbased sparse recovery on each super-band. Specifically, the

Algorithm 2 QSR on B j
Input: B j , λ, ρ = 1.25, ε = 10−7
Output: Sparse anomaly part A j ∈ Rr×c×4
Initialize: µ0 = 1.25/ max(σ(B j )), N0j = 0̂ ∈ Qr×c , t = 0,
Y0j = B j / max(max(σ(B j )), λ2 max(|B j (µ, ν)|))
while not converged do
1: t = t + 1
2: Update A j by
!
Yj

j
j
j
t−1
A j 2,1 + µt−1
2 Nt−1 + A − B + µt−1

Atj = arg minA j

2

F

3: Update N j by
Nt j = arg minN j

Yj

j
j
j
t−1
N j ∗ + µt−1
2 N +At − B + µt−1

2

!

F

j
4: Ytj = Yt−1
+ µt−1 (B j − Atj − Nt j )
5: µt = ρµt−1
Check the convergence conditions (9)
end while
6: Perform the inverse q−1 (·) of transformation (7)
A j = q−1 (A j )

To address the optimization problem and derive the optimal
solution, we utilize an inexact augmented Lagrange multiplier [39], which provides guaranteed convergence properties.
Empirical evidence shows that the algorithm generally converges within 20–30 iterations for standard hyperspectral
datasets, primarily influenced by the employed quaternion
singular value decomposition computation. The convergence
criterion monitors the relative primal residual by
kB j − A j − N j kF
<ε
kB j kF

(9)

where the quaternionic
on B j is expressed
P P Frobenius norm
1/2
r
c
j
2
as kB j kF =
. The whole procedure
µ=1
ν=1 |B (µ, ν)|
j
to obtain the sparse anomaly A and the corresponding real
A j ∈ Rr×c×4 is detailed in Algorithm 2.
Fig. 4 displays the decomposition results of QSR applied
to San Diego, showcasing bands from the 9th and 18th
super-bands. The original bands (top row) contain mixed
information, while the sparse components (middle row) isolate distinctive spectral signatures representing anomalous. By
comparing red-highlighted regions across gray images, it is

5536217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

retained sparse elements preserve the key super-band properties of intragroup homogeneity and intergroup heterogeneity.
To amplify the contrast between sparse anomalies and the
remaining background in each A j , an unsupervised reconstruction module DG-QCD is designed, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
1) Multiscale Quaternionic Grouped Convolution: First, a
multiscale quaternionic grouped convolution is performed on
each homogeneous group A j ∈ Rr×c×4 obtained by QSR as

(quat)
Gδ A j = A j ~ W δ
, δ ∈ {1, 3, 5, 7}
(10)

Fig. 4. Grayscale images of different bands within distinct super-bands. (First
to third rows) Original band, the retained sparse components, and the discarded
low-rank components.

Fig. 5. Flowchart of the proposed DG-QCD.

clear that these sparse components maintain consistent patterns within each super-band while preserving the differences
between super-bands, demonstrating how QSR effectively
captures spectral intragroup homogeneity and intergroup
heterogeneity. The decomposition quality is particularly evident in the transition areas between different surface materials,
where the sparse components clearly emphasize boundary features. However, the sparse components still contain traces of
background elements, and the low-rank components (bottom
row) retain some anomalous features. This overlap between
components confirms a fundamental challenge in matrix
decomposition; perfect separation is rarely achievable. Despite
this limitation, the quaternionic model offers an advantage by
concentrating most of the spectrally significant information in
the sparse components, thereby providing reliable input for the
downstream detector.

where Gδ (·) is a quaternionic multiscale operation with the
grouped convolution operator ~, the grouped convolution
(quat)
kernel Wδ
∈ RCδ ×4×δ×δ , and the size of the quaternion
convolution kernel δ. It preserves local relationships among
homogeneous bands through grouped execution rather than
single-band traversal. In this step, we do not implement
actual quaternion calculations. Instead, inspired by the parallel
quaternion framework introduced in Section III-B, we group
the pre-divided “quaternion” spectral bands and feed them
directly into the convolution network as independent units.
This approach eliminates redundant computational steps while
preserving the structural advantages of the quaternion-inspired
design. After employing the quaternionic grouping architecture
that includes all kernel sizes, the feature maps Gδ (A j ) ∈
Rr×c×Cδ of different scales are connected to T j ∈ Rr×c×CT
by




(11)
T j = Concat G1 A j , G3 A j , G5 A j , G7 A j
where Concat(·) stands for connect features of multiple scales
along the spectral dimension and CT = C1 + C3 + C5 + C7 . In
our implementation, we set C1 = C3 = C5 = C7 = CT /4 = 16
to ensure balanced multiscale representation. This multiscale
feature extraction method allows the model to have more
substantial detection capabilities for anomaly targets of various
sizes. However, such networks easily yield gradient disappearance problems, decreasing feature expression ability. To solve
this problem, a residual connection mechanism is employed
to obtain Y j ∈ Rr×c×CT as

(12)
Y j = T j + P1×1 Concat T j−1 , T j , ∇ j
where P1×1 (·) : Rr×c×3CT → Rr×c×CT is a 1 × 1 group
connection layer to ensure dimensional consistency for all
residual connections. ∇ j represents the computed intergroup
gradient features. This residual connection mechanism ensures
that the input information can be directly passed to the output,
effectively alleviating the gradient vanishing problem and
enhancing expression capabilities.
2) Difference-Guided Anomaly Detection: Since bands
from heterogeneous super-groups often present different
anomaly reflectance values, we further calculate the tensor
difference D j between the ( j − 1)th and jth super-bands by
D j = Y j − Y j−1 ,

C. Difference-Guided Quaternionic Convolution Detector
Unlike conventional methods that rely on low-rank components or original data for background reconstruction, our
approach completely discards the low-rank component and
solely depends on the sparse component. Crucially, the

j ∈ {2, 3, . . . , n} .

(13)

This difference between groups can effectively capture the
band change mode and is significant for detecting spectral anomalies. By calculating the absolute difference of the
characteristics of adjacent groups, the model can pay attention to areas with abnormal relationships between bands.

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

Then, the proposed detector connects the attributes of all
super-bands and the differences between groups through a
three-layer encoder–decoder framework. The encoder part
includes group convolution, multiscale features, and group
differences

E1 = LeakyReLU G3 Concat Y1 , . . . , Yn , D2 , . . . , Dn
E2 = LeakyReLU (G3 (E1 ))
E3 = LeakyReLU (G3 (E2 ))

(14)

where LeakyReLU(x) = max(0.2x, x) is an activation function.
This part can help the model learn a compact data representation, removing redundant information. The three-layer
decoder then tries to rebuild the compressed features back
to K, holding the original dimension of the global sparse
component A = Concat(A1 , A2 , . . . , An ) ∈ Rr×c×4n by
J1 = LeakyReLU (G3 (E3 ))
J2 = LeakyReLU (G3 (J1 ))
K = G3 (J2 ) .

(15)

The initial anomaly score map is derived from the pixelwise mean square error between the sparse component A and
its reconstruction K
4n

Lbase (A, K) =

1 X
(A (:, :, i) − K (:, :, i))2
4n

(16)

i=1

where Lbase is the base reconstruction error map, and the summation is performed over the 4n channels of the concatenated
sparse component.
Rather than directly utilizing this basic reconstruction
error, we introduce a novel reconstruction quality-aware loss
(RQAL) that dynamically modulates the optimization process
based on the intrinsic reconstructability of different image
regions. This approach is grounded in the key observation
that the sparse component A can be divided into easily
reconstructible background regions (characterized by near-zero
values and minimal spectral variation) and challenging anomalous regions (exhibiting higher energy and spatial–spectral
deviation). RQAL operates through two fundamental computational stages. First, it dynamically generates a quality mask by
thresholding the instantaneous pixel-wise reconstruction error
Mhigh = M (Lbase (A, K) < τ)

(17)

where τ = 0.001 denotes the quality threshold, M(·) is the
indicator function that returns 1 for true conditions and 0
otherwise, and Mhigh is the resulting binary mask identifying
well-reconstructed pixels, which correspond primarily to the
background regions of A. The final training loss LRQAL is then
computed as a selectively masked average focused exclusively
on these high-quality regions
i
P h
(A,
L
K)
·
M
base
high
i,
j
i, j
i, j
P
LRQAL =
(18)
M
+

highi, j
i, j
where the indices i and j iterate over all spatial positions
in the error map and  is a small constant (e.g., 1 × 10−8 )
included for numerical stability to prevent division by zero.

Fig. 6. Grayscale images of sparse components obtained by (a) QSR and
(b) DG-QCD on different bands within distinct super-bands on San Diego
and Cri.

The encoder–decoder network is trained in a fully unsupervised manner for around 50 epochs using the Adam optimizer
with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and an initial learning rate of 1 ×
10−4 . This formulation ensures that gradient updates explicitly
enhance the model’s capacity to reconstruct the predominant
background patterns while strategically ignoring anomalous
regions. Consequently, the model progressively refines its
background reconstruction capability, thereby amplifying the
discrimination between background and anomalies in the final
anomaly score. For inference, the normalized anomaly score
map is obtained by min–max scaling the base reconstruction
error Lbase (A, K) to the range [0, 1], where higher values
indicate a greater probability of anomaly presence.
Fig. 6 presents the grayscale images of sparse components
obtained by (a) QSR and (b) DG-QCD on different bands
within distinct super-bands on San Diego and Cri datasets.
This visualization demonstrates the progressive refinement
of anomaly components through our proposed pipeline. As
illustrated in Fig. 6, the sparse components extracted by
QSR contain valuable anomaly information but exhibit fragmented and scattered spatial patterns across different spectral
bands. While QSR successfully decomposes the hyperspectral
data into sparse and low-rank components, isolating potential
anomalous pixels from the background subspace, the resulting sparse components lack spatial coherence due to the
pixel-wise nature of the sparse decomposition process. The
anomaly components obtained through DG-QCD demonstrate the effectiveness of the subsequent encoder–decoder
refinement stage. After processing the QSR-generated sparse
components, DG-QCD produces considerably more precise

5536217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

and concentrated spatial distributions. In the refined anomaly
component maps, anomalous targets appear as white regions
on San Diego and dark regions on Cri, featuring well-defined
boundaries and regular shapes with strong contrasts against
the gray background. This transformation demonstrates effective spatial aggregation and enhanced visibility of anomalous
information.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
All the experiments are primarily performed on a laptop
with a 2.60-GHz CPU running on a Windows 11 system, Intel
Core i9-13900H processors, and 32 GB of memory.
A. Experiment Datasets
To quantitatively verify the proposed model’s performance,
we conducted experiments on the following six publicly
available real-world HSIs. The false-color images and the
ground-truth maps are given in Fig. 7(a) and (b).
1) San Diego: This dataset, acquired by the Airborne
Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) over
San Diego, CA, USA, consists of 189 spectral bands
after excluding noisy and water absorption bands. It
has 90 × 90 pixels with 3.5-m spatial resolution, where
77 pixels are identified as anomaly targets, representing
0.95% of the total [43]. The targets are in three relatively
focused areas.
2) Cri: Collected by the Nuance Cri hyperspectral sensor
over Wuhan University, China, this dataset contains 46
spectral channels retained at 10-nm spectral resolution
and 400×400 pixels. There are 860 anomalies, accounting for 0.54% of total pixels [44]. The targets are in ten
relatively scattered areas.
3) Bay Champagne: Captured by AVIRIS, this dataset
contains 188 spectral bands (after preprocessing) and
100×100 pixels, with a spatial resolution of 4.4 m/pixel.
The scene includes 11 anomalous pixels occupying
0.11% of the global space [45]. The targets are concentrated in a small area.
4) Texas Coast: Acquired by AVIRIS along the Texas Coast
(Texas-C), USA, this dataset consists of 207 spectral
bands (after removing absorption and low-signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) bands) and 100 × 100 pixels with
17.2-m spatial resolution. This scene contains 155 pixels
identified as anomaly targets, representing 1.55% of the
total [46]. The targets are in 20 relatively focused areas.
5) Pavia: Acquired by the Reflectance Optical System
Imaging Spectrometer (ROSIS-03) sensor over Pavia,
Italy, this dataset comprises 102 spectral bands and
150 × 150 pixels, with 1.3-m spatial resolution. The
anomalies include 68 target pixels (0.30% of the total),
primarily vehicles on a bridge [47]. The targets are in
seven relatively scattered areas.
6) Cat Island: Collected by AVIRIS around Cat Island, this
dataset contains 188 spectral bands (after noise removal)
and 150×150 pixels, with 17.2-m spatial resolution. The
scene includes 19 anomalous pixels (0.08% of the total)
corresponding to aircraft targets [46]. The targets are
concentrated in a small area.

B. Experiment Settings
They are given as follows.
1) Evaluation Indexes: Multiple quantitative and qualitative
metrics are employed to assess the performance.
1) Anomaly Score Map: It qualitatively and visually represents the effects of background suppression and
highlights anomalies. By observing color changes on the
maps, we can quickly identify anomalies.
2) Receiver Operating Characteristic: The qualitative
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve graphically represents the tradeoff between the probability
of detection (PD) and false alarm rate (FAR) across
varying thresholds. The ROC curve plots the PD in
the y-axis against the FAR in the x-axis, where curves
closer to the upper left corner demonstrate superior
detection performance, achieving higher detection rates
while maintaining lower false alarm probabilities.
3) AUC, Running Time, and MRs: To thoroughly assess
detection performance, we utilize three key quantitative
metrics: area under the ROC curve (AUC), running time,
and memory requirements (MRs). AUC measures the
area under the ROC curve, where a larger value indicates
greater detection accuracy. Additionally, we include
running time and MR to evaluate the computational
efficiency and space needed by the model, respectively.
4) Separability Box Plot: It is a statistical tool to qualitatively evaluate the distinction between the background
and anomalies. In this method, distinct colored boxes
represent the background and the anomaly parts. The
greater the distance between the two boxes, the easier it
is to differentiate the two parts.
2) Comparison Methods: Comprehensive comparisons
are conducted by introducing various state-of-the-art HAD
techniques, including statistical method FrFE-RX [12],
representation-based methods comprising matrix-derived
approaches, i.e., SuperRPCA [15] and low-rank and sparse
representation (LRASR) [43], and tensor-based methods,
i.e., GNLTR [14], PCA-TLRSR [28], and prior-based tensor
approximation (PTA) [13], and deep learning methods, i.e.,
PDBSNet [21] and RGAE [40]. Among these methods,
SuperRPCA and RGAE employ superpixel segmentation to
capture homogeneous and heterogeneous spatial mechanisms,
thereby enhancing spatial context extraction. Meanwhile,
most experiments are conducted using the public codes from
the related authors. However, due to discrepancies in dataset
configurations, some methods lacked recommended parameter
settings for our specific experimental setup. In such cases, we
carefully adjusted the parameters to ensure proper execution.
C. Comparison of Performance
This section presents quantitative and qualitative comparison results on six benchmark hyperspectral datasets.
1) Anomaly Score Map: Fig. 7(c)–(k) presents the detection
results in heatmap format across six original HSIs, comparing the performance of all nine detectors. Brighter pixels
indicate higher anomaly probabilities in these visualizations,
while darker regions represent background areas. It is worth

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

Fig. 7. Qualitative heat maps of (a) false-color image and (b) ground truth. Detection results obtained by (c) proposed SuperB-QSNet, (d) RGAE, (e) PDBSNet,
(f) SuperRPCA, (g) GNLTR, (h) PCA-TLRSR, (i) PTA, (j) LRASR, and (k) FrFE-RX.

noting that SuperB-QSNet consistently generates the cleanest
detection maps, showcasing well-defined anomaly regions with
minimal false alarms. The proposed model demonstrates high
alignment with the ground-truth References across all datasets.
Among these HSIs, PDBSNet performs similar to the proposed model, particularly in the Cri and Bay Champagne
(Bay-C) datasets, where it effectively isolates anomalies while
minimizing background noise. In contrast, other methods
show varying performance limitations. For instance, PTA and
LRASR generate significant background artifacts and false
positives, especially in San Diego and Bay-C scenes, where
they mistakenly highlight areas that are not anomalous. On the
other hand, the GNLTR and PCA-TLRSR algorithms perform
moderately but are affected by noticeable noise interference
in complex environments, such as Texas-C. The results from
Cat Island further illustrate this issue, as multiple algorithms
(RGAE, SuperRPCA, GNLTR, and PCA-TLRSR) incorrectly
identify linear features that do not exist in the ground truth.
However, both SuperB-QSNet and PDBSNet successfully
avoid these artifacts.
2) ROC Curves: In Fig. 8, each subfigure displays the
ROC curves obtained by distinct HAD models on the same
dataset. Among all the ROC curves, SuperB-QSNet consistently demonstrates superior detection capabilities. It maintains
steady curves with smoother transitions than competitors,
indicating robust detection stability across varying thresholds,
particularly in critical low false alarm regions. Specifically, the
corresponding curve rises sharply near the origin in San Diego,
outperforming other methods in early detection capability.

While several algorithms achieve near-perfect detection on
Cri, SuperB-QSNet maintains its advantage through more
consistent curve progression. Besides, the matching curve
exhibits remarkable separation from most competitors on the
Bay-C dataset, particularly from algorithms like LRASR and
RGAE that hold significantly flatter trajectories. Furthermore,
our model demonstrates an exceptional ability to maintain
high detection probability even at extremely restrictive false
alarm thresholds on Texas-C. Similarly, its curve consistently
dominates the upper left quadrant of the ROC space for both
Pavia and Cat Island.
3) AUC, Running Time, and MR: Table I displays various
algorithms’ AUC and running time performance on six HSIs.
The comprehensive evaluation demonstrates that SuperBQSNet achieves an exceptional balance of accuracy and
efficiency across all datasets. This proposed model consistently
maintains high accuracy, with AUC scores exceeding 0.9900,
while completing detection tasks within 10.00 s. No other
algorithm can match this combination of speed and precision.
As illustrated in Table I, PDBSNet achieves similar accuracy
as SuperB-QSNet on some datasets but requires much longer
processing time (up to 1349 s on Cri). RGAE delivers good
results on some datasets but performs poorly on others,
while consuming extremely long processing time. Traditional
approaches like FrFE-RX occasionally work well but lack
consistency in performance and efficiency. Considering the
comprehensive evaluation of AUC results and running time,
our SuperB-QSNet effectively balances detection accuracy

5536217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 8. Qualitative ROC curves by different HAD models on (a) San Diego, (b) Cri, (c) Bay-C, (d) Texas-C, (e) Pavia, and (f) Cat Island.
TABLE I
AUC AND RUNNING T IME (S ECONDS ). T HE B EST AND S ECOND VALUES ON E ACH DATASET A RE M ARKED IN R ED AND B LUE , R ESPECTIVELY

TABLE II
MR S ’ C OMPARISON B ETWEEN D EEP L EARNING A LGORITHMS

and computational efficiency, making it a practical choice for
real-world HAD applications.
To comprehensively evaluate the proposed algorithms’ practical applicability and deployment feasibility, we analyzed
memory usage using a sophisticated monitoring framework
that employs Python’s psutil library. As shown in Table II,
MRs vary significantly across different datasets, ranging from

162 to 1641 MB. PDBSNet demonstrates superior memory efficiency on high-dimensional datasets, particularly Cri,
where it achieves 62.5% memory reduction compared to
SuperB-QSNet. Conversely, SuperB-QSNet exhibits advantages on most datasets, requiring substantially less memory
on Cat Island. These results demonstrate that both algorithms
are practically deployable on modern computing systems with
standard RAM configurations (2–4 GB), providing essential
guidance for practitioners in resource planning and system
design for real-world HAD applications. Nevertheless, considering other evaluation metrics, our proposed SuperB-QSNet
outperforms the alternatives.
4) Separability Box Plots: Fig. 9 presents box plots with
outliers in red circles of various anomaly detection methods
across six HSIs. The proposed SuperB-QSNet exhibits
outstanding performance, consistently maintaining low
background scores while achieving effective anomaly

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

Fig. 9. Separability box plots with outliers in red circles generated by various HAD models on (a) San Diego, (b) Cri, (c) Bay-C, (d) Texas-C, (e) Pavia,
and (f) Cat Island.

separation, particularly in San Diego, Bay-C, and Texas-C
datasets. The red circle outliers in the anomaly boxes reveal
the core anomalous pixels that receive extremely high scores,
demonstrating strong discriminative capability despite the
compressed appearance of the interquartile ranges caused by
the inclusion of lower scoring peripheral pixels within the
ground-truth masks. SuperRPCA demonstrates comparable
patterns of separation, underscoring the effectiveness of
superpixel-based approaches. Within the deep learning
category, PDBSNet stands out in Pavia and Cat Island due to
its remarkable anomaly-background separation. In contrast,
RGAE performs well in Cri but lacks consistency across
other datasets. Tensor-based methods, such as GNLTR and
PCA-TLRSR, perform better in Bay-C than anticipated, with
high anomaly scores that rival those of leading methods.

D. Robustness to Additional Noise
In the model construction, we assume that the acquired
images are free from sparse noise, an assumption that often
does not hold in real-world raw data. To evaluate the robustness of SuperB-QSNet against noise interference, we introduce
two common types of noise with two degrees of intensity to
the original HSIs. The first type is independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian noise, denoted as N(0, σ2 ), with
standard deviations σ = 0.05 and σ = 0.07. The second
type is non-i.i.d. Gaussian noise, where the SNR follows a
uniform distribution between [10, 20] dB or [20, 30] dB

for each spectral band. These noise types and intensity levels are selected by practical considerations in hyperspectral
imaging. The i.i.d. Gaussian noise represents moderate-to-high
sensor noise commonly encountered in real-world acquisitions. The non-i.i.d. Gaussian noise with varying SNR levels
simulates more realistic scenarios where different spectral
bands experience varying noise levels due to atmospheric
absorption, sensor characteristics, and illumination conditions.
The simulation experiments are conducted using San Diego
dataset, where we compare SuperB-QSNet with two existing
deep learning approaches: RGAE [40] and PDBSNet [21].
In this experiment, to fairly compare the anomaly detection
performance of different algorithms on the same dataset with
additional Gaussian noise, we employ the same quantile
threshold (99%) to the anomaly score maps produced by
each method. Specifically, we mark the top 1% pixels with
the highest anomaly scores as anomalous pixels for each
technique. This approach ensures that the number of detected
anomalies is consistent across methods, allowing for a direct
comparison of the distribution of true and false anomaly
detections under noise. Consequently, it provides a clear basis
for evaluating the robustness of different algorithms to noise
perturbations.
The results of the noise robustness evaluation are presented
in Fig. 10. SuperB-QSNet exhibits superior detection
accuracy, as its predicted target area aligns more closely with
the target across various noise conditions. In contrast to
PDBSNet, which generates fewer false detections,

5536217

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE III
AUC BY D IFFERENT M ODULES OF S UPER B-QSN ET

Fig. 11. 3D-ROC on six HSIs acquired by SuperB-QSNet and direct RX
detection on sparse components generated after HH-SBC and QSR.

Fig. 10. (a) False-color image of simulated noisy San Diego. Binary maps
acquired by (b) SuperB-QSNet, (c) RGAE, and (d) PDBSNet.

SuperB-QSNet maintains a more balanced performance,
achieving comparably low false positives and higher
precision. SuperB-QSNet demonstrates strong detection
capabilities even in high-noise environments, highlighting its
algorithmic adaptability. Unlike RGAE, SuperB-QSNet offers
greater stability in noisy conditions and results in significantly
fewer errors, further validating the effectiveness of its design.
The visual detection results show that our model effectively
identifies anomalous targets, even in noisy conditions.
E. Empirical Analysis
1) Ablation Study: To validate the contribution of each component in our proposed model, we conducted a comprehensive
ablation study using two different detectors: the DG-QCD
and RX detectors. The experiments systematically evaluate
the effectiveness of each module using both the classical RX
detector and our proposed DG-QCD detector. We chose the
RX detector as our baseline because it is a classical statistical
anomaly detector that relies solely on second-order statistics
(covariance matrix) [11]. This ensures that any performance
improvements observed when incorporating HH-SBC or QSR
can be attributed exclusively to the algorithmic contributions of
these modules, rather than to any effects from neural network

optimization. Table III presents the ablation results, where
the classical RX detector is the default detection head when
DG-QCD is not employed (i.e., when the DG-QCD column is
unchecked).
As shown in Table III, the combination of HH-SBC with
the RX detector achieves robust performance (AUC >0.95
on most datasets), demonstrating effective spectral redundancy
reduction while preserving relevant anomaly information. QSR
exhibits dataset-dependent performance; it excels on some
datasets but struggles on others with complex spectral characteristics. Fortunately, combining HH-SBC and QSR mitigates
QSR’s instability issues, indicating that hierarchical band
clustering offers a more suitable input structure for sparse
decomposition. When DG-QCD is introduced, all combinations show significant improvements, with the complete model
achieving optimal performance across all datasets.
Furthermore, a 3D-ROC visualization is created to verify the effectiveness of our proposed method by applying
the RX detector and DG-QCD to the sparse components
generated by HH-SBC and QSR, as shown in Fig. 11.
The 3D-ROC visualization offers several advantages over
traditional 2D-ROC curves for multidataset performance
evaluation. It enables simultaneous detection performance
comparison across multiple datasets within a comprehensive
view, facilitating direct visual assessment of method consistency and robustness. Across all six datasets, SuperB-QSNet
(solid lines) consistently outperforms the RX detector applied

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

reveals that with an appropriately set regularization parameter
λ j = 0.05, the model exhibits minimal sensitivity to variations in super-band numbers, maintaining stable AUC values
above 0.95 across all datasets. This robustness confirms that
the SuperB-QSNet algorithm possesses strong generalization
capabilities and parameter insensitivity, enabling it to adapt to
diverse hyperspectral data types without requiring meticulous
parameter tuning. Notably, even under the least favorable
parameter combinations, the model consistently delivers high
performance on Pavia and Cri datasets, further attesting to its
reliability.
V. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 12. Parameter sensitivity analysis of SuperB-QSNet on (a) regularization
parameter λ j and (b) number of super-bands n.

to sparse components (dashed lines), demonstrating that
SuperB-QSNet maintains consistent performance advantages
across all datasets, indicating strong generalization capabilities and robustness. The 3-D visualization also shows that
SuperB-QSNet achieves higher true positive rates at extremely
low FARs (10−4 ). This finding is particularly significant for
HAD, where minimizing false alarms is crucial for operational
deployment.
2) Hyperparameter Sensitivity: To analysis the effect of
different parameter values, we tested the performance of the
model with the regularization parameter value λ j ranging from
{0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5} and the number of super-bands
n ranging from {2, 6, 10, 14, 18, 22} on most datasets (except
Cri where the maximum of n can only reach 18 because of
its limited spectral size). The parameter sensitivity analysis is
given in Fig. 12.
Fig. 12(a) illustrates the impact of different regularization
parameters on model performance under a fixed super-band
number n = 6. When the regularization parameter is small,
the AUC values across all datasets remain above 0.95, demonstrating excellent stability. However, as the parameter increases
to 0.5, significant performance degradation is observed on
San Diego, Bay-C, and Texas-C datasets. In contrast, the
Pavia and Cri datasets maintain relatively stable performance.
This suggests that the choice of regularization parameter has
a more pronounced effect on complex scenarios, with the
optimal parameter range between 0.05 and 0.1. Fig. 12(b)

The proposed SuperB-QSNet introduces an innovative
framework that synergistically combines spectral-structured
processing with quaternion-based techniques for HAD. Our
approach addresses the critical limitation of spectral feature
underutilization in existing methods through three key innovations: 1) HH-SBC that intelligently groups spectral bands
while preserving discriminative information; 2) QSR model
that uniquely encodes both spatial and spectral correlations
in a unified hypercomplex domain; and 3) DG-QCD that
enhances discriminative power through spectral coherence
preservation and intergroup difference operations. Through
extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that this integrated
approach significantly improves the identification of subtle
spectral anomalies while maintaining computational efficiency,
even under noisy scenes. In the future, we will focus on developing dynamic or irregular size-adapted super-unit quaternion
operations that automatically balance spectral and spatial
feature representation without manual tuning. Moreover, we
plan to expand the manner of identifying and maintaining
spectral context to the domain of multitemporal or multimodal
analyses.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

A. M. Morley, T. A. Mather, D. M. Pyle, and J.-M. Kendall, “Detecting
shallow subsurface anomalies with airborne and spaceborne remote
sensing: A review,” Sci. Remote Sens., vol. 11, Jun. 2025, Art. no.
100187, doi: 10.1016/j.srs.2024.100187.
H. Wei et al., “Real-time remote sensing detection framework of the
Earth’s surface anomalies based on a priori knowledge base,” Int.
J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 122, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 103429,
doi: 10.1016/j.jag.2023.103429.
A. Gemitzi, P. Dalampakis, and G. Falalakis, “Detecting geothermal
anomalies using Landsat 8 thermal infrared remotely sensed data,” Int.
J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 96, Apr. 2021, Art. no. 102283, doi:
10.1016/j.jag.2020.102283.
J. Li, X. Wang, S. Wang, H. Zhao, and Y. Zhong, “One-step detection
paradigm for hyperspectral anomaly detection via spectral deviation
relationship learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5517515, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3392189.
M. Ciotola et al., “Hyperspectral pansharpening: Critical review, tools,
and future perspectives,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 13,
no. 1, pp. 311–338, Mar. 2025, doi: 10.1109/MGRS.2024.3509139.
Y. Liu, K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Zhang, Y. Li, and L. Fang, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection with self-supervised anomaly prior,” Neural Netw.,
vol. 187, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 107294, doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2025.107294.
C. Liu et al., “OSHFNet: A heterogeneous dual-branch dynamic fusion
network of optical and SAR images for land use classification,” Int.
J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 141, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 104609,
doi: 10.1016/j.jag.2025.104609.

5536217

[8]

C. McCann, K. S. Repasky, R. Lawrence, and S. Powell, “Multi-temporal
mesoscale hyperspectral data of mixed agricultural and grassland regions
for anomaly detection,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens., vol. 131,
pp. 121–133, Sep. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2017.07.015.
[9] T. Ke, Y. Zhong, M. Song, X. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Mineral detection
based on hyperspectral remote sensing imagery on Mars: From detection methods to fine mapping,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.,
vol. 218, pp. 761–780, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2024.09.020.
[10] J. Qi, Z. Gong, W. Xue, X. Liu, A. Yao, and P. Zhong, “An unmixingbased network for underwater target detection from hyperspectral
imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14,
pp. 5470–5487, 2021, doi: 10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3080919.
[11] Z. Li and Y. Zhang, “A new hyperspectral anomaly detection method
based on higher order statistics and adaptive cosine estimator,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 661–665, Apr. 2020, doi:
10.1109/LGRS.2019.2929314.
[12] R. Tao, X. Zhao, W. Li, H.-C. Li, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection by fractional Fourier entropy,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 4920–4929, Dec. 2019, doi:
10.1109/JSTARS.2019.2940278.
[13] L. Li, W. Li, Y. Qu, C. Zhao, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Prior-based tensor
approximation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1037–1050, Mar.
2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3038659.
[14] H. Qin, Q. Shen, H. Zeng, Y. Chen, and G. Lu, “Generalized nonconvex
low-rank tensor representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5526612,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3321789.
[15] J.-T. Lin and C.-H. Lin, “SuperRPCA: A collaborative superpixel
representation prior-aided RPCA for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5532516, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3459956.
[16] X. Fu, S. Jia, L. Zhuang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and Q. Li,
“Hyperspectral anomaly detection via deep plug-and-play denoising
CNN regularization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11,
pp. 9553–9568, Nov. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3049224.
[17] S. Xiao, T. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. Qu, S. Hou, and W. Dong,
“Anomaly detection of hyperspectral images based on transformer with
spatial–spectral dual-window mask,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16, pp. 1414–1426, 2023, doi: 10.1109/
JSTARS.2022.3232762.
[18] J. Li, X. Wang, H. Zhao, and Y. Zhong, “Learning a cross-modality
anomaly detector for remote sensing imagery,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 33, pp. 6607–6621, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIP.2024.3490894.
[19] J. Li, Y. Zhong, H. Zhao, Z. Gao, and X. Wang, “Segmenting remote
sensing anomalies at instance level via anomaly map-guided adaptation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5527216, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2024.3439491.
[20] J. Yao, J. Pan, and Y. Zeng, “Gauging-: A non-parametric hierarchical
clustering algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 47,
no. 6, pp. 4897–4907, Jun. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3545573.
[21] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. J. Plaza,
“PDBSNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot reconstruction network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, May 2023, Art. no. 5511914, doi: 10.1109/
TGRS.2023.3276175.
[22] J. Jiang, J. Ma, C. Chen, Z. Wang, Z. Cai, and L. Wang, “SuperPCA:
A superpixelwise PCA approach for unsupervised feature extraction
of hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56,
no. 8, pp. 4581–4593, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2018.2828029.
[23] Q. Wang, F. Zhang, and X. Li, “Hyperspectral band selection via
optimal neighborhood reconstruction,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 8465–8476, Dec. 2020, doi: 10.1109/
TGRS.2020.2987955.
[24] T. Qiao et al., “Joint bilateral filtering and spectral similarity-based
sparse representation: A generic framework for effective feature extraction and data classification in hyperspectral imaging,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 77, pp. 316–328, May 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2017.10.008.
[25] X. Wang, L. Qian, M. Hong, and Y. Liu, “Dual homogeneous patchesbased band selection methodology for hyperspectral classification,”
Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 15, p. 3841, Aug. 2023, doi: 10.3390/
rs15153841.
[26] Y. Long, B. Rivard, D. Rogge, and M. Tian, “Hyperspectral band
selection using the N-dimensional spectral solid angle method for the
improved discrimination of spectrally similar targets,” Int. J. Appl.
Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 79, pp. 35–47, Jul. 2019, doi: 10.1016/
j.jag.2019.03.002.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[27] L. Qian, X. Wang, M. Hong, Y. Zhang, and H. Wang, “SS-PLRQR:
Super-spectrum parallel low-rank quaternion recovery for hyperspectral
image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025,
Art. no. 5505216, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3540460.
[28] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023, doi:
10.1109/TCYB.2022.3175771.
[29] S. Li, K. Zhang, P. Duan, and X. Kang, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with kernel isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 319–329, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1109/
TGRS.2019.2936308.
[30] O. S. Chander Goud, T. H. Sarma, and C. S. Bindu, “Optimal band
selection in hyperspectral images using improved K-means clustering
with spectral similarity measures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Artif.
Intell. Eng. Technol. (IICAIET), Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, Sep. 2023,
pp. 268–271, doi: 10.1109/IICAIET59451.2023.10291338.
[31] L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Sun, L. Zhuang, Q. Du, and B. Zhang,
“Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on chessboard topology,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5505016, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2023.3249748.
[32] H.-F. Yan, Y.-Q. Zhao, J. C.-W. Chan, and S. G. Kong, “Rapid
hyperspectral anomaly detection using discriminative band selection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5533818,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3451559.
[33] J. Hu, Y. Zhang, M. Zhao, and P. Li, “Spatial–spectral extraction for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 19, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 6004605, doi: 10.1109/
LGRS.2021.3130908.
[34] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, and L. Jiao, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection via background and potential anomaly dictionaries construction,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4,
pp. 2263–2276, Apr. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2018.2872590.
[35] L. Li, Z. Wu, and B. Wang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via
merging total variation into low-rank representation,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 17, pp. 14894–14907, 2024, doi:
10.1109/JSTARS.2024.3447896.
[36] X. Yang, W. Cao, Y. Lu, and Y. Zhou, “QTN: Quaternion transformer
network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 7370–7384, Dec. 2023, doi:
10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3283289.
[37] L. Zhang and B. Fu, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using a quaternion matrix of wavelet transform,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 25, no. 10,
pp. 17769–17781, May 2025, doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2025.3556778.
[38] T.-S.-T. Chan and Y.-H. Yang, “Complex and quaternionic principal
component pursuit and its application to audio separation,” IEEE Signal
Process. Lett., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 287–291, Feb. 2016, doi: 10.1109/
LSP.2016.2514845.
[39] B. Tu, X. Yang, W. He, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection using reconstruction fusion of quaternion frequency domain
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6,
pp. 8358–8372, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3227167.
[40] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314, doi: 10.1109/
TGRS.2021.3097097.
[41] X. Cheng et al., “Deep feature aggregation network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, 2024, Art.
no. 5033016, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2024.3403211.
[42] M.-Y. Liu, O. Tuzel, S. Ramalingam, and R. Chellappa, “Entropy rate
superpixel segmentation,” in Proc. CVPR, Jun. 2011, pp. 2097–2104.
[43] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in
hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000, Apr.
2016, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2493201.
[44] D. Zhu, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Two-stream convolutional networks for hyperspectral target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 59, no. 8, pp. 6907–6921, Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1109/
TGRS.2020.3031902.
[45] X. Fu, T. Zhang, J. Cheng, and S. Jia, “MMR-HAD: Multiscale mamba
reconstruction network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, 2025, Art. no. 5516914, doi:
10.1109/TGRS.2025.3541353.
[46] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with attribute and edgepreserving filters,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10,
pp. 5600–5611, Oct. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2017.2710145.

WANG et al.: BEYOND SPATIAL PRIORS: SPECTRAL-AWARE HAD NETWORK

5536217

[47] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix
decomposition-based Mahalanobis distance method for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2016, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2479299.

Tao Tang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees
in information and communication engineering from
the National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, China, in 2002, 2006, and 2016, respectively.
He has been an Associate Professor with the
School of Electronic Science, National University of
Defense Technology. His research interests include
synthetic aperture radar target detection and recognition, and remote sensing image registration and
feature extraction.

Xianyue Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree in statistics from Huaqiao
University, Xiamen, China, in 2021, and the M.S.
degree in applied statistics from the School of Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in 2024. She is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering with the National University
of Defense Technology, Changsha, China.
Her research interests include feature extraction,
data mining, and hyperspectral image processing.

Yuli Sun received the Ph.D. degree in information
and communication engineering from the National
University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2023.
He currently holds a post-doctoral position at
the College of Aerospace Science and Engineering, NUDT. He has authored articles in IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND
L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING, International
Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, and Pattern Recognition. His research
interests include remote sensing image processing and multitemporal image
analysis.

Lin Lei received the Ph.D. degree in information
and communication engineering from the National
University of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2008.
She is currently a Professor with the School of
Electronic Science, NUDT. Her research interests
include computer vision, remote sensing image interpretation, and data fusion.