1760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

Boosting Encrypted Traffic Classification Using
Feature-Enhanced Recurrent Neural Network
With Angle Constraint
Gongxun Miao , Guohua Wu, Zhen Zhang, Yongjie Tong, and Bing Lu

Abstract—With the surge in various types of network traffic and
the widespread application of encryption technology, the classification of encrypted traffic plays an increasingly important role in
ensuring network security, enhancing quality of service, and managing network traffic. However, most existing methods often suffer
from issues such as excessive reliance on manual feature extraction
and expert knowledge, unstable classification performance, and
lack of transfer learning capabilities. To address these challenges,
this paper proposes a high-performance hybrid encrypted traffic
classification framework, FERNN-AC. It directly extracts features
from raw traffic and fully explores and utilizes the spatiotemporal
information of traffic data by integrating specially designed feature
enhancement module and temporal feature extraction module in
a reasonable manner. It introduces angle constraints and can be
combined with meta-learning, thereby improving classification performance while possessing certain transfer learning capabilities.
The experiments are conducted on three datasets, and the results
shows that compare with relevant baseline methods, FERNN-AC
has excellent and stable classification performance.
Index Terms—Angle constraint, encrypted traffic classification,
feature enhancement, few-shot learning, LSTM.

I. INTRODUCTION
S INTERNET technology advances, the increasingly diverse range of network applications has brought convenience to people’s work and daily lives. However, the accompanying surge in various types of network traffic has brought about
numerous issues, such as network security threats and a decline
in the network quality of service (QoS). Meanwhile, with the rise
of awareness about network security and the widespread application of encryption technology, the proportion of encrypted traffic

A

Received 8 May 2024; revised 14 September 2024; accepted 16 October
2024. Date of publication 22 October 2024; date of current version 11 July
2025. This work was supported in part by the “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose”
Research and Development Program of Zhejiang under Grant 2023C03203,
Grant 2023C03180, and Grant 2022C03174. Recommended for acceptance by
P. D’Urso. (Corresponding author: Gongxun Miao.)
Gongxun Miao is with the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China, and also with the Zhongfu Information Company,
Ltd., Jinan 250100, China (e-mail: miaogx@hdu.edu.cn).
Guohua Wu is with the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University,
Hangzhou 310018, China, and also with the School of Intelligent Science,
Technology, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou 310018, China
(e-mail: wugh@hdu.edu.cn).
Zhen Zhang is with the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University,
Hangzhou 310018, China (e-mail: zhangzhen@hdu.edu.cn).
Yongjie Tong and Bing Lu are with the Zhongfu Information Company, Ltd.,
Jinan 250100, China (e-mail: tongyongjie@zhongfu.net; lubing@zhongfu.net).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBDATA.2024.3484674

in the network environment is constantly increasing, gradually
becoming an integral component of network traffic [1], [2].
Big data technology offers new possibilities for addressing this
challenge. By applying Big Data analytics methods, such as data
mining, machine learning, and deep learning, we can extract
valuable information from massive amounts of encrypted traffic
data, enabling more accurate traffic classification. This is of
significant importance for ensuring network security, optimizing
network resource utilization, and improving QoS. By mining
large-scale historical data and processing real-time streaming
data, we can establish more intelligent and dynamic encrypted
traffic classification models that adapt to the ever-changing
network environment and emerging encryption technologies.
For traffic classification, researchers have proposed various
classification methods. For instance, methods based on port lists
or payload analysis of data packets are used to identify application types, but these methods are unable to handle encrypted
traffic [3]. Statistical-based approaches involve manual feature
extraction followed by the utilization of traditional machine
learning classifiers for classification [4]. While these methods
achieve high accuracy rates, they heavily rely on expert knowledge and manual feature extraction. As the complexity of real
network traffic increases, the cost of manual feature extraction
becomes prohibitive. Deep learning-based methods can directly
use raw traffic as input, offering automatic feature extraction advantages and highly complex nonlinear fitting capabilities. This
eliminates the reliance on expert experience during the manual
feature extraction process and is more suitable for handling
increasingly complex encrypted traffic, making it a hot topic in
traffic classification research in recent years [5], [6]. However,
these methods still struggle with adapting to uneven sample
distributions and distinguishing samples with high similarity
across different categories but low similarity within the same
category, and lack transfer learning capabilities for new types of
samples.
To address the aforementioned issues, this paper proposes
an encrypted traffic classification model, FERNN-AC, based
on feature-enhanced recurrent neural network framework with
angle constraints. FERNN-AC comprises three main modules:
feature enhancement, temporal feature extraction, and classification. The feature enhancement and temporal feature extraction modules fully exploit and utilize the spatiotemporal
information of traffic data, enabling the model to obtain effective
representations. The classification module imposes constraints

2332-7790 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE

1761

TABLE I
ABBREVIATION EXPLANATIONS

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF RELATED WORKS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

on the angle in the embedded space and can be combined with
few-shot learning methods, thus achieving high-performance
classification of traffic and certain transfer learning capabilities.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows,
r A hybrid high-performance encrypted traffic classification
framework, FERNN-AC, is proposed, which makes full
use of the spatiotemporal information of traffic data and
imposes angle constraints on the embedding vector, realizing the high performance classification of traffic data.
r A unique feature enhancement module is designed, which
integrates one-dimensional pointwise convolution with the
Squeeze & Excitation mechanism, effectively utilizing the
features of the traffic data and improving the model’s
capability to the nonlinear representation.
r By aggregating all temporal step information of the recurrent neural network, the global information of encrypted
traffic flows are retained, which effectively enhances the
model’s the representation ability.
r The introduction of L2 normalization and angular constraints enforces closer proximity between samples of
the same type and greater separation between samples
of different types, thereby improving classification performance. Additionally, the model can be combined with
meta-learning, enabling transfer learning with few-shot
case.
We conducted extensive experiments on three real network
traffic datasets, and the results demonstrate that FERNN-AC
exhibits outstanding classification performance and stability
across different datasets.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
reviews related work in the field of traffic classification; The
concepts and problem definitions in the article are described in

Section III; Section IV provides a detailed description to the
theoretical framework of FERNN-AC; Section V presents the
experimental details, including datasets, experimental settings,
and analysis of experimental results; Finally, we conclude this
paper in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review previous researches on encrypted traffic classification, including statistical-based methods, deep learning-based methods and few-shot learning methods. The professional terms and their corresponding abbreviations mentioned throughout this article are shown in Table I. In
Table II, a comparison between the state-of-the-art techniques
and the method proposed in this paper was conducted across
four characteristics: spatiotemporal information, transfer learning, stability, and computational complexity. The comparison
indicates a significant advantage,
is represented as follows,
indicates a moderate advantage, and
indicates no advantage.
A. Statistical-Based Methods
These methods manually extract a feature set from the traffic
based on prior knowledge, then use data containing these feature
sets to train traditional machine learning models such as decision
trees, random forests, Bayesian classifiers, k-nearest neighbors,
etc., to achieve classification. The selected traffic features can
be divided into two categories: packet features and network flow
features. Packet features include packet size, packet inter-arrival
time, packet header length, etc.; network flow features include
flow duration, up/downstream byte counts, flow bit rate per
second, number of packets, etc. For example, Leroux et al. [7]

1762

extracted features such as packet size, arrival time, burst time,
burst size, etc. from encrypted flows, and then used naive Bayes,
logistic regression, and random forests to predict traffic types
passing through IPsec or TOR tunnels. Obasi et al. [8] proposed
an ensemble learning model CARD-B, which stacked multiple
technical components using random forests and achieved an
overall accuracy of 96% and an AUC value of 98% on the
ISCXVPN2016 dataset. Draper-Gil et al. [9] studied the timerelated characteristics of flow-based VPN traffic detection and
classified encrypted traffic into categories such as web pages and
streaming media. The above methods have achieved satisfactory
results in encrypted traffic classification tasks, but the extraction
of feature sets heavily relies on expert knowledge, and model
training typically requires large-scale labeled samples.
B. Deep Learning-Based Methods
These methods typically involve automatic feature learning
from ample labeled data, thereby effectively circumventing the
manual feature extraction process. For instance, Wang et al. [10]
proposed an end-to-end one-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model for encrypted traffic classification,
achieving a 17% reduction in false positive rate on the ISCXVPN2016 dataset. Liu et al. [11] introduced an end-to-end
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) traffic classification model
called FS-NET. This model took packet length sequences as
input and utilized bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units (GRU)
to learn traffic feature representations, achieving a recall rate
of 99.14% on a real dataset containing 18 applications. Hu
et al. [12] combined CNN and Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) layers to improve the classification performance of unknown encrypted network traffic. Akbari et al. [13] designed features with good generalization and combined stacked LSTM layers with CNN to learn encrypted protocols. Lotfollahi et al. [14]
proposed a Deep-Packet encrypted traffic classification model,
which combines CNN with stacked autoencoders to classify
traffic applications by analyzing packet payloads. Shi et al. [15]
proposed a Byte Feature Convolutional Network (BFCN) algorithm based on BERT and CNN for encrypted traffic, which
demonstrated significant improvements in recall, precision, and
F1-score. The BFCN integrated a transformer-based packet encoder and a CNN module to capture both global traffic characteristics and byte-level local features. Similarly, Lin et al. [16]
proposed ET-BERT. The model utilized a transformer encoder
to learn feature representations of raw traffic data streams and
packets, and it employed unsupervised pre-training and supervised fine-tuning techniques for training and testing. ET-BERT
could adapt to multiple downstream tasks with limited labeled
samples and achieved state-of-the-art performance across five
encrypted traffic classification tasks.
Yang et al. [17] proposed a customized deep learning technique based on gradient backpropagation (GradBP) and applied
it to zero-day application detection. As a commercial-grade traffic classification model, GradBP demonstrated excellent performance in both accuracy and computational cost when classifying
known types and detecting unknown types on a dataset with over
200 application labels. Song et al. [18] introduced an incremental

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

and interpretable recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic
classification, called I 2 RNN. Unlike traditional classification
model training methods, this model aims to learn independent
fingerprints for different types of samples, allowing it to handle
imbalanced samples and support rapid training of new sample
types. I 2 RNN exhibited stable and effective performance on
two public datasets while also providing reliable interpretability.
However, the model’s hyperparameters rely on expert experience
and face the risk of fingerprint database obsolescence. Similarly,
Cerasuolo et al. [19] proposed an incremental learning model
based on fine-tuning techniques, named MEMENTO. Through
its memory management module, the model incorporates old
sample information when updating training on new samples,
significantly improving classification performance for new application types while maintaining stable classification accuracy
for old application types.
C. Few-Shot Learning Methods.
Few-shot learning aims to learn general patterns or rules
from limited data to achieve effective generalization to unseen
samples. Methods based on few-shot learning include data
augmentation, generative models, and meta-learning. Among
them, meta-learning methods, as an efficient few-shot learning approach, have made significant progress in the field of
image classification, such as Relation Net [20], Prototypical
Network (ProtoNet) [21], and Model Agnostic Meta Learning
(MAML) [22]. With their special architecture, these methods
can learn a universal learning strategy by learning shared patterns
and structures across tasks, thereby achieving the effect of transfer learning. Xu et al. [23] were the first to apply meta-learning
to network intrusion detection. They used raw traffic bytes as
input and achieved few-shot traffic classification by training
on meta-tasks. Yang et al. [24] proposed an improved traffic
classification model, FS-IDS, which enhanced the performance
of the model in few-shot classification by integrating raw traffic
and traffic statistical features. Shi et al. [25] introduced the
“Learned to Forget” (L2F) mechanism into MAML for the
first time. L2F dynamically controlled task conflicts during the
initialization process of MAML, thereby improved the convergence speed of the model. Shirekar et al. [26] proposed a
method called “Class-Cognizant Contrastive Learning” (C3 LR),
which introduced class-level awareness and modified contrastive
loss to learn class-level global structures, thereby enhanced the
performance of few-shot classification.
Horowicz et al. [27] proposed a few-shot classification
method called mini-FlowPics. This method is based on FlowPic [28] and significantly reduces the dimensions of twodimensional images by aggregating the time and number of
packets. While mini-FlowPics reduces training costs and improves classification performance, it is limited to classification
tasks within predefined classes and cannot detect unknown
samples. Bovenzi et al. [29], [30] explored the use of few-shot
learning in mobile applications and IoT traffic classification
tasks. They compared various few-shot learning methods, analyzed the sensitivity of the Number of Ways and Number of
Shots, the relationship between embedding functions or the size

MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE

1763

TABLE III
NOTATIONS

of the few-shot set and classification performance, and provided
directions for optimizing few-shot learning. Zhang et al. [31]
proposed a few-shot malicious traffic classification method that
combines knowledge transfer and neural architecture search
(NAS). This approach not only overcomes the dependency on
labeled data and the manual selection of network architecture parameters but also significantly reduces time costs. Zhao
et al. [32] introduced a few-shot classification method for IoT
traffic, named Festic. This model uses a meta-learning strategy
to extract sample representations and employs an integrated
similarity comparison module to compute a composite score
for the samples to be classified, achieving the final few-shot
classification task. Additionally, Festic incorporates a detection
module with a threshold, enabling the identification of unknown
samples.

B. Meta Learning
The form of traffic data can be represented as D =
{(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xN , yN )}, where xi ∈ RD and yi ∈
{1, 2, . . . , M } respectively denote samples and their corresponding labels. The dataset is divided into two parts, the
meta-training set Dtrain and the meta-test set Dtest . In this
paper, the label sets of Dtrain and the label sets of Dtest have no
intersection. The meta-learning process consists of two phases,
meta-training and meta-testing, each of which comprises multiple episodes. Each episode contains one or more meta-tasks.
Meta-task is the basic unit of meta-learning, which can be
defined as Ti . In meta-training phase, Ti randomly selects a
subset of labels from Dtrain , with each label having a few
samples randomly selected to form the support set and the query
set. In meta-testing, meta-task Ti are generated from Dtest in the
same manner as during the meta-training phase.

III. PROBLEM DEFINITION

IV. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

This section introduces several concepts and definitions.
Table III outlines the notations used in the paper along with
their corresponding descriptions.

This section provides a detailed explanation of the FERNNAC and its design principles. The detailed structure is shown
in Fig. 1, which includes three molules, Feature Enhancement,
Temporal Feature Extraction, and Classification in a bottom-up
manner. First, the Feature Enhancement is used to extract spatial
information of the data and obtain multidimensional features.
Then, the output from the previous step is reorganized, and
multiple features at each time step are sequentially input into
LSTM cell according to the temporal order. The hidden layer
information of the LSTM is fused and dimensionally reduced
to obtain a representation vector of a sample. Finally, the representation vector is projected onto a hypersphere, and the angle
constraint method is used for training. The following is a detailed
description of each module.

A. Classification Tasks
The purpose of encrypted traffic classification is to categorize
network traffic according to specific granularities, which helps
improve the quality of service and precise control of network
traffic. Before performing encrypted traffic classification tasks,
it is necessary to first determine the granularity of traffic division.
There are mainly five granularities for network traffic division:
1) Encrypted traffic identification, which determines whether
the traffic is encrypted or not. 2) Protocol classification, which
categorizes traffic based on encryption protocols (such as SSL,
SSH, IPSec protocols, etc.). 3) Application classification, which
classifies traffic according to the associated applications (such
as YouKu, WeChat, Skype, QQ, etc.). 4) Service classification,
which categorizes traffic based on the type of service (such as
streaming media, instant messaging, etc.). 5) Web page classification, which identifies web browsing under the HTTPS protocol
(such as Baidu search, Taobao, Sohu, etc.). This paper conducts
research on encrypted traffic classification using applications or
services as the classification granularity.

A. Feature Enhancement
We reprocessed each traffic data into a sequence of length
L, as described in Section V-B. First, we organize the data
into a single-channel one-dimensional grayscale image (format:
1 × L). Typically, single-channel data means that each position
point has only one feature. This feature is considered shallow
and limited in quantity, making it unable to represent the deep
features of the samples. Therefore, to enhance the model’s
representational capacity and its ability to decouple information
from the raw data, this paper applies one-dimensional pointwise

1764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

Fig. 2.

Fig. 1.

The overview of FERNN-AC framework.

convolution and performs channel number transformation to
achieve this objective. The convolution involves using a 1 × 1
convolution kernel, and its convolution operation is represented
by (1).

pi = f 1




wc xi,c

(1)

c

Here wc represents the convolution kernel parameters, xi,c
denotes the input data, i is the position index, and c is the
channel index. f1 is a non-linear function, and ReLU is used
here. The stride is set to 1 during the process. We set up two
layers of the aforementioned convolutional layers. The first layer
employs C1 convolutional kernels, while the second layer uses
C2 convolutional kernels. The final output is the convolution
p ∈ RC2 ×L .
In general, if a data point consists of multiple features, different features may contribute differently to the classification task.
Inspired by the work of [36], this paper introduces the Squeezeand-Excitation mechanism (SE). Through simple pooling and
fully connected operations, the SE mechanism adaptively allocates importance weights to each channel, enhancing the model’s
ability to utilize different channel features.
The specific structure of the SE module is illustrated in
Fig. 2, which consists of two steps: squeeze and excitation. In
the squeeze step, global average pooling is performed on each
channel, which squeeze the feature maps of each channel into a
single value. In the excitation step, two fully connected layers,
a dimension reduction layer and a dimension expansion layer
(as shown in the second and third boxes of the right branch in
Fig. 2) are utilized to learn the weights for each channel. These
weights represent the importance of each channel’s feature maps.
Finally, each learned weight is multiplied element-wise with the

Structure of SE module.

corresponding feature map in the original feature maps, resulting
in the weighted feature maps.
In Fig. 2, r represents the reduction ratio, which is usually
an integer greater than 1 that can divide C2 . PReLU refers to
a parameterized nonlinear operation similar to leakyReLU, but
with different learnable slope parameters for the negative part of
the activation, which vary across different neurons (for detailed
explanation, refer to [37]). The “Scale” operation multiplies the
feature map of each channel with the corresponding weights
obtained from the SE module.
B. Temporal Feature Extraction
Despite the fact that traffic data can be treated as a image and
convolutional operations can be applied to extract features, its
essence lies in being a sequence, thus temporal characteristics
should be taken into consideration. In this paper, LSTM is employed as the temporal feature extraction module, where the data
processed by the feature enhancement module are sequentially
fed into the LSTM, as shown in Fig. 1. The obtained hidden
vectors at each time step are as follows:


(2)
ht = LST M pt , ht−1
It is worth noting that when we input data into the LSTM,
we do not directly feed the outputs from feature enhancement
module in different channels. Instead, the data is first organized
into feature vectors at different time steps. Since the features
at the same time step contain the characteristics of different
channels, the feature vector pt at any time step t is arranged as
[pt1 , pt2 , . . . , ptC2 ], where C2 represents the number of channels
output by the convolutional operation. Then, the feature vectors
at each time step are sequentially input into the corresponding
time steps of the LSTM in chronological order.
After obtaining the hidden vectors ht at each time step,
they are concatenated to form a representation vector h̃ that
contains global information, where h̃ = h1 ⊕ h2 . . . . ⊕ hL and
ht ∈ RD . Then, a fully connected layer is applied to fuse and
reduce the dimensionality of h̃.
h = Wh̃ · h̃

(3)

MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE



Where h̃ ∈ RL·D , and Wh̃ ∈ RD ×(L·D) . Here, D and D represent the dimensions of the hidden vector’s and the embedding
vector’s dimensions respectively.

1765

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF THE DATASET USED FOR EXPERIMENT

C. Classification
After the processing in Sections IV-A and IV-B, each traffic
data is transformed into an embedding vector in a latent space.
Traditional classification methods often involve using a simple
fully connected layer and softmax loss for classification, where
the classification matrix W and bias term b are adjusted through
training data. However, for certain traffic data, there are great differences among samples from same type, and great similarities
among different types of samples. This results in suboptimal
classification performance for some classes. Moreover, with
the increasing diversity of applications and advancements in
encryption techniques, newly generated traffic may exhibits
certain differences from the past, and some types of traffic may
be insufficient in quantity, leading to insufficient generalization
of models trained solely on historical data.
Inspired by articles [38], [39], We alleviate the above issues by
introducing angle constraints into the embedded space. Without
considering the bias term b, each row of the classification matrix
W can be viewed as a vector representing the class-specific features (referred to as “class representation vectors” and denoted
as lj , where Wj = ljT ). The process of classifying a data point
can be seen as taking the dot product between its embedding
vector and the class representation vectors, and selecting the
class with the highest dot product as the predicted class for this
data point. To enhance the stability of the model’s classification,
we eliminate the influence of feature scale differences [40],
[41] by applying L2 normalization to both the embedding vectors and the class representation vectors. Specifically, Wj hi =
Wj hi cosθj , and applying L2 normalization to Wj and hi
allows Wj  = hi  = 1. We then scale it with a factor s, so
that all embedding vectors and class representation vectors lie
on the surface of a sphere with a radius of s.
The classification matrix W can be randomly initialized and
learned through training, similar to traditional methods. However, it can also be made to rely not only on the training data but
also on external memory, which can partially address the issues
of limited generalization and lack of transfer learning ability
caused by the scarcity of certain types of data in real-world scenarios. Specifically, drawing from the idea of meta-learning [20],
[21], we generate the class representation vectors in real-time
based on the data included in the current task. In each batch,
a certain number of data samples are selected for each class
to form the class representation vectors, following the process
outlined below:

fφ (xi )
(4)
lj =
xi ∈Sj

Here, lj represents the class representation vector for the j-th
class, Sj denotes the set of data belonging to class j, and the
number of samples extracted from Sj for each class is denoted
as nj . fφ refers to the embedding model (i.e., the process described in Sections IV-A and IV-B), where the embedding vector

hi = fφ (xi ). In the experiments conducted in Section V, we
will compare and evaluate the performance of the classification
matrix generated using these two different approaches.
According to the research [42], the paper introduces an additive angular margin penalty in the cosine space to impose certain
constraints on the distribution of data’s representation vectors
on the hypersphere, which enhances intra-class compactness
and inter-class discrepancy simultaneously(this method is called
ArcMargin). The final model’s loss function can be written as
follows,
⎞
⎛
NB
s cos(θyi +m)
e
1 
⎠
log ⎝
L=−
NB
es cos(θyi +m) + K
es cos θj
i=1

j=1,j=yi

(5)
Where θyi is the angle between the sample and the class
representation vector it belongs to, NB is the number of samples
in a batch during the training process, K is the number of classes,
s is the scaling factor, and m is the additive angle margin.
D. Complexity Analysis
The computational complexity of two-layer convolution
and SE module are O(L · C1 · C2 ) and O(C22 /r), respectively. LSTM and fully connected layer need complexity
O(L · (C2 · D + D2 )) and O(L · D · D ), respectively. The
classfication layer costs O(D · M ). D and C2 are much
smaller than D . C2 /r is less than C1 . M significantly
smaller than L · D. Thus, the overall time complexity is
O(L · C1 · C2 + L · D · D ).
V. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Datasets
In order to validate the performance of the proposed method,
experiments were conducted on three datasets: ISCXVPN2016,
USTC-TFC2016, and App60. Table IV shows the number of
samples and types after preprocessing for the three datasets.
Descriptions of the datasets are as follows,
r ISCXVPN2016: It consists of encrypted traffic data comprising both Virtual Private Network (VPN) and non-VPN
traffic [9]. This dataset comprises pcap files corresponding to 17 types of applications, including Skype, Email,
Facebook, Gmail, and others. Among these, the SCP, Tor,
and Gmail applications only contain non-VPN packets,
while the remaining 14 application types contain both VPN
and non-VPN packets. The application types are further
categorized into 12 classes based on the specific activities
involved in the packets of each application, such as voice
calls, chats, etc.

1766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

r USTC-TFC2016: It consists of encrypted traffic containing
both malicious software and benign applications [43]. This
dataset comprises 20 categories of application flows, with
10 categories for benign applications and 10 for malicious
ones. The malicious software traffic was collected by CTU
researchers from real network environments, while the normal software traffic was collected using traffic simulation
device. The dataset size is 3.71 GB.
r App60: The dataset is collected from 60 mobile applications (such as YouKu, QQ, PPTV, Douyin, Gmail, etc.)
using the Monkey tool to trigger specified applications on
Android devices from Google Play [44]. The dataset has a
total size of 32.3 GB and consists of raw traffic and flow
files.
B. Data Preprocessing
The characteristic information of network traffic data is typically reflected at the application layer (L7) of the OSI model.
For instance, the SMTP protocol represents email traffic, and
the HTTP protocol represents browser traffic. According to the
research in [45], using information from application layer can
effectively avoid biased input and improve the generalization
ability of the model. Therefore, this paper utilizes “Session+L7”
of raw traffic as the representation for each traffic sample, where
“Session” denotes the bidirectional flow of traffic, and “L7”
denotes application layer of traffic.
The method described in article [43] was adopted for data
preprocessing in this study. First, the raw traffic was divided
into sessions, with each session representing a sample. Second,
the first L bytes were extracted from each session, and if the
total number of bytes in a session was less than L, padding with
zeros was performed. Therefore, each sample was organized into
a sequence of length L. Finally, these hexadecimal bytes were
converted into decimal values, ranging from 0 to 255.
C. Evaluation Metrics
This paper employs precision (P), recall (R), accuracy (Acc),
and F1 score (F1) to evaluate the performance of the model. The
evaluation metrics are defined as (6)–(9),
1 
Pi
(6)
P =
Mtest i
R=
F1 =

Acc =

1 
Ri
Mtest i

1 
F 1i
Mtest i
1

M
test


Ntest

i=1

T Pi

(7)
(8)

(9)

Pi
T Pi
2Pi ·Ri
where, Pi = T PTi +F
Pi , Ri = T Pi +F Ni , F 1i = Pi +Ri represent the precision, recall and F 1 score of the i-th class sample
respectively. T P i represents the number of i-th class samples
identified as the i-th class, F Pi represents the number of non-i-th
class samples identified as the i-th class, and F Ni represents
the number of i-th class samples identified as non-i-th class.

TABLE V
EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS

Mtest and Ntest are respectively the number of categories and
the number of samples in the test.

D. Experimental Setup
During training, we applied additive angular margin penalty
to the angle between the samples and their corresponding class
representation vectors. During testing, we directly performed
dot product between the normalized representation vectors of
the samples and the class representation vectors to obtain the
classification results. This paper conducted experiments on conventional classification (Experiment 1), i.e., training on a large
dataset containing numerous samples and then testing on a
test set (with the same class set as the training set). As class
representation vectors can be generated from real-time data,
this paper combined the model with a meta-learning framework
and conducted experiments on transfer learning under few-shot
scenarios (Experiment 2).
r Experiment 1: In this type of experiment, we set up training and testing sets similar to conventional classification
methods. The samples in the training and testing sets
are different, but their set of classes is exactly the same.
There is no scenario involving transfer learning. In this
experiment, we configured the model in two ways: one
where class representation vectors are randomly generated
by the system and trainable, denoted as FERNN-AC(GT);
and another where class representation vectors are sourced
from external memory, i.e., generated from a few number
of real-time data or standardized data, denoted as FERNNAC(EM). We selected R, P , F1 and Acc as evaluation
metrics for this experiment.
r Experiment 2: In this type of experiment, the set of classes
in the training differ from those in the testing. Additionally,
due to the limited number of samples available for classifying new types during testing, this type of classification
can be considered as transfer learning based on few-shot
sizes. For ISCXVPN2016, USTC-TFC2016, and App60,
the numbers of classes in the training and testing sets were
chosen as (7, 5), (12, 8), and (45, 15), respectively, with
no intersection between them. They respectively contain
7
12
45
, C20
and C60
. For each dataset, we
combinations of C12
randomly selected 10 combinations and conducted 5-shot
5-way tests, averaging the Acc and F1 scores over all
combinations of the testing sets as the evaluation metrics
for this experiment.
r Parameter Settings: The detailed explanation of the parameters is given in Table V, where the three values of
m respectively represent the settings on ISCXVPN2016,
USTC-TFC2016 and App60.

MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE

1767

TABLE VI
COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION RESULTS BETWEEN THE PROPOSED METHOD AND ALL BASELINE METHODS

Fig. 3.

Acc on three datasets.

E. Results Analysis.
1) Analysis of Experiment 1: In this section, we compare
the proposed method with relevant baseline methods on three
datasets and conduct analysis. The results are shown in Table VI.
r RF/XGBoost: These two methods, based on statistical approaches, show moderate performance on the ISCXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016. But on the App60,
RF and XGBoost performs pooly. Overall, XGBoost outperforms RF. Their inputs consist of 80-dimensional flow
features extracted by CICFlowMeter, with the selection of
these features requiring domain expertise.
r 1D-CNN: This method performs moderately on the ISCXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016 but poorly on the
App60. It adopts a one-dimensional LeNet structure, which
despite considering the temporal aspects of traffic data and
potentially enhancing classification accuracy, falls short
in capturing comprehensive sequence features due to its
simple convolutional stacking. With datasets containing
a larger variety of types, it struggles to obtain effective
representations, resulting in significant performance discrepancies across different datasets.
r DeepPacket: This method yields the poorest performance
across the three datasets, likely due to the characteristics
of the data. As only the application layer information of
the packets was retained and the first 1500 bytes of each
packet were extracted, a significant portion of the sample
sequences contained zero values. These sequences lack
sufficient informative content, resulting in class representations that are not adequately representative.
r ET-BERT: This model demonstrates excellent and stable
performance across all metrics on the three datasets. Especially on App60, it achieve best results in recall and

accuracy. The main reason is that it uses BERT architecture, which undergoes extensive pre-training on massive
amounts of traffic data containing diverse types, enabling
it to acquire more effective representations of traffic data.
Subsequently, fine-tuning is performed on downstream
tasks on various datasets, making it more adaptable to each
classification task.
r ST-CasualConvNet*: This model achieves generally better
results across all three datasets. It is based on a causal
convolution structure, which possesses the characteristic of
obtaining a larger receptive field with the same parameters,
thus increasing its ability to perceive sequence characteristics. Additionally, to fully utilize global sequence information, we modified the original structure of the model to
fuse and utilize all information from the last convolutional
layer, rather than just that from the last neuron (The label
“*” represents this modification). These two aspects may
be the main reasons for its outstanding performance.
r FERNN-AC(EM)/(GT): This model achieves the best results across all metrics on the ISCXVPN2016 and USTCTFC2016. It is on par with ET-BERT on the App60. The
main reason for its performance lies in its design tailored
to the characteristics of traffic data. First, It employs a
feature enhancement module that maximizes the utilization
of data features. And then it utilizes LSTM to extract and
fuse the temporal features of the data, obtaining a globally perceptive embedding vector. Finally, by employing
angular margin penalty, the model enhances intra-class
compactness and inter-class discrepancy simultaneously.
In the comparison between versions GT and EM of the
model, on the ISCXVPN2016, FERNN-AC(EM) performs
better, while on the USTC-TFC2016 and App60, FERNNAC(GT) achieves better results. This indicates that the
FERNN-AC(EM) excels at handling data with fewer types,
while the FERNN-AC(GT) method has an advantage on
datasets with a greater variety of types.
We compare Acc on three datasets, as shown in Fig. 3. On the
ISCXVPN2016, compared with all baselines, FERNN-AC(EM)
achieves the best results, surpassing RF by 14.52%, XGBoost
by 12.25%, ET-BERT by 0.07% and ST-CasualConvNet* by
0.88%, respectively. On the USTC-TFC2016, RERNN-AC(GT)
is on par with ET-BERT, surpassing XGboost by 6.47%,
1D-CNN by 6.88%, and ST-CasualConvNet* by 1.02%. On
App60, FERNN-AC(GT) shows significant advantages, surpassing XGboost by 28.05%, 1D-CNN by 30.22%, ET-BERT by

1768

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

F1 scores of FERNN-AC and baseline methods across different types on ISCXVPN2016.

TABLE VII
THE ACC AND F1 SCORES OF THE ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON THE THREE
DATASETS

Fig. 5. Comparison of training time and the number of trainable parameter
between FERNN-AC and related baseline methods on three datasets.

0.07% and ST-CasualConvNet* by 7.04%, respectively. Overall, the proposed model demonstrats consistently outstanding
classification performance.
In addition, to analyze the specific classification details of
FERNN-AC and baselines for different types of traffic, we
take the example of ISCXVPN2016 (includes 12 classes) and
display the F1 score of each class for all methods, as shown in
Fig. 4, where different colors represent different types. It can
be observed that although RF, XGBoost, 1D-CNN, and DeepPacket show good discriminative capabilities in few classes, their
overall performance varies greatly across different categories.
ET-BERT, ST-CasualConvNet* and FERNN-AC perform exceptionally well in all categories except for chat and email,
possibly due to the lack of distinctiveness in these two categories
caused by the traffic’s L7 layer features. Overall, FERNN-AC
(EM) achieves the best results, surpassing RF, XGBoost, ETBERT, and ST-CasualConvNet* by 19.64%, 17.49%, 0.30%,
and 1.30%, respectively.
Based on the above analysis, it can be observed that the performance of ET-Bert, ST-CasualConvNet*, and FERNN-AC far
exceeds that of RF, XGBoost, 1D-CNN and DeepPacket. Therefore, we compare and analyze the training time and the number
of trainable parameters of ET-Bert, ST-CasualConvNet*, and
FERNN-AC. As shown in Fig. 5, the upper and lower graphs
represent the training time and the number of trainable parameters of these methods on three datasets. It can be seen that in terms
of training time, FERNN-AC has a significant advantage over

ET-Bert and ST-CasualConvNet*. On ISCXVPN2016, USTCTFC2016 and App60, FERNN-AC (GT) is 13.59%, 16.03%
and 22.73% of ET-Bert’s training time, respectively. In terms
of the number of trainable parameters, FERNN-AC (GT/EM)
also has the lowest count. Compared to ST-CasualConvNet*,
FERNN-AC has higher overall classification performance and
fewer parameters. ET-Bert has classification performance similar to FERNN-AC, but the number of trainable parameters far
exceeds that of FERNN-AC, being over 15 times more than
FERNN-AC on three datasets.
In addition, we conducted ablation experiments by comparing
two versions of the FERNN-AC method with their respective
counterparts lacking the AC enhancement (without AC) and
lacking the SE enhancement (without SE) from Table VII.
On the ISCXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016, FERNN-AC(GT)
demonstrates improvements of over 1.6% in Acc compared to
the scenario without AC, while showing only marginal gains in
comparison to the scenario without SE. On the App60, FERNNAC(GT) achieves an approximately 5% increase in both Acc
and F1 scores over the scenario without AC, and around 1.3%
improvement compared to the scenario without SE.
Compared to the scenario without AC, FERNN-AC(EM)
achieves notable gains in both Acc and F1 scores across all
datasets, with over an 80% increase on the App60. In comparison to the scenario without SE, the improvements were less
pronounced, with the highest increase in Acc at 2.3% and in F1
at 0.4%. Overall, these improvements contribute positively to
enhancing the model’s performance.
2) Analysis of Experiment 2: In this section, we analyze the
performance of the model on few-shot classification across three
datasets, as shown in Table VIII.

MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE

1769

TABLE VIII
THE FEW-SHOT CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT METHODS ON THE THREE DATASETS

r C3 LR: It performs moderately on ISCXVPN2016 and
USTC-TFC2016, and poorly on App60. One possible explanation for this is that it ignores the sequential features
of the data and its pretraining approach is not suitable for
traffic data. As a result, the model fails to acquire effective
representations on traffic data.
r ProtoNet: This method demonstrates consistently excellent
performance on all three datasets, especially achieving the
best results on the App60 dataset. The main reasons for this
may be that data augmentation processing is implemented
before inputting the data into the model, and the model
represents class’s features using prototype vectors and is
trained using a loss based on euclidean distance. This
allows the model to rely more on the characteristics of
the real-time data itself rather than the model parameters
obtained on the training data, thus enabling the model to
be more suitable for datasets that include a greater variety
of categories.
r FC-Net: Due to the inability to preprocess the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, this method was only experimented
with on the USTC-TFC2016 and App60 datasets. It doesn’t
demonstrate superior performance, primarily because it
relies on a data format that requires truncating a portion
of bytes for each packet. For some datasets, this approach
may overlook important features for classification, making
it difficult for the model to obtain effective representations.
r NAS-based FS-MTC: This method shows moderate performance across all datasets. The main issue is that it
uses a convolutional neural network structure, which only
captures the spatial structure of traffic data and overlooks
important temporal features.
r Festic: This method performs poorly across all three
datasets, which may primarily be attributed to its corresponding preprocessing approach. The application layer
data in the first N packets is either too short or nonexistent,
resulting in many zero values in the extracted sequences,
making it difficult to learn effective class representations.
This also indicates that the method is highly affected by
the data.
r FERNN-AC(FS): The proposed model achieves the best results on the ISCXVPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016 datasets,
and performs better on App60. The main reason could be
that although the data, dealt with feature enhancement and
processed by recurrent neural networks, largely preserves
the spatial and temporal characteristics of the data, this
processing relies heavily on network parameters, which

are highly dependent on training data. As a result, the
model may lack generalization ability when faced with
new data from a large number of categories. In addition, the model did not implement data augmentation processing like ProtoNet, which could also be a reason for
this.
Overall, FERNN-AC(FS) shows better performance compared to the baseline methods. It outperforms the second-best
model by 0.42% on ISCXVPN2016 and 1.91% on USTCTFC2016in terms of Acc. This indicates that the proposed
method not only performs significantly well in conventional
classification tasks but also exhibits some transfer learning
capabilities.

VI. CONCLUSION
The rapid and accurate classification of encrypted traffic is of
great importance for ensuring network security and enhancing
network service quality. Based on the nature of encrypted traffic
data, this paper proposes a high-performance encrypted traffic
classification framework called FERNN-AC. First, the framework employs the feature enhancement module to extract feature
of traffic data. The module uses the pointwise convolutional layers to increase the model’s non-linear representation capability
and obtain multidimensional features, and leverage SE modules
to adaptively learn an importance weight for each channel, enhancing the model’s ability to utilize different features. Next, the
framework employs LSTM to capture the temporal characteristics of the data and performs feature fusion and dimensionality
reduction, obtaining an effective embedding vector. Finally, by
using additive angular loss, the framework makes the data in
the embedding space more compact within the same class and
further apart between different classes, thereby improving the
classification performance. In this process, the framework can
also combine with external memory, so that it can adapt to uneven distribution or conduct transfer learning based on few-shot
case. In this paper, experiments are performed on three datasets,
and the results show that compared with the baseline methods,
FERNN-AC has excellent and stable classification performance.
However, the method proposed in this paper also has some
limitations, 1) The model’s adaptability and scalability are weak;
2) The model lacks interpretability. The nature of network traffic
typically changes rapidly over time, requiring models to have
stronger adaptability. Deep learning-based traffic classification
models often exhibit a “black box” nature, leading to a lack

1770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 11, NO. 4, JULY/AUGUST 2025

of a certain degree of trustworthiness in the classification results. Therefore, in future work, we will focus primarily on
enhancing the model’s adaptability and interpretability. With the
continuous development of artificial intelligence and computing
power, we will continue to explore AI-powered network traffic
classification models to achieve adaptive enhanced training and
dynamic analysis of the factors influencing classification performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Support for this project is provided by Guohua Wu. The
authors thank the anonymous engineers for their support with
the software.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. ThreatLabz, “Zscaler threatlabz 2023 state of encrypted attacks
report,” Zscaler, Tech. Rep., 2023. [Online]. Available: https://resources.
wisdominterface.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/threatlabz-2023state-of-encrypted-attacks-report.pdf
[2] Google, “Iittps encryption on the web – google transparency report,”
2024. [Online]. Available: https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/
overview
[3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in
traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, Jan./Feb. 2012.
[4] S. Bagui, X. Fang, E. Kalaimannan, S. C. Bagui, and J. Sheehan, “Comparison of machine-learning algorithms for classification of VPN network
traffic flow using time-related features,” J. Cyber Secur. Technol., vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 108–126, 2017.
[5] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
[6] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noiseresistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019.
[7] S. Leroux, S. Bohez, P.-J. Maenhaut, N. Meheus, P. Simoens, and B.
Dhoedt, “Fingerprinting encrypted network traffic types using machine
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2018,
pp. 1–5.
[8] T. Obasi and M. O. Shafiq, “CARD-B: A stacked ensemble learning technique for classification of encrypted network traffic,” Comput. Commun.,
vol. 190, pp. 110–125, 2022.
[9] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” in
Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414.
[10] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted
traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat., 2017, pp. 43–48.
[11] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[12] X. Hu, C. Gu, and F. Wei, “CLD-net: A network combining CNN and
LSTM for internet encrypted traffic classification,” Secur. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 2021, pp. 1–15, 2021.
[13] I. Akbari et al., “Traffic classification in an increasingly encrypted web,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 75–83, 2022.
[14] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and M.
Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012,
2020.
[15] Z. Shi, N. Luktarhan, Y. Song, and G. Tian, “BFCN: A novel classification
method of encrypted traffic based on BERT and CNN,” Electronics, vol. 12,
no. 3, 2023, Art. no. 516.
[16] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted
traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642.
[17] L. Yang, A. Finamore, F. Jun, and D. Rossi, “Deep learning and zero-day
traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-grade dataset,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4103–4118,
Dec. 2021.

[18] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural
network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., to be published, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
[19] F. Cerasuolo et al., “MEMENTO: A novel approach for class incremental learning of encrypted traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, 2024,
Art. no. 110374.
[20] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. Torr, and T. M.
Hospedales, “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
pp. 1199–1208.
[21] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 4080–4090.
[22] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast
adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR,
2017, pp. 1126–1135.
[23] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
[24] J. Yang, H. Li, S. Shao, F. Zou, and Y. Wu, “FS-IDS: A framework for
intrusion detection based on few-shot learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 122,
2022, Art. no. 102899.
[25] Z. Shi, M. Xing, J. Zhang, and B. H. Wu, “Few-shot network intrusion
detection based on model-agnostic meta-learning with L2F method,” in
Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., 2023, pp. 1–6.
[26] O. K. Shirekar and H. Jamali-Rad, “Self-supervised class-cognizant
few-shot classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., 2022,
pp. 976–980.
[27] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Self-supervised traffic classification: Flow embedding and few-shot solutions,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3054–3067, Jun. 2024.
[28] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232,
Jun. 2021.
[29] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
“Few shot learning approaches for classifying rare mobile-app encrypted
traffic samples,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2023,
pp. 1–6.
[30] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè,
“Classifying attack traffic in IoT environments via few-shot learning,”
J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 83, 2024, Art. no. 103762.
[31] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
[32] Z. Zhao, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, W. Jia, and H. He, “A few-shot learning based
approach to IoT traffic classification,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 537–541, Mar. 2022.
[33] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001.
[34] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,” in
Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016,
pp. 785–794.
[35] L. Zhang, J. Na, J. Zhu, Z. Shi, C. Zou, and L. Yang, “Spatiotemporal causal convolutional network for forecasting hourly PM2. 5 concentrations in Beijing, China,” Comput. Geosciences, vol. 155, 2021,
Art. no. 104869.
[36] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[37] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers:
Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
[38] H. Wang et al., “CosFace: Large margin cosine loss for deep face
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018,
pp. 5265–5274.
[39] F. Wang, X. Xiang, J. Cheng, and A. L. Yuille, “NormFace: L2 hypersphere
embedding for face verification,” in Proc. 25th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
2017, pp. 1041–1049.
[40] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, M. Li, B. Raj, and L. Song, “SphereFace: Deep hypersphere embedding for face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 212–220.
[41] R. Ranjan, C. D. Castillo, and R. Chellappa, “L2-constrained softmax loss
for discriminative face verification,” 2017, arXiv:arXiv: 1703.09507.
[42] J. Deng, J. Guo, N. Xue, and S. Zafeiriou, “ArcFace: Additive angular
margin loss for deep face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 4690–4699.

MIAO et al.: BOOSTING ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION USING FEATURE-ENHANCED RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORK WITH ANGLE

[43] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2017, pp. 712–717.
[44] J. Shi, C. Yang, Q. Yang, J. Zhang, M. Cui, and G. Xiong, “SpBiSeq:
An early-stage fingerprint generation method with high robustness for
encrypted mobile application traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Comput.
Commun. Eng. Technol., 2021, pp. 185–193.
[45] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted
traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, lessons
learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage., vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 445–458, 2019.

Gongxun Miao received the MS degree from the
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University of Technology, Zibo, China, in 2018.
He is currently working toward the PhD degree with
the School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China. His current research interests
include computer cyber security, information system,
data mining and information security.

Guohua Wu received the BS degree from the Shandong University of Technology, Jinan, China, in 1992,
the MS degree from the National Institute of Metrology, Beijing, China, in 1995, and the PhD degree from
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 1998. He is
currently a professor with the School of Cyberspace,
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China. He is also an executive director with the Information Security Laboratory. His current research
interests include information system, model driven
architecture, data mining, and digital heath.

Zhen Zhang received the graduate degree from the
Zhejiang University of Computer Science, in 2005.
Now he is an associate professor with the School
of Cyberspace in Hangzhou Dianzi University. His
current research interests include information visualization, information security, information hiding,
confidential technology, etc.

1771

Yongjie Tong received the MS degree from the
School of Physics, Nankai University, Tianjin, China,
in 2019. He has been engaged in the work of data mining from 2019 to now. He is currently a data-mining
engineer with Zhongfu Information Company, LTD,
Jinan, China. His research interests include machine
learning and optimization, graph mining and cyber
security.

Bing Lu received the BEng and MS degrees from
the College of Computer Science and Technology,
Wuhan University of Technology, China, in 2015
and 2017. He is currently data-mining engineer of
Zhongfu Information Company, LTD, Jinan, China.
His research interests include machine learning and
its application, data mining and information security.