1794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Bottom Aggregating, Top Separating: An
Aggregator and Separator Network for
Encrypted Traffic Understanding
Wei Peng , Lei Cui , Wei Cai, Wei Wang, Xiaoyu Cui , Zhiyu Hao , and Xiaochun Yun

Abstract—Encrypted traffic classification refers to the task
of identifying the application, service or malware associated
with network traffic that is encrypted. Previous methods mainly
have two weaknesses. Firstly, from the perspective of word-level
(namely, byte-level) semantics, current methods use pre-training
language models like BERT, learned general natural language
knowledge, to directly process byte-based traffic data. However,
understanding traffic data is different from understanding words
in natural language, using BERT directly on traffic data could
disrupt internal word sense information so as to affect the
performance of classification. Secondly, from the perspective of
packet-level semantics, current methods mostly implicitly classify
traffic using abstractive semantic features learned at the top layer,
without further explicitly separating the features into different
space of categories, leading to poor feature discriminability.
In this paper, we propose a simple but effective Aggregator
and Separator Network (ASNet) for encrypted traffic understanding, which consists of two core modules. Specifically, a
parameter-free word sense aggregator enables BERT to rapidly
adapt to understanding traffic data and keeping the complete
word sense without introducing additional model parameters.
And a category-constrained semantics separator with task-aware
prompts (as the stimulus) is introduced to explicitly conduct
feature learning independently in semantic spaces of different
categories. Experiments on five datasets across seven tasks
demonstrate that our proposed model achieves the current
state-of-the-art results without pre-training in both the public
benchmark and real-world collected traffic dataset. Statistical
analyses and visualization experiments also validate the interpretability of the core modules. Furthermore, what is important
is that ASNet does not need pre-training, which dramatically
reduces the cost of computing power and time. The model code
and dataset will be released in https://github.com/pengwei-iie/
ASNET.
Index Terms—Traffic classification, pre-training language
model, prompt learning, word sense aggregating, semantic separating.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NCRYPTED traffic analysis, referring to the examination
and characterization of encrypted network traffic without
decrypting the actual content, is a significant research in cybersecurity and network management [1], [2]. It is a significant
research area in cybersecurity and network management, as it
helps network operators to understand and gain insights from
encrypted traffic without compromising data confidentiality
[3], [4]. The importance of encrypted traffic analysis lies in the
fact that a large portion of network traffic is now encrypted,
driven by the growing adoption of secure communication
protocols and privacy concerns. While encryption protects
data confidentiality, it also poses challenges for network
operators and security analysts in performing various network
operations and management activities. One of the primary
applications of encrypted traffic analysis is the detection of
malicious activities [5], [6], [7] by analyzing anomalies in
encrypted traffic patterns. Despite the content being encrypted,
the metadata and packet characteristics of the traffic can
reveal valuable information about potential security threats or
abnormal behaviors. Some examples about malicious detection
and application classification are in Figure 1.
Network traffic often exists in the form of data packets
in cyberspace, as illustrated in Figure 1, the data packet
can usually be divided into two parts. The header portion
mainly includes source IP address, destination IP address,
source port, destination port, protocol type, etc. The payload
portion refers to the actual data being transmitted, which is
often encrypted in the form of hexadecimal. For instance, a
byte “\x17” in Figure 1, “\” means separator, “x” represents
hexadecimal, “17” indicates one byte (00010111). Nowadays,
the growing trend toward encrypted protocols and the fastevolving nature of network traffic are rendering traditional
traffic classification methods obsolete. These traditional methods, such as port matching, server name indication matching,
deep packet inspection, etc., mainly perform rule matching
based on plaintext fields. However, they are ineffective on
encrypted traffic data where the payload cannot be inspected.
In recent years, with the development of deep learning and
Pre-training Language Models (PLMs) [8], [9], [10], more and
more researchers have focused on utilizing Natural Language
Processing (NLP) methods to directly learn from raw traffic
bytes for automated feature extraction, treating the encrypted
data as text sequences for semantic understanding. In this
paper, the bytes in the traffic data are called words, similar to

E

Received 19 April 2024; revised 2 November 2024; accepted 4 January
2025. Date of publication 13 January 2025; date of current version 13
February 2025. This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62072453 and Grant 61972392. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it
for publication was Prof. Kun Sun. (Corresponding authors: Xiaochun Yun;
Zhiyu Hao.)
Wei Peng and Lei Cui are with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing
100093, China, and also with the Quan Cheng Laboratory, Shandong 300020,
China (e-mail: pengwei@zgclab.edu.cn; cuilei@zgclab.edu.cn).
Wei Cai, Wei Wang, Zhiyu Hao, and Xiaochun Yun are with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100093, China (e-mail: caiwei@zgclab.edu.
cn; wangwei@zgclab.edu.cn; haozy@zgclab.edu.cn; yunxiaochun@zgclab.
edu.cn).
Xiaoyu Cui is with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3529316
1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

PENG et al.: BOTTOM AGGREGATING, TOP SEPARATING: AN AGGREGATOR AND SEPARATOR NETWORK

Fig. 1. Some examples of traffic data packet. The right-hand part means the
label of downstream tasks. Green font represents the different categories.

natural language. By casting the traffic data analysis problem
as a language modeling task, deep learning models such
as LSTMs and Transformers can be applied for sequential
modeling of network traffic and understanding of semantics.
This allows learning traffic patterns and performing analysis
tasks such as anomaly detection and traffic classification even
on encrypted data, without needing to decrypt the payload.
However, there are currently two main problems with the
understanding of traffic data in existing methods.
Firstly, from the perspective of word-level semantics, understanding traffic data is different from understanding words in
natural language, especially when the traffic is encrypted. Current PLMs like BERT [8] mainly learn general knowledge at
the natural language level and may not be suitable for directly
processing traffic data. This is because most current researches
[3], [11], [12], [13] treat one hexadecimal raw traffic byte
as an independent word unit like “x00”, “xde”, “xff”, etc.
Using BERT directly on traffic data could disrupt internal
word sense so as to affect the performance of classification,
for example, splitting “xde” into [“x”, “##d”, “##e”]. The “##”
indicates that it’s a subword token. One feasible approach is
to reconstruct the vocabulary directly using traffic data and
retrain from scratch like ET-BERT [14]. However, this type
of method requires massive data and computational resources,
and cannot effectively leverage the general natural language
knowledge learned during the pre-training phase of BERT.
Secondly, from the packet-level semantics perspective, traffic packet has multiple types of semantics. Specifically, the
semantics vary for different categories or tasks. For instance,
the semantics of network traffic going to YouTube would
indicate video information, while traffic to an FTP server
would indicate file transfers. However, current methods mostly
implicitly classify traffic applications using abstractive semantic features learned at the top layer, without further explicitly
separating the features into different space of categories,
leading to poor feature discriminability. Therefore, how to

1795

understand the encrypted traffic data from the word-level and
packet-level semantics is the core problem in this paper.
To this end, we propose a simple but effective Aggregator
and Separator Network (ASNet) for encrypted traffic understanding. The core modules include Word Sense Aggregator
(WSA) and Category-constrain Semantic Separator (CSS).
Specifically, from a word-level semantics perspective, we
propose a parameter-free WSA that enables BERT to rapidly
adapt to understanding traffic data and keeping the complete
word sense without introducing additional parameters. Furthermore, to allow the model to conduct feature learning
independently across semantic spaces of different categories,
making traffic features more distinguishable, a categoryconstrained semantics separator with task-aware prompts (as
the stimulus) is introduced from the packet-level semantics.
The contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a simple but effective ASNet with bottom aggregating and top separating for encrypted traffic
analysis, which can enhance the model’s understanding
of traffic data and achieve better traffic classification
performance.
• From the word-level semantics, we introduce a parameterfree word sense aggregator that enables BERT to adapt to
understanding raw traffic bytes and keeping the complete
word sense without adding extra model parameters.
• From the packet-level semantics, we propose a categoryconstrained semantic separator with task-aware prompts
(as the stimulus), which enables explicitly independent
feature learning in separated semantic spaces for different
categories, resulting in more distinguishable features.
• Without pre-training, experiments on five datasets across
seven tasks demonstrate that ASNet achieves state-of-theart (SOTA) results. Analysis experiments also validate
the effectiveness and interpretability of the core modules.
And what is important is that ASNet does not need
pre-training, which dramatically reduces the cost of computing power and time.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Pre-Training Language Models
PLMs like BERT [8], GPT-3 [15], etc. have driven tremendous progress in NLP in recent years. The key idea is to
utilize self-supervised objectives like mask language modeling
and next sentence prediction during pre-training to uncover
linguistic properties of textual information. After pre-training
on massive text data, the model parameters partly capture
contextualized semantics. These generic representations are
then specialized for tasks like text classification [16], [17],
question answering [18], [19] or dialog [20], [21], [22] by
adding task-specific output layers and fine-tuning on labeled
data.
In PLMs, a key preprocessing step is tokenization which
converts sentences into appropriate input ids to keep the word
sense for the model. Common strategies include subword,
WordPiece and byte-pair encoding which break words into
subwords or characters. For BERT, it utilizes a WordPiece
tokenizer that breaks words into subwords or tokens. For

1796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

example, “playing” can be split as [“play”, “##ing”]. The “##”
indicates that it’s a subword token. However, for encrypted
network traffic, directly using the pre-trained tokenizer could
disrupt internal word sense information, e.g., a complete byte
“xde” is split into [“x”, “##d”, “##e”].
Choosing the right tokenization strategy is vital for retaining
maximum information from raw traffic bytes and enabling
PLMs to learn useful representations. Therefore, we introduce
a parameter-free word sense aggregator that enables BERT
to adapt to understanding raw traffic bytes and keeping the
complete word sense without adding extra model parameters.
B. Encrypted Traffic Classification
From a methodological perspective, encrypted traffic methods can be categorized into feature-based methods, byte-based
models, and PLMs. The details are as follows.
Feature-based methods [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28]
for encrypted traffic analysis primarily rely on extracting
statistical traffic features based on expert domain knowledge.
As features of individual packets are limited, most researchers
collect statistical features across multiple packets, grouping
them into flows, sessions, or time series. The traffic data
is first pre-processed to derive characteristics like packet
lengths, inter-arrival times, flow duration, number of packets,
etc. These hand-engineered features that capture essential
properties of the network flows serve as input to traditional
machine learning models such as Random Forests or Naive
Bayes for encrypted traffic classification or prediction tasks.
For example, Shen et al. [29] propose an efficient fine-grained
webpage fingerprinting method to construct the packet length
sequence and extract three types of features to build webpage
fingerprints for encrypted traffic classification. The ability to
explain the decisions of statistical models in terms of the input
features makes them attractive for encrypted traffic analysis.
However, the dependence on manual feature engineering is
a limitation. And it also requires collecting multiple packets,
which needs large requirements for computing and storage.
Recently, byte-based methods that utilize deep learning to
perform traffic classification have grown in popularity [30],
[31], [32], [33], [34], [35]. These techniques analyze only a
single packet to automatically extract complex features from
raw traffic bytes.
Byte-based models work directly on raw traffic bytes and
learn representations using techniques like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Long Short-Term Memory Networks
(LSTMs). They can capture complex patterns in encrypted
data packets without manual feature engineering [30], [31],
[32], [33], [34], [35]. These approaches can be categorized as
image-based or text-based depending on how they interpret
the input traffic. Specifically, image-based models [30], [32],
[34] treat the traffic data as 2D images by transforming the raw
bytes into grayscale intensity values or RGB colors. They then
apply well-known image classification CNN architectures like
ResNet and Inception, which can identify visual patterns in the
transformed input matrix. Text-based models such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and LSTMs process the input
sequentially as text sequences [12], [33]. They can analyze
long-range dependencies in the raw traffic bytes. Self-attention

models like transformer are also popular for learning contextual relationships in encrypted traffic data. For example, Meng
et al. [33] utilize contrastive loss and attention mechanism
to optimize the learned representations with various traffic
classification tasks. Recently, PLMs have achieved tremendous
progress in NLP, advancing SOTA results on numerous NLP
tasks. And there is an increasing number of researchers that
leverage PLMs for encrypted traffic classification.
The PLMs [14], [34] follow the self-supervised pre-training
paradigm that has proven hugely effective for NLP. The
models first train on massive amounts of unlabeled network
traffic data in a self-supervised manner to learn generic traffic
representations. that allow the models to ingest the raw bytes
and uncover intrinsic properties of the traffic. Lin et al. [14]
propose ET-BERT to pre-train deep contextualized datagramlevel representation with the same-origin BURST prediction.
Meng et al. [36] provide a generative pre-trained model
NetGPT for both traffic understanding and generation tasks.
Peng et al. [35] proposes an efficient and effective two-stage
approach to make traffic classification with the CNN-based and
PLM-based model. However, this type of approach requires
massive data and computational resources to retrain a large
language model. In this paper, the proposed ASNet effectively
leverages the general natural language knowledge learned
during the pre-training phase of BERT without retraining.
III. M ODELS
The framework is presented in Figure 2, which consists of
the BERT Tokenizer, Traffic Encoder, Word Sense Aggregator
(WSA), Category-constrain Semantic Separator (CSS) and
Classifier. The core modules consist of a WSA and a CSS.
Specifically, the parameter-free WSA is able to aggregate the
split tokens into the complete word sense, which enables
BERT to adapt to understanding raw traffic bytes and keeping the complete word sense without adding extra model
parameters. The CSS enables independent feature learning in
separated semantic spaces for different categories with taskaware prompts, which results in more distinguishable features.
In the following, we first describe the problem formulation.
Then, the detail of the ASNet is introduced step by step.
A. Problem Formulation
Given a pcap file, the scapy toolkit parses the file and
extracts the network packets. Each packet includes header portion and payload data in the form of string X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xN }
that consists of N traffic words. The traffic words within
the packet can be tokenized into smaller sub-words (tokens).
Formally, we denote the i-th word as xi = (xi1 , . . ., xik , . . .),
where xik indexes the k-th token in word xi . The category
label is defined as y, e.g. YouTube, Facebook, etc. Our task
is then to learn a function F that takes these words as input,
and outputs the corresponding packet label.
B. BERT Tokenizer
The BERT tokenizer tokenizes the input traffic words into
tokens that can be processed by the BERT encoder. It plays a
crucial role in preparing and formatting the input data for the

PENG et al.: BOTTOM AGGREGATING, TOP SEPARATING: AN AGGREGATOR AND SEPARATOR NETWORK

1797

Fig. 2. The overview of ASNet. Note: in the solid blue boxes in the lower left corner of the figure, to highlight the aggregation process of word sense, we
represent them as characters, which are actually vector representations after encoding.

model. Generally, BERT uses a WordPiece tokenizer that splits
traffic words into subwords with the pre-defined vocabulary.
If a traffic word (“xde”) does not exist during the pre-training
of BERT, the tokenizer will either split it into individual
characters ([“x”, “##d”, “##e”]) or replace it with the special
token [UNK]. Specifically, the tokenizer splits traffic words
X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xN } into tokens, as:
X sep = Tokenizer (x1 , . . ., xN ) = {(x11 , . . .), . . .(xN1 , . . .)}

(1)

while retaining length information when splitting traffic words
into subwords, meaning it tracks how many subwords each
word is divided into. This length information helps the WSA
module rebuild and aggregate the meaning of traffic words
later. For the WSA module, a simple way is to modify the
original vocabulary.

C. Traffic Encoder
The purpose of the traffic encoder is to generate representations for the network traffic data. After the BERT tokenizer
finishes splitting the traffic words into tokens, the traffic
encoder encodes these tokens to capture contextual features
and output hidden states of traffic tokens H sep . In this paper, we
leverage the pre-trained BERT encoder as our traffic encoder,
which can be defined as:
H sep = Traffic Encoder (X sep ) = {(h11 , . . .), (h21 , . . .). . .} (2)
where hik is the representation of subword xik in Eqn. 1.

D. Word Sense Aggregator
Since BERT is pre-trained on natural language corpora,
it lacks representations for payload bytes like “\x17” and
“\x0f” that are commonly found in network traffic data.
To retain the complete word sense information while still
leveraging BERT’s general linguistic knowledge, a simple and
parameter-free Word Sense Aggregator (WSA) is introduced.
Specifically, we utilize the original token length information
retained by the BERT tokenizer to aggregate the separated
word senses after tokenization. And the separated hidden states
are aggregated to obtain the packet-level semantics H through
a directly additive operation, the equation is as follows:
H = (h1 , . . ., hi , . . ., hN )

(3)

hi = aggregating (hi1 , . . ., hik , . . .) = (hi1 + . . . + hik + . . .) (4)
where H ∈ RN×d , d is the hidden dimension size. hi indicates
the representation of i-th word, k indexes the k-th subword
within hi .
E. Category-Constrain Semantic Separator
From the packet-level semantics, traffic packet has multiple
types of semantics. For example, the semantics of network traffic going to YouTube indicate video information, while traffic
to an FTP server suggest file transfers. To obtain the better
feature discriminability, the Category-constrained Semantics
Separator (CSS) with task-aware prompts is designed for
further explicitly separating packet-level semantics features
into different space of categories.

1798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Unlike the previous researches that implicitly classify traffic
data using abstractive semantic features learned at the top
layer, the CSS module introduces task-aware prompts as
stimulus and hints to explicitly guide PLMs in separating
packet-level semantics features, so as to enhance the discriminability of the feature. For instance, specific categories words
can regard as the input query in different tasks. In application
classification task, the prompt P can be which category does
the packet belong to? YouTube, Spotify, Skype, Gmail. . . The
task-aware prompts explicitly provide a natural way to inject
inductive biases into the PLM to guide the separation of
packet-level semantics, which is useful for identifying salient
patterns in the traffic data. Detail visualization is presented in
Sec. VI. Other prompt lists are illustrated in Section IV-F.
To this end, the task-aware prompts P (directly as the input)
are firstly encoded like traffic data with another BERT Encoder
that has the same architecture with the traffic encoder, as:
H 0 = Prompt Encoder(P) = (h01 , . . ., h0j , . . ., h0M )
0

(5)

M×d

where H ∈ R
, M means the total number of tokens in the
prompt, j indicates the j-th token in the prompt.
Then, the stimulus operation is performed to separate the
packet-level semantics H (Eqn. 3) into corresponding independent hidden states Hc00 for better discriminability, as:
score = softmax (H · H 0T )

(6)

Hc00 = (score · H 0 )Wc + bc

(7)

where score ∈ RN×M , Wc ∈ Rd×d , bc ∈ R1×d , Hc00 ∈ RN×d . c
means the category, different categories have different parameters. c ∈ {1, 2, . . ., C}, C is the total number of the category.
After stimulus operation, to preserve the original information, intuitively, a residual structure is leveraged to combine the
original and updated hidden states. And then using an average
pooling to obtain the final class-level semantics lc for each
class, the above process is formulated as follows:
lc = average − pooling (H + αHc00 )

(8)

where lc ∈ Rd , α is a hyper-parameter that control the weight
between the two hidden states.
F. Classifier
The goal of the classifier is to categorize the class-level
semantics after separation. After the CSS module, each category has its own corresponding class-level semantics. The
classifier utilizes a sigmoid function to obtain the final class
probabilities for each sample, as shown below:
pc = sigmoid (MLP(lc ))

(9)

where pc indicates the probability of c-th category, MLP
means the multi-layer perceptron.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
The proposed ASNet and comparison methods are evaluated
on four public benchmarks encrypted traffic datasets and one
real-world collected scenario.

TABLE I
S TATISTICS OF THE DATASETS

The four public benchmarks include ISCXVPN, USTCTFC, CICIoT, ISCXTor. Specifically, the ISCXVPN [37]
dataset primarily contains network traffic data using Virtual
Private Networks (VPNs). Each packet has two labels - a VPN
label and an application label. For the VPN label (task1), it can
be VPN or NONVPN. For application classification (task2),
there are 12 categories such as YouTube, Facebook, etc. The
USTC-TFC [38] dataset collects traffic data about malicious
and benign software. Each packet has two labels - a software
abnormality label and a software label. For the software
abnormality label (task1), it can be malicious or benign. For
the software label (task2), there are 19 categories such as
Outlook, Cridex, Virut, etc. The CICIoT [39] dataset is sourced
from industrial Internet of Things (IoT) systems [40] and
consists of 6 different experiments: power, interaction, idle,
scenarios, active and attacks. The ISCXTor [41] dataset uses
The Onion Router (Tor) for communication privacy enhancement. It contains 13 categories of application classification.
As for the real-world collected dataset CHNAPP, we manually
collected traffic data of six types of popular applications on the
Internet, including Weibo, Wechat, QQMail, TaoBao, Youku
and QQMusic. The statistical dataset information on how
many packets are used for training, validation and testing can
be seen in Table I.
B. Experimental Setting & Evaluation Metrics
For the experimental settings, the epoch is set to 3 with the
64 batch size in the training phrase. The max input length is
set to 256, the length of prompts are set to 50. The hyperparameter α is set to 0.2 according to the grid search. The
Adam [42] optimizer with the initial learning rate of 1e-5 is
utilized for training, and the Pytorch framework is adopted.
The experiments are implemented on the Tesla A100-80G
GPU. Other parameters are following the paper [8]. For details
of the WSA module, one convenient and simple way is to
modify the original vocabulary.
The category distribution in these seven tasks is not consistent. Some of them are balanced while some are imbalanced.
To effectively evaluate the performance of baselines and
ASNet, we consider two evaluation metrics: macro F1 and
micro F1. Specifically, macro F1 calculates the F1 score independently for each class and takes the average, weighting each
class equally. This helps evaluate the performance of models
on imbalance issues. In contrast, micro F1 aggregates the
contributions across all classes to compute a global F1 score,
which emphasizes bigger classes. The key difference is that
macro F1 treats all classes as equally important, while micro
F1 considers class distribution proportions and emphasizes

PENG et al.: BOTTOM AGGREGATING, TOP SEPARATING: AN AGGREGATOR AND SEPARATOR NETWORK

1799

TABLE II
C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON ISCXVPN AND USTC-TFC DATASETS . † I NDICATES R EPRODUCED R ESULTS

bigger classes. For datasets with balanced class distribution,
macro and micro F1 tend to be similar. But for imbalanced
data, macro F1 better highlights model performance on small
classes, while micro F1 focuses more on prevalent classes. By
reporting both metrics in our experiments, we can provide a
more comprehensive evaluation.
C. Baselines
The baselines can be divided into three categories for
comparison: (1) feature-based methods (i.e., APPS [43], SMT
[24], DevNet [23]); (2) byte-based models (i.e., Deep Packet
[12], TR-IDS [44], HEDGE [45], 3D-CNN [46]); and (3)
PLMs-based methods (i.e., BERT [8], PacRep [33], ET-BERT
[14], YaTC [34], EETS [35]). To make a more competitive
comparison, we mainly focus on the SOTA baselines, such as
BERT, Pacrep, ET-BERT and YaTC. Details are as follows.
• APPS [43], which selects statistical features, and uses a
random tree classifier for application classification.
• SMT [24], which fuses different features by a kernel
function for decentralized applications fingerprinting.
• Deep Packet [12], which integrates both feature extraction
and classification phases to train the stacked autoencoder
and CNN for application classification.
• 3D-CNN [46], which leverages the byte data as input for
3D-CNN and can classify packets from both known and
unknown patterns.
• BERT [8], which is based on Transformer architecture
and has achieved noticeable performance on NLP tasks.
• PacRep [33], which utilizes the BERT as an encoder
and uses contrastive loss to optimize the learned packet
representations with multi-task learning.
• ET-BERT [14], which pre-trains deep contextualized
datagram-level representation from raw traffic bytes.
• YaTC [34], which introduces a masked autoencoder based
traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation
and performs pre-training process for traffic classification.

• EETS [35], which proposes an efficient and effective twostage approach to balance the trade-off between plaintext
and encrypted text in traffic classification.
D. Main Results
As shown in Table II and Table III, we compare the
performance of baseline models and ASNet on 5 datasets
across 7 tasks. The conclusions can be summarized as follows:
(1) the performance of feature-based methods and byte-based
models is comparable, whereas PLM-based methods have
achieved further improvements. Notably, our proposed model
ASNet obtains SOTA results on all the evaluation metrics,
which validates the importance of keeping the complete word
sense and explicitly separating packet-level semantics into
different space of categories. (2) On the CICIoT dataset (in
Table III), the performance gap of ASNet on macro F1 and
micro F1 metrics has been reduced to 2.89%, while the
gap of PLM-based methods ranges from 4% to 14%. This
demonstrates that utilizing the category-constrained semantic
separator with task-aware prompts can explicitly help the
model distinguish semantic features across different categories,
enhancing semantic discriminability on the unbalanced category so as to boost macro F1 performance. Note: the original
micro-F1 of YaTC on CICIoT is 96.58%, which is similar to
the micro-F1 96.04% that we reproduced. The same goes for
the others. (3) For the real-world collected dataset CHNAPP,
our proposed model achieves the best performance compared
to other baselines. Specifically, our model obtained about 2%
and 4% improvements over the SOTA baseline in terms of
micro-F1 and macro-F1 scores respectively. This demonstrates
the effectiveness of our approach in handling real-world traffic
classification tasks with potentially diverse and noisy data
distributions. In contrast, the YaTC model exhibits relatively
poorer performance on CHNAPP. A plausible reason for
this could be the mismatch between the data distribution of
CHNAPP and the pretraining data used by YaTC.

1800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE III
C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON CICI OT, ISCXT OR AND CHNAPP DATASETS

TABLE IV
A BLATION R ESULTS OF K EY C OMPONENTS ON ISCXVPN AND USTC-TFC DATASETS

TABLE V
A BLATION R ESULTS ON CICI OT, ISCXT OR AND CHNAPP DATASETS

Interestingly, ASNet achieves 100% F1 score on task 1 of
ISCX-VPN and task 1 of USTC-TFC, and so do some baselines. There are several possible reasons for this phenomenon.
First, binary classification tasks are typically easier. Second, in
the ISCX-VPN dataset, the VPN payload exists in encrypted
form, whereas the NONVPN data contains plaintext information, making it easy to make a classification. Similarly, the
behavior patterns of malicious and benign traffic in the USTCTFC dataset may present clearer separability. In summary,
through performance comparison on 5 datasets across 7 tasks,
it is demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed ASNet
model. Moreover, without pre-training, our model surpasses
the performance of ET-BERT and YaTC which require massive
data and computational resources to make pre-training.

either of the proposed modules leads to degraded performance,
demonstrating their contribution to the ASNet. Particularly,
on the application classification task in USTC-TFC (task
2) and the CICIoT dataset, removing the CSS module significantly impacts results. This highlights the benefits of
packet-level semantics, which explicitly separates different
space of categories to learn more discriminative features,
thus improving classification performance. In summary, the
ablation study indicates that incorporating the WSA and CSS
modules leads to better performance across various datasets
and tasks, confirming their importance within the proposed
ASNet architecture. The effectiveness of both modules is
further evidenced by analyses and visualization experiments
in Sec. V and VI. And experiments of prompt are illustrated
in Section IV-F because of space limitation.

E. Ablation Study
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed WSA and
CSS modules, we conduct ablation experiments on 5 datasets
across 7 tasks. As shown in Table IV and Table V, removing

F. Details of Prompt
Prompts provide critical guidance and context for language
models like BERT, GPT-3, instructing the model on the desired

PENG et al.: BOTTOM AGGREGATING, TOP SEPARATING: AN AGGREGATOR AND SEPARATOR NETWORK

1801

TABLE VI
T HE D IFFERENT P ROMPTS A RE U TILIZED ON THE ISCXVPN TASK 2 DATASET

Fig. 3. Macro F1 and micro F1 scores over different length on the USTC-TFC - application classification task.

completion. Well-designed prompts lead to more coherent,
relevant responses from the model. To examine how different
prompts affect model performance, we designed three variations as in the Table VI. From the experimental results, the
second prompt obtains the best result in the traffic classification task. Without prompt, the micro-F1 score decreases
about 3%, which highlights the importance of prompt engineering to unlock the full potential of pre-trained language
models. Interestingly, the third prompt obtains the lower result
(decrease 0.5%) compared to the without prompt setting,
indicating that the provided prompt may have inadvertently
introduced some form of bias or constraint that hindered the
model’s performance on this particular task. It’s worth noting
that the effectiveness of prompts can vary depending on the
specific problem, data, and model architecture. The prompt
serves as a guidance, providing the context needed to direct
these powerful models towards our goals. Further research
on how to craft optimal prompts will enable even greater
improve performance on downstream tasks. As for the model’s
generalization capabilities, we can design different prompts for
different situations. For instance, in malicious traffic detection
task, the prompt can be design as Given the following traffic
data, is the traffic malicious or benign? In the scene that exists
a large number of categories, the prompt also can be adapted
to Given the following traffic data, which category does the
packet belong to? List: YouTube, Spotify, Skype and Gmail. The
category may not be included in the List. Therefore, the prompt
learning could be designed for different situations so as to
improve the model’s generalization capabilities. In conclusion,
the prompt engineering process is crucial to steering these
PLMs and achieving our desired outcomes. Carefully designed

prompts pave the way for language models to reach their full
capabilities.
G. Input Length Analysis
To verify the model’s sensitivity to the input length, we
conduct experiments on the USTC-TFC - application classification task. As shown in Figure 3, the length settings range
from 64 to 500, with different colors representing different
evaluation metrics.
The conclusions: (1) The macro F1 score (orange in Figure 3) demonstrates a clear upward trend as the input sequence
length increases from 64 to 256, indicating that longer input
sequences (contain payload information) provide more context for the model to make accurate predictions. As the
input length continues increasing, the performance decreases
slightly, suggesting that overly long sequences introduce noise
information. (2) For the micro F1 score (blue in Figure 3), its
sensitivity to length is smaller and shows irregular tendency,
but it can still be observed from the figure that micro F1
reaches its peak value when the length is 256. (3) In the case
of length 64 to 128, the difference between two metrics is
large. To further make an explanation, we manually calculate
the F1 scores of each category and find that the F1 score of
the “Shifu” class is really low (only 0.25), and its proportion
is very small (only 0.7%). Therefore, the impact on micro
F1 is smaller, whereas the impact on macro F1 is greater.
However, with the length increases, the payload information
contains, leading to higher macro F1 score. This phenomenon
further illustrates the necessity of payload information on
unbalanced condition. In summary, this experiment demonstrates the importance of the input length.

1802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 4. The degree of high-frequency word overlap between classes (calculate the intersection of high-frequency words between two classes) under two
different settings on the ISCXVPN dataset. Area indicates the area surrounded by the graphs.

V. WSA V ISUALIZATION
To validate the effectiveness and interpretability of the
proposed WSA, we conduct some visualization to make a
comparison in the following setting: (1) without aggregating
word sense (without WSA) and (2) with aggregating word
sense (with WSA). The comparison is based on the 4–6
categories (due to the space limitation, randomly sampling 4–6
categories) on the ISCXVPN dataset. Specifically, three data
statistical analyses are conducted: Inter-Class Word Overlap
Analysis, Word Distribution Visualization for each class, and
Word Frequency Statistical Analysis for each class.
The primary objective of this section is to attempt to
explain the WSA module from a data statistical perspective,
explaining why introducing this parameter-free aggregation
method can improve the model’s performance. While the word
frequencies obtained may differ across various datasets or
encryption algorithms, their corresponding statistical features
exhibit inter-class discrepancies. This diversification in statistical characteristics across classes contributes to the model’s
improved performance.
A. Word Overlap Analysis
In this section, we analyze the degree of high-frequency
word overlap between classes under two different settings.
Higher overlap indicates more shared features and greater
classification difficulty, and vice versa. We randomly select
2 of the 6 sampled categories and get 15 combinations (C62 ,
from 01 to 45), and count the overlap of the top 10 (orange
in Figure 4), top 50 (cyan in Figure 4) and top 100 (pink in
Figure 4) high-frequency word. As shown in Figure 4 (b), after
aggregating word sense, the areas surrounded by the graphs
are 9.40 and 9.17 in the case of top 10 and top 50, respectively,
reduced by about 36% and 24% compared to setting one
(without WSA). This indicates that WSA is able to make a

noticeable decrease in inter-class high-frequency word overlap,
preserving better distinguishability across classes. Naturally,
for the top 100 case, the coverage reduction is slightly smaller,
the possible reason is that the probability of overlap increases
when the base of words is larger. To sum up, the WAS makes
the overlap of high-frequency word lower, which is beneficial
to improve the category distinction.
B. Word Distribution Visualization
To further validate how WSA impacts classification performance, we visualize the distribution of high-frequency word
across different categories to clearly observe the efficacy of
WSA. Specifically, under both settings, we select the top
10 high-frequency word and plot their frequency distribution
across 4 categories. As Figure 5 shows, after aggregating
word sense, the distribution of high-frequency word varies
significantly across the 4 categories, exhibiting distinct trends.
However, without WSA, the distribution shows high similarity
across categories, increasing classification difficulty for the
model. In conclusion, the high-frequency word distribution
visualization provides further explanation of the proposed
WSA, analyzing the underlying correlations to its mechanism.
From the above two analyses on WSA, the proposed WSA
is able to enhance model’s understanding to the raw traffic
bytes by aggregating the word sense, so as to improve traffic
classification performance. And the visualization also provides
more interpretability to study the importance of word sense in
the traffic domain.
C. Statistical Analysis of Word Frequency
To validate the effectiveness and interpretability of the
proposed WSA, we conduct another statistical analysis of
word frequency. Specifically, to study the impact of the word
frequency under each class on the classification performance,

PENG et al.: BOTTOM AGGREGATING, TOP SEPARATING: AN AGGREGATOR AND SEPARATOR NETWORK

1803

Fig. 5. Distribution visualization of high-frequency word on the ISCXVPN dataset.

Fig. 6. A bar chart of word frequency statistics on the ISCXVPN dataset.

we analyze the top 50 word frequency across 3 randomly
sampled categories in setting (1) and setting (2) that illustrated
in Sec. V, as shown in Figure 6 (a) and (b), respectively. The
following conclusions can be drawn:
Firstly, without aggregating word sense, there is a clear
long tail distribution, causing models to optimize more for
frequently occurring words and learn less effective boundaries for infrequent words, which reduces model classification
performance. However, the proposed WSA flattens the distribution more evenly. Secondly, in setting one, the top 15
high-frequency word within each class account for a large
1 https://github.com/pengwei-iie/PaperAppendix

proportion, and these words have high overlap between classes
(including “x”, “=”, “##0”, “##9”, etc.), indicating poor
distinguishability. In contrast, WSA presents different word
distribution across categories, which reduces overlap and better
ensures separability. (More high-resolution pictures are here1 )
For the [UNK] token in the figure, it represents tokens that
are not present in the vocabulary of BERT. In traffic data
preprocessing, particularly in the payload portion, some bytes
will transfer to the characters in the ASCII table, such as the
‘ö’ symbol. These characters do not exist in the vocabulary, so
the tokenizer marks them as [UNK]. As a result, we observe
that [UNK] occupies a certain proportion in the processed
data.

1804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 7. The visualization of the packet-level semantics on the CICIoT dataset. PCA projections of the embeddings learned by different models. From left to
right: projections learned using CSS module; projections learned by BERT; original data space (the original input ids without any embeddings).

VI. CSS V ISUALIZATION
A. Packet-Level Semantics Visualization
To validate the effectiveness and interpretability of the proposed CSS, we conduct packet-level semantics visualization
to make a comparison between the ASNet and BERT baseline
in Figure 7. The comparison is based on the 6 categories
on the CICIoT2022 dataset. Specifically, we check the PCA
projections of the hidden states (before the classification layer)
from the proposed CSS module, and from that learned by the
baseline, i.e. the representation of the [CLS] in BERT. As a
negative control, we also give the PCA projection of the original data space without any forward calculation. As the scatter
plots show, both the ASNet and baseline model cluster the
samples with the same labels better than the original data, but
the clusters in the ASNet are much more distinguishable and
the different categories are further separated in the semantic
space. In Figure 7 (a), the data can be divided into different
clusters by eight ovals. However, it is difficult to separate
samples that are clustered in the lower left corner of Figure 7
(b). In summary, the proposed CSS module can obtain better
embedding space, thus achieving better improvements on the
traffic downstream tasks. In addition, the prompt analysis is in
Section IV-F because of space limitation.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a simple but effective Aggregator
and Separator Network which enhances the understanding of
the traffic data, leading to the advanced performance on the
traffic classification tasks. From the perspective of word-level
and packet-level semantics, the proposed parameter-free WSA
and CSS modules are introduced for keeping complete word
sense and separating packet-level semantics in different spaces
of different categories, respectively. In summary, ASNet is
very effective and robust, which outperforms the previous
methods on five datasets across seven tasks without pretraining. Furthermore, the visualization analyses demonstrate
the effectiveness and interpretability of the WSA and CSS
modules. And what is important is that ASNet does not
need pre-training, which dramatically reduces the cost of
computing power and time. For future work, the design of
prompts or continuous prompts could be considered for further
research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to all the reviewers for their
valuable suggestions and insights that helps them to improve
the quality of this work.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Independent comparison of popular DPI tools for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 76, pp. 75–89, Jan. 2015, doi: 10.1016/J.COMNET.2014.11.001.
[2] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Toward
effective mobile encrypted traffic classification through deep
learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 409, pp. 306–315, Oct. 2020, doi:
10.1016/J.NEUCOM.2020.05.036.
[3] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an
increasingly encrypted web,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst.,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–26, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3447382.
[4] L. Cui, J. Cui, Y. Ji, Z. Hao, L. Li, and Z. Ding, “API2 Vec: Learning
representations of API sequences for malware detection,” in Proc. 32nd
ACM SIGSOFT Int. Symp. Softw. Test. Anal., Seattle, WA, USA, Jul.
2023, pp. 261–273.
[5] S. Bi, K. Li, S. Hu, W. Ni, C. Wang, and X. Wang, “Detection
and mitigation of position spoofing attacks on cooperative UAV
swarm formations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 1883–1895, 2024.
[6] H. Jmal, F. B. Hmida, N. Basta, M. Ikram, M. A. Kaafar, and A. Walker,
“SPGNN-API: A transferable graph neural network for attack paths
identification and autonomous mitigation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 19, pp. 1601–1613, 2024.
[7] J. Chen, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, X. Feng, and K. Xu, “FedDef: Defense against
gradient leakage in federated learning-based network intrusion detection
systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 4561–4576,
2023.
[8] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pretraining of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,”
in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum.
Lang. Technol. Minneapolis, MI, USA: Association for Computational
Linguistics, vol. 1, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[9] A. Radford, “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,”
OpenAI blog, vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[10] M. Lewis et al., “BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training
for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension,”
in Proc. 58th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2020,
pp. 7871–7880.
[11] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identification using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2020.
[12] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020, doi:
10.1007/S00500-019-04030-2.
[13] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
[14] X. Lin, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic
classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642.

PENG et al.: BOTTOM AGGREGATING, TOP SEPARATING: AN AGGREGATOR AND SEPARATOR NETWORK

[15] T. B. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Proc.
Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2020, pp. 1–14.
[16] Z. Wen and Y. Fang, “Augmenting low-resource text classification with
graph-grounded pre-training and prompting,” in Proc. 46th Int. ACM
SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2023, pp. 506–516, doi:
10.1145/3539618.3591641.
[17] S. Ma, C. Chen, J. Mao, Q. Tian, and X. Jiang, “Session search
with pre-trained graph classification model,” in Proc. 46th Int. ACM
SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2023, pp. 953–962, doi:
10.1145/3539618.3591766.
[18] J. Liao, X. Zhao, J. Zheng, X. Li, F. Cai, and J. Tang, “PTAU:
Prompt tuning for attributing unanswerable questions,” in Proc. 45th
Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Madrid, Spain, Jul. 2022,
pp. 1219–1229, doi: 10.1145/3477495.3532048.
[19] W. Peng, W. Li, and Y. Hu, “Leader-generator net: Dividing skill and
implicitness for conquering FairytaleQA,” in Proc. 46th Int. ACM SIGIR
Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jul. 2023, pp. 791–801.
[20] W. Peng, Y. Hu, L. Xing, Y. Xie, Y. Sun, and Y. Li, “Control globally,
understand locally: A global-to-local hierarchical graph network for
emotional support conversation,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intell., Jul. 2022, pp. 4324–4330.
[21] J. Zhang et al., “GLM-dialog: Noise-tolerant pre-training for knowledgegrounded dialogue generation,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Long Beach, CA, USA, Aug. 2023,
pp. 5564–5575, doi: 10.1145/3580305.3599832.
[22] Z. Jia and R. Liu, “Intra- and inter-modal context interaction modeling
for conversational speech synthesis,” 2024, arXiv:2412.18733.
[23] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection
with deviation networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 353–362.
[24] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Encrypted traffic
classification of decentralized applications on Ethereum using feature
fusion,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 27th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS),
Jun. 2019, pp. 1–10.
[25] X. Meng, S. Wang, Z. Liang, D. Yao, J. Zhou, and Y. Zhang, “Semisupervised anomaly detection in dynamic communication networks,” Inf.
Sci., vol. 571, pp. 527–542, Sep. 2021.
[26] W. Cai, G. Gou, M. Jiang, C. Liu, G. Xiong, and Z. Li, “MEMG:
Mobile encrypted traffic classification with Markov chains and graph
neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput.
Communications; 7th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Systems; 19th Int. Conf. Smart
City; 7th Int. Conf. Dependability Sensor, Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl.,
Dec. 2021, pp. 478–486.
[27] X. Meng, Y. Wang, S. Wang, D. Yao, and Y. Zhang, “Interactive
anomaly detection in dynamic communication networks,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2602–2615, Dec. 2021.
[28] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022, doi:
10.1109/TIFS.2022.3179955.
[29] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TIFS.2020.3046876.
[30] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Oct. 2018,
pp. 1928–1943.
[31] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[32] I. Jemal, M. A. Haddar, O. Cheikhrouhou, and A. Mahfoudhi,
“Performance evaluation of convolutional neural network for web
security,” Comput. Commun., vol. 175, pp. 58–67, Jul. 2021, doi:
10.1016/J.COMCOM.2021.04.029.
[33] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Packet
representation learning for traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM
SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2022, pp. 3546–3554.
[34] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
[35] W. Peng, L. Cui, W. Cai, Z. Ding, Z. Hao, and X. Yun, “Efficiently and
effectively: A two-stage approach to balance plaintext and encrypted text
for traffic classification,” 2024, arXiv:2407.19687.
[36] X. Meng, C. Lin, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “NetGPT: Generative
pretrained transformer for network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09513.

1805

[37] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
pp. 407–414.
[38] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[39] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy,
Security Trust (PST), 2022, pp. 1–11.
[40] G. Wu, B. Zhu, J. Li, Y. Wang, and Y. Jia, “H2SA-ALSH: A privacypreserved indexing and searching schema for IoT data collection and
mining,” Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 2022, pp. 1–12, Apr.
2022.
[41] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
“Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 253–262.
[42] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[43] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018, doi:
10.1109/TIFS.2017.2737970.
[44] E. Min, J. Long, Q. Liu, J. Cui, and W. Chen, “TR-IDS: Anomalybased intrusion detection through text-convolutional neural network and
random forest,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2018, pp. 1–9, Jul. 2018,
doi: 10.1155/2018/4943509.
[45] F. Casino, K. R. Choo, and C. Patsakis, “HEDGE: Efficient traffic
classification of encrypted and compressed packets,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2916–2926, Nov. 2019, doi:
10.1109/TIFS.2019.2911156.
[46] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2020, pp. 397–405.

Wei Peng received the B.S. degree in computer
science and technology from Chang’an University,
Xi’an, China, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree from
the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2023. His
research interests include encrypted traffic classification, natural language generation, and question
answering. He has published his research in high
quality journals and conferences in the area, including IJCAI, SIGIR, AAAI, EMNLP, and KBs.

Lei Cui received the Ph.D. degree in computer
software and theory from Beihang University
in 2015. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing. He
has published over 40 papers in journals and
conferences, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS
AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
SERVICES COMPUTING, ISSTA, ICCD, RAID,
VEE, LISA, and DSN. His research interests
include operating systems, system security, and system virtualization.

1806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Wei Cai received the Ph.D. degree from the Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. He is currently an Assistant Research
Scientist with the Network Connection Security Department, Zhongguancun Laboratory. His
research interests include mobile encrypted traffic
analysis and adversarial machine learning.

Zhiyu Hao received the Ph.D. degree in computer system architecture from Harbin Institute of
Technology in 2007. He is currently a Professor with the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing.
He has published over 50 papers in journals and
conferences, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, ICPP,
IEEE S&P, ICA3PP, and CLUSTER. His research
interests include network security and system virtualization.

Wei Wang received the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Information Engineering, School of Cyber
Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. She is currently a Research Assistant with
the Zhongguancun Laboratory. She has published
several papers in journals and conferences, including
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING,
ICCD, and VEE. Her research interests include
system virtualization and network security.

Xiaoyu Cui received the M.S. degree from Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 2023.
She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing. Her
research interests include machine learning, network
security, and encrypted traffic analysis.

Xiaochun Yun received the bachelor’s degree in
computer science and application and the Ph.D.
degree in computer system architecture from Harbin
Institute of Technology. He is currently the Deputy
Director of the National Computer Network Emergency Response Technical Team/Coordination Center of China. He has published over 100 academic
papers. His research interests include network malware detection and prevention technology, security
analysis, and content security.