IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5514715

CL-BioGAN: Biologically Inspired Cross-Domain
Continual Learning for Hyperspectral
Anomaly Detection
Jianing Wang , Member, IEEE, Zheng Hua , Wan Zhang , Shengjia Hao, Yuqiong Yao,
and Maoguo Gong , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— The memory stability and learning flexibility in
continual learning (CL) is a core challenge for cross-scene
hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) task. Biological neural
networks can actively forget history knowledge that conflicts with
the learning of new experiences by regulating learning-triggered
synaptic expansion and synaptic convergence. Inspired by this
phenomenon, we propose a novel biologically inspired CL
generative adversarial network (CL-BioGAN) for augmenting
continuous distribution fitting ability for cross-domain HAD
task, where CL bioinspired loss (CL-Bio Loss) and self-attention
generative adversarial network (BioGAN) are incorporated to
realize forgetting history knowledge as well as involving replay
strategy in the proposed BioGAN. Specifically, a novel bioinspired
loss composed with an active forgetting loss (AF Loss) and
a CL loss is designed to realize parameters releasing and
enhancing between new task and history tasks from a Bayesian
perspective. Meanwhile, BioGAN loss with L 2 -norm enhances
self-attention (SA) to further balance the stability and flexibility
for better fitting background distribution for open-scenario
HAD (OHAD) tasks. Experimental results underscore that the
proposed CL-BioGAN can achieve more robust and satisfying
accuracy for cross-domain HAD with fewer parameters and
computational cost. This dual contribution not only elevates CL
performance but also offers new insights into neural adaptation
mechanisms in OHAD task.
Index Terms— Active forgetting, continual learning (CL),
generative adversarial network (GAN), hyperspectral anomaly
detection (HAD).

I. I NTRODUCTION

H

YPERSPECTRAL image (HSI) contains hundreds or
even thousands of contiguous narrow spectral bands,
which makes possibilities for precisely distinguishing different
Received 5 December 2024; revised 17 February 2025; accepted 17 March
2025. Date of publication 6 May 2025; date of current version 29 May
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61801353 and in part by the Foundation
of Guangdong Testing Institute of Product Quality Supervision under Grant
2025zz01. (Jianing Wang and Zheng Hua contributed equally to this work.)
(Corresponding authors: Jianing Wang; Wan Zhang.)
Jianing Wang and Wan Zhang are with the Key Laboratory of Collaborative
Intelligence Systems, Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science
and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: circuitwang@163.com; zhangwan2021@163.com).
Zheng Hua, Shengjia Hao, and Yuqiong Yao are with the Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding, Ministry of Education
of China, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071,
China (e-mail: HuaZheng79@163.com).
Maoguo Gong is with the Key Laboratory of Collaborative Intelligence
Systems, Ministry of Education, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
(e-mail: Gong@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3561174

Fig. 1. Comparison of traditional DL training model and the CL method.
(a) Traditional DL method, which obtains OHAD results by a set of independent well-trained parameters. (b) Proposed CL method. The parameters of
the model are continuously updated with the arrived tasks, but the updated
parameters will not forget the previous learned knowledge.

materials [1]. As one of important research fields of hyperspectral information processing, the main aim of open-scenario
HAD (OHAD) task is to find pixels that are significantly
different from the background in terms of spectral signatures
without any prior knowledge of target [2]. Recent years,
various traditional deep learning (DL)-based algorithms have
been proposed for OHAD tasks [3]. However, most existing DL-based methods mainly excel at acquiring knowledge
through generalized learning behavior based on solving specific scene task from a distinct training phase [4]. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), traditional DL-based algorithms can only excel
at specific task or current scenario because of the specific
constructed parameters of network is incapable of dealing with
new tasks or scenarios, which is liable to result in catastrophic
forgetting phenomenon. Whereas the network parameters of
CL can be automatically updated through customized loss
functions or automatically updated exemplar set. After the
training for t different scenarios, the learned parameters of
the model contains the ability of OHAD for all the previous
tasks in open scenario circumstance, the procedure is briefly
illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
Continual learning (CL) [5] (also known as lifelong learning [6] or incremental learning [7]) as a representative method
for alleviating catastrophic forgetting phenomenon caused by
varied conditions and scenarios [8], is gradually attracting
more and more attention in recent years [9]. Aim at learning
knowledge and feature properties of current task while still

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5514715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 2. Principles of active forgetting and learning in our proposed neural network. (a) Neural and protrusion function diagram. (b) Synaptic changes diagram
during the learning of a new task.

maintaining the knowledge information from previous training tasks, current methodologies in CL can be conceptually
grouped into three main categories: 1) adding regularization
terms with reference to the old model (regularization-based
approach); 2) approximating and recovering the old data
distributions (replay-based approach); and 3) constructing
task-specific parameters with a properly designed architecture
(architecture-based approach) [10], which have presented proficiencies in addressing numerous CL challenges. However, the
effectiveness of strategies varied significantly across different
experimental settings, such as task types and similarities,
input sizes, and training sample quantities [11]. Therefore,
a significant gap exists between research advancements and
practical applications especially for OHAD tasks.
Biological neural networks can effectively learn new knowledge based on memorizing history knowledge, even if they
conflict with each other. This advantage of memory flexibility
is achieved by actively forgetting history knowledge that
interferes with the learning of new experiences [12]. Inspired
by this biological properties, in order to alleviate catastrophic forgetting problem caused by traditional DL-based
method, we explore CL from a biological learning perspective.
As shown in Fig. 2(a), the biological active forgetting properties can regulate the learning-triggered synaptic expansion and
synaptic convergence [13]. Specifically, biological synapses
can expand with additional functional connections to learn new
experiences with previously learned functional connections
(synaptic expansion), and then prune excrescent connections
by transferring useful knowledge to the previously learned
synaptic connections (synaptic pruning). Driven by this phenomenon, the proposed biologically inspired CL generative
adversarial network (CL-BioGAN) can actively forget history
knowledge which interferes with new learning tasks without
significantly arousing catastrophic forgetting. We formulate
this process with the framework of Bayesian learning to
well synthesize and model biological synaptic plasticity by
tracking the probability distribution of synaptic weights under
dynamic sensory inputs [14], [15]. Specifically, we employ the

Bayesian CL incorporate SA to actively forget the posterior
distribution, absorbing all information from the history tasks
with a forgetting factor to better learn each new task for
facilitating CL performance, which fully utilizes bioinspired
loss and replay strategy to mitigate the issue of catastrophic
forgetting. In addition, the potential spatial feature extraction
capability of L 2 -norm enhanced SA and the local feature
extraction capability of CNN are designed through GAN
structure to reconstruct the background pixels.
The main innovations and contributions of the proposed
CL-BioGAN are summarized as follows.
1) A novel CL-BioGAN is proposed to elaborately integrating CL bioinspired loss (CL-Bio Loss) and BioGAN
structure, which can adaptively efficient releasing ineffective parameters as well as strengthening robust
parameters through local–global Transformer-based SA
learning. CL-BioGAN can provide a dual stable and
flexible way from bioinspired network structure and
bio-inspired loss to achieve high accuracy with robust
performance for cross-domain OHAD task.
2) The proposed BioGAN model is incorporated with a L 2
local–global SA discriminator structure, which can efficiently approximate the background distribution through
alternating training with bioinspired encoder–decoder
generator to acquire local–global representative background spectral characteristics.
3) A novel bioinspired loss is designed to integrate BioGAN loss, active forgetting loss (AF Loss) and CL
loss for balancing the memory stability and learning
flexibility for OHAD. The BioGAN loss updates the
parameters of network for current task and enhances
the robustness of BioGAN. AF Loss is formulated with
the framework of Bayesian learning, and encourages the
model to improve the probability of learning each new
task through attenuating old memories by a designed
forgetting rate. Meanwhile, the CL loss can automatically balance and maintain the stability of parameters in
learning procedure.

WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING

The proposed CL-BioGAN can realize efficient generation
and fitting ability to the varied background distribution, which
presents satisfying detection accuracy and robust performance
for OHAD, and offers a novel approach to the application of
DL for open scenarios remote sensing area.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. The related
work is introduced in Section II. The detail of the proposed
CL-BioGAN framework is introduced in Section III. The
related experiments are analyzed and presented in Section IV.
The conclusion and future work are presented in Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORKS
A. Continual Learning
Modern machine learning often outperforms human intelligence when it comes to developing robust models from
fixed datasets and fixed surroundings [16]. Traditional DL
techniques usually suffer from catastrophic forgetting phenomenon for forgetting what has been previously learned
by overriding with new data [17]. Therefore, CL methods
address this issue by striking a balance between the stability
(ability to retain knowledge) and plasticity (ability to learn
new concepts) of neural network models [18]. For DL-based
CL, similar to the learning of human, the learner typically
encounters a nonstationary data stream through a series of
learning episodes [19].
Numerous efforts have been devoted to preserving memory
stability to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in artificial neural
networks. The realization of existing CL methods can be
roughly categorized into five mainstreams.
1) Replay-Based Techniques: These approaches typically
create a replay pool in which features or samples
from earlier tasks are maintained to avoid catastrophic
forgetting. Generative models is proposed to generate pseudo data for replay strategy [20], [21]. Cheng
et al. [22] select the augmentation stability rehearsal
(ASR) method by estimating the augmentation stability
to select the most representative and discriminative
samples. Constructive noises is introduced in each
stage of constructive vision transformer (ViT) and an
exponential moving average of the working modal
is utilized to enforce consistency in predictions [23].
An exemplar-based CL method is introduced by using
contrastive learning to learn a task-agnostic and continuously improved feature expression [24]. Rehearsal-based
methods aim at handling “stability–plasticity” dilemma
by maintaining an appropriate balance between learning
new information and retaining previous knowledge [25].
2) Regularization-Based Techniques: These techniques are
mainly based on minimizing the catastrophic forgetting
through utilizing the regularization loss term to minimize
the model’s parameter distance in various tasks. A dual
distillation training objectives is proposed to achieve
the combination of two independent models of old
classes and new classes [26]. Class similarity knowledge
distillation (CSW-KD) method is proposed to perform
semantic segmentation by extracting the knowledge of
previous models of old classes which are similar to the

5514715

new class [27]. Three contrastive learning losses are
designed to significantly improve the CL effect in the
field of remote sensing images [28]. In [29], the elastic
weight-consolidated loss function is combined with a
self-supervised network. Focusing on the CL model to
retain old knowledge while ensuring the model’s ability
to learn new knowledge, Kim et al. [30] proposed auxiliary network CL (ANCL). Regularization-based methods
can effectively avoid the storage of old tasks, therefore
it can avoid data leakage and the need for increased
memory.
3) Architecture-Based Methods: In order to reduce forgetting performance, these methods mainly involve new
task-specific layers or structures for new tasks and activities. Parameter masking [31] can learn binary masks on
existing networks to obtain a suitable neural network for
multiple tasks. Li et al. [32] proposed a method to use
architecture search for the best structure of each task.
Meta-attention (MEAT) mechanism is designed to determine which image patches and parameters are needed to
be isolated by optimizing the binary mask [33]. In [34],
the network structure is divided into task-sharing components and task-specific components, where task-specific
components can be continuously expanded for new
coming tasks. This type of method is adept at dealing
with increasing domain shift tasks. In addition, a rulebased model ensemble [35] is introduced by forming
a distributed architecture to manage high-dimensional
data, where an adjustable weight vector is emphasized
by the role of correlation strategies in incremental
learning.
4) Optimization-Based Techniques: Optimization-based CL
algorithms can be achieved by explicitly designing
and manipulating the optimization programs. A typical
idea is to perform gradient projection. For instance,
AdamNSCL [36] instead projects candidate parameter
updates into the current null space approximated by the
uncentered feature covariance of the old tasks, while
AdNS [37] considers the shared part of the previous
and the current null spaces. Another attractive idea
is meta-learning or learning-to-learn for CL, which
attempts to obtain a data-driven inductive bias for various scenarios, rather than designing it manually [16].
ARI [38] combines adversarial attacks with experience
replay to obtain task-specific models, which are then
fused together through metatraining. MARK [39] maintains a set of shared weights that are incrementally
updated with metalearning and selectively masked to
solve specific tasks. Besides, some other works refine the
optimization process from a loss landscape perspective.
Linear connector [40] adopts Adam-NSCL [36] and
feature distillation to obtain respective solutions of the
old and new tasks connected by a linear path of low
error, followed by linear averaging.
5) Representation-Based Techniques: Have attempted to
incorporate the advantages of self-supervised learning
(SSL) and large-scale pretraining to improve the
representations in initialization and in CL. Based

5514715

on SSL strategy (basically with contrastive loss) for
CL, MinRed [41] further promotes the diversity of
experience replay by decorrelating the stored old training
samples. CaSSLe [42] converts the self-supervised loss
to a distillation strategy by mapping the current state of a
representation to its previous state. Based on pretraining
for downstream CL, representative strategies include
selecting the most relevant prompts from a prompt pool
(L2P [43]), optimizing a weighted summation of the
prompt pool with attention factors (CODAPrompt [44]),
using explicitly task-sharing and task-specific prompts
(DualPrompt [45]) or only task-specific prompts
(SPrompts [46]), and progressive expansion of taskspecific prompts (progressive prompts [47]).

B. Hyperspectral Anomaly Detection
HAD task aims at detecting the anomalies from background
samples through the significant difference between continuous
spectral signatures [48]. Existing HAD algorithms can be
roughly divided into three mainstreams.
1) Statistic-Based HAD Approaches: Mainly estimate the
probability of anomalous samples primarily by calculating the relationship difference between the background
and the anomalous distribution by calculating differences. Reed–Xiaoli (RX) [48] is proposed to detect
anomalies by computing the mean and variance of
the entire image through comparing the Mahalanobis
distance between the test sample and the background
mean vector. Many variations based on RX, such as
kernel-based RX (KRX) algorithm [49], local RX (LRX)
[50] have been gradually proposed. Meanwhile, a tensor RX (TRX) algorithm based on fractional Fourier
transform [51] and the recursive RX with extended
multi-ttribute profiles [52] are designed to extract more
image feature information. In [53], an adaptive reference
correlation graph embedding (ARGE) is proposed to
effectively obtain low-dimensional features and improve
computational efficiency. To overcome the limitations of
distributional assumptions in HAD, recent years have
seen increased interest in.
2) Representation-Based HAD Approaches: The cooperative representation-based detector (CRD) [54] assumes
that background pixels can be minimized by enhancing
the L 2 -norm of the representation weight vector, approximately represented by a linear combination of its spatial
neighbors. LRASR [55] assumes that backgrounds
present low-rank attributes and anomalies present sparse
attributes. Chang [56] proposed an effective anomaly
space (EAS) to solve the problem of anomalies being
sandwiched between the background and noise during
the background suppression (BS) process in HAD. The
total variation (TV) representation model is introduced
into HAD [57], such as the new enhanced TV (ETV)
of the endmember background dictionary (EBD) to
represent the row vector of the coefficient matrix [58].
Feedback band group and variation low-rank sparse
model (FBGVLRS-AD) is proposed by utilizing local

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

spatial constraints within spectral features combined
with the TV tensor-based HAD method [59].
3) DL-Based HAD Approaches: Can learn complex data
distribution even under the condition of lack of prior
information [60]; therefore, background estimation and
reconstruction are key issues in the implementation
of HAD. Based on the ability for hierarchical
learning, abstraction, and high-level representation of
autoencoder (AE), which provides an unsupervised
manner for background reconstruction [61]. The
background-guided deformable convolutional AE
(DCAE) network is designed for HAD [62]. In [63],
a weighted adaptive loss combined with AE is
designed to suppress the reconstruction of abnormal
samples. PASSNet [47] built a lightweight hybrid
model, which ensembles the respective inductive bias
from the convolutional neural network (CNN) and
global receptive field from transformers with a designed
patch attention module (PAM) to extract spatial–spectral
features from multiple spatial perspectives by integrating
both CNNs and transformer blocks. In terms of feature
representation capabilities and adversarial training
capabilities, generative adversarial network (GAN)
has been successfully used to estimate background
distribution and spectral domain features to achieve
high-confidence background sample reconstruction [64],
[65]. Under the condition that the number of background
samples is much larger than abnormal samples, the
recognition error of abnormal pixels is higher than that
of background pixels. Jiang et al. [66] only used the
normal background samples to train the GAN to estimate
the background distribution to achieve the detection
of abnormal samples. Based on the visual attention
Transformer model, a clustering module is introduced
to detect false background and abnormal samples
in [67]. In [68], an HAD network based on variational
background inference and generative adversarial
framework (VBIGAN-AD) is established based on the
relationship between data samples and latent samples
through two subnetworks to capture the data distribution.
C. Bayesian CL
CL needs to remember the old tasks and learn each new
task effectively. Therefore, considering a neural network with
parameter θ continually learns two independent task t and task
t + 1 based on their training datasets Xtrain
and Xtrain
t
t+1 . All the
training datasets for each task is only available when learning
the task; therefore, the posterior distribution and the Bayesian
CL can be represented as follows.
1) Bayesian Learning: After learning Xtrain
, the posterior
t
distribution


p Xtrain
|θ p(θ )
t
train

(1)
p θ|Xt
=
p Xtrain
t
incorporates the knowledge of task t. Then, we can get the
predictive distribution for the testing data of task t
Z



test
train
train
p Xt |Xt
=
p Xtest
dθ
(2)
t |θ p θ|Xt

WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING

whereas the posterior p(θ|Xtrain
) is generally intractable
t
(except very special cases), we must resort to approximation methods, such as the Laplace approximation or
other approaches of approximate inference [69]. Let us
take Laplace approximation as an example. If p(θ|Xtrain
)
t
is smooth and majorly peaked around the mode θt∗ =
arg maxθ log p(θ|Xtrain
), we can approximate it with a Gaust
sian distribution whose mean is θt∗ and covariance is the
inverse Hessian of the negative log posterior [13].
2) Bayesian CL: Further for incorporating the new task into
the posterior, the posterior p(θ|Xtrain
) is used as the prior of
t
the next task


train

p Xtrain
t+1 |θ p θ|Xt
train
train

.
(3)
p θ|Xt , Xt+1 =
p Xtrain
t+1
Then, we can test the performance of CL by evaluating

test
train
p Xtest
, Xtrain
t , Xt+1 |Xt
t+1
Z


train
test
(4)
, Xtrain
=
p Xtest
t+1 dθ.
t , Xt+1 |θ p θ|Xt
, Xtrain
Similarly, p(θ|Xtrain
t+1 ) can be approximated by a Gaust
sian using Laplace approximation whose mean is the mode of
the posterior

∗
, Xtrain
θt,t+1
= arg max log p θ|Xtrain
t+1
t
θ


train
|θ
= arg max log p Xtrain
t+1 |θ + log p Xt
θ

− log p Xtrain
(5)
t+1 .
|
{z
}
const.

III. M ETHOD
In this section, we mainly introduce the proposed
CL-BioGAN by combining knowledge learned from history
and present tasks. The overall architecture of the proposed
CL-BioGAN is represented in Fig. 3, which is mainly composed of the CL structure and BioGAN networks.
Suppose that there are T different scenario domains
X1 , . . . , Xt , . . . , XT for OHAD task datasets, each Xt represents the tth HAD scenario task. An HSI can be represented
as Xt ∈ R M×N ×C = {xi ∈ RC }i=M×N
, t ∈ 1, 2, . . . , T , where
i=1
xi represents the ith spectral vector in Xt .
A. Structure of BioGAN
The whole BioGAN for OHAD mainly consists of three
components: the background selection module (BSM), the
generator module G, and the discriminator module D.
1) Background Selection Module: BSM is shown in
Fig. 3(b), which consists of the two main processes: 1)
spectral-based background selection strategy (SBSS) and 2)
spatial–spectral noise smoothing strategy (SSNS). The pseudolabel for the background samples and anomalies are first
coarsely selected through SBSS. Then, SSNS is used to
involve spatial information for better exploiting and enhancing
spectral–spatial features for each vector.

5514715

a) Spectral-based background selection strategy: Aiming to approximately obtain the background datasets, we calculate the similarity value of neighboring spectral vectors based
on SAM [70] for coarsely selecting the background sample
sets Bt for any HAD scenario Xt

xi · x j
(6)
SAM xi , x j =
||xi || × x j
(

0, SAM xi , x j ≥ µ

si =
(7)
1, SAM xi , x j < µ

Bt = index(i) {si == 0} .
(8)
The threshold µ is defined to determine whether xi is
a background sample or an anomalous sample. The value
of si = 0 indicates that the current pixel is part of the
background, where si = 1 indicates the current pixel is
abnormal pixel, where Bt ∈ Rn b ×C and n b represents the
number of background.
b) Spatial–spectral noise smoothing strategy: We developed SSNS to incorporate spatial pixel information into
spectral data, which concatenate the original spectral vector
values with the average value of the spectral vectors of the
w × w local region around the center pixel (in the experiment,
we take w as 3), and compute the mean vector as follows:
w
1 X r
x
w × w r =1 i
2

x̄i =

(9)

where r is the pixel’s index in the w × w region. The original
spectral vector xi and the mean vector x̄i are merged to create
the enhanced vector ei
ei = xi ⊗ x̄i

(10)

where ei ∈ R2C and ⊗ represents the concatenating operation across the channel dimension. Therefore, the augmented
spectral–spatial background sample sets Bt updated as follows:

Bt ∈ Rn b ×2C = ei | index(i) {si == 0} .
(11)
2) Generator Module G: Further for improving reconstruction performance of background pixels, we introduce an
advanced encoder–decoder architecture, where the structure of
G is shown in Fig. 3(b). The AE [71] has been widely used
in various applications such as HSI unmixing [72] and target
detection [73] because of the simple and outstanding performance in feature extraction. For the simplest AE structure,
in which the encoder and decoder are both fully connected
layers. Therefore, for the arbitrary selected background input
bi ⊂ Bt ∈ Rn b ×2C and the hidden layer zi ⊂ Zt ∈ Rn b ×L with
L(L < 2C) dimensions, the reconstructed output b̂i ⊂ B̂t ∈
Rn b ×2C can be calculated as follows:
zi = f (Wen bi + biasen )

(12)

b̂i = f (Wde zi + biasde )

(13)

where Wen and biasen and Wde and biasde denote the weights
and biases of the encoder and decoder, respectively, and f (·)
is an inconclusive activation function. Based on the reality
that the majority of pixels in HSIs belong to the background

5514715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 3. Overview of the proposed CL-BioGAN for OHAD. The left part represents the continual training phase, which is mainly composed of replay
strategy, BioGAN structure, and bioinspired loss (CL Loss, AF Loss, and recon Loss). The right part in the figure is the continual testing part, the well-trained
biogenerator is only used in the testing phase to detect the continually arrived HAD scenarios.

while only a few pixels are anomalies, AE mainly progressively emphasizes the background features during the training
process, and finally reconstructed background pixels as the
inputs background pixels as similar as possible. Therefore,
the training goal of the proposed BioGAN is to learn the
features of the training dataset bi and reconstruct b̂i as similar
as possible. The reconstruction error of a well-trained AE can
be used to calculate the final anomaly detection result.
3) Discriminator Module D: D is shown in Fig. 3(b), which
is used to learn more complicated spectral properties as well
as support the training of G. D consists of two modules:
the multi-scale convolution (MSC) module for extracting multiscale features, and L 2 SA [L 2 norm self-attention (SA)]
module for channel feature extraction and channel correlation.
Three multiscale spectral feature maps F have been generated
by using 1 × 1, 3 × 3, and 5 × 5 convolutional operations.
Meanwhile, residual connection structure is utilized in L 2
SA module, and feature information in different levels can
be extracted by concatenating the feature maps of several
receptive fields together, and the spatial position embedding
is introduced to capture the local discrimination details and
the general characteristic changes of the spectral information.
For an arbitrary input B̂t ∈ Rn b ×2C , the corresponding output
of an SA block can be formulated as follows:
Q = Wq F ∈ Rn b ×L
K = Wk F ∈ Rn b ×L
n b ×L

V = Wv F ∈ R

between each input and all other inputs. Especially for HSIs,
the SA can fully excavate more important spatial information
for background reconstruction.
A linear full-connection layer is utilized for converting the
intermediate feature dimension to the output feature dimension
2C, after the completion of the L 2 SA computation. The
following final attention feature map is calculated as follows:
F̂ = FFN((Linear(SA) + F)) + (Linear(SA) + F)

where F̂ ∈ Rn b ×2C and FFN represents feedforward neural network, which consists of dropout, linear, and the stable GELU
activation function. Then, F̂ is imported to the a multiple layer
perception (MLP) to obtain the final discrimination result.
B. Sample Replay Based on Clustering
After t task has been learned, in order to alleviate
the catastrophic forgetting problem, an alternative sampling
approach for sample replay selection is designed by involving sample replay strategy to random choose and store
pixels from historical data. Suppose the background set
Bt with totally Mt samples, we cluster the whole dataset
into P groups by utilizing K -means technique. Overall,
the expectation–maximization (EM) optimization algorithm
is used [74], and the optimization objective function is as
follows:
E=

(14)



||Q||2 ||K||2 T
√
SA = Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
V
2C
(15)
where Wq ∈ R2C×L , Wk ∈ R2C×L , and Wv ∈ R2C×L are
three predefined transformation matrices, respectively. ||·||2
represents the L 2 norm of SA ∈ Rn b ×L . We can observe
from (14) and (15) that the SA considers the relationships

(16)

P X
X

∥x − µi ∥2

(17)

i=1 x∈Ci

where Ci represents the set of all sample points of each
cluster, x denotes a sample point belonging to Ci , and µi
represents the center of the ith cluster. Each group will
contain Mti (i = 1, 2, . . . , P) samples. We assume that each
task adaptively selects N representative samples by taking
into account memory restriction. We take the sum of one
percentPof Mti closest to the sample center in each cluster,
P
i
N =
i=1 (Mt × 100)/10 000 denoted by N . The specific

WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING

value of N is detailed in Section IV. The sample replay
equation can be represented as follows:

 
P
[
N ∗ Mti
(18)
k(Bt ) =
K Means :
Mt
i=1
where samples in K Means have been organized in ascending
order based on their distance from each cluster’s center pixel,
and ((N ∗ Mti )/Mt ) is the picked data from each cluster sets.
The computed representative sample set of the ith cluster
is represented by the symbol K Means [ : ⌊(N ∗ Mti )/Mt ⌋]. The
replay buffer may be modified as follows:
Rt ← Rt−1 ∪ k(Bt ),

Rt−1 = φ, when t = 1.

(19)

We may lessen the effects of the imbalanced data distribution and increase the spectral anomaly detection algorithm’s
resilience by using (19) for adaptive replay technique. Obviously, abnormalities in various HSI sets may be continually
detected with better accuracy performance based on the clustering sample replay in CL module.
C. CL-Bio Loss Function
In this section, we mainly introduce the proposed bioinspired loss of CL based on the Bayesian learning framework,
which hypothesized based on biological synaptic plasticity by
tracking the probability distribution of synaptic weights under
dynamic sensory inputs [14]. The whole proposed CL-bio loss
function is composed with: 1) ACL loss L ACL and 2) the
BioGAN loss L BioGAN . The ACL loss is used to assure stability
for detection and prevent catastrophic forgetting for crossdomain scenarios. BioGAN loss mainly ensures the training
fidelity performance for background sample reconstruction.
Therefore, we construct and summarize the whole loss function as follows:
L = L BioGAN + L ACL
L BioGAN = L G + L D + L recon
L ACL = L CL + L AF .

(20)
(21)
(22)

1) BioGAN Loss: The spatial–spectral background sets Bt
and reconstruction background set B̂t = G(Bt ) is measured
by using the mean square error (mse) loss
L recon = B̂t − Bt

2
.
2

(23)

We performed differentiable data enhancement (Diff) on the
data and pseudodata in the G and D to assure the training
stability of GAN without appearing feature shift phenomenon
for brightness, saturation, and contrast information to realize
better convergence results. Consequently, the adversarial process allows G and D to be updated alternately as follows:


L G = Ex∼ p(Bt ) log(1 − D(Diff(G(x))))
(24)


L D = −E x∼ p(Bt ∪B̂t ) log(D(x)) + log(1 − D(Diff(G(x)))) .
(25)
2) ACL Loss: ACL loss is composed of CL loss to prevent
weight drift caused by new knowledge and the AF Loss for
selectively converging the related parameter weights of the
network.

5514715

a) AF Loss : Inspired by biological forgetting and
Bayesian CL, we introduce a forgetting factor β and replace
p(θ|Xtrain
) that absorbs all the information of Xtrain
with a
t
t
weighted product distribution
(1−β)

p(θ )β
p θ|Xtrain
t
train
(26)
p̂ θ|Xt , β =
Z
where we denote that p(θ|Xtrain
) and p(θ ) are mixed to prot
duce the new distribution p̂. Z is the normalization value that
depends on β, which keeps p̂(θ|Xtrain
, β) following a Gaussian
t
distribution if p(θ|Xtrain
) and p(θ ) are both Gaussian. When
t
p(θ ) → 0, p̂ will be dominated by p(θ|Xtrain
) and remember
t
all the information about task t, where p(θ ) → 1, p̂ will
actively forget all the information about task t. By modifying
(4), the new target becomes

test
train
p Xtest
, Xtrain
t , Xt+1 |Xt
t+1 , β
Z


test
train
=
p Xtest
, Xtrain
(27)
t , Xt+1 |θ p θ|Xt
t+1 , β dθ
where β decides how much information from task t should be
forgotten to maximize the probability of learning task t + 1.
A suitable β value should be defined as follows:

train
,β
β ∗ = arg max p Xtrain
t+1 |Xt
β
Z


train
, β dθ .
(28)
= arg max p Xtrain
t+1 |θ p̂ θ|Xt
β

Here, β should be between 0 and 1, we make a grid search to
determine the optimal value for β. Next, p(θ|Xtrain
, Xtrain
t
t+1 , β)
can also be estimated by the approximated Gaussian using
Laplace approximation, and the maximum a posteriori (MAP)
estimation is

∗
, Xtrain
θt,t+1
= arg max log p θ|Xtrain
t+1 , β
t
θ

= arg max(1 − β) log p Xtrain
t+1 |θ
θ


+ β log p θ|Xtrain
+ log p θ|Xtrain
t+1 + const.
t
(29)
Then, we obtain the active forgetting AF Loss function by
synaptic expansion-convergence (AF Loss)
X
L AF = λAF ×
(θc )2
(30)
c

where θc represents the parameters of the current task.
Fig. 2(b) indicates the implementation of active forgetting in
a CL model.
b) CL loss: This loss function minimizes the magnitude
of parameter updates by forcing the distance between the input
data of task t and the reconstructed image of task t + 1 to get
closer to preserve stability for OHAD. We use a replay sample
set Rt to reduce the distance between different task models for
stability protection in CL. Finally, the definition of the F-norm
regularization loss for every task t is
L CL = λCL ×

G t (Rt−1 )G t (Rt−1 )T
Bb

5514715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Algorithm 1 CL-BioGAN

TABLE I

Input: The stream HSIs X1 , . . . , Xt , . . . , XT for T tasks.
Parameter: µ = 0.99, the number of clustering groups P = 3,
w = 3, the channel dimension C = dmin(X1 , . . . , XT ), λ AF = 0.1,
λC L = 0.9, lr = 0.00005.
Output: Amap,t .
1: Initialize replay buffer R1 = φ, the model parameters θ1 .
2: for t = 1 to T tasks do
i=M×N
3:
Xt ∈ R M×N ×C = {x i ∈ RC }i=1 ;
4:
for H training epochs do
5:
generate si vector by (6) and (7);
6:
construct background samples set Bt by (11);
7:
if t = 1 then
8:
update θ1 by minimizing L G , L D and L r econ through
equation (24), (25) and (23), as equation (30) L AF = 0,
equation (31) L C L = 0;
9:
else
10:
update θt by minimizing L G , L D and L r econ through
equation (24), (25) and (23);
11:
end if
12:
apply K-Means to obtain Mi (i = 1, 2, 3) containing three
groups exemplars respectively for the subset through (18);
13:
if t = 1 then
14:
update replay buffer by R1 ← k(Bt );
15:
else
16:
update replay buffer by Rt ← Rt−1 ∪ k(Bt );
17:
end if
18:
end for
19: end for
20: Construct the detection for tasks through equation (20);

+

mask
X

G t (Rt−1,mask )G t (Rt−1,mask )T
−I
P
i, j

.
F

(31)
Among them, Bb stands for batch size, P denotes the
number of pixel in mask. I stands for the identity matrix,
∥•∥F represents the matrix’s Fibonacci norm, and λCL represents the balancing parameter. The CL loss will gradually
update the parameters of the generator in accordance with the
continuously coming tasks.
D. Continual Anomaly Detection
During the testing procedure in Fig. 3(c), the final projected anomaly probability map is obtained by subtracting the
continuous data Y1 , . . . , Yt , . . . , YT from the reconstructed
background pixel Ŷ1 = G(X1 ), . . . , Ŷt = G(Xt ), . . . , ŶT =
G(XT ) by our proposed well-trained CL-BioGAN
2

Amap,t = Ŷt − Yt 2 .

(32)

The detailed pseudocode for the proposed CL-BioGAN is
introduced in Algorithm 1.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we mainly assess the proposed CL-BioGAN
for the open scenario OHAD on five cross domain distinct
hyperspectral datasets. In the following section, we will
introduce and analyze the performance of the proposed
CL-BioGAN from experimental setting, detection results, and
ablation experiments under open scenario circumstances.

D ETAILS OF THE ABU A NOMALY D ETECTION DATASET

TABLE II
D ETAILS OF THE HAD100 A NOMALY D ETECTION DATASET

A. Experimental Setting
1) Datasets and Computing Infrastructure: We evaluated
our method on two types of datasets: ABU-Urban and ABUBeach (ABU) [75], as well as HAD100 for OHAD [76].
For the ABU dataset, we select five different real HSIs
to form the CL tasks: Los Angeles-1, Bay Champagne,
Los Angeles-2, Cat Island, and San Diego. These HSIs are
captured by the airborne visible/infrared imaging spectrometer
(AVIRIS) sensor under different scenarios with distinct spatial
resolutions, channels, spatial size, and spectral bands. The
detailed information of these datasets is illustrated in Table I.
Meanwhile, we randomly select five different areas from
the HAD100 dataset as shown in the table as HAD10Data
as ang20170821t183707_91, ang20170821t183707_100,
ang20191004t185054_24,
ang20210614t141018_33,
ang20170908t225309_40, are, respectively, denoted by
HAD100_91, HAD100_100, HAD100_24, HAD100_33,
and HAD100_40, which are all captured by Airborne
Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer-next generation
(AVIRIS-NG). The details of the HAD100 dataset are shown
in Table II. All the experiments conducted under the hardware
environment: Intel1 Xeon1 CPU at 2.30 GHz with 64-GB
RAM and an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 2080 Ti graphical
processing unit (GPU) with 11-GB RAM, and a 64-bit
Windows 10 system and the Pytorch 1.10.2 DL frameworks.
2) Methods: In order to demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed CL-BioGAN for OHAD, we select the most
representative methods from each paradigm to establish the
benchmark. These training methods include DL-based joint
(J ) training for OHAD, fine-tune (FT)-based OHAD, and
CL-based algorithm MAS [77], EWC [17], OWM [78], and
CL-CaGAN [79].
3) Metrics: In this article, we mainly utilize receiver operating characteristics (ROCs) [80] and the area under the ROC
curve (AUC) [81] to quantitatively assess the performance of
detectors. The ROC curve illustrates the relationship between
1 Registered trademark.

WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING

true positive rate (PD ) and false positive rate (PF ). A 3-D
ROC curve can be generated by a triplet parameter vector
specified by (PD , PF , and τ ), or by three 2-D ROC curves
of (PD and PF ), (PD and τ ), and (PF and τ ) and their AUC
values expressed as AUC(D,F) , AUC(D,τ ) , and AUC(F,τ ) . In the
experiments, we use AUC(F,τ ) and AUCBS [82] to represent
the BS rate, and AUC(D,F) is used to evaluate the performance
of the detector. AUCBS can be computed by AUC(D,F) and
AUC(F,τ )
AUCBS = AUC(D,F) − AUC(F,τ ) .

5514715

TABLE III
N UMBER OF S AMPLES IN E ACH C LUSTER (T OTAL N UMBER
S ELECTED N UMBER ) AND THE S PECIFIC VALUE OF N IN THE
S AMPLE R EPLAY

AND

(33)

The accuracy (ACC) as the average test AUC(D,F) of all
tasks is utilized to better assess the capacity of CL to identify
anomalies. Meanwhile, backward transfer (BWT) represents
the average forgetting measure of the model after completing
T tasks. In order to explore the learning plasticity of new
tasks in OHAD, we also use the forward transfer (FWT) to
continuously estimate the learning ability for the new task.
The following are the formulas of ACC, BWT, and FWT:
T

ACC =

1 X
AUC(D,F)T,i
T i=1

(34)

BWT =

T −1

1 X
AUC(D,F)T,i − AUC(D,F)T −1,i
T − 1 i=1

(35)

FWT =

T

1 X
AUC(D,F)T,i − AUC∗ (D,F)i .
T − 1 i=2

(36)

AUC∗ (D,F)i represents the result of training on the ith task.
The AUC(D,F)T,i represents the ith task after learning the T th
task, where T represents the total number of tasks, and i refers
to the ith task being evaluated. During the inference procedure,
we evaluate the model after training on all tasks.
4) Number of N : For the sample replay strategy, the number
of samples in each cluster is P = 1, P = 2, and P = 3, and
the specific value of the total replay samples N is selected
adaptively, which is shown in Table III.
B. Main Results
To verify the accuracy improvements and the robustness
of our proposed CL-BioGAN for OHAD tasks under open
scenario circumstances, we conducted comprehensive evaluations of the aforementioned six comparable methods on
five OHAD datasets. CL-CaGAN is a comparable SOTA
method for unsupervised continual OHAD. MAS and EWC are
two representative strategies for regular, continuous learning
method for traditional RGB images, respectively. We change
the application form to the OHAD task to verify the effectiveness. Intuitively, these two methods appear to be better suited
for the CL scenario. Furthermore, OWM is a representative
method of gradient orthogonality in the CL family. Therefore,
we mainly use these CL-based algorithm to evaluate and
demonstrate the effect and performance in this article.
1) Quantitative Analysis: As shown in Table IV, we evaluate the performance of these methods for OHAD tasks,
and the experiments cover different task combinations from
tasks 2 to tasks 5. For instance, task 2 means the CL-based

OHAD for Los Angeles-1 and Bay Champagne, task 5 means
the CL-based OHAD from Los Angeles-1 to San Diego.
We mainly analyze CL-based strategies and the backbone
effect between BioGAN and CaGAN. The results in Table IV
indicate that our proposed method CL-BioGAN presents the
best ACC for most of the OHAD tasks, i.e., tasks 3–5.
Specifically, this result not only displays the high ACC of
CL-BioGAN in processing continuous tasks, but also indicates
the satisfying stability and robustness ability to avoid forgetting old tasks when learning new tasks. Parameter comparison
further demonstrates that our method achieves high accuracy
with fewer parameters while maintaining robust accuracy
improvement for learning new tasks. The testing results of
catastrophic forgetting performance on previous tasks are
shown in Fig. 4, which demonstrates that CL-BioGAN is
capable of retaining important knowledge from previous tasks
while learning new tasks, thereby presenting more stable
AUC for each task. From ACC, BWT and FWT performance presented in Fig. 5, we can observe that our proposed
CL-BioGAN indicates more robustness and reliability for all
the tasks 5 in terms of involved transformer structure and
biological-inspired AF Loss, and exhibits potential practical
applications for the proposed CL strategy. Fig. 6 further
demonstrates that our method exhibits more stable detection
capabilities across different AUC curves. In addition, the BS
rates are illustrated in Table V as new tasks are learned, where
the larger the BS rate means the better the discrepancy between
anomalies and backgrounds.
For the HAD100 dataset, we compared the CL-CaGAN
and CL-BioGAN methods, as shown in Table VI. The ACC,
BWT, FWT, and Avg BS are valued after continual anomaly
detection on the five HAD100 datasets. The experiments
cover different tasks combinations from tasks 2 to tasks 5. For
instance, tasks 2 means the CL-based OHAD for HAD100_91
and HAD100_100, tasks 5 means the CL-based OHAD from
HAD100_91 to HAD100_40. It can be clearly observed
that CL-BioGAN achieves a better balance between memory
stability and plasticity, resulting in less forgetting. Meanwhile,
the Average BS values further reinforce the conclusion that
CL-BioGAN exhibits strong stability in continual anomaly
detection.

5514715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE IV
CL FOR OHAD P ERFORMANCE W ITH T HREE E VALUATION M ETRICS

Fig. 4. Catastrophic forgetting performance evaluation for open scenario OHAD on previous tasks. (a) AUC value for tasks 1 and 2 after training on the
second task. (b) AUC value for tasks 1–3 after training on the third task. (c) AUC value for tasks 1–4 after training on the fourth task. (d) AUC value for
tasks 1–5 after training on the fifth task.

Fig. 5. ACC, BWT, and FWT Performance evaluation for OHAD of different methods. (a) Variation of ACC for tasks 1–5. (b) Variation of BWT for OHAD
tasks 1–5. (c) Variation of FWT for OHAD tasks 1–5.

Fig. 6. AUC testing results of different methods on the previous task after learning the fifth task are shown as follows. The first column (a) represents the
AUC(D,F) value on Los Angeles-2 after training tasks 1–5. The second column (b) represents the AUC(D,τ ) value on Los Angeles-2 after training tasks 1–5.
The third column (c) represents the AUC(F,τ ) value on Los Angeles-2 after training tasks 1–5. (d) 3-D ROC value on Los Angeles-2 for tasks 1–5 after
completing training on the fifth task.

2) Visual Detection Results: As illustrated in Fig. 7,
CL-BioGAN demonstrates more stable detection capacity
for the previous detection scenes/tasks after learning the
knowledge of multiple scenes/tasks, the detection performance

does not affected by surrounding noisy pixels. Compared
to CL-CaGAN, we can observe from Fig. 7(h) and (i) that
our method exhibits more robust detection performance for
different anomalies. Meanwhile, CL-BioGAN can minimize

WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING

5514715

Fig. 7. Visualization for five OHAD results after learning tasks 1–5. The dataset from top to bottom is Los Angeles-1, Cat Island, Los Angeles-2, San Diego,
and Bay Champagne, respectively. (a) False color image of HAD. (b) Ground-truth map. (c) J-BioGAN. (d) FT-BioGAN. (e) MAS-BioGAN. (f) EWC-BioGAN.
(g) OWM-BioGAN (h) CL-CaGAN. (i) CL-BioGAN.
TABLE V
AUC BS I MPACT A NALYSES OF D IFFERENT CL S TRATEGIES . BS R EP RESENT THE VALUE OF AUC BS , THE L ARGER VALUE M EANS THE
B ETTER P ERFORMANCE . AVG R EPRESENTS THE M EAN VALUE OF
BS. T HE O PTIMAL R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

TABLE VI
CL FOR OHAD P ERFORMANCE W ITH T HREE E VALUATION M ETRICS AND
AVERAGE AUC BS IN HAD100 DATASET. AVG BS R EPRESENT THE
VALUE OF AVERAGE AUC BS

C. Ablation Experiment

the false positives of anomalies in terms of the local-global
attention mechanism involved in the transformer structure with
a designed AF Loss for efficient BS.

1) Effect Analysis of λAF and λCL : A detailed effect and
assessment of CL performance for the proportions of λAF and
λCL is illustrated in Fig. 8. We can observe that the network
stability is enhanced with the addition of AF Loss, which
helps to learn new knowledge more effectively when new tasks
arrive. The results proves that the proposed AF Loss and CL
loss can efficiently alleviate the issue of catastrophic forgetting
in CL. We selected the optimal λAF and λCL value for the
following experiments.
2) Effect Analysis for BSM: The comparison between the
number of selected pixels and the real background pixels is
shown in Table VII. We can note that background selection
based on the SAM strategy indicates more accurate background pixel selection in most cases, which also provides
the basic information for the generator to accurately learn
reconstruction features of the background pixel.

5514715

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE IX
ACC AND BWT I MPACT A NALYSES FOR D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS OF
THE P ROPOSED CL-B IO GAN. W / O R M EANS E XCLUDE OF R EPLAY,
W / O T M EANS E XCLUDE OF L 2 SA, W / O L AF M EANS E XCLUDE OF
AF L OSS , W / O L CL M EANS E XCLUDE OF CL L OSS , AND O URS
M EANS CL-B IO GAN. AUC R EPRESENT THE VALUE OF
AUC(D,F) . T HE O PTIMAL R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED
IN B OLD

Fig. 8. Varied parameter proportions of λAF and λCL for the detection
ACC. (a) Individual impact of λAF and λCL on the experimental results and
(b) impact of λAF and λCL on the experimental results within a certain range
of values.
TABLE VII
R ESULT OF I DENTICAL P IXELS TO THE T OTAL N UMBER OF P IXELS
(R ATIO 1) AND C ORRECTLY I DENTIFIED BACKGROUND P IXELS TO THE
ACTUAL BACKGROUND P IXEL C OUNT (R ATIO 2) FOR E UCLIDEAN
D ISTANCE (ED) AND SAM IN ROUND P IXELS IN G ROUND
T RUTH

TABLE VIII
A NALYZING THE I MPACT OF THE N UMBER OF C LUSTERING G ROUPS FOR
CL-B IO GAN. AUC M EANS THE VALUE OF AUC(D,F) . T HE O PTIMAL
R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

3) Effect Analysis of the Number of Clustering Group:
Table VIII provides an insightful analysis of the impact of
varying cluster numbers P in the K -means algorithm for CL
OHAD task performance within the sample replay strategy
framework. Across the range of cluster numbers studied from
P = 2 to P = 6, we can notice that the configuration with
P = 3 consistently yields the highest accuracy. While configurations with P = 5 and P = 6 indicate a slightly increasing
BWT in certain tasks, P = 3 provides a more consistent

performance across all task configurations. Therefore, the
choice of P = 3 represents an optimal balance between ACC
and BWT. Although other P values exhibit minor advantages
in individual metrics, P = 3 delivers the optimal or suboptimal
performance across all principal indicators.
4) Other Ablation Effect Experiment: We mainly evaluate
and analyze the impact of the L2 SA structure in D, the
replay strategy, the AF Loss, and the CL loss for OHAD
performance across five different scenario tasks. The effect
of above mentioned components utilized in our proposed
CL-BioGAN is illustrated in Table IX, respectively. We can
observe that CL-BioGAN with all above mentioned components presents the optimal ACC and BWT results in most cases
especially after CL from the second task. For the modal of
CL-BioGAN without AF Loss, it exhibits unstable changes
in ACC and significant fluctuations in BWT when learning
new scenario tasks. In contrast, CL-BioGAN demonstrates
more stable learning of new tasks while effectively preventing catastrophic forgetting issues. Particularly, after learning
the third scenario, the CL-BioGAN demonstrates beneficial
retention of knowledge for previous scenarios, which indicates
that AF Loss enhances sustained detection performance while
increasing the robustness and stability of the model.
Table X reflects the AUCBS impact analyses for different
components of the proposed CL-BioGAN. As new tasks are
learned, AF Loss may degrade the BS performance in certain
scenarios, while AF Loss ensures the stability of BS. While for
the CL-BioGAN Without AF Loss, it exhibits significant fluctuations as new knowledge is incorporated. This performance

WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING

TABLE X
AUC BS I MPACT A NALYSES FOR D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS OF CLB IO GAN. T HE O PTIMAL R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

indicates that AF Loss is a key component for sustaining
CL ability and serves as a stabilizer for BS. The similar
results between AUC(D,F) in Table IX and AUCBS in Table X
indicate that CL-BioGAN reduces false positives in AUC(D,F)
as well as enhances the AUCBS performance, which further
demonstrates the proposed CL-BioGAN can facilitate better
generation for pseudobackground pixels in OHAD.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this study, in order to mitigate catastrophic forgetting as well as adapt to new endless tasks coming in the
cross-domain OHAD, a novel CL-BioGAN is proposed to
improve the detection accuracy and robustness through a
designed bioinspired AF Loss and SA-based GAN structure.
The proposed CL-BioGAN incorporates a continuous replay
strategy by CL-Bio loss to preserve historical knowledge
and adapt to new tasks in an open scenario circumstance.
AF Loss is designed to balance stability and plasticity by
modulating the forgetting rate of previous knowledge, which
is functionally consistent with the advantage of biological
forgetting in memory flexibility. This connection provides a
underlying mechanism theoretical explanation for the conflict
between biological active forgetting and continually learning
experiences. In addition, CL-BioGAN achieves an end-to-end
reconstruction by the synergistic integration of a generator
and an L 2 SA discriminator within a GAN framework for
effectively learning representative spectral characteristics of
background distribution through differentiable data augmentation. Our experiments on five cross-domain OHAD datasets
indicate that CL-BioGAN significantly offers more stable
OHAD performance while maintaining a balance between
historical and new tasks.

5514715

R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Duan, C. Chen, M. Fu, Y. Li, X. Gong, and F. Luo, “Dimensionality
reduction via multiple neighborhood-aware nonlinear collaborative analysis for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 9356–9370, Oct. 2024.
[2] Z. Li, Y. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection for spectral anomaly targets via spatial and spectral constraints,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5511515, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3091156.
[3] J. Li, X. Wang, S. Wang, H. Zhao, and Y. Zhong, “One-step detection
paradigm for hyperspectral anomaly detection via spectral deviation
relationship learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5517515, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3392189.
[4] L. Song, Z. Feng, S. Yang, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Interactive spectral–
spatial transformer for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 8589–8601, Sep. 2024.
[5] G. I. Parisi, R. Kemker, J. L. Part, C. Kanan, and S. Wermter, “Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review,” Neural Netw.,
vol. 113, pp. 54–71, May 2019.
[6] M. De Lange et al., “A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in
classification tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44,
no. 7, pp. 3366–3385, Jul. 2022.
[7] M. Masana, X. Liu, B. Twardowski, M. Menta, A. D. Bagdanov,
and J. van de Weijer, “Class-incremental learning: Survey and performance evaluation on image classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5513–5533, May 2023.
[8] M. McCloskey and N. J. Cohen, “Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem,” in Psychology
of Learning and Motivation, vol. 24. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier, 1989, pp. 109–165.
[9] S. Dohare, J. F. Hernandez-Garcia, Q. Lan, P. Rahman, A. R. Mahmood,
and R. S. Sutton, “Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning,” Nature,
vol. 632, no. 8026, pp. 768–774, Aug. 2024.
[10] L. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “A comprehensive survey
of continual learning: Theory, method and application,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 5362–5383, Aug. 2024.
[11] K. Li, H. Chen, J. Wan, and S. Yu, “ESDB: Expand the shrinking
decision boundary via one-to-many information matching for continual
learning with small memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 7328–7343, Aug. 2024.
[12] L. Wang et al., “Incorporating neuro-inspired adaptability for continual
learning in artificial intelligence,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 5, no. 12,
pp. 1356–1368, Nov. 2023.
[13] L. Wang et al., “AFEC: Active forgetting of negative transfer in
continual learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2021,
pp. 22379–22391.
[14] L. Aitchison, J. Jegminat, J. A. Menendez, J.-P. Pfister, A. Pouget,
and P. E. Latham, “Synaptic plasticity as Bayesian inference,” Nature
Neurosci., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 565–571, Apr. 2021.
[15] S. Schug, F. Benzing, and A. Steger, “Presynaptic stochasticity improves
energy efficiency and helps alleviate the stability-plasticity dilemma,”
eLife, vol. 10, p. 69884, Oct. 2021.
[16] R. Hadsell, D. Rao, A. A. Rusu, and R. Pascanu, “Embracing change:
Continual learning in deep neural networks,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 24,
no. 12, pp. 1028–1040, Dec. 2020.
[17] K. James et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 114, no. 13, pp. 3521–3526, Mar. 2017.
[18] C. I. Tang, L. Qendro, D. Spathis, F. Kawsar, C. Mascolo, and A. Mathur,
“Kaizen: Practical self-supervised continual learning with continual finetuning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV),
Jan. 2024, pp. 2829–2838.
[19] Y. Zhang, L. Charlin, R. Zemel, and M. Ren, “Integrating present and
past in unsupervised continual learning,” 2024, arXiv:2404.19132.
[20] Z. Huang et al., “Learning prompt with distribution-based feature replay
for few-shot class-incremental learning,” 2024, arXiv:2401.01598.
[21] X. Li, H. Li, and L. Ma, “Continual learning of medical image
classification based on feature replay,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf.
Signal Process. (ICSP), vol. 1, Oct. 2022, pp. 426–430.
[22] H. Cheng, H. Wen, X. Zhang, H. Qiu, L. Wang, and H. Li, “Contrastive continuity on augmentation stability rehearsal for continual
self-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 5684–5694.
[23] K. Jeeveswaran, P. Bhat, B. Zonooz, and E. Arani, “BiRT: Bioinspired replay in vision transformers for continual learning,” 2023,
arXiv:2305.04769.

5514715

[24] S. Chen, M. Zhang, J. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Exemplar-based continual
learning via contrastive learning,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 7,
pp. 3313–3324, Jul. 2024.
[25] Q. Wang et al., “Relational experience replay: Continual learning
by adaptively tuning task-wise relationship,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia,
vol. 26, pp. 9683–9698, 2024.
[26] J. Zhang et al., “Class-incremental learning via deep model consolidation,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV),
Mar. 2020, pp. 1120–1129.
[27] M. H. Phan, T.-A. Ta, S. L. Phung, L. Tran-Thanh, and A. Bouzerdoum,
“Class similarity weighted knowledge distillation for continual semantic
segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2022, pp. 16866–16875.
[28] A. S. Alakooz and N. Ammour, “A contrastive continual learning for
the classification of remote sensing imagery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci.
Remote Sens. Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 7902–7905.
[29] V. Marsocci and S. Scardapane, “Continual barlow twins: Continual
self-supervised learning for remote sensing semantic segmentation,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16,
pp. 5049–5060, 2023.
[30] S. Kim, L. Noci, A. Orvieto, and T. Hofmann, “Achieving a better
stability-plasticity trade-off via auxiliary networks in continual learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 11930–11939.
[31] A. Mallya, D. Davis, and S. Lazebnik, “Piggyback: Adapting a single
network to multiple tasks by learning to mask weights,” in Proc. Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 67–82.
[32] X. Li, Y. Zhou, T. Wu, R. Socher, and C. Xiong, “Learn to grow:
A continual structure learning framework for overcoming catastrophic
forgetting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 3925–3934.
[33] M. Xue, H. Zhang, J. Song, and M. Song, “Meta-attention for ViTbacked continual learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 150–159.
[34] S. Ebrahimi, F. Meier, R. Calandra, T. Darrell, and M. Rohrbach,
“Adversarial continual learning,” in Computer Vision—ECCV 2020,
A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, and J.-M. Frahm, Eds., Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 386–402.
[35] Y. Cui, W. Pedrycz, and Z. Li, “Design of distributed rule-based models
in the presence of large data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 31, no. 7,
pp. 2479–2486, Jul. 2023.
[36] S. Wang, X. Li, J. Sun, and Z. Xu, “Training networks in null space
of feature covariance for continual learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 184–193.
[37] Y. Kong, L. Liu, Z. Wang, and D. Tao, “Balancing stability and plasticity
through advanced null space in continual learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 219–236.
[38] R. Wang, Y. Bao, B. Zhang, J. Liu, W. Zhu, and G. Guo, “Antiretroactive interference for lifelong learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 163–178.
[39] J. Hurtado, A. Raymond-Sáez, and Á. Soto, “Optimizing reusable
knowledge for continual learning via metalearning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2021, pp. 14150–14162.
[40] G. Lin, H. Chu, and H. Lai, “Towards better plasticity-stability tradeoff in incremental learning: A simple linear connector,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 89–98.
[41] S. Purushwalkam, P. Morgado, and A. Gupta, “The challenges of
continuous self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2022, pp. 702–721.
[42] E. Fini, V. G. T. Da Costa, X. Alameda-Pineda, E. Ricci, K. Alahari,
and J. Mairal, “Self-supervised models are continual learners,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
pp. 9621–9630.
[43] Z. Wang et al., “Learning to prompt for continual learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
pp. 139–149.
[44] J. S. Smith et al., “CODA-Prompt: Continual decomposed attentionbased prompting for rehearsal-free continual learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 11909–11919.
[45] Z. Wang et al., “DualPrompt: Complementary prompting for rehearsalfree continual learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 631–648.
[46] Y. Wang, Z. Huang, and X. Hong, “S-prompts learning with pre-trained
transformers: An occam’s Razor for domain incremental learning,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 5682–5695.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[47] A. Razdaibiedina, Y. Mao, R. Hou, M. Khabsa, M. Lewis, and
A. Almahairi, “Progressive prompts: Continual learning for language
models,” 2023, arXiv:2301.12314.
[48] M. Imani, “RX anomaly detector with rectified background,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 1313–1317, Aug. 2017.
[49] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
[50] S. Matteoli, T. Veracini, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A locally adaptive
background density estimator: An evolution for RX-based anomaly
detectors,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 323–327,
Jan. 2014.
[51] L. Zhang, J. Ma, B. Cheng, and F. Lin, “Fractional Fourier transformbased tensor RX for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 14, no. 3, p. 797, Feb. 2022.
[52] F. He et al., “Recursive RX with extended multi-attribute profiles for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 3, p. 589,
Jan. 2023.
[53] Y. Ma, S. Cai, and J. Zhou, “Adaptive reference-related graph embedding
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504514, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3249344.
[54] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
[55] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in
hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000,
Apr. 2016.
[56] C.-I. Chang, “Effective anomaly space for hyperspectral anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5526624, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2022.3161632.
[57] L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Sun, L. Zhuang, Q. Du, and B. Zhang,
“Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on chessboard topology,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5505016,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3249748.
[58] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023.
[59] C. Zhao, C. Li, S. Feng, and X. Jia, “Enhanced total variation regularized representation model with endmember background dictionary for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5518312, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3128183.
[60] S. Mohla, S. Pande, B. Banerjee, and S. Chaudhuri, “FusAtNet: Dual
attention based SpectroSpatial multimodal fusion network for hyperspectral and LiDAR classification,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2020, pp. 92–93.
[61] L. Gao, J. Li, K. Zheng, and X. Jia, “Enhanced autoencoders with
attention-embedded degradation learning for unsupervised hyperspectral
image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61,
Apr. 2023, Art. no. 5509417.
[62] Z. Wu et al., “Background-guided deformable convolutional autoencoder
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531816, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3334562.
[63] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5503314.
[64] S. Arisoy, N. M. Nasrabadi, and K. Kayabol, “GAN-based hyperspectral anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th Eur. Signal Process. Conf.
(EUSIPCO), Jan. 2021, pp. 1891–1895.
[65] J. Wang, S. Guo, R. Huang, L. Li, X. Zhang, and L. Jiao, “Dualchannel capsule generation adversarial network for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5501016, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2020.3044312.
[66] K. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, G. He, and Q. Du, “Semisupervised
spectral learning with generative adversarial network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7,
pp. 5224–5236, Jul. 2020.
[67] Z. He, D. He, M. Xiao, A. Lou, and G. Lai, “Convolutional transformerinspired autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1–5, 2023.
[68] Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Tan, B. Han, J. Ding, and Z. Liu,
“Hyperspectral anomaly detection based on variational background
inference and generative adversarial network,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 143, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109795. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031320323004934
[69] C. V. Nguyen, Y. Li, T. D. Bui, and R. E. Turner, “Variational continual
learning,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10628.

WANG et al.: CL-BioGAN: BIOLOGICALLY INSPIRED CROSS-DOMAIN CONTINUAL LEARNING

[70] R. H. Yuhas, A. Goetz, and J. Boardman, “Discrimination among semiarid landscape endmembers using the spectral angle mapper (SAM)
algorithm,” in Proc. JPL, Summaries 3rd Annu. JPL Airborne Geosci.
Workshop, vol. 1. AVIRIS Workshop, 1992.
[71] G. E. Hinton and R. S. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum description
length and Helmholtz free energy,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 6, Nov. 1993, pp. 3–10.
[72] Q. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Mei, and J. Ma, “TANet: An unsupervised
two-stream autoencoder network for hyperspectral unmixing,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5506215,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3094884.
[73] Y. Li, Y. Shi, K. Wang, B. Xi, J. Li, and P. Gamba, “Target detection
with unconstrained linear mixture model and hierarchical denoising
autoencoder in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
vol. 31, pp. 1418–1432, 2022.
[74] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin, “Maximum likelihood
from incomplete data via the EM algorithm,” J. Royal Stat. Soc. B,
Methodol., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 1977.
[75] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with attribute and edge-preserving filters,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5600–5611,
Oct. 2017.
[76] Z. Li et L., “You only train once: Learning a general anomaly enhancement network with random masks for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5506718,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3258067.
[77] R. Aljundi, F. Babiloni, M. Elhoseiny, M. Rohrbach, and T. Tuytelaars,
“Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget,” in Proc. Eur.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Sep. 2018, pp. 139–154.
[78] G. Zeng, Y. Chen, B. Cui, and S. Yu, “Continual learning of contextdependent processing in neural networks,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 1,
no. 8, pp. 364–372, Aug. 2019.
[79] J. Wang et al., “CL-CaGAN: Capsule differential adversarial continual learning for cross-domain hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5517315,
doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3388426.
[80] M. H. Zweig and G. Campbell, “Receiver-operating characteristic (ROC)
plots: A fundamental evaluation tool in clinical medicine,” Clin. Chem.,
vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 561–577, Apr. 1993.
[81] C. Ferri, J. Hernndez-Orallo, and P. Flach, “A coherent interpretation of
AUC as a measure of aggregated classification performance,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2011, pp. 657–664.
[82] S. Chen, C.-I. Chang, and X. Li, “Component decomposition analysis
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5516222, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2021.3117765.
Jianing Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
and M.S. degrees in circuit and system from
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China, in 2005 and
2008, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Xidian
University, Xi’an, China, in 2016.
She worked with China Aerospace Science and
Technology Corporation, Xi’an. She is currently
an Associate Professor and a member of the Key
Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image
Understanding, Ministry of Education of China,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian
University. Her research interests include image processing, machine learning,
artificial intelligent algorithm and applications, big data processing, embedded
algorithms for intelligent model compression methods, pattern recognition and
artificial intelligence, video data processing, analysis and content understand,
and continual learning.
Zheng Hua received the bachelor’s degree from
Digital Media Technology, Xi’an Engineering University, Xi’an, China, in 2022. She is currently
pursuing the master’s degree in computer science
and technology with Xidian University, Xi’an.
Her research interests include continual learning,
incremental learning, hyperspectral anomaly detection, and image processing.

5514715

Wan Zhang received the bachelor’s degree from
Intelligent Science and Technology, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China, in 2024. She is
currently pursuing the master’s degree in computer science and technology with Xidian University,
Xi’an, China.
Her research interests include continual learning,
prompt learning, hyperspectral large models, and
image processing.

Shengjia Hao received the bachelor’s degree from
Digital Media Technology, Xi’an University of Technology, Xi’an, China, in 2022. She is currently
pursuing the master’s degree in computer science
and technology with Xidian University, Xi’an.
Her research interests include point cloud classification, point cloud segmentation, 3-D object
detection, 3-D vision, and multimodal learning.

Yuqiong Yao received the bachelor’s degree from
Data Science and Big Data Technology, Shanxi
University, Xi’an, China, in 2022. She is currently
pursuing the master’s degree in computer science
and technology with Xidian University, Xi’an.
Her research interests include video action recognition, video action detection, and prompt learning.

Maoguo Gong (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
and Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an,
China, in 2003 and 2009, respectively.
Since 2006, he has been a Teacher with Xidian
University, where he was promoted to an Associate Professor and a Full Professor in 2008 and
2010, respectively, both with exceptional admission.
He has published more than 100 papers in journals
and conferences, and holds more than 20 granted
patents as the first inventor. He is leading or has
completed more than 20 projects as the Principle
Investigator, funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the
National Key Research and Development Program of China, and others. His
research interests are broadly in the area of computational intelligence, with
applications to optimization, learning, data mining, and image understanding.
Dr. Gong was a recipient of the prestigious National Program for Support of
the Leading Innovative Talents from the Central Organization Department of
China, the Leading Innovative Talent in the Science and Technology from the
Ministry of Science and Technology of China, the Excellent Young Scientist
Foundation from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the
New Century Excellent Talent from the Ministry of Education of China,
and the National Natural Science Award of China. He is the Executive
Committee Member of Chinese Association for Artificial Intelligence, a Senior
Member of Chinese Computer Federation, and an Associate Editor or Editorial
Board Member for over five journals, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
E VOLUTIONARY C OMPUTATION and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL
N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS.