Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Information Security and Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jisa

Commander: A robust cross-machine multi-phase Advanced Persistent Threat
detector via provenance analytics
Qi Liu

∗

, Kaibin Bao , Veit Hagenmeyer

Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, 76344, Germany

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Advanced Persistent Threat detection
Data provenance analysis
Digital forensics
Active Directory
Industrial-sector organization security

ABSTRACT
Intrusion detection systems (IDS) have traditionally focused on identifying malicious behaviors caused by
malware undertaking a series of suspicious activities within a short time. Facing Advanced Persistent Threat
(APT) actors employing the so-called low-and-slow strategy, defenders are often blindsided by the poor
performance of these IDS. Provenance-based IDS (PIDS) emerged as a promising solution for reducing false
alerts, detecting true attacks, and facilitating attack investigation, by causally linking and contextualizing
indicative system activities in provenance graphs. However, most existing PIDS can detect neither multi-phase
nor cross-machine APT attacks, enabled by persistence and lateral movement techniques, respectively. In the
present work, we propose a new PIDS called Commander, which is, to our knowledge, the first system capable
of detecting cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks. Further, Commander targets several evasion attacks that
can bypass existing PIDS, making it more robust. In addition, Commander can perform whole network tracing
for cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks across an industrial-sector organization, for which we additionally
develop parsers for system logs of popular industrial controllers. We also develop detection rules with a
reference to MITRE’s knowledge base for industrial control systems. Our evaluations show that Commander
accurately detects attacks, outperforms existing detection systems, and delivers succinct and insightful attack
graphs.

1. Introduction
Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) actors are well-resourced attackers specialized in launching covert cyberattacks on computer systems
to which they maintain unauthorized access for an extended period
of time. The main objectives of APT actors are cyber espionage and
impairing physical processes when targeting industrial-sector organizations. Once achieved initial access on a machine in a target organization, attackers typically find ways to pivot to other domain-joined
machines for more sensitive data, or means to cause destructive damages to cyber–physical systems. Stolen credentials are the most popular
way for attackers to access further machines in the network: Recent
CrowdStrike studies [1–4] show that 80% of modern cyberattacks
are identity-driven, and Dragos’s findings [5] suggest that nearly all
attackers leverage stolen credentials for lateral movement.
To remain undetected, APT actors routinely employ the so-called
low-and-slow strategy. Relying on Living-Off-the-Land Binaries (LOLBins) [6,7], i.e., system pre-installed programs, helps attackers stay
low, as legacy intrusion detection systems (IDS) often consider system
activities associated with these programs benign, due to their constant
presence during normal operations. In response to this, current IDS

incorporate TTP (Tactics, Techniques, Procedures) detection rules with
a reference to the MITRE ATT&CK Matrix [8]. This matrix provides
a high-level summary of attack tactics and techniques based on realworld observations, including execution of LOLBins. It is maintained
with contributions from leading security vendors.
Yet, simply applying TTP detection rules results in a deluge of
security alerts, and hence leads to the alert fatigue problem, as the
majority of these alerts are in fact false positives [9]. Provenance-based
IDS (PIDS) [10–24] emerged as a promising approach for reducing false
alerts and accelerating attack investigation, by parsing system audit
logs into provenance graphs and thus presenting historical context of
system activities. Starting from an indicative system activity associated
with a security alert, backward & forward tracing in the provenance
graph can uncover more indicative, causally related system activities.
By doing so, TTP security alerts can be linked, contextualized, and then
prioritized for further investigation. The underlying assumption of PIDS
is that, when a series of TTP alerts can be causally linked into an attack
graph reassembling a Cyber Kill Chain, they are more likely caused by
attackers than those alerts unrelated to each other.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: qi.liu@kit.edu (Q. Liu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2025.104057
Available online 29 April 2025
2214-2126/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

systems, i.e., Siemens SIPROTEC [32] and Hitachi Energy RTU500 [33].
We also developed TTP detection rules with a reference to the MITRE
ATT&CK Matrix for ICS [34] for these controllers. Commander is capable
of accurately attributing the activities on these controllers to the true
identity behind those actions, even if the access originates from the
enterprise network.
We evaluate Commander on the AVIATOR dataset [27], which is
based on the MITRE attack emulation plans [35] and consists of the
most complex and authentic APT attacks comparing to other datasets.
The AVIATOR dataset includes two extended MITRE emulation plan:
one for Sandworm [36] and one for Oilrig [37]. These extended emulation plans incorporate an ICS infrastructure and attack steps on it,
making AVIATOR the only APT dataset for investigating attacks spanning from an enterprise network to an ICS network. Our evaluations on
the AVIATOR dataset show that Commander accurately detects attacks,
outperforms open-source detection rules and a commercial detection
system, and produces succinct and informative attack graphs.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

However, most existing PIDS can detect neither multi-phase nor crossmachine APT attacks, enabled by persistence and lateral movement techniques, respectively. Multi-phase attack detection necessitates an understanding of persistence attacks’ nature, and cross-machine tracing
faces significant challenges due to the notorious dependency explosion problem [25,26]. In order to evade PIDS, APT actors resort to
persistence techniques, which enable them to disassemble an attack
chain into multiple phases and stay slow. This makes it infeasible for
PIDS without persistence awareness [10–24] to causally link those
system activities (and the TTP alerts) from the same attacker, as they
are located in fragmented, seemingly unrelated graphs. Cpd [25] is
the first specialized persistence detector, which can accurately identify
attackers’ use of persistence techniques from system logs, and hence
recouple those disassembled, but actually related graphs.
Most PIDS are restricted to intra-machine provenance tracing, even
though cross-machine activities are omnipresent in real-world APT
attacks [27]. This, again, limits PIDS’ ability to link attack steps of
the same APT actor, and thus reveal the scale of the attacker’s traversal inside an organization, crucial for accurate attack detection and
remediation. To overcome this, Hades [26] presents a concept called
logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing, which tackles the
cross-machine dependency explosion problem, and hence enables accurate and efficient causality-based cross-machine tracing in enterprise
networks.
However, our analysis of APT threat reports linked in the MITRE
ATT&CK knowledge base [28] yields the finding that Hades, as the first
PIDS capable of accurate cross-machine tracing, is susceptible to several
evasive attack tactics/techniques routinely employed by APT actors:
persistence [29], session hijacking [30], and port forwarding [31].
Whereas port forwarding attacks can directly interrupt Hades’s crossmachine tracing, both persistence and session hijacking attacks hinder
accurate intra-machine tracing, on which cross-machine tracing hinges.
The impacts of these evasion techniques on Hades are discussed in
Section 4.2 in detail.
Recognizing the weaknesses of Hades, we designed Commander
(CrOss-Machine Multi-phase AdvaNced persistent threat DEtectoR).
Commander integrates Cpd with Hades, and incorporates another two
specialized detectors: one for session hijacking and one for port forwarding. Commander features a three-stage approach for efficient and
accurate attack detection and graph reconstruction. The first stage of
Commander serves as preliminary detection, and accommodates four specialized detectors running in parallel, i.e., an authentication anomaly
detector, a cyber persistence detector, a session hijacking detector
and a port forwarding detector. The authentication anomaly detector
identifies anomalies indicating identity-driven attacks, and produces
an initial high-level attack graph for each anomaly, which is passed
to Commander’s second stage, i.e., whole network tracing. The other
three specialized detectors make complementary contributions to ensuring robust and correct whole network tracing, by delivering critical
information to guide and adjust the tracing process.
The objective of whole network tracing is to separate system activities from different identities, and causally link system activities
of the same identity, be it the attacker or a genuine user, on each
involved machine across the entire organization. Correct and complete
tracing in this stage is vitally important for the attack graph ranking in
Commander’s final stage, in which graphs are ranked by threat score. The
threat score is determined by the set of indicative attack steps/security
alerts found in an attack graph. Thus, incorrect or incomplete tracing
could let true attack graphs be ranked lower than false-positive ones.
Further, Commander is designed as a PIDS for detecting crossmachineattacks in industrial-sector organizations consisting of an enterprise network and an industrial control system (ICS), which are
typically in two separate domains. That is, Commander is able to trace
across domains, given that the enterprise network and the ICS network
are often connected via a gateway server. Besides, we developed parsers
for system logs from two popular industrial controllers in energy

• We introduce several attack techniques for evading Hades, the first
PIDS capable of accurate cross-machine tracing.
• We present two specialized detectors: one for session hijacking
attacks and one for port forwarding attacks.
• We propose Commander, a modularized provenance-based detection system that integrates Cpd and the above two specialized
detectors with Hades to counter evasion attacks.
• We develop parsers and TTP detection rules for two popular
industrial controllers.
• We demonstrate Commander’s ability to perform robust whole
network tracing, including attribution of malicious activities conducted on industrial controllers.
2. Background
An industrial-sector organization typically has an enterprise/IT network and an ICS/OT (Operational Technology) network that are separated from each other [38]. Communications between these networks
are often enabled by a gateway/jump server. To reduce the risk, the
enterprise network and the ICS network have separate identity and
access management (IAM) systems [5,39]. IAM systems are ubiquitous
in networks of large organizations. (Microsoft) Active Directory is the
most popular IAM system, with more than two-thirds of the market
share and 90% of Fortune 1000 companies relying on it [4,40,41].
Active Directory is popular not only in IT networks, but also in OT
networks. In fact, OT vendors, e.g., Schneider Electric, shifted their
OT products’ OS from Unix-based ones to Windows NT long time ago
in order to better make use of Active Directory functionalities like
Kerberos Authentication and Group Managed Service Accounts [42].
Although our implementation and evaluation of Commander rest on
Active Directory, the concept for robust whole network tracing and
efficient attack detection introduced in Section 6 is transferable to
networks employing another IAM system.
As shown in [43], during an attack against an industrial-sector
organization, a complete attack path includes multiple cross-machine
movements necessary for APT attackers to achieve their final objectives. Often, attackers first gain an initial foothold on a machine in
the IT network through phishing or binary exploitation. From the
initially accessed machine, attackers routinely perform Active Directory
discovery to locate more machines in the network. In comparison
to network scanning using third-party tools like nmap [44], Active
Directory discovery techniques leverage native Windows programs like
setspn [45] to avoid noisy network activities and hence bypass network IDS. Moreover, attackers commonly steal credentials, e.g., cached
authentication tickets, password hashes, or even clear text passwords,
on each accessed machine. Leveraging stolen credentials is the most
popular way for attackers to move across a target network [1–5]. The
pivotal access on a gateway server enables attackers to reach machines
2

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

Fig. 1. Taxonomy of APT detection and investigation systems.

in the OT network. As the objective of attacks against industrial-sector
organizations is impairing physical processes, the final target of the
attackers is typically Engineering Workstations, through which field
controllers are programmed and configurated, and field controllers,
like PLC (Programmable Logic Controller), RTU (Remote Terminal
Unit) and IED (Intelligent Electronic Device), through which physical
processes are controlled.

nor assist attack investigation by providing detailed attack graphs, in
which the lateral movement attack stage is associated with other attack
stages of a Cyber Kill Chain.
There are only a few network log-based kill chain detectors: BPF
[53], KCSM [54]. By construction, network log-based kill chain detectors can only detect a partial Cyber Kill Chain, as some attack stages,
e.g., persistence, credential access, and privilege escalation, can be
detected only with host logs. Further, attack graphs output by such
detectors are very coarse granular, in which nodes denote individual
machines and edges denote suspected attack stages. To find the root
cause for an attack or thoroughly assess the attack consequences,
security analysts would still need to manually inspect host logs from
each involved machine.
We find that the majority of host log-based APT detection systems
leverage data provenance analysis. Only a few detectors do not fall into
the category of provenance-based intrusion detection systems (PIDS),
e.g., MDATP [55] for detecting credential access attack stage, and
APTMalInsight [56] and Bon-APT [57] for detecting (APT malware)
execution attack stage. Comparing to network log-based kill chain
detectors, host log-based kill chain detectors operate at a finer granularity. Attack graphs produced by PIDS expose malicious behaviors
at the system activity level, e.g, malicious process creation or suspicious file access, rather than at machine level, e.g., suspicious network
interaction.
A recent study [58] shows that PIDS are considered more effective
than other detection systems, mostly due to better interpretability
of detection results. Context-rich provenance graphs are leveraged
in PIDS to accelerate attack detection & investigation process. PIDS
are often categorized into anomaly-based systems and heuristic-based
systems. Anomaly/learning-based PIDS model/learn benign behavior
from provenance graphs, and detect deviations from it as anomalies.
Heuristic-based PIDS embed expert knowledge and developed heuristics into detection algorithms. Heuristics are often derived from key
insights identified during analysis of past real-world APT attack campaigns. PIDS are included in the red, dashed bounding boxes in Fig. 1,
and further discussed in Section 3.1 in detail due to their relevance to
our system Commander.
In order to enhance PIDS’ practicality, a number of auxiliary systems
have been proposed. For instance, various dedicated log reduction
schemes are developed: CPR [59], NodeMerge [60], DPR [61], LogApprox [62], SEAL [63], ELISE [64]. They serve to reduce the volume of

3. Related work
In Fig. 1, we present a taxonomy of APT detection and investigation
systems, which we categorize into main systems and auxiliary systems.
Systems designed directly for APT detection and investigation are considered as main systems, while systems that serve to assist the detection
or investigation process, but do not perform detection themselves are
considered as auxiliary systems. We further categorize main systems
into network log-based and host log-based systems, depending on the
data source. In addition, we classify a detection system as single attack
stage detector, if it is designed for detecting a specific attack stage,
e.g., data exfiltration. In contrast, kill chain detectors have a broader
detection scope: a Cyber Kill Chain consisting of several attack stages.
We find that network log-based APT detection and investigation
systems largely fall into the category of single attack stage detector,
whereas host log-based APT detection and investigation systems mostly
aim to detect an entire Cyber Kill Chain. For instance, Hopper [46],
Euler [47,48] target lateral movement detection using network logs.
There are also network log-based single attack stage detectors for
detecting phishing emails/initial access, e.g., DAS [49], command and
control (C2) activities, e.g., DNND [50], Hawk-Eye [51], and data
exfiltration, e.g., ibHH [52].
It is worth noting, that although our system Commander’s crossmachine APT detection involves detection of lateral movement, it
is more than a lateral movement detector. That is, like Hades [26],
Commander performs whole-network provenance tracing to accurately
and comprehensively unravel attackers’ traversal inside a network, and
hence to reveal detailed malicious system activities of an attacker on
each involved machine (see Fig. 7 and 12). On the contrary, existing
lateral movement detectors like Hopper [46], Euler [47,48] leverage
network logs to infer simply the presence of the lateral movement
attack stage. They can neither perform accurate provenance tracing,
3

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.
Table 1
Comparison of PIDS.
Name

Methods

Innovative
techniques

Tracing
optim.

Attack
scope

Target
envir.

Detect.
result

Investigation
assistance

Resp.
time

SLEUTH
[10], 2017

Heuristics

Node Tagging,
Tag Propagation

✓

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

Winnower
[11], 2018

Heuristics

Graph Grammar
Models

7

NonAPT

Distr.
appli.

Alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

NoDoze
[13], 2019

Rules,
Anomaly

Behavioral Execution
Partitioning

✓

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Ranked
alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

HOLMES
[12], 2019

Rules,
Heuristics

Information Flow
Correlation

7

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Ranked
alerts

High-level
scen. graphs

short

RapSheet
[14], 2020

Rules,
Heuristics

Graph-Based
Scoring Scheme

✓

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Ranked
alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

OmegaLog
[16], 2020

Heuristics

Log Unification,
Peephole Concretization

7

NonAPT

Indiv.
hosts

Alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

UNICORN
[19], 2020

ML,
Anomaly

Sketch-based
Provenance Encoding

7

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Alerts

None

long

MORSE
[15], 2020

Heuristics

Tag Attenuation,
Tag Decay

✓

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

CONAN
[17], 2020

Heuristics

State-based
Detection Framework

✓

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

TRACE
[18], 2021

Heuristics

Unit-based Selective
Instrumentation

✓

Simp.
APT

Enter.
netw.

Alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

ATLAS
[21], 2021

ML,
Anomaly

Sequence-based
Model Learning

7

Simp.
APT

Small
netw.

Alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

long

SHADEWA.
[20], 2022

ML,
Anomaly

Recomm.-guided
Log Analysis

7

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Alerts

None

N/A

DISTDET
[22], 2023

Anomaly

Alarm Deduplication &
Semantic Aggregation

7

Simp.
APT

Small
netw.

Ranked
alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

N/A

KAIROS
[23], 2024

ML,
Anomaly

Encoder–Decoder-based
Anomaly Quantification

7

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Alerts

Verbose
attack graphs

long

FLASH
[24], 2024

ML,
Anomaly

Embedding Recycling
Database

7

Simp.
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Ranked
alerts

Verbose
attack graphs

long

Cpd
[25], 2024

Rules,
Heuristics

Pseudo Edges,
Expert-guided Edges

✓

MP
APT

Indiv.
hosts

Ranked
alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

Hades
[26], 2024

Rules,
Heuristics

Logon Session-based
Execution Partitioning

✓

CM
APT

Enter.
netw.

Ranked
alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

Commander

Rules,
Heuristics

Anti-evasion techniques,
Robust Tracing

✓

CM MP
APT

IS
organ.

Ranked
alerts

Succinct
attack graphs

short

Note: appli. = applications, APT = Advanced Persistent Threat, CM = Cross-Machine, Detect. = Detection, Distr. = Distributed, Enter. = Enterprise, envir. = Environment, Indiv. =
Individual, IS = Industrial-sector, MP = Multi-Phase, ML = Machine Learning, N/A = not applicable/available, netw. = networks, optim. = optimization, organ. = organizations,
Recomm. = Recommendation, Resp. = Response, scen. = scenario, SHADEW. = SHADEWATCHER, Simp. = Simplified.

logs required for APT detection and investigation, and hence alleviate
the long-term log storage problem.
The large volume of host logs also deteriorate the dependency
explosion problem. Dependency explosion happens for long-running
processes, in which each input event is conservatively considered
causally responsible for all subsequent output events, and vice versa,
resulting in excessive amounts of false dependencies and formidably
dense provenance graphs [65,66]. Program execution partitioning techniques introduced in BEEP [65] and ProTracer [67] are the first
proposed approaches for combating (intra-machine) dependency explosion. MPI [68] improves these techniques by introducing a semanticaware program annotation and instrumentation technique.

hosts in isolation. We consider an attack scenario as simplified APT attack,
if the entire scenario is restricted to a single host and does not contain
an effective persistence technique, as apposed to real-world APT attacks.
SLEUTH produces alerts as detection result, and succint attack graphs
to support investigation by security analysts. Evaluation on a DARPA
dataset [69] shows that SLEUTH has a short response time, i.e., within
a few seconds or minutes. Winnower [11] is a heuristic-based PIDS
that adapts graph grammar techniques to detect attacks on distributed
applications, instead of whole systems. It is evaluated on a unpublished,
self-developed dataset.
NoDoze [13] is an anomaly-based PIDS that leverages detection
rules from commercial security products to generate initial alerts. Then
it performs tracing on these alerts with system logs, and employs behavioral execution partitioning for enhanced tracing efficiency. With a
path-based anomaly scoring algorithm, NoDoze is the first PIDS producing ranked alerts. Ranked alerts are more useful in practice, as security
analysts can prioritize the highest ranked alerts for investigation due to
limited time.
HOLMES [12], as a heuristic-based PIDS, proposes the notion highlevel scenario graph (HSG), which is a summarized description of an

3.1. Comparison of PIDS
Table 1 provides a comparison of PIDS. SLEUTH [10] is a PIDS
that introduces node tagging and tag propagation based on heuristics
for attack graph reconstruction. It is designed for detecting and investigating simplified APT attacks, and focuses on attacks on individual
4

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

attack history. It first produces initial alerts through self-developed
detection rules, then performs tracing via correlation between suspicious information flows, and outputs HSG at the end. RapSheet [14]
also combines detection rules with heuristics for APT detection and
investigation. Instead of relying on self-developed detection rules, RapSheet employs a commercial EDR (Endpoint Detection and Response)
product for the initial alerts. Unlike NoDoze, RapSheet adopts a graphbased scoring scheme for ranking final alerts. RapSheet also proposes
techniques to perform graph reduction, which makes produced attack
graphs more succinct. OmegaLog [16] presents the first approach realizing log unification, in which system logs and application logs are
combined to enhance tracing efficiency, and to produce succinct attack
graphs with enriched context.
UNICORN [19] is the first Machine Learning (ML)-based anomaly
detector via runtime provenance analytics. It uses a sketch-based,
time-weighted provenance encoding scheme to summarize provenance
graphs for training and detection. However, unlike aforementioned
PIDS, UNICORN does not assist attack investigation by producing attack
graphs. Rather, it classifies an entire provenance graph as benign or
malicious. UNICORN is evaluated on StreamSpot [70] and DARPA [69]
datasets.
MORSE [15] improves on SLEUTH [10] by introducing two key
techniques called tag attenuation and tag decay, which help to combat the dependency explosion problem for long-running attacks. Note
that SLEUTH [10] can create succinct attack graphs only for shortlived attacks. For long-running attacks, SLEUTH would produce dense
attack graphs containing many benign system activities. CONAN [17]
proposes a state-based detection framework, in which each system
entity, e.g., process and file, is represented as an finite state automata (FSA)-like structure. Combined with suspicious code execution
tracking, system entities are assigned with benign or malicious states.
TRACE [18] presents a network connection-based cross-machine
tracing approach, and proposes a technique called unit-based selective instrumentation to reduce dependence explosion during tracing.
TRACE’s cross-machine tracing is, however, restricted to system activities of individual instrumented programs, rather than an entire
machine’s system activities. In addition, such invasive program instrumentation is often too costly to be adopted in practice [16]. Although
TRACE’s target environment is enterprise networks, it is evaluated only
on DARPA-E3 [69] and DARPA-E5 [71] datasets, which contain simplified APT attack scenarios not in an enterprise setting [27]. Besides,
TRACE’s design is oblivious to the domain context of an enterprise
environment, and insufficient for combating cross-machine dependency
explosion [26].
ATLAS [21] is a ML-based PIDS that leverages sequence-based
model learning for APT attack graph reconstruction. It is applied to
detect attacks on individual hosts or small networks consisting of only
two hosts. SHADEWATCHER [20] is another ML-based PIDS, which
combines recommendation principles with provenance analysis. Like
UNICORN, SHADEWATCHER does not support security analysts in
attack investigation. DISTDET [22] is an anomaly-based PIDS focusing
on cost-effective deployment of PIDS in practice. It introduces alarm
deduplication & semantic aggregation techniques to filter false alarms.
KAIROS [23] is an anomaly-based PIDS that adopts a Graph Neural
Network (GNN)-based encoder–decoder architecture for quantifying
the degree of anomaly of each system event. It improves on UNICORN,
and performs attack detection at a finer granularity. That is, instead of
taking an entire provenance graph as input, it takes system events as
input, splits the entire time line into many time windows, and classifies
each time window as benign or malicious. Yet, this approach produces comparatively dense attack graphs mixing malicious and benign
system activities. FLASH [24], as another GNN-based PIDS, performs
classification at an even finer granularity level: the node level. In
addition, FLASH presents an embedding recycling database to store the
node embeddings from the training phase for improved computational
efficiency. Nevertheless, attack graphs produced by FLASH still contain

a high percentage of benign system activities, complicating attack
investigation [25]. Further ML-based PIDS, e.g., APT-KGL [72], WATSON [73], THREATRACE [74], DEPIMPACT [75], PROGRAPHER [76],
MAGIC [77], are not discussed, as they all, like the state-of-the-art MLbased PIDS KAIROS and FLASH, have a limited attack scope: simplified
APT attacks.
We argue that, most prior PIDS, both anomaly-based [13,19–24] and
heuristics-based ones [10–12,14–18], would fail at detecting not only multiphase APT attacks but also cross-machine APT attacks. First, prior PIDS
fall short of detecting persistence, due to failure to recognize that persistence attack is always a two-part act [25]. By leveraging persistence,
APT attackers break down an entire attack chain into multiple phases,
which in turn makes these PIDS create rather disintegrated, seemingly
unrelated attack graphs. Second, prior PIDS are, by construction, limited
to intra-machine tracing, and unable to causally associate an attacker’s
activities across machines in an organization’s network(s), as a result
of an obliviousness to the network context [26].
Unlike these systems, Cpd excels in detecting persistence techniques
by combining advanced detection rules with pseudo-edges and expertguided edges. This unique approach enables Cpd to effectively identify
and investigate persistence threats, bridging the gaps that other PIDS
fail to address. Hades is the first PIDS capable of performing truly
causality-based cross-machine tracing, capitalizing on a critical yet previously undiscovered information: logon session ID. However, we find
that Hades is vulnerable to several evasion attack techniques, including
persistence. By integrating several preliminary detectors, targeting each
evasion attack technique individually, with Hades, our system Commander’s whole network tracing achieves a considerably higher level of
robustness. Moreover, Commander is the first PIDS that incorporates a
module for provenance tracing to industrial controllers.
Like HOLMES [12] and RapSheet [14], Commander leverages the
synergy of detection rules and heuristics for APT detection and investigation. These detection rules match indicative system activities, and
are used to initiate the tracing process or calculate a threat score, which
in turn serves to discover related indicative system activities, or rank
an attack graph, respectively. But, unlike RapSheet [14], we do not
rely on any commercial security product. Comparing to self-developed
detection rules in HOLMES [12], self-developed rules in Commander are
readily integrable into open-source rule repositories like Sigma [78].
We consider that a system offers tracing optimization, if specific
techniques are proposed to improve tracing efficiency, completeness,
or correctness. While most prior systems [10,13–16,18] optimize the
tracing process all by enhancing the efficiency, e.g., through optimized
path selection or instrumentation, Cpd and Hades optimize the tracing
process by improving efficiency and completeness, and Commander also
improves tracing correctness.
We stress that each compared study in Table 1 has its own strengths,
in which it solves a specific problem with the proposed innovative techniques. For instance, SLEUTH [10] and MORSE [15] present tag-based
key techniques to combat the dependency explosion problem [65,66].
Winnower [11] specifically targets attacks on distributed applications
with its graph grammar models. NoDoze’s behavior execution partitioning [13] can enhance tracing efficiency. HOLMES’s information flow
correlation produces simplistic high-level scenario graphs, which are
easily understandable without extensive security background knowledge. RapSheet’s graph-based scoring scheme aims to produce more
reasonably ranked alerts and help security analysts focus on more likely
serious incidents. OmegaLog [16] presents a log unification technique
to enhance tracing efficiency, and more properly leverage existing logs.
CONAN [17] demonstrates yet another technique to increase tracing efficiency, i.e., a state-based detection framework. TRACE [18] addresses
the dependency explosion problem with another key technique called
unit-based selective instrumentation. DISTDET’s alarm deduplication
technique [22] can reduce deployment cost of PIDS in practice.
The main strength of ML-based systems UNICORN [19], ATLAS
[21], THREATRACE [74], KAIROS [23] and FLASH [24] is that they require less security domain-specific expert knowledge from researchers
5

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

Fig. 2. Comparison of cross-machine tracing approaches. Whereas a thin black edge
denotes a network connection, a thick black edge denotes a logon by a genuine user and
a thick red edge denotes a logon by an attacker. (For interpretation of the references
to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

to develop and improve. However, the detection logic and results are
comparatively less explainable. The common weakness of all compared
studies is that only simplified APT attacks are addressed, rather than
cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks in real world. To detect these
more complex attacks, dedicated techniques are required, which are
incorporated in our system Commander.
Nevertheless, key techniques in the compared studies can be complementary to our key techniques for efficient and accurate APT detection and investigation. For instance, tag-based techniques from
SLEUTH [10] and MORSE [15], and the log unification technique from
OmegaLog [16] could be integrated in our system Commander for further
reducing dependency explosion during tracing. The main weakness of
our system Commander, like other heuristic-based approaches, lies in the
fact that it requires expert knowledge in security domain to develop and
maintain.

Fig. 3. Comparison of results from different cross-machine tracing approaches. Whereas
black denotes system activities originated from genuine users, red denotes system
activities caused by attackers. If a tracing approach returns more than one graph,
these graphs are numbered and considered as independent for further investigation.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

dense graphs in Fig. 3(b). However, in the prevalence of identity theft,
it is infeasible to discern the true identity behind each logon. That is, a
provenance graph produced from logon-based tracing can still contain
system activities of multiple identities. In contrast, logon session-based
tracing narrows down system activities deemed as relevant from an
entire machine to just one logon session, as shown in Fig. 2(c), truly
linking system activities belonging to the same identity, and separating
system activities unrelated to each other into individual provenance
graphs displayed in Fig. 3(c).
While intuitive, logon session-based tracing faces several challenges,
which are addressed in Hades. We refer readers to [26] for a detailed description of these challenges and the solutions. Note that a logon session
is a computing session assigned with an access token representing the
authenticated account’s security context, and a unique ID (until next
reboot) to label system activities run in that session [79,80]. Each logon
session contains only a fraction of all system activities collected from a
machine. An enterprise-level server can run cumulatively thousands of
logon sessions in only one day’s operation. This significantly increases
the risk of creating an extremely dense provenance graph impossible
to investigate for security analysts: Being unaware of logon sessions, a
provenance tracing approach would connect all system activities inside
a machine, as they all in the end can be traced back to the root process,
i.e., system (PID=4) on Windows. The more logon sessions a machine
hosts, the more obvious logon session-based tracing’s performance in
reducing provenance graphs’ size will be, as it identifies truly involved
logon sessions and tracks system activities only inside them.
For the sake of simplicity and readability, we assume there are
only two logon sessions on each machine in Fig. 2. Also, note that
we differentiate between benign system activities and malicious system
activities through different colors for illustration purpose only. The task
of accurate tracing is to connect system activities that can be attributed
to the same identity, be it the attacker or a genuine user, and separate

4. Motivating examples
4.1. Hades’s cross-machine tracing
Hades [26] is the first PIDS capable of performing accurate causalitybased cross-machine tracing, by tackling the cross-machine dependency
explosion problem with a method called logon session-based execution
partitioning and tracing. Whereas intra-machine dependency explosion
problem occurs for long-running processes [65,66], in which each input
is conservatively considered causally responsible for all subsequent
outputs, and vice versa, cross-machine dependency explosion happens
if cross-machine edges are created merely on a network connection
basis.
Fig. 2 illustrates the difference between three cross-machine tracing
approaches. Network connection-based tracing, which naively connects
two intra-machine provenance graphs whenever there is a network
connection between the two machines, as shown in Fig. 2(a), would
lead to a dense graph indiscriminately connecting all system activities
as depicted in Fig. 3(a). It is worth noting that most provenance-based
detection systems mentioned in Section 3 can produce attack graphs
including network activities/network socket accesses. However, this
can only suggest that they would be capable of network connectionbased cross-machine tracing, which is highly inaccurate and associated
with prohibitively high cost for further investigation.
Logon-based tracing in Fig. 2(b) reduces false dependencies by
considering only logon-initiated network connections, resulting in less
6

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

of persistence attacks, broken links between involved logon sessions
during intra-machine tracing are unavoidable. With logon sessionbased execution partitioning and tracing, missing cross-session edges
in intra-machine tracing would lead to inaccurate and incomplete
cross-machine tracing.
An example of how accurate cross-machine tracing can be hindered
via persistence is given in Fig. 4. Fig. 4(a) shows a persistence attack
inside the Machine B, where the persistence setup is conducted in a
logon session under user Alice, and the persistence execution is run
in a logon session under user Bob. This is possible when the attacker
drops a C2 agent program in the Machine B and links the path to this
program with the Registry Run key under user Bob. Therefore every
time user Bob logs in, the C2 program is automatically started by the
operating system and connects back to the same attacker for further
commands. Note that the logon session associated with persistence
execution, i.e., the second session in the Machine B, can be under the
user Alice as well, if the attacker links the path to the C2 program with
the Registry Run key under user Alice, or even under the System user,
if, for instance, the attacker hides the C2 program in a Windows service.
The link between persistence setup and persistence execution cannot
be established by parsing system logs alone. Only a persistence detection system like Cpd [25] that accurately detects persistence setups and
persistence executions of various persistence attack techniques curated
by MITRE [28] can discover the broken links and rebuild them into
the provenance graphs. As Hades [26] is unaware of evasion attack via
persistence, the dashed violet edge indicating a persistence attack in
Fig. 4(b) is invisible, leading Hades to attribute the system activities in
red and the system activities in pink to two different identities in Fig.
4(c), although they are conducted by the same attacker.

Fig. 4. Evasion of cross-machine tracing via persistence or session hijacking. Whereas
black denotes benign system activities, red, violet and pink all denote malicious system
activities. The dashed violet edges indicate a persistence or session hijacking attack.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

Evading HADES via Session Hijacking. In the present work, as
session hijacking, we refer to console/remote desktop session hijacking [30,83], or more precisely logon session hijacking, rather than
browser/web session hijacking. Note that console / remote desktop session and logon session are two different concepts, and are at different
abstraction levels. A console/remote desktop session contains at least
one logon session, and a console/remote desktop session hijacking indicates hijacking of all logon sessions within it. With sufficient privilege
on one session, attackers can hijack another existing session. A typical
reason for an attacker to conduct session hijacking is that the hijacked
session may contain more (credentials-related) information enabling
the attacker to further access other devices in the network.
Like persistence attacks, a session hijacking attack is not directly
evident in system logs, meaning that the link between a hijacking
logon session and a hijacked logon session cannot be created by solely
processing system logs. If a session hijacking attack is not detected, the
hijacking session would not be linked to the hijacked session during
logon session-based tracing, inevitably leading to premature end of
whole network tracing. The dashed violet edge in Fig. 4(a) and (b) can
also indicate a session hijacking attack, apart from a persistence attack.
Unlike in a persistence attack, the second session, i.e., the hijacked
session, in the Machine B is typically under a user different from the
user in the first session, i.e., the hijacking session. Being oblivious to
evasive session hijacking attacks, and hence to the dashed violet edge
in Fig. 4(b), Hades will attribute the system activities in red and the
system activities in pink to two different identities, as shown in Fig.
4(c), even though they are in fact caused by the same attacker.

system activities belonging to different identities. That is, the color
coding is transparent to logon session-based tracing.
4.2. Evading Hades’s cross-machine tracing
Through our study on the MITRE ATT&CK knowledge base [28]
and linked APT threat reports, we found three attack tactics/techniques that can be leveraged to evade Hades’s cross-machine tracing,
i.e., persistence, session hijacking, and port forwarding. These attack
techniques are employed frequently by APT attackers, even if their
objective is not necessarily to evade Hades’s cross-machine tracing.
However, leveraging these attack techniques will inevitably misguide
and impede cross-machine tracing, if they are not explicitly detected
and the tracing process is not properly adjusted.
Evading HADES via Persistence. Cpd [25] is the first work systematically investigating persistence techniques and realizing that an effective
persistence is always a two-phase process that includes a persistence
setup phase and a persistence execution phase. While the persistence
setup phase serves simply as preparation, the persistence execution
phase reveals attackers’ true intentions. During the persistence setup
phase, attackers typically leverage a legitimate system functionality,
e.g., Registry Run key [81] or Windows Service [82], to drop some
code functioning as a C2 (Command & Control) agent. This C2 agent
program is then run automatically during the persistence execution
phase. Intuitively, during persistence execution, the C2 program needs
to either receive or initiate a remote connection from or to the attacker
for further instructions, disclosing the attacker’s true objectives.
As the persistence execution phase often starts with a machine
reboot or a new user logon, related system activities run under a new
logon session. That is, the persistence setup phase and the persistence
execution phase often exist on different logon sessions. These logon
sessions can belong to the same user or different users. Being unaware

Evading HADES via Port Forwarding. Due to network segmentation,
attackers frequently rely on port forwarding to reach other machines
via an intermediate, already compromised machine, also known as
proxy [31]. When port forwarding is employed, the source IP address in
a logon event shows the IP address of the proxy machine, instead of the
true source machine. However, having the correct source IP address is
critical for Hades’s cross-machine tracing: During Hades’s cross-machine
tracing, it takes the source IP address from each logon event, and checks
against the authentication events collected from the domain controller
and system events on the source host (resolved from the IP address)
7

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

long-running attacks in which threat actors already managed to get
an initial access to a domain-joined host via phishing or program
exploitation, and move laterally to other machines leveraging stolen
domain credentials instead of program exploitation. Attacks confined
to a single machine are out of Commander’s detection scope.
6. System design

Algorithm 1: Robust Cross-Machine Tracing and Attack Detection
Inputs : System audit log events ;
Authentication & logon events ;
AD TTP rules 𝐴𝐷 ;
ICS TTP rules 𝐼𝐶𝑆
Output: List 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> of attack graph and its threat score pairs
1 Function GetAttackGraph(,  )

/* Get a list of auth. & logon anomalies
2

𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ← DetectAuthenticationAnomaly()

3

𝐿<𝑠𝑒𝑡 ,𝑒𝑥𝑒 > ← DetectPersistence()

4

𝐿<

5

𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 ,

6

𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> ← null
foreach (𝛾, 𝛾,  𝛾) ∈ 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> do
𝐴𝐺 ← null
𝐻𝐺 ← CreateHighLevelGraph(𝛾, 𝛾)
𝐴𝐺 ← 𝐴𝐺 ∪ 𝐻𝐺
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑦𝑝𝑒 ← CheckRemoteAccessType(𝛾, )
𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷 ← ReassignSessionID(𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑇 𝑦𝑝𝑒, 𝛾, )
𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷 ← LinkSessions(𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, 𝛾, )
(𝛼, 𝐺𝛼) ← TraverseBackward(𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, ,
𝐿<𝑠𝑒𝑡 ,𝑒𝑥𝑒 > , 𝐿< , > , 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > )

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

ℎ𝑔 ,ℎ𝑑 >

← DetectSessionHijacking(, )

← DetectPortForwarding(, )
𝑑𝑒𝑠 >

ℎ𝑔

Fig. 5. Evasion of cross-machine tracing via port forwarding. The dashed violet edges
indicate a port forwarding attack step. (For interpretation of the references to color in
this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

ℎ𝑑

(𝜅, 𝐺𝜅) ← TraverseForward(𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑒𝑑𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷, ,
𝐿<𝑠𝑒𝑡 ,𝑒𝑥𝑒 > , 𝐿< , > , 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > )

16

𝐴𝐺 ← 𝐴𝐺 ∪ 𝐺𝛼 ∪ 𝐺𝜅
𝛼 ← 𝛼 ∪ 𝜅
𝛼 ← CheckAuthenticationLogon(𝛼, )
if 𝛼 is not null then
goto 11
end
𝑇 𝑆 ← GetThreatScore(𝐴𝐺)
𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> ← 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆> ∪ (𝐴𝐺, 𝑇 𝑆)

ℎ𝑔

18
19
20

to confirm that an authentication request was sent from this host,
and a logon was indeed initiated from this host, respectively. If the
authentication request and logon initiation are confirmed, Hades will
process further events to identify the logon session and user name etc.,
and continue with the tracing. Otherwise Hades will not proceed the
tracing from this logon event.
Apparently, taking the IP address of the proxy machine would lead
to premature termination of the tracing, as the logon was not initiated
from the proxy machine. Fig. 5(a) shows a port forwarding attack
scenario, in which the attacker from the Machine A has logged on the
Machine C via port forwarding through the Machine B. Being oblivious
to port forwarding, Hades is unable to create the dashed violet edge
in Fig. 5 (b), and end up wrongly attributing the system activities
in red and in pink to two different identities, as shown in Fig. 5(c).
That is, naively relying on the IP address in a logon event could lead
to incomplete cross-machine tracing.
The objective of logon session-based execution partitioning and tracing
itself is to precisely separate system activities under different identities,
rather than classifying system activities as benign or malicious. Yet, the
detection accuracy of Hades [26], like other PIDS [12,14], depends
on the completeness of returned attack graphs, which in turn rests on
the soundness of its tracing method. In the last step of Hades, it ranks
attack graphs according to their threat scores, which are determined by
indicative attack steps/techniques present in the corresponding graphs.
An incomplete attack graph would likely lead to a lower threat score,
which in turn could let a true attack graph be ranked lower than
false-positive attack graphs.

𝑑𝑒𝑠

15

17

21
22
23
24
25

*/

ℎ𝑑

𝑑𝑒𝑠

end
return 𝐿<𝐴𝐺,𝑇 𝑆>

26 Function DetectAuthenticationAnomaly( )
27

𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ← null

28

foreach 𝑎𝑒 ∈  do
𝛼 ← TraversalBackward(𝑎𝑒)
𝜅 ← TraversalForward(𝑎𝑒)
𝛼 ← 𝛼 ∪ 𝜅
(𝛼,  𝛼) ← CheckAttackType(𝛼 )
if 𝛼 ∈ 𝐿<
then
𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 >
𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ← 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾> ∪ (𝛼, 𝛼,  𝛼)

29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

end
end
return 𝐿<𝛾,𝛾, 𝛾>

38 Function GetThreatScore(𝐴𝐺)

← null

39

𝐿<𝑇 𝑆

40

foreach (𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑀𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑒𝐸𝑑𝑔𝑒,  𝜔) ∈ 𝐴𝐺 do
𝑇 𝑆𝑠𝑢𝑏 ← CalculateScore(𝐴𝐺,  𝜔, 𝐴𝐷 , 𝐼𝐶𝑆 )
𝐿<𝑇 𝑆 > ← 𝐿<𝑇 𝑆 > ∪ 𝑇 𝑆𝑠𝑢𝑏

41
42

𝑠𝑢𝑏 >

𝑠𝑢𝑏

𝑠𝑢𝑏

44

end
𝑇 𝑆 ← SumScore(𝐿<𝑇 𝑆

𝑠𝑢𝑏 >

45

return 𝑇 𝑆

43

)

Our system Commander follows a three-stage approach for efficient
and accurate attack detection. We present Commander’s system architecture in Fig. 6, and a formal description of Commander’s tracing and
detection procedure in Algorithm 1. The first stage of Commander serves
as preliminary detection, and consists of four specialized detectors
running in parallel, i.e., an authentication anomaly detector, a cyber
persistence detector, a session hijacking detector and a port forwarding
detector. While the authentication anomaly detector is introduced in
Hades [26] and the cyber persistence detector is introduced in Cpd [25],
both the session hijacking detector and the port forwarding detector are
proposed in our system Commander.

5. Threat model
Like other PIDS [10–26], our system Commander works under the
assumption that the integrity of the underlying OS, firmware and our
logging frameworks is guaranteed. Commander focuses on detecting
8

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

Fig. 6. System overview of Commander.

The authentication anomaly detector is integrated into Commander as
the first preliminary detector, which takes only authentication & logon
logs as input. It is implemented as a dedicated module in Commander.
Commander starts with running this module and waiting for its outcome,
i.e., a list of authentication & logon anomalies. Each such anomaly
includes information of all involved hosts and the corresponding logon
sessions; this information is used to initiate the whole network tracing
in Commander’s second stage.
In the meantime, i.e., before Commander’s second stage starts, the
cyber persistence detector runs as the second integrated preliminary
detector. This detector is also implemented as a dedicated module in
Commander. It parses through system logs to identify a list of persistencerelated logon session pairs, which is then used in Commander’s second
stage to defend against persistence-based evasion attacks. That is,
during the intra-machine backward & forward tracing in Commander’s
second stage (Fig. 6), Commander checks against this list to find out
whether there is a persistence-related logon session in the traced sessions. By doing so, Commander can pinpoint further logon sessions
involved in evasive persistence attacks. Otherwise, the whole network
tracing could be interrupted like in Fig. 4, resulting in the entire attack
chain being missed.
Unlike the first two above-mentioned preliminary detectors, the
session hijacking detector and the port forwarding detector proposed
in our system Commander require both system logs and authentication
& logon logs as input. These two detectors are implemented in two
separate dedicated modules in Commander, and run along with the first
two preliminary detectors during Commander’s first stage. The objectives
of the session hijacking detector and the port forwarding detector are
the same; they serve to counter evasion attacks and hence ensure robust
and correct tracing in Commander’s second stage. The session hijacking
detector produces a list of hijacking & hijacked logon session pairs,
against which Commander checks during the intra-machine backward
& forward tracing in its second stage. Like the cyber persistence detector, this detector prevents the whole network tracing from being
interrupted by session hijacking attacks as in Fig. 4.
Further, the port forwarding detector outputs a list of source &
destination logon session pairs, against which Commander checks during
the cross-machine backward & forward tracing in its second stage. This
is to discover any port forwarding-related logon session in the traced
sessions, so that Commander can track down further logon sessions
involved in evasive port forwarding attacks. Otherwise, the whole
network tracing could be interrupted like in Fig. 5.
Commander’s second stage starts by taking as input the identified host
names, user names and their logon session ID for each anomaly from
the authentication anomaly detector. It performs robust logon sessionbased execution partitioning and tracing to discover all involved logon
sessions from each host the same identity has accessed. The whole
network tracing ends, if no further logon session and host can be
found. It produces a low-level whole network provenance graph for
each anomaly spotted in Commander’s first stage.

In the final stage of Commander, it matches the provenance graphs
resulted from the whole network tracing against open-source TTP (Tactics, Techniques, Procedures) detection rules [78] for Active Directory
discovery and credential access, and ICS TTP detection rules we developed for Siemens SIPROTEC and Hitachi Energy RTU500 industrial
controllers. Then it ranks these attack graphs according to a threat
scoring algorithm.
Our system Commander is unique for several reasons. First, Commander can accurately detect cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks, while
existing systems cannot. Second, Commander’s modular design further
enhance the robustness against evasion attacks. Third, Commander is
designed as a provenance-based detection system for detecting attacks
on industrial-sector organizations consisting of an enterprise network
and an industrial control system (ICS). That is, Commander includes
parsers we developed for system logs from two popular industrial
controllers in energy systems. Further, Commander also incorporates TTP
detection rules we developed with a reference to the MITRE ATT&CK
Matrix for ICS [34] for these industrial controllers. Most importantly,
Commander can accurately attribute the system activities on these industrial controllers to the true identity behind those actions, even when the
access originates from the enterprise network.
6.1. Preliminary detection
In the following, we discuss the four specialized detectors in the preliminary detection stage of Commander one by one. As the authentication
anomaly detector and the cyber persistence detector are described in
Hades [26] and in Cpd [25] in detail, respectively, we discuss these two
detectors only briefly in the present paper.
6.1.1. Authentication anomaly detection
The authentication anomaly detector rests on a light-weight authentication anomaly detection model introduced in Hades [26]. This
model results from an extensive analysis of identity-based attacks in
Active Directory. In these attacks, the complex network authentication
process in Windows domain is exploited by attackers who succeed in
stealing some form of credentials or credentials-related data. The stolen
credentials from one machine are then used to authenticate against a
domain controller, and hence access other machines.
In order to detect authentication anomalies, this module of Commander inspects each authentication & logon log event, and performs
backward tracing on each logon event, and backward & forward tracing
on each authentication event (Algorithm 1 Lines 29–30). Note that
the authentication process in Active Directory is a multi-step process.
The authentication & logon tracing’s outcome is matched against the
light-weight anomaly detection model to find out whether an authentication anomaly is evident and, if yes, to which attack type it
belongs (Algorithm 1 Line 32). For each authentication anomaly, like
Hades, Commander produces a high-level attack graph including involved
9

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

users and machines only (Algorithm 1 Line 9), marking the end of its
stage one. Fig. 7 presents an example of such high-level attack graphs
at its top right corner. It shows that user Alice from the Exchange
Server has used user Bob’s password hash to authenticate against the
Domain Controller, and then accessed the Data Server, following the
Pass-the-Hash behavior.

Algorithm 2: Session Hijacking Detection
Inputs : System audit log events ;
Logon events ;
Logoff events 
Output: List of hijacking & hijacked logon session pairs 𝐿<

ℎ𝑔 ,ℎ𝑑 >

1 𝐿< , > ← null
ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑
2 foreach 𝜅 ∈  do

/* Get the logon time, user and host of current
logon event
*/

6.1.2. Cyber persistence detection
Understanding persistence attacks’ nature is critical for persistence
detection and hence correct provenance tracing. Cpd [25] is the first
specialized cyber persistence detection system, which recognizes that
a successful persistence attack is always a two-part act consisting of
the persistence setup phase and the persistence execution phase. While
the persistence setup phase serves only as preparation, the persistence
execution phase discloses attackers’ true motives. As discussed in Section 4.2, the persistence setup phase and the persistence execution
phase often exist on different logon sessions, necessitating explicit and
correct association of these logon sessions. Otherwise, broken links
between involved logon sessions controlled by the same attacker would
be inevitable, ultimately resulting in incomplete cross-machine tracing.
We implement Cpd as a preliminary detection module for Commander, so that during Commander’s whole network tracing in the second
stage, persistence related logon sessions can be explicitly associated.
Thus, broken links due to persistence attacks can be avoided. The cyber
persistence detector first parses all system logs, and matches them
against a set of persistence setup detection rules introduced in [25] to
create a persistence setup table. Next, it spots all processes with remote
connections from those system logs, and performs backward tracing
on these processes individually to create sub-graphs. Each sub-graph
is then checked against a set of persistence execution detection rules,
producing a persistence execution table.
Subsequently, the entries in the persistence setup table and persistence execution table are aligned with each other based on TTP
labels, temporal order, and specific attributes. An alignment indicates
a potential persistence attack. These alignments are fed to a false
positive reduction algorithm introduced in Cpd [25], which integrates
key insights from real-world persistence attacks, for enhanced detection
accuracy. The final outcome of the cyber persistence detector module
in Commander is a list of logon session pairs, each include a persistence setup logon session and a persistence execution logon session
(Algorithm 1 Line 3).

( 𝜅,  𝜅, 𝜅) ← GetAttribute(𝜅 )
𝛾 ← CheckLogOff(,  𝜅,  𝜅, 𝜅)

3
4

if 𝛾 is not null then
(𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷,  𝛾,  𝛾) ← GetAttribute(𝛾 )

5
6

10

(𝛾, 𝐺𝛾) ← TraverseBackward(, 𝜅, 𝑆𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐼𝐷,  𝛾,  𝛾)
𝑝𝑒ℎ ← CheckPrivilegeEscalationHst(𝛾, 𝐺𝛾)
if 𝑝𝑒ℎ is not null then
𝐿< , > ← 𝐿< , > ∪ (𝛾, 𝜅)

11

end

7
8
9

ℎ𝑔

ℎ𝑑

ℎ𝑔

ℎ𝑑

end

12
13 end

14 return 𝐿< , >
ℎ𝑔 ℎ𝑑

Algorithm 3: Port Forwarding Detection
Inputs : System audit log events ;
Authentication & logon events ;
List of port forwarding-related processes 𝐿<>
Output: List of source & destination logon session pairs 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 ,

𝑑𝑒𝑠 >

1 𝐿< ,
← null
𝑠𝑟𝑐 𝑑𝑒𝑠 >
2 foreach 𝜅 ∈  do

/* Get process name, host name, and timestamp of
current event
*/
3
4
5
6
7
8

(𝜅 , 𝜅,  𝜅) ← GetSubject(𝜅 )
if 𝜅 ∈ 𝐿<> then
(𝐼𝑃𝑠𝑟𝑐 , 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑐 , 𝐼𝑃𝑑𝑒𝑡 , 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑡 ) ← CheckCmd(𝜅 )
if 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑐 is not null then
𝑝𝑜 ← CheckPortOpening(𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑠𝑟𝑐 , )
𝐼𝑃𝑝𝑟𝑜 ← GetIp(𝜅)
if 𝑝𝑜 is not null then
(𝛾 ) ← CheckLogon(,  𝜅, 𝐼𝑃𝑝𝑟𝑜 , 𝐼𝑃𝑑𝑒𝑡 , 𝑃 𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑡 )

9
10

foreach 𝑎𝑒 ∈ 𝛾 do
(𝛾, 𝜔) ← TraversalBackward(𝑎𝑒, 𝐼𝑃𝑠𝑟𝑐 )
𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > ← 𝐿<𝑠𝑟𝑐 , > ∪ (𝛾, 𝜔)

11
12
13

𝑑𝑒𝑠

end

15

end

16
17

𝑑𝑒𝑠

end

14

end

18 end
19 return 𝐿< ,
𝑠𝑟𝑐 𝑑𝑒𝑠 >

6.1.3. Session hijacking detection
Commander’s session hijacking detector module leverages two key
insights: (1) a successful session hijacking will cause a logon event under
hijacked user and a logoff event under hijacking user almost at the
same time,1 and (2) in order to perform session hijacking, the attacker
has to first conduct privilege escalation to receive the highest privilege,
i.e. system privilege on Windows.
Algorithm 2 outlines the session hijacking detection procedure in
Commander, which starts from processing each logon event and then
checking for a possibly related logoff event under a different user (Lines
3–4). After finding a related logoff event, it inspects the terminated
logon session due to the logoff, and performs backward tracing from
this logon session (Algorithm 2 Lines 6–7). Subsequently, it checks if
the tracing result contains a privilege escalation to the highest privilege
(Algorithm 2 Line 8). With logon session-based execution partitioning
and tracing, detecting privilege escalation is not only most accurate

but also very efficient, as an operating system like Windows introduces
the separation of privileges with logon sessions. That is, given the OS
integrity, Commander’s session hijacking detector only needs to check a
few attributes, i.e., ‘‘Token Elevation Type’’ and ‘‘Integrity Level’’, in a
process generation system event to detect a privilege escalation. Finally,
the session hijacking detector outputs a list of logon session pairs
consisting of a hijacking logon session and a hijacked logon session.
6.1.4. Port forwarding detection
The port forwarding detector module in Commander identifies port
forwarding setup in each machine from system logs, and checks for
occurrence of port forwarding-based logon from authentication & logon
logs. First, it parses each system log event to get the process name,
and checks if it belongs to the list of port forwarding-related processes,
e.g., plink, ssh, netsh (Algorithm 3 Lines 3–4). Next, it parses the
command line arguments of that process to determine the source port &
IP and destination port & IP for the port forwarding (Algorithm 3 Line
5). If a source port can be identified, it checks in system logs if this
port was opened through the host-based firewall, and the IP address

1
Note that Windows Security events with event ID equal to 4778 or 4800
are considered as logon or logoff events, respectively. Whereas event ID 4778
reveals that a disconnected session was resumed/logged on, event ID 4800
states that an ongoing session was locked/logged out [84,85]. For instance,
these events are always logged by Windows when a RDP session, and hence
the associated logon session(s), are hijacked.

10

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

of this proxy machine (Algorithm 3 Lines 7–8). Subsequently, it parses
all logon events on the destination host that have happened after the
timestamp of the port forwarding setup event, and have the IP address
of the proxy machine as source IP (Algorithm 3 Line 10). For each found
logon event, it performs backward tracing with the corrected source IP
address to find the source logon session, and then appends the source
& destination logon session pair to a list.

industrial-sector organization’s network is generally segmented into an
IT domain network and an OT domain network, and the connection of
these two domains is done via a gateway/jump server, as mentioned in
Section 2.
Following the cross-domain tracing, Commander checks if the Engineering Workstations are involved in the tracing process. If yes, it then
examines whether there are logon activities on the field controllers
coming from a logon session in a Engineering Workstation. For each
logon event, it parses all log events between that logon and the corresponding logoff on the field controller. Field controllers typically
have a single-user single-task embedded OS. Unlike general-purpose
OS, embedded OS do not implement the concept of logon session,
meaning that system activities cannot be sorted by logon session ID.
However, thanks to its single-user restriction, it is straightforward to
correctly link a specific logon session on the Engineering Workstation
with only system activities on a field controller that are indeed caused
by commands from that session.
Fig. 7 renders the result of whole network tracing for the extended
Oilrig attack scenario in the AVIATOR dataset, unraveling the attacker’s traversal inside the target organization. Commander first creates
an initial high-level attack graph including only high-level entities,
i.e., users and hosts, after the authentication anomaly detector identifies a potential Pass-the-Hash attack. In Pass-the-Hash attacks [86],
attackers leverage stolen password hashes and choose NTLM authentication process over the default Active Directory authentication process
Kerberos. Then it performs forward tracing inside the specific logon
session under user Bob in the accessed host Data Server, and forward
& backward tracing inside the logon session of Alice in the accessing
host Exchange Server. The remote access type on the Data Server is
identified as PsExec [87], for which session ID reassignment is not
required. User Bob’s logon session (0x4aa81e86) is linked to the
System logon session (0 × 3e7), as the server process psexesvc runs
in the System logon session. psexesvc receives remote commands
from the Exchange Server, and the remote commands run in Bob’s
logon session. The whole network forward tracing from the Data Server
leads to no further logon session on another machine, as the attacker
found the targeted data and did not move forward from the Data Server.
In contrast, the whole network backward tracing from the Exchange
Server discloses that the current logon sessions (0xb4874, 0xb4829,
0xb37f41d122) on it belong to a RDP session that was initiated
from another logon session of user Alice inside another machine Workstation_1. Besides, it spots a privilege escalation from unprivileged
user to Administrator, i.e., from 0xb4874 to 0xb4829, and a further
privilege escalation from Administrator to System, i.e., from 0xb4829
to 0xb37f41d122. Subsequently, it proceeds with the backward &
forward tracing from the logon session of Alice (0xc8cf0a) in the
Workstation_1. While backward tracing from the Workstation_1 leads
to no further domain-joined machine, but rather an external IP address
that belongs to the C2 server run by the attacker, forward tracing from
the Workstation_1 unveils multiple logon sessions on several machines.2
Among the newly found logon sessions, two sessions are on the
Exchange Server. These two sessions predate other sessions on the
Exchange Server. One of these two sessions contains system activities
related to credential access, contributing to the lateral movement to
the Data Server. Unlike Hades, Commander performs also cross-domain
tracing inside the same organization, resulting in identifying a logon
session in the Gateway Server located in the OT domain. Besides,
each time Commander discovers a new logon session during tracing, it
checks against the logon session pairs identified by its cyber persistence
detector, session hijacking detector and port forwarding detector, individually. This is to find out whether this logon session is involved

6.2. Whole network tracing
In its stage two, Commander performs whole network tracing, which
improves Hades’s logon session-based tracing with enhanced robustness
against evasion attacks, and extends it to trace also across domains inside an industrial-sector organization. This stage starts with processing
the data delivered from the authentication anomaly detector, i.e., identified host names, user names and logon session ID. First, it infers the
remote access type, in which it pulls both related authentication &
logon events and system events. Then it extracts a list of attributes from
the events to analyze the context, and classify the remote access type
(Algorithm 1 Line 11).
Next, it performs logon session ID reassignment and logon session
linking according to the remote access type (Algorithm 1 Lines 12–13).
Logon session ID reassignment is necessary for several remote access
types, e.g., RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol) and Powershell-Remoting,
as the system activities performed on a new logon session are recorded
under an existing logon session ID. With logon session linking, a user
logon session is coupled with the system logon session directly responsible for the creation of that user logon session. Note that a system logon
session is normally a long-running session accommodating numerous
system activities. The logon session linking module selects only a
fraction of these system activities, which are related to the user session
creation, to parse into the provenance graph.
Subsequently, Commander proceeds with intra-machine backward &
forward tracing to find all involved logon sessions and system activities
inside them (Algorithm 1 Lines 14–15). This step automatically spots
privilege escalation, as system activities run with different privileges
are contained in different logon sessions and labeled with different
session ID. A process’s privilege is tied to the security context of the
logon session in which the process is running. During normal process
creation, both child process and parent process run in the same logon
session. But, during a privilege escalation, when a process is spawned
from another process with lower privilege, the spawned process runs in
a new logon session. Unlike Hades, Commander checks in this step also if
current logon sessions are involved in a persistence attack or a session
hijacking attack, by inspecting the list of persistence setup & execution
logon session pairs, and the list of hijacking & hijacked logon session
pairs. These lists are passed from the cyber persistence detector and the
session hijacking detector, respectively. If it finds a match, it connects
the related logon sessions with a corresponding edge, and continues the
intra-machine backward or forward tracing on the newly joined logon
session.
Afterwards, Commander examines the authentication & logon logs
from the same domain. This is, on the one hand, to determine the
source machine & logon session of current logon sessions, i.e., crossmachine backward tracing, and, on the other hand, to identify logon
sessions inside any domain-joined machine initiated from the current
machine, i.e., cross-machine forward tracing. During this step, Commander also checks if the traced logon sessions are involved in a port
forwarding attack, by inspecting the list of source & destination logon
session pairs output from the port forwarding detector. It attaches any
newly found logon sessions to existing ones. At the end of intra-domain
tracing, Commander checks logon activities on the gateway server. If
any logon initiated from a machine in the IT domain is found, and
that machine is involved in the current tracing process, Commander
begins the cross-domain tracing. Commander’s performance to trace
across domains inside an organization benefits from the fact that an

2
Note that backward tracing can lead to no more than one logon session,
whereas forwarding tracing may lead to multiple logon sessions, as one may
remotely access several other machines from one machine.

11

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

Fig. 7. An attack graph created by Commander on the AVIATOR dataset for the extended Oilrig attack scenario. Note that the bounding boxes with a session ID label or host
name are manually added for better readability, this information is encoded in nodes in the original attack graph. Besides, we replaced the user names in the original emulation
plan with shorter names. Some processes, e.g., ps and vmware, in the attack graph are malicious processes disguised under a false name. Further, meta-nodes are introduced as
an optimization technique in Hades [26] to conclude system activities of standard known benign routines.

in stealthy attacks that could impede accurate tracing. By doing so,
Commander discovers a few more logon sessions in the Gateway Server
and in the Engineering Workstation. The logon session in the Engineering Workstation under user Dave finally leads to logon sessions on two
Siemens field controllers.
Because the first logon session of user Carol (0 × 256dcd90) on
the Gateway Server is identified as a persistence setup logon session by
the cyber persistence detector, a persistence-based cross-session edge,
named as pseudo-edge in Cpd [25], is created to connect it to the persistence execution logon session (0 × 3e7). Without the cyber persistence
detector, forward tracing from Carol’s first logon session would end
up finding no further logon session and stopping the tracing process.
During the persistence attack step, the attacker has created a new local
user Mallory on the Gateway Server. This persistence technique [88]
provides the attacker the ability to access the desktop environment on
the Gateway Server. Note that the first access to the Gateway Server
was done via SSH and through public key authentication. That is,
without knowing user Carol’s password, the attacker was able to log
into the Gateway Sever as Carol using a private key stored in the
Workstation_1.
Following the persistence execution, the attacker hijacked user
Carol’s RDP session and hence the logon sessions (0 × 22a215,
0 × 22a1f9) inside it. From these logon sessions, the attacker was
able to conduct Active Directory discovery to find more machines in
the OT domain, as the user Carol is a domain user and the attackercreated user Mallory is not.3 Besides, the attacker has set up a port
forwarding in the session with higher privilege (0 × 22a1f9). Enabled

by the port forwarding, the attacker was able to access the Engineering
Workstation in the OT domain directly from the Workstation_1 in the
IT domain. Thanks to the port forwarding detector, the link to the
Engineering Workstation can be discovered during the tracing. Further,
cross-field tracing is initiated from the Engineering Workstation. Due to
the coarse granularity of system logs on field devices, it is not feasible
to create links between the system activities inside a device. Hence,
in the attack graph, we use more abstract entities, i.e., matched ICS
TTP, and cluster and link them to the logon session on the Engineering
Workstation from which the corresponding commands originate.
6.3. Attack graph ranking
In an operational environment, as a detection system cannot guarantee the perfect detection performance, i.e., no false positives and
no false negatives at the same time, each detection result needs to
be further investigated by a security analyst. The reality is however
that most detection results/alerts cannot be investigated by security
analysts due to limited time [9,89]. Our system Commander can not only
produce attack graphs explaining attack history to accelerate further
investigation by security analysts, but also rank the attack graphs with
threat score. Ranked attack graphs/alerts are a very practical way to
handle the trade-offs between false positives and false negatives in

domain information. Depending on the remote access type, a domain user’s
logon session’s security context may not be sufficient for accessing domain
information, a restriction implemented on Windows. That is, from the SSHenabled logon session (0 × 256dcd90) of the domain user Carol, the attacker
was unable to conduct Active Directory discovery.

3
Note that only domain administrators and specifically delegated users
can create new domain accounts. Local users are restricted from accessing

12

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

reality. This is because that, in order to avoid false negatives, it still
allows a great number of false positives, as a trade-off. However, with
threat score ranking, those false positive alerts are more likely ranked
lower than true positive alerts, and get investigated later, if a security
analyst still has time for them. That is, security analysts can prioritize
the highest ranked alerts for investigation due to limited time.
Commander’s threat scoring scheme in its final stage builds on
Hades’s, resting on two key insights introduced in Hades [26]: (1) longrunning attacks against a large organization follow a rigid pattern
after the initial access: Active Directory discovery, credential access,
lateral movement and privilege escalation, (2) a successful credential
access is essential for the attacker to proceed with the attack, and the
most observable result of an ongoing attack is lateral movement. For
each whole network attack graph output from Commander’s stage two,
Commander calculates a threat score. By ranking attack graphs via threat
score, Commander presents security analysts with the most likely true
attack graphs first for further investigation.
Commander extends Hades’s threat scoring scheme by also considering the occurrence of (1) persistence, session hijacking and port
forwarding attacks, (2) cross-domain activities, and (3) ICS TTP alerts
in an attack graph for score calculation. That is, for each potential
lateral movement, i.e., a cross-machine edge in an attack graph, it
checks the variety and frequency of credential access techniques and
Active Directory discovery techniques used in the source host. It also
checks the presence of persistence and session hijacking attacks in both
source and destination hosts, and whether this is a port forwardingenabled or a cross-domain lateral movement. Further, it checks whether
the destination host is a field controller on which ICS TTP alerts are
present. Each occurrence of these indicators increases the threat score.
More formally, the threat score is determined by the following
two equations, of which Eq. (1) calculates the threat score for each
cross-machine edge, and Eq. (2) accumulates the threat scores passed
from Eq. (1), and yields the final score.
𝑇 𝑆𝐸 =

𝑛
∑
(𝐹 𝑟𝑒𝑞(𝑡𝑒𝑞𝑖 ) × 𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑖 ))𝑤𝑖

by the authentication anomaly detector in the preliminary detection
stage. During the tracing, it searches for relevant events to process
via Elasticsearch, which provides scalable and near real-time search
for log data investigation. Moreover, we use Python NetworkX [92]
for creating provenance graphs on demand, and PyVis [93] for graph
visualization.
Whereas authentication logs for each domain are collected from the
corresponding domain controller, logon logs are collected from each
accessed domain-joined machine. System logs are collected from all
machines. On Windows, we collect Windows Security [80] logs and Sysmon [94] logs. Sysmon generates and records a process GUID (Globally
Unique Identifier) for each process, reducing false dependencies during
post-processing. However, Sysmon lacks logging for file/Registry read
operations.4 Hence, we rely on Windows Security [80] logs for these
system activities, as well as authentication and logon activities. On
Linux we collect Auditd [95] logs. These logs are all industry-standard
logs, boosting Commander’s applicability in industry. To ensure log
integrity, recent versions of Sysmon start as protected processes, which
prevent tampering or disabling by attackers. Windows introduced Protected Event Logging [96] to secure logs from unauthorized access. On
Linux, making Auditd configuration immutable [97] safeguards against
rule changes and rule disabling.
8. Evaluation
In this section, we evaluate Commander’s performance on the AVIATOR [27] dataset. In particular, we compare Commander’s detection
accuracy with prior detection systems, showcase Commander’s response
time, and analyze attack graphs produced by Commander. Note that a direct, empirical comparison with prior PIDS is difficult given the absence
of source code and differences in evaluation datasets. A comparison
between one of Commander’s preliminary detectors Cpd and state-of-theart PIDS KAIROS [23] and FLASH [24] is given in [25], in which it
shows that prior PIDS fall short of detecting persistence, due to failure
to recognize that persistence attack is always a two-part act. That
is, prior PIDS would not be able to detect multi-phase APT attacks.
Further, as mentioned in Section 3.1, prior PIDS are, by construction,
limited to intra-machine tracing, and unable to causally associate an
attacker’s activities across machines in an organization’s network(s), as
a result of an obliviousness to the network context.

(1)

𝑖=1

where 𝑛 denotes the number of tactics involved, e.g., credential access
or persistence. 𝐹 𝑟𝑒𝑞(𝑡𝑒𝑞𝑖 ) denotes the accumulated execution frequency
of techniques in a given tactic, and 𝑉 𝑎𝑟(𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑖 ) denotes the number of
techniques being applied for the given tactic. 𝑤𝑖 is a weighting factor
for each tactic, with credential access having the highest weight due to
its importance as per the second key insight.
𝑇 𝑆𝐺 =

𝑛
∑

(𝑇 𝑆𝑖 × (𝐷𝐴 + 1) × 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦)

8.1. Datasets
Attack scenarios in most public datasets taken for evaluation of APT
detection and investigation systems often lack not only a persistence
attack step, but also a lateral movement attack step, even though these
steps are omnipresent in real-world APT attacks [27]. For instance,
the DARPA E3 dataset [69], which is one the most used datasets
for PIDS evaluation, contains neither a persistence attack step, nor a
lateral movement trace. Although the DARPA E5 dataset [71] includes
two Windows-based persistence attack instances, attacks in this dataset
are confined in individual machines. The more recent DARPA OpTC
dataset [98] is the only public dataset emulating APT attacks in a realistic enterprise environment with domain-joined machines. However,
this dataset contains only system logs on domain-joined machines, but
no logs from the domain controller. Authentication logs, which are
recorded only on domain controllers, are critical for not only three out
of four Commander’s preliminary detectors, but also the whole network
tracing. Further, logs in the DARPA OpTC dataset lack a logon session
ID, making it even more infeasible to evaluate Commander on this
dataset.

(2)

𝑖=1

where 𝑛 denotes the number of cross-machine edges found in a given
attack graph, and 𝑇 𝑆𝑖 denotes the threat score assigned for each crossmachine edge from Eq. (1). 𝐷𝐴 indicates whether credentials of domain
administrators are involved in the cross-machine activities, and has the
value 0 or 1. Different values of 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 are given to different attack
types, in which the Golden-Ticket attack type receives the highest
value, as it implies a compromise of an entire domain. Besides, it
scales up 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 accordingly, if a cross-machine edge (1) is port
forwarding enabled, or (2) connects two machines from two different
domains, i.e., cross domain, or (3) is tied to a field controller on which
ICS TTP alerts are present, i.e., cross field.
7. Implementation
We implemented a prototype of Commander in Python, and deployed
it on a 64-bit Ubuntu 22.04 OS with 256 GB of RAM and a 32core processor. This machine also hosts Elasticsearch [90], to which
Commander interfaces via EQL [91], a query language designed for
security purposes. Like Hades, Commander operates as an on-demand
tracing system for enhanced efficiency. That is, it starts the whole
network tracing, only after an authentication anomaly is identified

4
Sysmon only records file/Registry modification operations, e.g., creation,
deletion, value change, name change. Note that the ‘‘Event ID 9: RawAccessRead’’ will not record most file/Registry read operations, as it only records
read operations from the drive using the \\.\denotation [94].

13

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

Fig. 8. Extended Oilrig emulation plan [27]. Edges in red denote initial access or lateral movement conducted by the attacker. These edges are numbered in chronological
order.

Fig. 9. Extended Sandworm emulation plan [27].

8.2. Commander vs. Prior detection systems
In contrast, at least two persistence attack techniques are included
in each of MITRE’s eleven full emulation plans [35], whereas Active
Directory-based lateral movement is present in nine out of eleven
emulation plans. These emulation plans are based on the observation
of past real-world APT attacks, and target enterprise networks with
more sophisticated, cross-machine attacks than most public datasets,
offering greater authenticity. AVIATOR is a dataset derived from MITRE
emulation plans. Apart from the original MITRE emulation plans, it also
includes data from emulating two extended MITRE emulation plans.
These extended MITRE emulation plans are based on real-world attacks
on both enterprise and ICS networks conducted by notorious APT
groups Sandworm [36] and Oilrig [37]. Whereas Sandworm is responsible for the attacks against Ukrainian electrical companies in 2015, 2016
and 2022 [99–102], Oilrig has targeted energy and chemical sectors in
Middle Eastern in 2017 [103–105].
The extended emulation plans are demonstrated in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9,
in which the original emulation plans are shown in a dashed bounding
box. As the extended emulation plans are the only ones including
attack steps on ICS, we evaluate Commander only on the corresponding
subsets of the AVIATOR dataset. Table 2 gives an overview of the
two subsets, which are also referred to as AVIATOR-Oilrig dataset and
AVIATOR-Sandworm dataset, respectively, for brevity.
It is worth noting that the possible errors of a dataset presented
in [106], i.e., incorrect labeling logic and wrongly generated features,
do not apply to the AVIATOR dataset. Like the DARPA E3 [69],
the DARPA E5 [71] and the DARPA OpTC [98] datasets, the AVIATOR dataset is not a dataset specifically created for training and
evaluating machine learning approaches. That is, unlike the examined
network log-based datasets in [106], DARPA E3, DARPA E5, DARPA
OpTC and AVIATOR are host log-based datasets, in which no finegrained automatic labeling was performed for each system activity.
Only coarse-granular labeling for each attack trace was performed,
which is manual, simple, and easily verifiable. Along with the raw
data, source code for environment setups, configuration files, attack
scripts etc. is also provided as a documentation in the dataset’s repository [107]. Besides, no feature generation was performed for APT
datasets like DARPA E3, DARPA E5, DARPA OpTC and AVIATOR. That
is, these datasets do not contain any wrong synthetic feature.

To compare Commander with prior detection systems, including
open-source detection rules and a commercial Active Directory attack
detector, we first extracted all detection rules for Active Directorybased attacks from the most well-known rule repositories, i.e., Elastic [108], Sigma [78], Google Chronicle [109], and installed a commercial Active Directory attack detector. Both the EQL queries converted
from the detection rules and the commercial attack detector are evaluated alongside Commander on the datasets. The commercial attack
detector is referred to as Cad in the present paper, since we did not get
the permission to reveal the name of the security vendor. This vendor
is considered as a significant security solution provider in the security
market overviews [110,111]. We compare the detection results w.r.t.
the number of false positives and false negatives on each dataset in
Table 3.
Table 3 shows that open-source detection rules generated more
false positives than a full-fledged attack detector like Commander and
Cad, and missed some true attacks. More specifically, Elastic produced
more false positives than Commander’s preliminary detection stage on
both datasets, while missing the true attack in the Sandworm dataset.
Although Chronicle has a lower false positive rate on both datasets, it
did not detect any true attack. In contrast, Sigma identified the true
attacks in both datasets, however at the expense of producing much
more false positives. Open-source detection rules’ overly high false
positive rate is well demonstrated and discussed in [25,26].
Contrary to open-source detection rules, a dedicated attack detector
like Commander and Cad associates events related to each other, and
analyzes the context, moving beyond inspecting individual log events
independently. This context-awareness can significantly lower the false
positive rate, as demonstrated by the comparison between the detection
results of Commander’s preliminary detection stage and final detection
stage, i.e., after the whole network tracing. Note that most attack
steps involved in stealthy APT attacks are based on misusing legitimate
system infrastructures and services, which are used intensively by
genuine users as well. The prevalence of ‘‘indicative’’ system activities
in benign operations helps attackers easily blend each of their attack
steps into the noise caused by genuine users. However, with precise
tracing, the system activities of individual attack steps can be linked
into a provenance graph, as they are causally related.
14

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.
Table 2
Overview of the evaluation datasets.
Dataset

Target host number

Ground truth attack

Target host OS

Data size

Event number

AVIATOR-Oilrig

10

Pass-the-Hash

Windows Embedded OS

566 GB

360 M

AVIATOR-Sandworm

8

Golden-Ticket

Windows Linux Embedded OS

610 GB

479 M

Note that the AVIATOR-Oilrig dataset and AVIATOR-Sandworm dataset are the subsets of the AVIATOR dataset including attack steps on
industrial control systems.

Table 3
Comparison of Commander and prior detection systems.
COMMANDER
Dataset

Elastic

Preliminary

Final

Chronicle

Sigma

CAD

FP

FN

FP

FN

FP

FN

FP

FN

FP

FN

FP

FN

AVIATOR-Oilrig

105

0

0

0

208

0

50

1

415

0

0

1

AVIATOR-Sandworm

59

0

0

0

196

1

31

1

722

0

0

0

Note that each dataset has only one true positive (TP=1). FP: false positives. FN: false negatives.
Table 4
Summarized comparison of detection systems.

Comparing to a provenance graph built from a genuine user’s all
system activities, a provenance graph containing the whole of an attacker’s system activities typically includes more ‘‘indicative’’ activities.
It also outlines a logical order, e.g., lateral movement after credential
access, underpinning threat scoring schemes in PIDS like [12–14,25,26]
and Commander. Often the longer the attack chain is, the more obvious
the attack pattern is, and thus the more likely the attack provenance
graph is ranked higher than benign ones. In comparison to Hades, which
has assigned the third-highest score to the true attacks in two datasets,
Commander has produced no false positive by ranking the true attack
in each dataset the highest. This is due to the longer attack chain in
the extended emulation plans and Commander’s robust whole network
tracing ability.
Commander’s final detection results in Table 3 are based on the
true attack threat score threshold in Fig. 10, which shows the cumulative distribution function of threat scores for benign and attack
provenance graphs. Like other provenance-based detection systems,
e.g., HOLMES [12] and RapSheet [14], the objective of our system Commander is not to remove all false alarms, but to prioritize investigation
of attack graphs based on their threat score. The value of the threat
score threshold can be configured depending on the human resources
of a security operation center has in practice. Fig. 10 shows that the true
attack in each dataset has the highest threat score. That is, when the
threshold is set with the value of the highest threat score, Commander
has a false positive rate of 0 and a true positive rate of 1 in both
datasets. However, if the threshold is set, for instance, 50% lower than
the highest threat score, Commander still has a true positive rate of 1
in both datasets, but a false positive rate of 1.9% in the Oilrig dataset
and a false positive rate of 3.4% in the Sandworm dataset. That is, the
threat score assigned by Commander to the true attack is significantly
higher than those assigned to most benign graphs in each dataset.
Further, the detection result comparison between Cad and Commander’s final stage in Table 3 shows that Commander outperforms Cad
by accurately detecting the true attacks in both datasets, thanks to
Commander’s more advanced tracing module than Cad’s. By investigating
attack graphs output from Cad, e.g., Fig. 13, we find that these are
more abstract graphs, whose graph granularity is only comparable to
the initial high-level attack graphs produced at the end of Commander’s
preliminary detection stage. Consulting on the documentation, which
was provided by the vendor and includes a guideline for Cad’s logging
configuration and detection logic for various kinds of attacks, reveals
that Cad does not collect system log events, but rather a subset of
authentication & logon event types. This leads to limited visibility
into intra-machine system activities, which we deem indispensable for
accurate tracing and attack detection. Our engagement with the vendor
over weeks confirmed that Cad’s detection on Pass-the-Hash attacks has
known issues, contributing to Cad’s false negative on the Oilrig dataset.

System

Precision

Recall

F1 score

COMMANDER
Elastic
Chronicle
Sigma
CAD

1.0
0.005
0.024
0.002
1.0

1.0
0.667
0.5
1.0
0.667

1.0
0.01
0.046
0.004
0.8

Fig. 10. CDF of threat score for false and true alerts.

We further compare the detection results w.r.t. precision, recall
and F1 score in Table 4, in which the detection results on the Oilrig
dataset and on the Sandworm dataset are merged for brevity. Table
4 shows that our system Commander significantly outperforms existing
systems. Note that the superiority of Commander over existing systems
is proved not only by Table 3 and Table 4, but also by the succinct and
complete attack graphs it produces, e.g., Fig. 7 and Fig. 12. Commander’s
ability to produce concise and informative attack graphs explaining
attack history of cross-machine multi-phase APT attacks is invaluable
for security analysts in practice. Other systems lack this functionality.
We compare attack graphs produced by Commander and Cad further in
Section 8.4.
8.3. Response time
Fig. 11 shows the cumulative distribution function of Commander’s
response time on each dataset. Commander’s response time is measured
per attack graph, i.e., the time it takes to output a single attack graph
with calculated threat score. Intuitively, Commander has longer response
time than its four integrated detectors, as only after the preliminary
detection stage has finished, i.e., all four integrated detectors have
finished, Commander’s next two stages start, i.e., whole network tracing
and threat score assignment. For each attack graph, the time spent on
Commander’s stage two & three, vary between only 7 s and 32 s on the
15

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

two sessions can only be found by a persistence detector. The cyber
persistence detector in Commander’s stage one correctly identifies this
as a WMI persistence instance [113]. Otherwise the backward tracing
would lead to nowhere, but a overly premature termination of the
whole network tracing and largely incomplete attack graph, like the
one Hades would output in this case.
Further, another logon session of user Carol (0 × 3c1ac442)
is spotted during the forward tracing from the newly found session
(0 × 3c128d94), as the session (0 × 3c1ac442) is a persistence
execution logon session of another persistence instance Registry run
keys [81]. That is, the attacker has executed two persistence techniques
on the same logon session 0 × 3c128d94, so that every time the
machine restarts, the attacker gets a call back from a System logon
session, or every time the user Carol logs in, the attacker receives a call
back from Carol’s logon session like 0 × 3c1ac442. On the System
logon session (0 × 3e7), the attacker conducted credential access
without performing privilege escalation first, and port forwarding &
port opening through host-based firewall, since this logon session is
always assigned with the highest privilege. On the user logon session 0 × 3c1ac442, the attacker executed several Active Directory
discovery techniques with the programs net, setspn and oradad.
Note that chronologically speaking, instead of in the tracing order, this
happened before the lateral movement to the OT Domain Controller
and the Engineering Workstation.
Next, backward tracing from the session 0 × 3c128d94 reveals
a logon session of user Alice (0 × 4500223c) on the Workstation_1
from the IT domain. Further backward tracing from Alice’s session
0 × 4500223c discloses that this session is a persistence execution
logon session, and hence is linked to the corresponding persistence
setup logon session, i.e., 0 × 3e7 on the Workstation_1. Forward
tracing from the session 0 × 4500223c leads to another user logon
session of Dave (0xe6362) on the Engineering Workstation in the
OT domain, thanks to the list of source & destination logon session
pairs output from the port forwarding detector from Commander’s stage
one. Without this list, the tracing would end prematurely at this step.
Finally, forward tracing from Dave’s logon session 0xe6362 results in
a session on the field controller Hitachi Energy RTU500 and several
activities in it that can be mapped to ICS TTP alerts, e.g., modify
parameters, further increasing the threat score of this attack graph.
In comparison, attack graphs produced by our compared system Cad
are incomplete and much less informative, slowing down attack investigation by security analysts. For the attack scenario in the AVIATOROilrig dataset, Cad did not output an attack graph, as it has missed the
attack. Fig. 13 shows the attack graph produced by Cad for the attack
scenario in the AVIATOR-Sandworm dataset. Comparing to the attack
graph produced by our system Commander in Fig. 12, Cad’s attack graph
is much less valuable for security analysts in practice. First, it does not
present the complete list of machines and users that are involved in
the attack. Second, due to Cad’s limited tracing ability, its attack graph
reveals no malicious system activities conducted by the attacker. That
is, when presented with such an attack graph, security analysts need to
perform laborious, error-prone manual analysis to assess the attacker’s
traversal inside the network for attack remediation and recovery.

Fig. 11. CDF of response time of Commander.

Oilrig dataset, and between 11 s and 52 s on the Sandworm dataset,
indicating how much longer Commander’s response time is than its
integrated detectors. For more than 90% of attack graphs, Commander’s
stage two & three takes less than 18 s in total per graph on the Oilrig
dataset, and less than 20 s in total per graph on the Sandworm dataset.
However, the absolute response time to output an attack graph
ranges from 103 s to 128 s on the Oilrig dataset, and from 586 s to
627 s on the Sandworm dataset. This is due to a bottleneck resulted
from Commander’s system design, i.e., Commander’s stage two only starts
after all four preliminary detectors in its stage one have finished. The
preliminary detection response time (marked with a dotted line pointed
by a red arrow in Fig. 11) takes the largest of response times of
the four preliminary detectors running in parallel. On both datasets,
the cyber persistence detector has the longest response time among
the four detectors, reaching 96 s on the Oilrig dataset and 575 s on
the Sandworm dataset. The response time of the cyber persistence
detector, as a preliminary detector, is a value accumulated from times
for processing all suspected persistence instances identified on each
host. That is, this detector’s longer response time on the Sandworm
dataset results from the fact that it has picked out noticeably more
suspected persistence instances to process on this dataset, including
false-positive ones.
8.4. Reconstructed attack graphs
Whereas the reconstructed attack graph for the attack in the Oilrig
dataset (Fig. 7) is already interpreted in Section 6.2, we discuss in
this section the true positive attack graph from the Sandworm dataset
in Fig. 12. The tracing on this attack starts from an authentication
anomaly mimicking the Golden-Ticket behavior in the OT domain. In
Golden-Ticket attacks [112], attackers use stolen credentials of the
krbtgt account from a domain controller for authentication, and can
impersonate any domain account, essentially having the ability to move
laterally to any domain-joined machine.
After identifying the Gateway Server as the source host, from which
the attacker has used the stolen credentials, and the Engineering Workstation as the destination host to which the attacker has moved, Commander performs forward tracing from the involved logon session under
user Dave (0 × 2b8d50717) on the Engineering Workstation, and
forward & backward tracing from the involved System logon session
(0 × 3e7) on the Gateway Server. The forward tracing from the session
0 × 2b8d50717 leads to no further machine or logon session, while
the forward tracing from the session (0 × 3e7) on the Gateway Server
exposes a user logon session (0 × 2b65c94e) belonging to the domain
administrator on the OT domain controller.
As Commander also checks the list of persistence setup & execution
logon session pairs during the tracing, and correctly identified the session (0 × 3e7) on the Gateway Server as a persistence execution logon
session, the backward tracing from this session results in a logon session
under user Carol (0 × 3c128d94) on the Gateway Server, i.e., the
corresponding persistence setup logon session. The link between these

9. Limitations & discussion
Although Commander has successfully detected the true attacks in
both datasets, the reconstructed attack graph from the Sandworm
dataset is not entirely complete. In practice, a PIDS’s ability to reconstruct
concise and complete attack graphs is invaluable for security analysts, as
detection systems cannot guarantee perfect accuracy. Further investigation
by security analysts is vitally important for further removing false
positives and locating true attacks. Concise and complete attack graphs
automatically generated from PIDS can substantially speed up the
investigation process, and therefore contribute to swift attack recovery
& remediation.
16

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

Fig. 12. An attack graph created by Commander on the AVIATOR dataset for the extended Sandworm attack scenario.

to design a sound scheme for accurately associating initial accesses on
different machines from the same attacker.
Another limitation of Commander is its reliance on logs & log integrity. Like any other detection system that relies on logs, i.e., every
system listed in Section 3, our system Commander would likely fail at
detecting the attacks, if attackers have managed to manipulate critical
logs without leaving any trace, or there are no logs generated or left
at all. This would be a very effective evasion technique for attackers
to bypass our system Commander. However, as mentioned in Section 7,
there are already efforts being put into preventing log manipulation.
For instance, Windows introduced Protected Event Logging [96] to secure
logs from unauthorized access. Nevertheless, we believe that more log
protection techniques need to be proposed in future study in case
attackers can bypass existing ones.
A further limitation of system log-based detection systems like
Commander is the demand for detailed system logs, which require more
computational resources to collect and process. On the one hand, this
presents a challenge for resource-constrained devices. On the other
hand, it may take longer to detect complex attacks that spread over
many machines. Therefore, it is important for future study to investigate techniques that can enhance logging efficiency. For instance, one
may selectively, dynamically log system activities based on the system
environment, in order to reduce the amount of likely non-essential
system logs.

Fig. 13. An attack graph created by Cad on the AVIATOR dataset for the extended
Sandworm attack scenario.

During its tracing on the true attack in the Sandworm dataset
(Fig. 9), Commander could not identify the attacker’s activities on the
Workstation_2, the Domain Controller and the Linux Server in the IT
domain. The whole network backward tracing from the OT domain,
where the initial authentication anomaly was detected, could only
lead to the Workstation_1 in the IT domain. This is because, in the
Sandworm emulation plan, the attacker has gained three initial accesses
(edges labeled as 1, 2 and 3, in Fig. 9) on different machines during
the engagement, instead of an initial access on one machine. Since no
system logs from the attacker’s machine are present, Commander’s logon
session-based tracing cannot causally link the three initial accesses
from the attacker’s machine. Note that Commander cannot detect initial
access, nor can any other PIDS. Rather, it adds network sockets with an
external IP address in the reconstructed attack graphs as an annotation,
suggesting where the initial access could come from. For the sake of
simplicity, we only show one such network socket in Fig. 7 and Fig. 12.
Commander does not perform backward tracing on an edge connecting
to a network socket, as, in Section 4, we show that network connection based-tracing would inevitably lead to the dependency explosion
problem.
Moreover, although Linux distributions also implement the concept
of logon sessions, popular Linux logging tools like Auditd [95] and
CamFlow [114] do not insert logon session ID into system log events,
nor do any other Linux logging tools we are aware of. That is, Commander cannot perform logon session-based tracing on Linux system logs
yet. We leave it to future work (1) to extend existing Linux logging
tools with means for embedding logon session ID into system logs, (2)

9.1. Generality of Commander
We developed Commander with considerations of its deployability
in real world in mind, in order to avoid possible deployment-related
restrictions in practice. First, Commander leverages system logs and
authentication & logon logs collected by popular industry-standard
instrumentation-free logging frameworks. Second, Commander’s whole
network tracing rests on a general concept called logon session-based
execution partitioning and tracing, which is not tied to any specific environment. Third, Commander’s detection rules are based on the MITRE
ATT&CK Matrix [8], which is a widely recognized framework esteemed
17

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.

by organizations worldwide. Leading security vendors, therefore, not
only contribute to this framework but also utilize it as a reference
for the development of detection mechanisms. Fourth, Commander interfaces with Elasticsearch, a widely utilized tool for event searching
and threat analysis within organizations. Last, Commander is evaluated
on a typical organization network as specified in the MITRE emulation
plans. These characteristics should make Commander easily deployable
and adaptable in various environments.

In future work, we plan to improve existing Linux auditing frameworks by including logon session ID into system logs emitted by them.
Moreover, we aim to create a reliable approach for associating initial
accesses on different machines in the same network from the same
attacker.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Qi Liu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis,
Data curation, Conceptualization. Kaibin Bao: Writing – review &
editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration. Veit Hagenmeyer: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project
administration, Funding acquisition.

9.2. Integration of machine learning models into Commander
Currently, Commander is a heuristic-based system. So are all integrated detectors in Commander’s preliminary detection stage. Future
study can explore the possibilities of enhancing Commander’s robustness by incorporating machine learning-based detectors, in particular
graph neural network-based ones, in case APT actors find new evasion
techniques or tactics. However, we believe that only when a machine
learning approach can accurately learn an attack technique’s semantics,
it would truly outperform heuristic-based approaches. We refer readers
to [25] for a case study-based comparison between a heuristic-based
approach and graph neural network-based approaches for detecting a
specific evasion tactic: persistence. It shows that state-of-the-art machine learning-based systems [23,24] fail to learn persistence attacks’
semantics, and hence cannot outperform the heuristic-based approach.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by funding of the Helmholtz Association
(HGF) through the Energy System Design (ESD) program.

9.3. Deploying Commander as a real-time detection system

Data availability

Our system Commander has been tested in an emulated environment,
but not yet deployed in a production system. There is a concern that
the detailed logs required by Commander would violate users’ privacy,
especially because, by combining recorded system activities and logon
activities, Commander can reveal which employee has carried out what
activities at what time. A proper log anonymization mechanism needs
to be designed in future work and incorporated into Commander.
Deploying Commander as a real-time detection system in a production system requires the capability of real-time log ingestion, which
can be easily realized, as Commander interfaces with Elasticsearch and
relies on Auditbeat [115] and Winlogbeat [116] to ship Linux and
Windows logs, respectively, to Elasticsearch. These log ingestion tools
provided by Elastic are designed to ship logs off of endpoints as soon as
possible. With real-time log ingestion, graphs created by Commander will
be dynamically updated. A critical step of Commander’s graph creation
or update is the query process for finding relevant events and filtering
out irrelevant ones. Although Elasticsearch provides scalable and near
real-time search for log query, the cumulative computing resources
required cannot be underestimated. That is, operators need to strike
the right balance between the available computing resources and the
graph update frequency according to the level of real-time requirement,
when deploying Commander.

Data will be made available on request.

References
[1] CrowdStrike, Inc. CrowdStrike 2023 global threat report. 2023, URL https:
//www.crowdstrike.com/global-threat-report/.
[2] CrowdStrike, Inc. CrowdStrike 2023 threat hunting report. 2023, URL https:
//www.crowdstrike.com/resources/reports/threat-hunting-report/.
[3] Shastri V. Attackers set sights on active directory: Understanding your
identity exposure. 2023, URL https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/attackersset-sights-on-active-directory-understanding-your-identity-exposure/. [Accessed:
Dec. 2023].
[4] Shastri V. Endpoint and identity security: A critical combination to stop modern
attacks. 2023, URL https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/unifying-endpoint-andidentity-security/. [Accessed: Dec. 2023].
[5] Dragos. Credentials across IT and OT environments. 2024, URL https:
//www.dragos.com/blog/minimizing-the-consequences-of-shared-credentialsacross-it-and-ot-environments/. [Accessed: July 2024].
[6] Falcon OverWatch Team. 8 LOLBins every threat hunter should know.
2023, URL https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/8-lolbins-every-threat-huntershould-know/. [Accessed: May 2023].
[7] Trellix. Trellix threat report 2023. 2023, URL https://www.trellix.com/
advanced-research-center/threat-reports/feb-2023/.
[8] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE matrix. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
matrices/enterprise/. [Accessed: Jan. 2023].
[9] Alahmadi BA, Axon L, Martinovic I. 99% false positives: A qualitative study of
SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms. In: USeNIX security symposium.
2022, p. 2783–800.
[10] Hossain MN, Milajerdi SM, Wang J, Eshete B, Gjomemo R, Sekar R, et al.
SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction from COTS audit data. In:
USeNIX security symposium. 2017, p. 487–504.
[11] Hassan WU, Mark L, Aguse N, Bates A, Moyer T. Towards scalable cluster
auditing through grammatical inference over provenance graphs. In: Network
and distributed system security. NDSS, 2018, p. 1–15.
[12] Milajerdi SM, Gjomemo R, Eshete B, Sekar R, Venkatakrishnan VN. HOLMES:
Real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious information flows.
In: IEEE symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2019, p. 1137–52.
[13] Hassan WU, Guo S, Li D, Chen Z, Jee K, Li Z, et al. NoDoze: Combatting threat
alert fatigue with automated provenance triage. In: Network and distributed
system security. NDSS, 2019, p. 1–15.
[14] Hassan WU, Bates A, Marino D. Tactical provenance analysis for endpoint
detection and response systems. In: IEEE symposium on security and privacy
(S&P). 2020, p. 1172–89.

10. Conclusion & future work
In this paper, we present Commander, a novel PIDS for detecting
long-running APT campaigns with the so-called low-and-slow strategy
in industrial-sector organizations. Commander’s modular design allows
it to incorporate specialized detectors for evasion attack techniques,
ensuring robust and accurate whole network tracing. We evaluate
Commander on two extended MITRE emulation plans, featuring APT
groups most known for their attacks against industrial-sector organizations in the past. Our evaluation results demonstrate that Commander
can accurately and efficiently detect cross-machine multi-phase APT
attacks, and reconstruct concise and insightful attack graphs, crucial for
understanding the intrusions and proper attack recovery & remediation.
We believe that Commander’s ability to perform robust whole network
tracing could make it a valuable asset for XDR (eXtended Detection and
Response) systems.
18

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.
[15] Hossain MN, Sheikhi S, Sekar R. Combating dependence explosion in forensic
analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics. In: IEEE symposium on
security and privacy (S&P). 2020, p. 1139–55.
[16] Hassan WU, Noureddine MA, Datta P, Bates A. OmegaLog: High-fidelity
attack investigation via transparent multi-layer log analysis. In: Network and
distributed system security. NDSS, 2020, p. 1–16.
[17] Xiong C, Zhu T, Dong W, Ruan L, Yang R, Cheng Y, et al. Conan: A
practical real-time APT detection system with high accuracy and efficiency.
IEEE Trans Dependable Secur Comput 2022;19(1):551–65. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TDSC.2020.2971484.
[18] Irshad H, Ciocarlie G, Gehani A, Yegneswaran V, Lee KH, Patel J, et al. TRACE:
Enterprise-wide provenance tracking for real-time APT detection. IEEE Trans Inf
Forensics Secur 2021;16:4363–76.
[19] Han X, Pasqueir T, Bates A, Mickens J, Seltzer M. UNICORN: Runtime
provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats. In: Network and
distributed system security. NDSS, 2020, p. 1–18.
[20] Zeng J, Wang X, Liu J, Chen Y, Liang Z, Chua T-S, et al. Shadewatcher:
Recommendation-guided cyber threat analysis using system audit records. In:
IEEE symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2022, p. 489–506.
[21] Alsaheel A, Nan Y, Ma S, Yu L, Walkup G, Celik ZB, et al. ATLAS: A
sequence-based learning approach for attack investigation. In: USeNIX security
symposium. 2021, p. 3005–22.
[22] Dong F, Wang L, Nie X, Shao F, Wang H, Li D, et al. DISTDET: A Cost-Effective
distributed cyber threat detection system. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2023,
p. 6575–92.
[23] Cheng Z, Lv Q, Liang J, Wang Y, Sun D, Pasquier T, et al. KAIROS: Practical
intrusion detection and investigation using whole-system provenance. In: IEEE
symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2024, p. 9–28.
[24] Rehman M, Ahmadi H, Hassan W. FLASH: A comprehensive approach to
intrusion detection via provenance graph representation learning. In: IEEE
symposium on security and privacy (S&P). 2024, p. 142–61.
[25] Liu Q, Shoaib M, Rehman MU, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V, Hassan WU. Accurate
and scalable detection and investigation of cyber persistence threats. 2024,
arXiv:2407.18832. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18832.
[26] Liu Q, Bao K, Hassan WU, Hagenmeyer V. HADES: Detecting active directory
attacks via whole network provenance analytics. 2024, arXiv:2407.18858. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18858.
[27] Liu Q, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V. AVIATOR: A MITRE emulation plan-derived
living dataset for Advanced Persistent Threat detection and investigation. In:
Proceedings of 2024 IEEE international conference on big data. 2024, p.
5592–601.
[28] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE ATT&CK. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre.org.
[Accessed: Jan. 2023].
[29] The MITRE Corporation. Persistence. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
tactics/TA0003/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[30] The MITRE Corporation. T1563. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
techniques/T1563/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[31] The MITRE Corporation. T1090.001. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
techniques/T1090/001/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[32] Siemens. Digital protection relays and control - SIPROTEC 5. 2024,
URL https://www.siemens.com/global/en/products/energy/energy-automationand-smart-grid/protection-relays-and-control/siprotec-5.html. [Accessed: June
2024].
[33] Hitachi Energy. RTU500 series function and software. 2024, URL
https://www.hitachienergy.com/products-and-solutions/substation-automationprotection-and-control/products/remote-terminal-units/rtu500-series-functionand-software. [Accessed: June 2024].
[34] The MITRE Corporation. ICS matrix. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
matrices/ics/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[35] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE adversary emulation library. 2023, URL https:
//github.com/center-for-threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library.
[Accessed: Jan. 2023].
[36] The MITRE Corporation. Sandworm emulation plan. 2023, URL
https://github.com/center-for-threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_
library/tree/master/sandworm. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
[37] The MITRE Corporation. Oilrig emulation plan. 2023, URL https:
//github.com/center-for-threat-informed-defense/adversary_emulation_library/
tree/master/oilrig. [Accessed: Oct. 2023].
[38] NIST. Guide to industrial control systems (ICS) security. 2024, URL https://
nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-82r2.pdf. [Accessed:
July 2024].
[39] Mathezer S. Introduction to ICS security part 3. 2024, URL https://www.sans.
org/blog/introduction-to-ics-security-part-3/. [Accessed: July 2024].
[40] 6sense. Identity and access management. 2024, URL https://6sense.com/tech/
identity-and-access-management. [Accessed: July 2024].
[41] Krishnamoorthi S, Carleton J. Active directory holds the keys to your kingdom,
but is it secure? 2020, URL https://www.frost.com/frost-perspectives/activedirectory-holds-the-keys-to-your-kingdom-but-is-it-secure/.

[42] Security W. Cybersecurity in the AVEVA enterprise SCADA product – going
deep. 2024, URL https://waterfall-security.com/ot-insights-center/ot-securitystandards/cybersecurity-in-the-aveva-enterprise-scada-product-going-deep-jakehawkes-episode-122/. [Accessed: July 2024].
[43] Liu Q, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V. Binary exploitation in industrial control systems:
Past, present and future. IEEE Access 2022;10:48242–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2022.3171922.
[44] Nmap. 2024, https://nmap.org/. [Last accessed: May, 2024].
[45] Microsoft. Setspn. 2024, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previousversions/windows/it-pro/windows-server-2012-r2-and-2012/cc731241(v=ws.
11). [Accessed: Jan. 2024].
[46] Ho G, Dhiman M, Akhawe D, Paxson V, Savage S, Voelker GM, et al. Hopper:
Modeling and detecting lateral movement. In: USeNIX security symposium.
2021, p. 3093–110.
[47] King IJ, Huang HH. Euler: Detecting network lateral movement via scalable
temporal link prediction. In: Network and distributed system security. NDSS,
2022, p. 1–16.
[48] Husák M, Yang SJ, Khoury J, Klisura Ð, Bou-Harb E. Unraveling network-based
pivoting maneuvers: Empirical insights and challenges. In: Goel S, Nunes de
Souza PR, editors. Digital forensics and cyber crime. Cham: Springer Nature
Switzerland; 2024, p. 132–51.
[49] Ho G, Sharma A, Javed M, Paxson V, Wagner D. Detecting credential
spearphishing in enterprise settings. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2017, p.
469–85.
[50] Novo C, Morla R. Flow-based detection and proxy-based evasion of encrypted
malware C2 traffic. In: Proc. ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and
security. 2020, p. 83–91.
[51] Alageel A, Maffeis S. Hawk-eye: holistic detection of APT command and control
domains. In: Proceedings of the 36th annual ACM symposium on applied
computing. SAC ’21, 2021, p. 1664–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3412841.
3442040.
[52] Ozery Y, Nadler A, Shabtai A. Information based heavy hitters for real-time
DNS data exfiltration detection. In: Network and distributed system security.
NDSS, 2024, p. 1–15.
[53] Oprea A, Li Z, Yen T-F, Chin SH, Alrwais S. Detection of early-stage enterprise
infection by mining large-scale log data. In: 2015 45th annual IEEE/iFIP
international conference on dependable systems and networks. 2015, p. 45–56.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/DSN.2015.14.
[54] Wilkens F, Ortmann F, Haas S, Vallentin M, Fischer M. Multi-stage attack
detection via kill chain state machines. In: Proceedings of the 3rd workshop
on cyber-security arms race. CYSARM ’21, 2021, p. 13–24. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/3474374.3486918.
[55] Ah-Fat P, Huth M, Mead R, Burrell T, Neil J. Effective detection of credential
thefts from windows memory: Learning access behaviours to local security
authority subsystem service. In: 23rd international symposium on research in
attacks, intrusions and defenses (RAID 2020). San Sebastian; 2020, p. 181–94.
[56] Han W, Xue J, Wang Y, Zhang F, Gao X. APTMalInsight: Identify and
cognize APT malware based on system call information and ontology
knowledge framework. Inform Sci 2021;546:633–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.ins.2020.08.095, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0020025520308628.
[57] Shenderovitz G, Nissim N. Bon-APT: Detection, attribution, and explainability
of APT malware using temporal segmentation of API calls. Comput Secur
2024;142:103862. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.103862, URL https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404824001639.
[58] Dong F, Li S, Jiang P, Li D, Wang H, Huang L, et al. Are we there yet?
An industrial viewpoint on provenance-based endpoint detection and response
tools. In: ACM conference on computer and communications security. CCS,
2023, p. 2396–410.
[59] Xu Z, Wu Z, Li Z, Jee K, Rhee J, Xiao X, et al. High fidelity data reduction for
big data security dependency analyses. In: ACM conference on computer and
communications security. CCS, 2016, p. 504—-516.
[60] Tang Y, Li D, Li Z, Zhang M, Jee K, Xiao X, et al. Nodemerge: Template based
efficient data reduction for big-data causality analysis. In: ACM conference on
computer and communications security. CCS, 2018, p. 1324—-1337.
[61] Hossain MN, Wang J, Sekar R, Stoller SD. Dependence-Preserving data compaction for scalable forensic analysis. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2018, p.
1723–40.
[62] Michael N, Mink J, Liu J, Gaur S, Hassan WU, Bates A. On the forensic validity
of approximated audit logs. In: Proceedings of the 36th annual computer
security applications conference. ACSAC ’20, 2020, p. 189–202. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/3427228.3427272.
[63] Fei P, Li Z, Wang Z, Yu X, Li D, Jee K. SEAL: Storage-efficient causality analysis
on enterprise logs with query-friendly compression. In: 30th USeNIX security
symposium (USeNIX security 21). USENIX Association; 2021, p. 2987–3004,
URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/fei.
[64] Ding H, Yan S, Zhai J, Ma S. ELISE: A storage efficient logging system powered
by redundancy reduction and representation learning. In: USeNIX security
symposium. 2021, p. 3023–40.
19

Journal of Information Security and Applications 91 (2025) 104057

Q. Liu et al.
[65] Lee KH, Zhang X, Xu D. High accuracy attack provenance via binary-based
execution partition. In: Network and distributed system security. NDSS, 2013,
p. 1–16.
[66] Ma S, Lee KH, Kim CH, Rhee J, Zhang X, Xu D. Accurate, low cost and
instrumentation-free security audit logging for Windows. In: Annual computer
security applications conference. ACSAC, 2015, p. 401–10.
[67] Ma S, Zhang X, Xu D. ProTracer: Towards practical provenance tracing by
alternating between logging and tainting. In: Network and distributed system
security. NDSS, 2016, p. 1–15.
[68] Ma S, Zhai J, Wang F, Lee KH, Zhang X, Xu D. MPI: Multiple perspective attack
investigation with semantic aware execution partitioning. In: USeNIX security
symposium. 2017, p. 1111–28.
[69] Keromytis AD. DARPA transparent computing E3. 2023, URL https:
//github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing/blob/master/README-E3.md.
[Accessed: Sept. 2023].
[70] Manzoor E, Milajerdi SM, Akoglu L. Fast memory-efficient anomaly detection
in streaming heterogeneous graphs. KDD ’16, 2016, p. 1035–44. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1145/2939672.2939783.
[71] Torrey J. DARPA transparent computing. 2023, URL https://github.com/darpai2o/Transparent-Computing. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
[72] Chen T, Dong C, Lv M, Song Q, Liu H, Zhu T, et al. APT-kgl: An intelligent
APT detection system based on threat knowledge and heterogeneous provenance
graph learning. IEEE Trans Dependable Secur Comput 2022;1–15. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TDSC.2022.3229472.
[73] Zeng J, Chua ZL, Chen Y, Ji K, Liang Z, Mao J. WATSON: Abstracting behaviors
from audit logs via aggregation of contextual semantics. In: Network and
distributed system security. NDSS, 2021, p. 1–18.
[74] Wang S, Wang Z, Zhou T, Sun H, Yin X, Han D, et al. Threatrace: Detecting
and tracing host-based threats in node level through provenance graph learning.
IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 2022;17:3972–87.
[75] Fang P, Gao P, Liu C, Ayday E, Jee K, Wang T, et al. Back-Propagating system
dependency impact for attack investigation. In: 31st USeNIX security symposium
(USeNIX security 22). Boston, MA; 2022, p. 2461–78.
[76] Yang F, Xu J, Xiong C, Li Z, Zhang K. Prographer: An anomaly detection system
based on provenance graph embedding. In: USeNIX security symposium. 2023,
p. 4355–72.
[77] Jia Z, Xiong Y, Nan Y, Zhang Y, Zhao J, Wen M. MAGIC: Detecting advanced
persistent threats via masked graph representation learning. 2023, arXiv:2310.
09831.
[78] SigmaHQ. Sigma. 2023, URL https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma. [Accessed:
Sept. 2023].
[79] Microsoft. LSA logon sessions. 2024, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/
windows/win32/secauthn/lsa-logon-sessions. [Accessed: Feb. 2024].
[80] Microsoft. Security auditing. 2023, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/
auditing/security-auditing-overview. [Accessed: May 2023].
[81] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE T1547.001. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre.
org/techniques/T1547/001/. [Accessed: May 2023].
[82] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE T1543.003. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre.
org/techniques/T1543/003/. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
[83] Koecher I. Are disconnected RDP sessions ticking time bombs in your network?.
2024, URL https://www.eventsentry.com/blog/2022/04/are-disconnected-rdpsessions-ticking-time-bombs-in-your-network.html. [Accessed: June 2024].
[84] Pamnani V. 4778(S): A session was reconnected to a Window Station. 2024, URL https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/
it-pro/windows-10/security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4778. [Accessed:
June 2024].
[85] Pamnani V. 4800(S): The workstation was locked.. 2024, URL https:
//learn.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/windows/it-pro/windows10/security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4800. [Accessed: June 2024].
[86] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE T1550.002. 2023, URL https://attack.mitre.
org/techniques/T1550/002/. [Accessed: Dec. 2023].
[87] Russinovich
M.
Psexec.
2024,
URL
https://learn.microsoft.com/enus/sysinternals/downloads/psexec. [Accessed: June 2024].
[88] The MITRE Corporation. T1136.001. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
techniques/T1136/001/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[89] Segal E. Alert fatigue. 2023, URL https://www.forbes.com/sites/
edwardsegal/2021/11/08/alert-fatigue-can-lead-to-missed-cyber-threats-andstaff-retentionrecruitment-issues-study/?sh=4c96871035c9. [Accessed: Aug.
2023].

[90] Elastic NV. Elasticsearch. 2023, URL https://www.elastic.co/. [Accessed: Sept.
2023].
[91] Elastic NV. EQL search. 2023, URL https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/
elasticsearch/reference/current/eql.html. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
[92] NetworkX developers. NetworkX. 2023, URL https://networkx.org/. [Accessed:
Sept. 2023].
[93] West Health Institute. PyVis. 2023, URL https://pyvis.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[Accessed: Sept. 2023].
[94] Russinovich M, Garnier T. System monitor. 2023, URL https://learn.microsoft.
com/en-us/sysinternals/downloads/sysmon. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
[95] Grubb S. The Linux audit daemon. 2023, URL https://linux.die.net/man/8/
auditd. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
[96] Wheeler S, Lombardi M. About logging windows. 2023, URL https:
//learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/
about/about_logging_windows?view=powershell-7.3. [Accessed: April 2023].
[97] Red Hat, Inc. Red hat security guide. 2023, URL https://access.redhat.com/
documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/security_guide/chapsystem_auditing. [Accessed: Feb. 2023].
[98] van Opstal M, Arbaugh W. DARPA OpTC. 2023, URL https://github.com/
FiveDirections/OpTC-data. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
[99] Hamilton BA. when the lights went out. 2024, URL https://www.boozallen.
com/content/dam/boozallen/documents/2016/09/ukraine-report-when-thelights-went-out.pdf. [Accessed: June 2024].
[100] Cherepanov A. WIN32/indUStroyer: A new threat for industrial control systems.
2024, URL https://web-assets.esetstatic.com/wls/2017/06/Win32_Industroyer.
pdf. [Accessed: June 2024].
[101] Slowik J. Anatomy of an attack: Detecting and defeating crashoverride. 2024,
URL https://www.dragos.com/wp-content/uploads/CRASHOVERRIDE2018.pdf.
[Accessed: June 2024].
[102] Mandiant. Sandworm disrupts power in Ukraine using a novel attack against
operational technology. 2024, URL https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/
threat-intelligence/sandworm-disrupts-power-ukraine-operational-technology/.
[Accessed: June 2024].
[103] The MITRE Corporation. OilRig. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/groups/
G0049/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[104] Mandiant. New targeted attack in the middle east by APT34. 2024, URL
https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/threat-intelligence/targeted-attack-inmiddle-east-by-apt34/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[105] Dragos Threat Intelligence. CHRYSENE threat group operations. 2024, URL
https://www.dragos.com/threat/chrysene/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[106] Liu L, Engelen G, Lynar T, Essam D, Joosen W. Error prevalence in NIDS
datasets: A case study on CIC-IDS-2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS-2018. In: 2022 IEEE
conference on communications and network security. CNS, 2022, p. 254–62.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CNS56114.2022.9947235.
[107] Liu Q, Bao K, Hagenmeyer V. AVIATOR dataset. 2024, URL https://gitlab.kit.
edu/kit/iai/rsa/aviator. [Accessed: November 2024].
[108] Elastic. Elastic detection rules. 2023, URL https://github.com/elastic/detectionrules. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
[109] Google Security Operations. Chronicle detection rules. 2023, URL https://
github.com/chronicle/detection-rules. [Accessed: Sept. 2023].
[110] Mirolyubov E, Taggett M, Hinner F, Patel N. Magic quadrant for endpoint
protection platforms. 2023, URL https://www.gartner.com/doc/reprints?id=12FFCXFOM&ct=231025&st=sb.
[111] Mellen A. The forrester new wave: Extended detection and response (XDR)
providers, Q4 2021. 2021, URL https://www.forrester.com/report/theforrester-new-wave-tm-extended-detection-and-response-xdr-providers-q42021/RES176400.
[112] The MITRE Corporation. Golden ticket. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
techniques/T1558/001/. [Accessed: Jan. 2024].
[113] The MITRE Corporation. T1546.003. 2024, URL https://attack.mitre.org/
techniques/T1546/003/. [Accessed: June 2024].
[114] Pasquier T, Han X, Goldstein M, Moyer T, Eyers D, Seltzer M, et al. Practical whole-system provenance capture. In: Symposium on cloud computing
(SoCC’17). ACM; 2017.
[115] Elastic NV. Lightweight shipper for audit data. 2023, URL https://www.elastic.
co/beats/auditbeat/. [Accessed: June 2023].
[116] Elastic NV. Lightweight shipper for windows event logs. 2023, URL https:
//www.elastic.co/beats/winlogbeat/. [Accessed: June 2023].

20