3948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Contrastive Multi-Knowledge Graph Learning
for Fake News Detection
Bingbing Xie , Xiaoxiao Ma , Shan Xue , Jian Yang , Member, IEEE, Jia Wu , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Hao Fan

Abstract—The widespread dissemination of fake news on social
media platforms has significantly disrupted people’s daily lives,
causing substantial inconvenience and loss. Although fake news
detection has captivated great research effort, most of the existing
works either overlook the complementary ground knowledge, formulated in individual knowledge graphs (KGs) or ignore multiple
aspects of knowledge in different knowledge graphs. In this paper,
we propose a novel contrastive learning framework for investigating the complementary knowledge in different knowledge graphs,
which achieves superior fake news detection performance. We first
model three components within news articles (i.e., news content, entities, and topics) as a heterogeneous graph (HG). Subsequently, we
leverage the valuable factual evidence among real-world entities,
which is enclosed in two open-source knowledge graphs (Wikidata
and DBpedia), and augment the heterogeneous graph into three
augmented graphs. We then fuse knowledge-enhanced high-level
news representations from each augmented graph and extract
a unified news representation through our proposed contrastive
multi-knowledge graph learning framework, which is ultimately
utilized to identify fake news. We conduct extensive experiments
on four public fake news datasets and demonstrate the superiority
of our method over nine state-of-the-art baselines regarding five
widely-used evaluation metrics (i.e., accuracy, precision, recall,
F1-score, and ROC).
Index Terms—Fake news detection, anomaly detection,
knowledge graph, graph neural networks (GNNs), contrastive
learning.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE popularity of social media, like Twitter, Instagram,
Weibo, etc., has significantly stimulated and accelerated

Received 14 April 2024; revised 28 March 2025; accepted 28 March 2025.
Date of publication 6 May 2025; date of current version 25 August 2025. This
work was supported in part by Chinese National Natural Science Foundation
under Project 72474160 and Project 72374161, in part by Australian Research
Council under Project DP230100899, and in part by Macquarie University Data
Horizons Research Centre and Applied Artificial Intelligence Centre supported
this work. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Dusit Niyato. (Bingbing Xie
and Xiaoxiao Ma contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors:
Jia Wu; Hao Fan.)
Bingbing Xie is with the School of Information Management, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China, and also with the School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2113, Australia (e-mail: bingbing.
xie@hdr.mq.edu.au, xbbice@outlook.com).
Xiaoxiao Ma, Shan Xue, Jian Yang, and Jia Wu are with the School of
Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2113, Australia (e-mail:
xiaoxiao.ma2@hdr.mq.edu.au; emma.xue@mq.edu.au; jian.yang@mq.edu.au;
jia.wu@mq.edu.au).
Hao Fan is with the School of Information Management, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: hfan@whu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3567296

the online intercommunication of people all over the globe. As is
well-known, advanced communication techniques undoubtedly
bring people closer together but come with the exponential
growth of fake news produced on social media platforms. The
rapid spread of fake news not only has an undesirable impact
on individuals, such as damage to reputation, influence on
decision-making, and erosion of trust but also causes serious
consequences to society, like economic degradation, social division, and even public panic [1], [2]. Meanwhile, it is extremely
challenging for individuals or organizations lacking prior knowledge to avoid being affected by fake news due to its complex
content, underscoring the urgency of fake news detection [3],
[4], [5].
To effectively identify fake news, recent efforts could be
divided into two categories, i.e., natural language processing
(NLP)-based methods and graph neural networks (GNNs)-based
methods. The former methods investigate fake news detection as a text classification task, where NLP techniques (e.g.,
long short-term memory neural networks (LSTM), recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) [6], convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [7], etc.) are applied to detect fake news from semantic
features of news articles. However, approaches in this line fail to
explore the news structural features, such as the relations among
entities, topics, and news. Therefore, the latter methods model
structural and textual information of news articles as graphs
and employ GNNs for fake news detection [8]. The overall
framework of GNN-based approaches can be summarized as:
1) First, the content and structure of news are extracted to construct informative graphs. 2) Second, the designed graph neural
networks are used to generate efficient news representations.
3) Eventually, the news is classified as fake or real based on
the representations. These works concentrate on modeling news
articles and designing effective graph neural networks but ignore
exploring the rich ground-truth knowledge in various knowledge
graphs (KGs) for fake news detection.
The factual knowledge in KGs, such as Wikidata [9], DBpedia [10], and YAGO [11], has been widely used in the industrial
community to determine investment opportunities, analyze the
quality of products, etc. [12] The affluent knowledge in KGs
can naturally serve as a factual basis for detecting fake news.
However, previous works rarely focus on combining KGs and
GNNs for fake news detection. Although CompareNet [13]
attempts to use external knowledge for a simple extension of
news embeddings, its straightforward approach cannot comprehensively explore KGs and leads to compromised performance.

2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION

Fig. 1. The Construction of HG. HG is constructed in light of entities and
related topics extracted from news content.

Additionally, the complementary role among multiple KGs
has not been probed. Fake news on social media frequently
spans various fields, making it challenging to rely solely on
a single KG for comprehensive factual evidence in fake news
detection. To be concrete, different KGs have their knowledge
tendencies, which may limit their ability to address the diverse
range of fake news circulating online. For example, a certain
KG is abundant in medical knowledge, while another excels in
financial knowledge [14], [15]. A single KG is insufficient for
detecting fake news, as social media news often spans multiple
domains. Thus, complementary knowledge from different KGs
offers more comprehensive factual information for detecting
fake news.
Existing studies (e.g., CompareNet [13]) combining a single
KG with GNNs for fake news detection overlook the value
of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs, limiting
performance improvements. Therefore, we propose a novel
Contrastive Multi-Knowledge Graph Learning for Fake News
Detection (Congrat), to provide fine-grained and multi-faceted
ground-truth knowledge for enhancing detection performance,
where multi-knowledge is the complementary factual evidence
from different KGs. To be specific, we first model news content
and structure as a heterogeneous graph (HG) with three types
of nodes (i.e., news, topics, and entities), as shown in Fig. 1.
Our approach thoroughly investigates the relationships among
these nodes to obtain high-level news representations. To capture
factual evidence for fake news detection, we then utilize the entities in two KGs to incorporate various factual information from
different KGs into multi-view heterogeneous graphs and thereby
enhance the integral graph content through graph augmentations. Then, we employ graph contrastive learning to assimilate
the information of the constructed HG and two ground-truth
KGs for learning news embeddings. The graph contrastive learning module possesses the capability to thoroughly absorb the
complementary knowledge from multiple KGs, thereby offering
substantial tangible evidence to detect fake news. After the
learning process, we acquire valuable representations of news
articles that encapsulate abundant information regarding both
news content and KGs. These representations are subsequently
utilized to accurately classify fake news from extensive news

3949

data. Moreover, we conduct additional investigations to explore
the impact of elements in the HG and KGs on our task. The main
contributions of this research can be summarized as follows:
r To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to explore
multiple aspects of knowledge encapsulated in different
KGs for fake news detection. Factual knowledge in different KGs provides complementary information about the
ground truth and is capable of serving as the factual basis
for fake news detection.
r Our innovative Congrat framework introduces an adaptive
capacity to digest ample textual and structural information
from news articles. Simultaneously, it harnesses graph
contrastive learning to effectively absorb complementary
knowledge from two distinct KGs. Specifically, we incorporate complementary knowledge from two KGs to
enhance our built HG through three different graph per1 ). Then, we employ graph
spectives, as detailed in Fig. 2(
contrastive learning to comprehensively compare factual
information across these three graph perspectives. This
allows us to investigate the impact of integrating knowledge from multiple KGs on fake news detection. Through
extensive experiments, we shed light on the remarkable
role of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs in
improving the performance of fake news detection.
r We conduct comprehensive experiments1 on four realworld datasets to verify the effectiveness of our proposed
Congrat. The results demonstrate its superior performance
compared with nine cutting-edge baselines on the evaluation metrics of accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score,
and ROC. Simultaneously, the ablation study confirms the
role of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs for
enhancing fake news detection performance.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we summarize previous research in the following three fields: knowledge graph embedding, graph neural
networks, and fake news detection.
A. Knowledge Graph Embedding
Knowledge graph embedding (KGE) target mapping triplets
of KGs into a low-dimensional, dense, and interpretable space,
thereby preserving as much knowledge as possible for downstream tasks like link prediction [16], anomaly detection [17],
[18], [19], fake news detection [20], [21], [22], etc. KGE approaches can be categorized into three distinct groups: translation, semantic matching, and neural network models. The
translation models attempted to interpret the relationships as
a translational distance between head and tail entities, where
the scoring function evaluates triplet plausibility by inversely
correlating it with the magnitude of this distance [23], [24], [25].
The semantic matching models, e.g., RESCAL [26], QuatE [27],
and ComplEx [28], aimed to qualify the semantic compatibility
between entities and relations by employing scoring functions,
which compute the similarity of their latent representations
1 https://github.com/KG4FD/Congrat

3950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 2. The Framework of Congrat. Firstly, a heterogeneous graph HG with three types of nodes (i.e. news, entities, and topics) is constructed according to news
content. Then, two open-source knowledge graphs are leveraged to add ground-truth knowledge into the HG for generating three augmented graph views (I, II,
III), as shown in 
2 . Next, three views are input to attention-based GNNs for encoding news embeddings, detailed in 2. Afterward, the generated hj , hi and hk
are used for learning the contrastive loss. Finally, we concatenate news embeddings by three views to predict news with label y  .

through dot product or tensor factorizations. The neural network
models aspired to compute plausibility scores by jointly processing the head entities, relations, and tail entities through a neural
architecture, which learns non-linear interactions to evaluate the
semantic validity of KG triplets [29], [30], [31], [32].
B. Graph Neural Networks
In recent years, graph neural networks have emerged as
a dominant paradigm for modeling topologically structured
data, achieving exceptional performance by iteratively aggregating neighborhood information to capture structural and relational dependencies [33], [34], [35]. GNNs are compatible with
data across numerous domains, which can be roughly categorized into graph convolutional networks, graph autoencoders,
graph attention networks, graph generative networks, and graph
spatial-temporal networks [36], [37], [38]. To date, a large number of scholars and organizations have attempted to use GNNs
for various tasks (e.g., clustering [39], anomaly detection [40],
multi-task learning [41], fake news detection [42], etc.), which
achieved commendable results [43], [44]. In addition, the recent
advent of graph contrastive learning (GCL) has significantly
advanced the capabilities of GNNs. By extending the idea of
contrastive learning, originally prevalent in visual representation tasks, to graph neural networks, GCL enables more generalizable, transferrable, and robust representation learning on
graph structure data [45], [46], [47]. However, as an emerging
methodology, GCL remains underexplored in diverse application contexts, particularly in the realm of fake news detection.
C. Fake News Detection
Recently, fake news detection techniques can be broadly
divided into NLP-based and graph-based methods.

NLP-based approaches leverage traditional machine learning
or deep learning techniques to analyze linguistic patterns and
semantic cues from news articles’ textual content, probably
augmented by external knowledge bases, e.g., decision trees,
support vector machines (SVM), RNNs, bidirectional LSTMs,
CNNs, and other techniques [21], [48], [49], [50], [51]. Although
these methods have a strong impression of enhancing detection
performance, they do suffer from the drawback of neglecting
news structures (e.g., the relations between news and topics [52],
[53]). Such a limitation may constrain further advancements
in detecting fake news. However, incorporating the structural
elements of news articles into the detection workflow could
be vital for achieving even higher levels of effectiveness in
identifying fake news.
Therefore, graph-based approaches are introduced to consider
the spatial structures of news articles in fake news detection. The
methods of this line can be classified into social context-based
and content-based approaches. The former aimed to represent
the available auxiliary information on social networks (e.g., user
comments, user profiles, user behaviors, etc. [54], [55], [56],
[57]) as graphs to learn news embeddings for classifying whether
the news is fake. However, accessing social media user information and profiles is usually challenging due to privacy concerns. In this research, we focus on content-based approaches,
which targeted leveraging textual and structural features of news
content (e.g., topics, entities, etc. [13]) to construct graphs for
training GNNs to detect fake news. For example, Yao et al. [8]
introduced TextGCN, a graph convolutional network that constructs a co-occurrence graph from textual features (e.g., worddocument relationships) for text classification like fake news
detection. Afterward, Karnyoto et al. [58] adapted TextGCN for
fake news detection by integrating text augmentation, enhancing
its robustness to linguistic variations in news content. In addition,
HGAT and CompareNet, proposed by Hu et al. [13], [53], trained

XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION

GNNs on complex heterogeneous graphs to enhance detection
capabilities, with CompareNet specifically incorporating KGs
for the task. However, CompareNet simply concatenated news
embeddings and KG embeddings, which resulted in the underutilization of the valuable information present in the KG
knowledge.
Up to now, none of the former studies have integrated graphs
and KGs into the learning process of GCL and investigated the
impact of complementary knowledge from multiple KGs on
fake news detection. Therefore, our work aims to bridge these
research gaps by exploring news articles and diverse KGs with
the specially designed Congrat framework.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Definition
1) Definition 1: (Heterogeneous Graph): A heterogeneous
graph is defined as HG = {N , E, A, V, R}, where N =
{ni }m
i=1 denotes the set of nodes, xij ∈ E depicts an edge
between node ni and node nj , A = {ai }m
i=1 is the set of node
attribute vectors, V and R represent the set of node types and
edge types. A key condition for a heterogeneous graph is that
|V| + |R| > 2, ensuring diversity in node and edge types.
2) Definition 2: (Knowledge Graph): A knowledge graph
KG contains numerous triplets, each of which can be uniformly
depicted as KG = {< s, r, t >}, where s, t, and r are head
entities, tail entities, and their relations, respectively.
B. Problem Statement
In this article, we define fake news as news articles on traditional and social media that contain factual inaccuracies or
distortions. Therefore, graph-based fake news detection aims to
detect anomalous/untrustworthy news with maximum accuracy
performance. Given a heterogeneous graph HG, each node ni
is a piece of news with an assigned label yi ∈ {0, 1}, where 1
represents that the news is fake. When detecting, only a subset of
node labels is known. After the detection procedure, the unseen
fake news can be detected. In this paper, we attempt to use a
HG defined in Section III-A1 and multiple KGs depicted in
Section III-A2 to detect fake news with high accuracy.
IV. METHODOLOGY
In this part, we introduce our proposed Contrastive MultiKnowledge Graph Learning for Fake News Detection (Congrat). Section IV-A summarizes the general procedure of how
our proposed model, Congrat, works superiorly. Sections IV-B
to IV-E delve into the intricate details of the constituent elements
within Congrat, specifically tailored to achieve outstanding fake
news detection. Section IV-F provides a detailed explanation of
the algorithm complexity associated with Congrat.
A. The Overview of Framework
To enhance fake news detection, we incorporate multiple
ingredients into Congrat, i.e., three types of nodes in our built
HG, and the complementary knowledge from two KGs. The

3951

overview of Congrat is shown in Fig. 2, which comprises four
modules, i.e., data modeling, knowledge preserving news embedding, multi-source knowledge enhancement via contrastive
learning, and fake news detector. Initially, we construct a heterogeneous graph HG for news articles and then use graph
1 ) to enhance the
augmentation techniques, as shown in Fig. 2(
factual information in the HG with two KGs, Wikidata5M [59]
and DBpedia [10]. Next, we input the knowledge-augmented
graphs into the three designed graph attention networks (GAT)
encoders to learn aggregated news embeddings by multi-edges in
2 ). Afterward, we employ contrastive
the HG, detailed in Fig. 2(
learning to compute the pairwise loss of the three knowledgeaugmented graphs and subsequently use cross-entropy to cal3 ).
culate the overall classification loss, as shown in Fig. 2(
In this manner, Congrat can detect fake news with superior
performance.
B. Data Modelling
1) Heterogeneous Graph Contruction: Social media platforms categorize the vast volume of published news articles
based on their respective topics for efficient management.
Hence, topics play a pivotal role as one of the primary properties
defining real-world news. Furthermore, it is widely recognized
that news articles typically encompass various entities that incorporate compelling and trending information to captivate the
readers’ interests. Thus, entities within news articles represent
another essential property that contributes to the definition and
understanding of news. Since topics and entities play significant roles in expressing the content of news articles, these two
properties also offer valuable insights for fake news detection.
In this research, we build a HG with three types of nodes
(i.e., news, entities, and topics) according to previous work [53],
where V = {n, t, e} and R = {xn,t , xn,e , xe,e }. n, t and e
denote news nodes, topic nodes, and entity nodes in the HG
respectively. xn,t , xn,e and xe,e represent news-topic edges,
news-entity edges, and entity-entity edges, detailed in Fig. 1.
We propose a series of steps designed to effectively construct
the heterogeneous graph including node-level extraction, multiedge connection, and feature initialization.
— Node-Level Extraction: In our built HG, each news article
is created as a news node with labels. For entity nodes, we
leverage TAGME,2 the entity link tool, to obtain various
entities in news content. For topic nodes, we utilize the
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model to extract the
topics of each news article. We set a threshold α = 50 as
the total number of topics for the LDA model and select
the top K relevant topics (detailed in Section V-F) for each
news article.
— Multi-Edge Connection: After creating nodes for HG, the
next step involves establishing connections for each pair
of nodes. We build three types of edges in the HG. The
news-topic edge xn,t is connected when the news article is
related to the topic. Each news node has K news-topic
edges, detailed in Section V-F. The news-entity edge
2 https://sobigdata.d4science.org/group/tagme/

3952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

xn,e is constructed when the news article contains the
entity, while each news node potentially has numerous
news-entity edges. The entity-entity xe,e is linked when
the cosine similarity score surpasses a threshold β = 0.5.
— Feature Initialization: We employ natural language techniques (i.e., Doc2vec, term frequency-inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF), and one-hot encoding) to obtain initial feature vectors for nodes in the HG. For news nodes,
TF-IDF and Doc2vec are leveraged to encode the content
of each news article. In addition, TF-IDF and one-hot are
applied to initialize the feature vectors for entity nodes
and topic nodes. These methods are capable of capturing
abundant features encapsulated in three types of HG nodes.
2) Knowledge Graph Embeddings: A knowledge graph KG
encompasses valuable real-world knowledge that can provide
factual information for fake news detection. Such knowledge is
encapsulated in KG triplets consisting of head entities, relations,
and tail entities. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the knowledge within a single KG might not cover all aspects of the world.
Therefore, incorporating complementary knowledge from multiple KGs can provide more comprehensive and sufficient factual
evidence for our task.
In this study, we employ HG entities to match relevant
knowledge entities from two open-source KGs, ensuring that
knowledge entities do not overlap with news nodes in HG.
Notably, we use Wikidata and DBpedia as factual knowledge
for three reasons: 1) Both are founded on Wikipedia, a trusted
and authoritative repository of factual knowledge. 2) Both are
RDF-based KGs that can be readily queried with SPARQL [60].
3) Both provide ample factual evidence to detect fake news,
covering a broad spectrum of knowledge. 4) DBpedia extracts
structured data from Wikipedia’s infoboxes, whereas Wikidata
offers secondary or tertiary data sourced from Wikipedia. Therefore, the knowledge within the two KGs strengthens each other
in a mutually beneficial manner. After obtaining multiple KG
knowledge entities, we expect to achieve excellent detection
performance by exploring knowledge entity features. Various
approaches that represent knowledge features in previous works
(e.g., QuatE [27], TransE [23], etc.) have been proven effective in preserving valuable KG information while generating
low-dimensional representations of knowledge entities, which
can be efficiently utilized for downstream tasks. Our proposed
framework, Congrat, can seamlessly integrate and collaborate
with different KG embedding methods. Owing to the simplicity
of TransE, we utilize the same embedding criterion and learn
KG entity representations as the factual basis.
hs + h r ≈ ht

(1)

where s is the head entity, t represents the tail entity, and r
denotes the relation between them. After training, each KG entity
will be allocated a vector hkg which is generated by moving s
and the t closer to each other along the direction of r. we leverage
hkg of two KGs as factual evidence to implement heterogeneous
graph augmentation.
3) Graph Augmentation: The techniques of graph augmentation can be generally split into feature-level, node-level, edgelevel, and subgraph-level, graph-level approaches. In this study,
we explore novel methods within the scope of node interpolation

and edge rewiring to augment our built HG. This involves
utilizing entities from two KGs to link news nodes and HG
entity nodes, thereby altering the internal structure of the HG
for augmentation purposes. Specifically, we incorporate factual
background knowledge to expand the HG into three distinct
1 . The augmentation
augmentation views, detailed in Fig. 2(
operations can be summarized: 1) View I is enhanced by connecting the entities from KGI (i.e., Wikidata) with news nodes
and entity nodes in the HG, i.e., xn,kgi , and xe,kgi . 2) View II
serves as the anchor of subsequent contrastive learning, which
requires background knowledge from both KGs. Hence, it is
augmented by linking the entities from two KGs with news and
entities nodes in the built HG, i.e., xn,kgi , xe,kgi , xn,kgii and
xe,kgii . 3) View III, similarly, is strengthened by building edges
for the KGII (i.e., DBpedia) entities, news and entity nodes in
the modeled heterogeneous graph, i.e., xn,kgii and xe,kgii .
C. Knowledge Preserving News Embedding
After the acquisition of a content-based heterogeneous graph
and two open-source knowledge graphs, features of the HG and
KGs need to be encoded to acquire valuable news representations
for promoting further fake news detection. In our proposed
framework, we leverage the commonly used GAT to generate
high-level news embeddings for the aforementioned augmented
graph views. Specifically, we employ multiple attention schemes
to learn news embeddings by aggregating neighboring information through the four-type relations surrounding news nodes in
the three augmented graphs (i.e., xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi , xn,kgii ),
2 ). After getting news representations of
detailed in Fig. 2(
different graph views, the contrastive module is introduced to
distinguish positive samples from negative samples in highdimensional spaces for training GNNs to generate the ultimate
news embeddings for deep fake news detection.
1) Node-Level Representation Generation: There are three
kinds of nodes in our built HG (i.e., news, entities, and topics).
Congrat develops the graph attention encoder, as shown in
2 ), which targets generating high-level embeddings for
Fig. 2(
nodes according to their relations and factual knowledge. For
three types of nodes in HG, the attention mechanism measures
the impact of their neighbors based on the surrounding relations
when projecting them into a latent space.
— Graph View I Embedding Generation: Particularly, for
nodes in graphs, Congrat introduces distinct attention layers tailored to news, entities, and topics for aggregating
neighboring information of nodes.
a) Topic node embeddings: Our approach leverages an attention neural network layer to generate their embeddings because
the type of topic nodes’ neighbors is only one (i.e., news nodes).
Therefore, the attention layer follows news-topic relation xn,t
to propagate node information via:

x
x
x
x
x
h t,in,t = ai,in,t ht,in,t +
ai,jn,t ht,jn,t ,
(2)
j∈S xn,t (i)
x

where h t,in,t is the learned embedding of topic node i according
x
x
to news-topic relation xn,t . ht,in,t and ht,jn,t represent the input
feature vectors of topic i and its neighboring news node j
respectively. S xn,t (i) denotes a set of surrounding news nodes

XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION

x

x

of topic i. ai,in,t and ai,jn,t depict the self-attention parameter of
topic i and the attention coefficient between topic i and news
node j respectively, which can be calculated as follows:
 

exp bτ σ[hτnode,i  hτnode,j ]
 
 , (3)
aτi,j = 
τ
τ σ[hτ
k∈S τ (i)∪{i} exp b
node,i  hnode,k ]
where σ(·) represents an activation function like Tanh,
LeakyReLU, etc. hτnode,i and hτnode,j express the feature representations of node i and its adjacent node j according to a
specific relation τ . b denotes trainable variables and  represents
the “concatenate” operation for multiple matrices.
b) Entity node embeddings: Congrat designs three attention
layers to digest the neighboring information for entity nodes
according to three relations. According to a specific relation τ ,
the attention layer learns entity embeddings by:

τ
aτi,j hτe,j ; τ ∈ {xe,e , xn,e , xe,kgi },
h e,i = aτi,i hτe,i +
j∈S τ (i)

(4)
where h τe,i represents the output representation of entity i according to a specific relation τ , S τ (i) is a set of surrounding
nodes of entity i according to the relation τ . aτi,i and aτi,j denote
the self-attention of entity i and the attention between i and its
adjacent nodes according to τ , which are quantized in the same
way as (5).
c) News node embeddings: Congrat leverages three attention
layers to generate news node embeddings according to the
neighboring relations (i.e., news-topic, news-entity, news-kgi),
and the method to obtain representations is measured as:
 

exp bτ σ[hτn,i  hτn,i ]
τ
 
 hτn,i
h n,i = 
τ σ[hτ  hτ ]

exp
b
n,i
k∈S τ (i)∪{i}
n,k
 

exp bτ σ[hτn,i  hτn,j ]

 
 hτn,j ,
+

τ
τ
τ

σ[hn,i  hn,k ]
j∈S τ (i)
k∈S τ (i)∪{i} exp b
(5)
where h τn,i is the learned representations of news nodes, S τ (i)

is a set of neighboring nodes of news node i under a specific
relation τ . Notably, τ ∈ {xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi }.
— Graph View II Embedding Generation: Congrat generates
the representations of topic nodes, and entity nodes according to (2) and (4), whereas the entity relations will
be τ ∈ {xe,e , xn,e , xe,kgi , xe,kgii }. The news embeddings
are generated by (5) but the relation set will be τ ∈
{xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi , xn,kgii }.
— Graph View III Embedding Generation: Our model obtains topic embeddings and entity embeddings through
(2) and (4), while the relation set of entity nodes will
be τ ∈ {xe,e , xn,e , xe,kgii }. Similarly, the news representations are computed by (5) and the relations will be
τ ∈ {xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgii }.
2) News Representation Aggregation: For the three augmented graph views, Congrat learns news embeddings through
prior steps that comprise affluent and valuable information from

3953

topics, entities, and two KGs. To generate unified news representations, we aggregate the news embeddings learned from the
augmented graph views by the following equation:
h i = Aggr(h n,i ),
τ

(6)

where Aggr(·) denotes an aggregation function. To avoid information loss, we utilize the “sum” operation to accumulate the
obtained news representations h τn,i as h i . For the three different
graph views, τ will be distinguishable but belong to subsets of
{xn,e , xn,t , xn,kgi , xn,kgii }.
D. Multi-Source Knowledge Enhancement Via Contrastive
Learning
In this section, we introduce a graph contrastive loss to
improve the performance of fake news detection. Generally,
the news embeddings generated by GAT encoders only explore
the internal information propagation in each graph view but
fail to investigate the effect of complementary knowledge from
multiple KGs on our task. To achieve this target, graph contrastive learning is a potent approach that can mine external
complementary information between varying augmented graph
views. Therefore, we design a contrastive module to further
explore how complementary knowledge from KGs influences
fake news detection.
Specifically, we generate three graph views to augment factual information for the original HG by capturing ground-truth
knowledge from two open-source KGs. Then, we acquire news
representations of each graph view through our devised GAT
encoders. Next, we employ contrastive learning to enforce the
embeddings of news nodes representing the same news article in
the three graph views to agree with each other and be different
from other news nodes. For any news node i, its embedding
in view II, hi is treated as the anchor. The two embeddings of
this news node i generated in the other graph views, hj and
hk are treated as positive samples. The embeddings hq of the
news nodes other than i in the three graph views are regarded as
negative samples. Formally, we compute the contrastive loss of
positive pairs by:


exp(θ(hi , hj )/Ω) + exp(θ(hi , hk )/Ω)

 

,
 /Ω)
exp(θ
h
,
h
q
i
q∈Δ(i)
i∈Φ
(7)
where θ is the cosine function to compute the similarity of two
nodes. Ω denotes a temperature parameter. Φ = {1, 2, . . . , 3m}
represents all news nodes generated by three graph views, each
of which is m. Δ(i) = Φ \ i denotes all negative samples.
Since View I and View III are employed to commence contrastive learning with View II, we have two positive samples and
3m − 3 negative samples for each news node. In addition, we
can comprehensively investigate the impact of complementary
knowledge from two KGs on the final detection performance by
comparing three graph views.
Lcontras = −

log

E. Fake News Detector
The three graph attention encoders generate high-quality news
embeddings by affecting each other via contrastive learning. For

3954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

fake news detection, Congrat concatenates each news representation learned by three graph views as the final news embeddings
hi,f inal and feeds it to a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for
learning a deep fake news detector. The detector predicts the
label of news i via:
yi = Γ(ρ(hi,f inal ; π)),

Algorithm 1: Congrat Framework.

(8)

where ρ(·) denotes an activation function that outputs a twodimensional vector with probabilities of news i’s label. Γ(·)
selects the label with the maximum probability to assign to
news i. π depicts trainable variables in MLP layers. The fake
news classification loss function is defined as cross-entropy.
Therefore, the overall loss of Congrat is measured as follows:
Loverall = λLcontras + CrossEntropy(yi , yi ),

(9)

where yi is the actual label of news i and yi is the predicted
label. λ is the hyperparameter to control the contribution of the
contrastive module. By minimizing the overall loss Loverall ,
Congrat will predict news labels with high accuracy.
Notably, Congrat outputs the representations of all news
nodes in HG and trains the detector by labels ytrain of Ntrain .
When new data is input, our model extracts relevant entities
and topics, integrating them into the existing graph for learning.
Since the model’s weights are not dependent on the size of HG,
we incrementally train the model with incoming data from the
previous checkpoints, like training settings of large language
models, demonstrating the real-world usability and adaptability
of our model.

TABLE I
STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS

F. Algorithm Complexity
Algorithm 1 shows the details of Congrat. Apart from applying TransE for extracting knowledge entities’ features, the
multiple GAT layers and contrastive learning module introduce the most computational costs to Congrat. Specifically, the
complexity of each GAT layer employed for generating news
embeddings is approximately O(mDD + |E|D ), where m is
the total number of nodes in our constructed HG, |E| is the total
number of edges, |D| is the input dimension and D is the embedding dimension. The contrastive learning algorithm complexity
is O(2m2 D ) and the overall computational cost of Congrat
will be O(mDD + |E|D + 2m2 D ) ≈ O(|E|D + m2 D ) ≈
O(m2 D ) since D < m and |E| ≤ m2 .
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we perform extensive experiments to address
the following research questions:
r RQ1: How does the performance of Congrat compare to
that of other state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines for fake
news detection?
r RQ2: How does complementary knowledge involved in
KGs help improve performance?
r RQ3: How does the contrastive learning (CL) module
benefit overall achievement?
r RQ4: How does Congrat perform when using different
hyperparameters?

r RQ5: How does the number of topics for each news article
influence the detection performance?

r RQ6: How computationally efficient is Congrat compared
with baselines?
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: To verify the performance of our proposed
model, we utilize four widely used datasets to conduct experiments consisting of COVID-19, FakeNewsNet, PAN2020,
and Liar. COVID-19 [61] contains news articles related to the
2019 coronavirus pandemic collected from diverse social media platforms, e.g., Twitter, Facebook, etc. FakeNewsNet [62]
comprises news content and associated posts, encompassing
political news and entertainment news that have been factchecked by reputable sources such as Politifact and Gossipcop.
PAN2020 [63] is a fake news dataset labeled by authentic
platforms such as PolitiFact or Snopes. Liar [64] is a fake
news dataset that collects concise statements with labels from
PolitFact. The statistical information of the datasets we used in
this research is shown in Table I.

XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF CONGRAT AND BASELINES

2) Baselines: We conduct comparative experiments in comparison to nine SOTA baseline methods to demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed Congrat. These baselines can be
divided into text-based approaches, graph-based approaches,
and KG-based approaches, and their detailed information is
discussed as follows:
1) Text-based approaches
r BiLSTM [65]: The model utilizes bi-directional neural
networks to represent the textual content of news and then
detects fake news via obtained news representations.
r RNN [6]: The method identifies fake news from the real
by employing recurrent neural networks to embed news
articles.
r TextCNN [66]: The approach embeds news content by applying a 1D-convolutional network for fake news detection.
r Electra [67]: The technique employs a large language
model, ELECTRA, to represent news articles for detecting
fake news.
2) Graph-based approaches
r TextGCN [8]: The model constructs a simple graph for
news textual and semantic content and then employs graph
convolutional neural networks (GCNs) to classify fake
news.
r AugTextGCN [58]: The approach uses text augmentation
techniques for news data and detects fake news by training
GCN models.
r HGAT [53]: The method models short texts as a heterogeneous graph and then utilizes their designed GCNs to
classify these short texts.
3) KG-based approaches
r KGinformedFD [21]: The approach applies language models to embed news articles and simply combines them with
entity embeddings from a KG for fake news detection.
r ComparNet [13]: The technique generates news embeddings by concatenating KG entity representations and news
representations learned by GCNs. Next, it utilizes the generated news embeddings for fake news detection.
Table II shows the differences between our proposed approach
and the baselines discussed in this article. Notably, there are
some semi-supervised methods like positive-unlabeled learning [57] widely used in the detection of fake news to address
the scarcity of labels. However, our work prioritizes a supervised framework for the integration of high-quality KGs and
graph contrastive learning. Supervised training ensures precise

3955

alignment of news content with KG entities, which is crucial
for modeling complex entity-news dependencies. In contrast,
semi-supervised approaches risk introducing noise or mislinked
entities, compromising detection robustness. Furthermore, our
contrastive learning framework relies on label-guided subgraph
comparisons to distinguish fake/real news, requiring reliable
supervision to avoid adversarial confusion. For fairness, we
exclude comparisons with semi-supervised learning methods in
our experiments.
3) Experimental Settings and Implementation: Our proposed Congrat framework employs a layered structure consisting of two sets of GAT layers aiming to acquire news
high-quality news embeddings for different augmented graph
views according to distinct types of relations accompanying
news nodes, topic nodes, and entity nodes of the HG. eLU and
LeakyReLU are chosen as the activation functions for graph
attention networks and contrastive learning. Meanwhile, Adam
is used as the optimizer with the learning rate, lr = 0.001, and
weight decay, wc = 5e − 4 when backpropagating messages
and minimizing overall loss. We split each dataset into 80%,
10%, and 10% as a training set, a test set, and a validation
set. The maximum of the training epoch is set as 300 with an
early stop when Loverall converges. Unless explicitly specified,
the parameter settings for all baselines are identical to those
employed in our model. We use accuracy, precision, recall,
F1-score, and ROC as evaluation metrics for experimental
results and set the same hyper-parameters of metrics for all
approaches. All experiments are carried out on the Linux server
with 60G RAM and an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU.
B. Model Comparison (RQ1)
Overall Performance: We compare our model with nine SOTA
baselines to detect fake news on four datasets. From the experimental results in Table III and Fig. 3, we make observations as
follows:
r In terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score, Congrat demonstrates its superiority over the majority of baselines on COVID-19, FakeNewsNet, and PAN2020 (except
for precision on COVID-19). On Liar, although BiLSTM
and TextCNN achieve remarkable accuracy and precision,
Congrat outperforms the baseline models in overall performance.
r Regarding the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve, Congrat demonstrates a significantly superior area
under the ROC curve (AUC) compared to nine baselines
on four datasets, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
Comparison with Text-based Approaches (G1): These four
methods achieve decent performance on certain datasets (e.g.,
over 85% accuracy on COVID-19), yet they also exhibit subpar
results (e.g., below 50% recall on Liar). Given the results, the
baselines achieve commendable performance on COVID-19,
particularly Electra. However, their results still lag behind that
of Congrat on COVID-19 (approximately 1%–10%) across all
metrics. On FakeNewsNet, all these approaches achieve acceptable accuracy and precision, whereas Electra’s performance is
second only to Congrat across all metrics. On PAN2020, the

3956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

TABLE III
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS (IN PERCENTAGE) OF CONGRAT IN COMPARISON WITH NINE EXCELLENT BASELINES ON FOUR DATASETS (MEAN ± STDV, BEST IN
BOLD, SECOND BEST IN UNDERLINE)

Fig. 3. The ROC Curves of Congrat and Baselines. To further verify the superiority of our model, the ROC curves on four datasets are provided to compare with
the SOTA baselines, demonstrating Congrat’s excellent performance.

four methods exhibit subpar performance except for the 80.36%
recall of BiLSTM which ranks second only to Congrat. This
is attributed to BiLSTM’s ability to accurately predict true
positive samples. On Liar, BiLSTM and TextCNN attain the
best accuracy and precision but remain far below Congrat across
other metrics. Besides, RNN performs worse than the other
three models. In summary, Congrat significantly outperforms
text-based methods, emerging as the leader in this category
across most metrics.
Comparison with Graph-based Approaches (G2): These
models do not exhibit notable performance on the four datasets
regarding all metrics. Specifically, on COVID-19, TextGCN and
AugTextGCN perform satisfactorily but lag behind Congrat,
while HGAT performs well across all metrics but still falls
short. On FakeNewsNet, the three methods achieve excellent
accuracy, while other metrics are far lower than Congrat (except
HGAT). On PAN2020, TextGCN and AugTextGCN exhibit
subpar precision, recall, and F1-score despite attaining reasonable accuracy. However, HGAT achieves the second-highest
accuracy (63.70%). On Liar, the models achieve acceptable
accuracy but have unsatisfactory precision, recall, and F1-score.
Notably, TextGCN and AugTextGCN perform unstably on different datasets. In addition, the significant variance in Liar’s
results is due to its inherent attributes, such as diverse topics and
multiple sources, which may cause fluctuations in performance
across different methods. Overall, our approach outperforms this
group of methods significantly across all metrics.

Comparison with KG-based Approaches (G3): KGInformedFD and CompareNet leverage KGs to enhance fake news
detection, improving their reliability in distinguishing fake news.
On COVID-19, both approaches perform acceptably across all
metrics, achieving scores above 80%. On FakeNewsNet, KGInformedFD underperforms (below 60% for all metrics), while
CompareNet shows strong performance. On PAN2020, both
approaches achieve acceptable results across four metrics, with
CompareNet’s precision and F1-score ranking second highest
among all models. On Liar, KGInformedFD obtains subpar results while CompareNet performs commendably (nearly above
50% for all metrics), indicating that KGs can indeed enhance
fake news detection. In conclusion, both methods exhibit decent performance on four datasets, while Congrat’s detection
capability still surpasses theirs.
Analysis of HG’s Structure: From the experimental statistics,
Congrat’s performance varies across different datasets. As we
can see, COVID-19 is the top-performing dataset, followed by
FakeNewsNet, PAN2020, and Liar. The main reason is the
coverage of entities in news nodes within KGs. Each news
node is linked to at least three entity nodes, which can be
associated with KG entities. Longer news texts contain more entities, strengthening their connection to KGs and providing more
factual evidence. However, the shorter texts in the Liar dataset
extract fewer entities, resulting in weaker associations with KGs.
Case Study: To qualitatively evaluate the detection results
of our model, we provide four representative cases in Fig. 4,

XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION

3957

TABLE IV
ABLATION TEST ON FOUR DATASETS (MEAN ± STDV, BEST IN BOLD)

Fig. 4. Examples of specific news article detection results. The four possible
outcomes (i.e., FP, FN, TP, and TN) of the fake news detection task are provided
for visual illustration.

enrich news information for detecting fake news. Such knowledge provides factual evidence for news articles and the performance could improve with an increased amount of ground-truth
knowledge provided.
C. Ablation Study (RQ2)

including false positive (FP), false negative (FN), true positive
(TP), and true negative (TN). FP/FN cases often arise from
politicized language, KG staleness, or misleading structural
patterns in the contrastive graph. For example, during graph
contrastive training, Congrat learns to distinguish ‘fake’ and
‘true’ by maximizing agreement between semantically similar
nodes. However, structurally similar but semantically distinct
cases (e.g., factual reports about political figures) may be pushed
closer to the ‘fake’ cluster if KGs lack nuanced relational edges
(e.g., ‘Sir Keir Starmer’ → ‘COVID-19 isolation guidelines’ →
‘public health protocols’). Fortunately, Congrat demonstrates
strong detection performance across multiple datasets (i.e., TP
and TN). This success can be attributed to the solid factual
foundation provided by the complementary knowledge of KGs
and the comprehensive training enabled by graph contrastive
learning.
Generally speaking, our model exhibits apparent advantages
in comparison to the other nine competing methods. The primary
reasons for the superiority are as follows: 1) Congrat leverages
different strategies to learn node embeddings in HG (e.g., LDA
model, Doc2vec, etc.) and aggregate the information for the
final generation of high-quality news representations according
to multiple relations. 2) Meanwhile, GAT-based encoders are
employed to adaptively learn the node representations of three
augmented graphs, which can extract valuable information for
the final news embeddings. 3) Congrat introduces contrastive
learning to absorb complementary knowledge from different
KGs to detect fake news. Multiple KGs are digested by our
model, which can provide comprehensive factual knowledge to

As shown in Table IV, we conduct an ablation study to
explore how the performance of Congrat changes when different
components (topics, entities, KGI, KGII, and the CL module)
are removed. In the table, ‘Congrat-M6’ refers to a version where
only the initial news embeddings without any element mentioned
above are used for fake news detection. ‘Congrat-M5’ uses the
representations of both topic nodes and news nodes to train
GNNs for detecting fake news. ‘Congrat-M4’ only leverages
the embeddings of entity, topic, and news nodes for detection.
‘Congrat-M3’, ‘Congrat-M2’, and ‘Congrat-M1’ successively
incorporate KGI, KGII, and both KGs into the model, but
without the CL module. Finally, ‘Congrat’ represents the full
model with the CL module used to detect fake news.
According to ablation experiments, ‘Congrat-M6’ attains
subpar performance (e.g., 27.80% precision on FakeNewsNet)
except 92.20% precision on COVID-19 when only considering
the initial news feature vectors. When topics are incorporated
into our model, the performance of ‘Congrat-M5’ is significantly
improved by approximately 2%–29% on COVID-19, 7%–50%
on FakeNewsNet, 3%–15% on PAN2020 and 32%–48% on Liar,
indicating that topics have the potential to enhance detection
performance. When considering news, topics, and entities in
our model for fake news detection, ‘Congrat-M4’ achieves
high precision (79.17%) on FakeNewsNet and further improves
performance on all four datasets. This implies that entities
exert a substantial influence on the overall performance of the
model. When we integrate knowledge graphs into our model,
‘Congrat-M3’, ‘Congrat-M2’, and ‘Congrat-M1’ perform better
than the models without KGs (i.e., ‘Congrat-M6’, ‘Congrat-M5’

3958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Fig. 5. Results of λ and Parameter Sensitivity. To explicitly compare the performance of our model, the hyperparameter λ test of models on four datasets is
provided on the left side. To investigate parameter sensitivity, the 3D figure is presented on the right part, where the x-axis depicts embedding sizes and the y-axis
denotes training epochs, detailed in Section V-E.

and ‘Congrat-M4’), which means that KGs indeed have a significant impact on fake news detection. Meanwhile, ‘Congrat-M3’
and ‘Congrat-M2’ exhibit similar performance across the four
datasets, which indicates that mere substitution of a knowledge
graph can not promote detection performance. When multiple
KGs are considered to identify fake news, the model’s performance experiences a slight enhancement, indicating that only
augmenting the quantity of knowledge graphs does not have
a substantial influence on the model’s performance. When the
contrastive learning module is added to our model, the complete
model achieves the highest scores for almost all metrics on four
datasets. This indicates that the CL module plays an important
role in our model to digest knowledge from multiple KGs.
The CL module facilitates the identification and absorption of
complementary information across distinct KGs through comparison and then generates news representations encompassing
comprehensive semantic, structural, and factual information.
In summary, news, topics, entities, KGI, KGII, and the CL
module have a profound effect on the performance of fake news
detection through ablation study. Notably, incorporating KGs
into GNNs for training is significantly beneficial for performance improvement, and the CL module is extremely important
to digest complementary knowledge from multiple KGs for fake
news detection.

tends to be stable and optimal when λ = 0.2. On PAN2020,
Congrat achieves the best performance when we set λ as 0.1.
Obviously, λ = 0.3 is the optimal parameter for Liar, and our
model showcases the highest level of discriminative power
regarding accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. Based on
the aforementioned observations, it is apparent that the value
of λ must be adjusted according to the specific dataset. This
adjustment allows for better control over the influence of the
contrastive learning module on the overall model, thereby optimizing the model’s effectiveness.
E. Parameter Sensitivity (RQ4)
To assess the sensitivity of parameters, we conduct an evaluation of Congrat using various embedding sizes and training
epochs in GNNs. For illustration purposes, we specifically examine the performance using PAN2020, considering 25 different
combinations of epochs and embedding sizes. The embedding
dimension and epoch are denoted as x and y, respectively,
detailed in Fig. 5(b). The results demonstrate that the model’s
performance exhibits improvement as the parameters increase,
peaking at x = 128 and y = 300. Notably, our model consistently maintains satisfactory results across different parameter
combinations.
F. Analysis of Topic Quantity (RQ5)

D. Contrastive Learning Module Analysis (RQ3)
In this part, we observe the impact of different λ on the
overall classification performance. λ is the significant parameter
to control the contribution of the contrastive loss to Congrat’s
performance, detailed in Fig. 5(a). As shown in the figure, for
different evaluation metrics, the values of λ present diverse
trends across different datasets. On COVID-19, the performance
of our model is optimal when λ = 0.2 in terms of the balance
of all metrics. On FakeNewsNet, our model exhibits significant
performance fluctuations according to different λ but Congrat

To observe the effect of the number of topics per news article
on the model, we conduct experiments to analyze the fluctuating
trend of Congrat’s performance under varying topic numbers,
detailed in Fig. 6. In typical news articles, the number of topics generally remains below ten, otherwise, the news becomes
overly scattered and devoid of coherence. Therefore, we set the
number of topics per news article from 1 to 10. In the radar
map, the outermost values denote the number of topics, while the
radar scale represents the percentage corresponding to accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score. As a metric extends outward, the

XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION

3959

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS

Fig. 6. Analysis of the number of topics per news article. To further demonstrate how the topic quantity influences our model, Radar maps on four datasets
are provided to investigate Congrat’s performance when the number of topics
per news article changes.

TABLE V
RUNNING TIME & GPU MEMORY COST

performance of the metric improves. According to the results on
four datasets, it is apparent that the model is in optimal condition
with a balance of all metrics when the number of topics per news
article is set as 2. Therefore, during the construction of the HG,
we set K = 2 as the top relevant topics of each news node.
G. Computational Cost (RQ6)
We compare the computational efficiency of Congrat with
baselines in terms of both time and memory consumption, as
detailed in Table V. We choose COVID-19 and FakeNewsNet
as the representative datasets. From the table, it is evident
that Congrat not only demonstrates an advantage in terms of
computational cost but also delivers superior performance in
a balanced manner. Specifically, Congrat achieves an optimal
trade-off between moderate running time and memory usage,
outperforming the baseline models that typically exhibit either
higher computational costs or less efficient performance.

In this paper, we develop a novel contrastive multi-knowledge
graph learning, namely Congrat to explore how complementary
knowledge from different knowledge graphs influences fake
news detection. To be concrete, we first construct a heterogeneous graph with three types of nodes (i.e., news, entities, and
topics) based on news content. Then, we extract ground-truth
knowledge entities from two different knowledge graphs to
enhance the factual information for the HG into three augmented
graph views. Next, we employ contrastive learning for the three
graph views, which involves positioning positive samples in
close proximity to each other within a high-dimensional space.
Simultaneously, we ensure that positive and negative samples
are placed far apart from each other within this space. Finally,
we concatenate news embeddings learned from the three graph
views and feed them to an MLP-based classifier for predicting
news labels. Comprehensive experiments on real-world datasets
are conducted to demonstrate the superiority of Congrat by
comparing it with nine baselines, and the further ablation study
verifies the efficacy of each part of our framework.
Discussion and Limitations: Our work focuses on fake news
detection combining KGs and graph contrastive learning, with
broader implications for combating fake news. The ‘truth sandwich’ strategy is to frame misinformation with accurate information before and after its presentation to mitigate false claims.
Although our model doesn’t explicitly implement this structure,
its use of KG-derived factual context aligns with the principle.
By grounding predictions in verified entities and relationships
(e.g., authoritative sources, temporal/logical consistency), our
framework inherently prioritizes truth, similar to the ‘bread’ of
a truth sandwich that surrounds misleading claims. We will explore integrating explicit ‘truth sandwich’ mechanisms into fake
news detection in follow-up work. In addition, the computational
complexity of integrating multiple knowledge graphs increases
the resource requirements, which needs to find strategies for
efficiency improvement.
Future Works: This work also identifies several underexplored areas for future research. These include exploring
techniques to achieve improved performance when detecting
short news articles within fake news datasets, determining which
fake news topics should receive greater attention, such as those in
the health or sports fields, and investigating advanced methods to
capture more semantic features for detecting fake news in textheavy news article data, etc. Furthermore, we will investigate
alternative news data modeling approaches, such as weighted
graphs, bi-directed graphs, and other explainable models.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Roozenbeek and S. Van der Linden, “Fake news game confers psychological resistance against online misinformation,” Palgrave Commun.,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2019.
[2] S. Qian, J. Hu, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Knowledge-aware multi-modal
adaptive graph convolutional networks for fake news detection,” ACM
Trans. Multimedia Comput., Commun., Appl., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1–23,
2021.
[3] L. Cheng, R. Guo, K. Shu, and H. Liu, “Causal understanding of fake
news dissemination on social media,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 148–157.

3960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

[4] K. Sharma, F. Qian, H. Jiang, N. Ruchansky, M. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “Combating fake news: A survey on identification and mitigation techniques,”
Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1–42, 2019.
[5] S. Qian, J. Wang, J. Hu, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Hierarchical multi-modal
contextual attention network for fake news detection,” in Proc. 44th Int.
ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2021, pp. 153–162.
[6] J. Ma et al., “Detecting rumors from microblogs with recurrent neural
networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2016, pp. 3818–3824.
[7] X. Zhou, J. Wu, and R. Zafarani, “SAFE: Similarity-aware multi-modal
fake news detection,” in Proc. PAKDD, 2020, pp. 354–367.
[8] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Graph convolutional networks for text
classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 7370–7377.
[9] D. Vrandečić and M. Krötzsch, “Wikidata: A free collaborative knowledgebase,” Commun. ACM, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 78–85, 2014.
[10] S. Auer, C. Bizer, G. Kobilarov, J. Lehmann, R. Cyganiak, and Z. Ives,
“DBpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data,” in Proc. ISWC ASWC, 2007,
pp. 722–735.
[11] F. M. Suchanek, G. Kasneci, and G. Weikum, “Yago: A core of semantic knowledge,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2007,
pp. 697–706.
[12] X. Zou, “A survey on application of knowledge graph,” in Proc. J. Phys.:
Conf. Ser., IOP Publishing, 2020, vol. 1487, no. 1, Paper 012016.
[13] L. Hu et al., “Compare to the knowledge: Graph neural fake news detection
with external knowledge,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics Int. Joint
Conf. Natural Lang. Process., 2021, pp. 754–763.
[14] X. Wu, J. Duan, Y. Pan, and M. Li, “Medical knowledge graph: Data
sources, construction, reasoning, and applications,” Big Data Mining
Analytics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 201–217, 2023.
[15] Z. Chen, Y. Wang, B. Zhao, J. Cheng, X. Zhao, and Z. Duan, “Knowledge
graph completion: A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 192435–192456,
2020.
[16] Y. Dai, S. Wang, N. N. Xiong, and W. Guo, “A survey on knowledge graph embedding: Approaches, applications and benchmarks,”
Electronics, vol. 9, no. 5, 2020, Art. no. 750.
[17] N. Vaska, K. Leahy, and V. Helus, “Context-dependent anomaly detection
with knowledge graph embedding models,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int Conf.
Automat. Sci. Eng., 2022, pp. 2020–2027.
[18] X. Ma, F. Liu, J. Wu, J. Yang, S. Xue, and Q. Z. Sheng, “Rethinking
unsupervised graph anomaly detection with deep learning: Residuals and
objectives,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 881–895,
Feb. 2025.
[19] X. Ma, R. Li, F. Liu, K. Ding, J. Yang, and J. Wu, “Graph anomaly detection
with few labels: A data-centric approach,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD
Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2024, pp. 2153–2164.
[20] B. Xie et al., “Multiknowledge and LLM-inspired heterogeneous graph
neural network for fake news detection,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social
Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 682–694, Apr. 2025.
[21] B. Koloski, T. S. Perdih, M. Robnik-Šikonja, S. Pollak, and B. Škrlj,
“Knowledge graph informed fake news classification via heterogeneous representation ensembles,” Neurocomputing, vol. 496, pp. 208–226,
2022.
[22] B. Xie, X. Ma, J. Wu, J. Yang, and H. Fan, “Knowledge graph enhanced
heterogeneous graph neural network for fake news detection,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2826–2837, Feb. 2024.
[23] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston, and O. Yakhnenko,
“Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data,” NeuralPS,
vol. 26, pp. 1–9, 2013.
[24] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Feng, and Z. Chen, “Knowledge graph embedding
by translating on hyperplanes,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 28,
no. 1, 2014, pp. 1112–1119.
[25] Y. Lin, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Y. Liu, and X. Zhu, “Learning entity and relation
embeddings for knowledge graph completion,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 29, no. 1, 2015, pp. 2181–2187.
[26] M. Nickel, V. Tresp, and H.-P. Kriegel, “A three-way model for collective
learning on multi-relational data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2011,
vol. 11, no. 10.5555, pp. 3104482–3104584.
[27] S. Zhang, Y. Tay, L. Yao, and Q. Liu, “Quaternion knowledge graph
embeddings,” NeuralPS, vol. 32, pp. 1–11, 2019.
[28] T. Trouillon, J. Welbl, S. Riedel, É. Gaussier, and G. Bouchard, “Complex
embeddings for simple link prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2016, pp. 2071–2080.
[29] A. Bordes, X. Glorot, J. Weston, and Y. Bengio, “A semantic matching energy function for learning with multi-relational data: Application
to word-sense disambiguation,” Mach. Learn., vol. 94, pp. 233–259,
2014.

[30] L. Cai and W. Y. Wang, “KBGAN: Adversarial learning for knowledge
graph embeddings,” in Proc. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang. Technol., 2018, pp. 1470–1480.
[31] T. D. N. Dai Quoc Nguyen, D. Q. Nguyen, and D. Phung, “A novel
embedding model for knowledge base completion based on convolutional
neural network,” in Proc. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
Hum. Lang. Technol., 2018, pp. 327–333.
[32] Z. Li, H. Liu, Z. Zhang, T. Liu, and N. N. Xiong, “Learning knowledge graph embedding with heterogeneous relation attention networks,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3961–3973,
Aug. 2022.
[33] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, 2020.
[34] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A comprehensive
survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[35] G. Corso, H. Stark, S. Jegelka, T. Jaakkola, and R. Barzilay, “Graph neural
networks,” Nature Rev. Methods Primers, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2024.
[36] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” NueralPS,
vol. 29, pp. 1–9, 2016.
[37] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” 2016,
arXiv:1611.07308.
[38] X. Li, J. Wang, and Z. Yan, “Can graph neural networks be adequately
explained? A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2025.
[39] T. H. Chan, G. Yin, K. Bae, and L. Yu, “Multi-task heterogeneous graph
learning on electronic health records,” Neural Netw., vol. 180, 2024,
Art. no. 106644.
[40] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022,
pp. 657–665.
[41] Y. Wang, X. Yao, P. Zhu, W. Li, M. Cao, and Q. Hu, “Integrated heterogeneous graph attention network for incomplete multi-modal clustering,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 132, no. 9, pp. 3847–3866, 2024.
[42] X. Su, J. Yang, J. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Mining user-aware multi-relations
for fake news detection in large scale online social networks,” in Proc.
16th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2023, pp. 51–59.
[43] S. Motie and B. Raahemi, “Financial fraud detection using graph neural
networks: A systematic review,” Expert Syst. With Appl., vol. 240, 2024,
Art. no. 122156.
[44] J. Zhang et al., “Linear-time graph neural networks for scalable recommendations,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 3533–3544.
[45] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive
learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, vol. 33, pp. 5812–5823.
[46] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph contrastive learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
pp. 2069–2080.
[47] D. Xu, W. Cheng, D. Luo, H. Chen, and X. Zhang, “Infogcl: Informationaware graph contrastive learning,” NeuralPS, vol. 34, pp. 30414–30425,
2021.
[48] R. K. Kaliyar, A. Goswami, and P. Narang, “FakeBERT: Fake news
detection in social media with a BERT-based deep learning approach,”
Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 80, no. 8, pp. 11765–11788, 2021.
[49] J. Z. Pan, S. Pavlova, C. Li, N. Li, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “Content based fake
news detection using knowledge graphs,” in Proc. 16th Int. Symp. Wireless
Commun. Syst., 2018, pp. 669–683.
[50] Y. Zhu et al., “Memory-guided multi-view multi-domain fake news detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 7178–7191,
Jul. 2022.
[51] L. Wu, Y. Rao, C. Zhang, Y. Zhao, and A. Nazir, “Category-controlled
encoder-decoder for fake news detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1242–1257, Feb. 2023.
[52] B. Xie, X. Ma, J. Wu, J. Yang, S. Xue, and H. Fan, “Heterogeneous graph
neural network via knowledge relations for fake news detection,” in Proc.
35th Int. Conf. Sci. Stat. Database Manage., 2023, pp. 1–11.
[53] H. Linmei, T. Yang, C. Shi, H. Ji, and X. Li, “Heterogeneous graph
attention networks for semi-supervised short text classification,” in Proc.
Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.-Int. Joint Conf. Natural
Lang. Process., 2019, pp. 4821–4830.
[54] Y. Jin et al., “Towards fine-grained reasoning for fake news detection,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 5746–5754.
[55] Y.-J. Lu and C.-T. Li, “GCAN: Graph-aware co-attention networks for
explainable fake news detection on social media,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics, 2020, pp. 505–514.

XIE et al.: CONTRASTIVE MULTI-KNOWLEDGE GRAPH LEARNING FOR FAKE NEWS DETECTION

[56] N. Ruchansky, S. Seo, and Y. Liu, “CSI: A hybrid deep model for fake
news detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2017,
pp. 797–806.
[57] M. C. de Souza, B. M. Nogueira, R. G. Rossi, R. M. Marcacini,
B. N. Dos Santos, and S. O. Rezende, “A network-based positive and
unlabeled learning approach for fake news detection,” Mach. Learn.,
vol. 111, no. 10, pp. 3549–3592, 2022.
[58] A. S. Karnyoto, C. Sun, B. Liu, and X. Wang, “Augmentation and heterogeneous graph neural network for AAAI2021-COVID-19 fake news
detection,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 2033–2043,
2022.
[59] X. Wang et al., “KEPLER: A unified model for knowledge embedding and
pre-trained language representation,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
vol. 9, pp. 176–194, 2021.
[60] O. Hartig, C. Bizer, and J.-C. Freytag, “Executing SPARQL queries over
the web of linked data,” in Proc. Semantic Web-ISWC 2009: 8th Int.
Semantic Web Conf., Springer, Chantilly, VA, USA, 2009, pp. 293–309.
[61] P. Patwa et al., “Fighting an infodemic: COVID-19 fake news dataset,” in
Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics Constraint., 2021, pp. 21–29.
[62] K. Shu, D. Mahudeswaran, S. Wang, D. Lee, and H. Liu, “FakeNewsNet:
A data repository with news content, social context, and spatiotemporal
information for studying fake news on social media,” Big Data, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 171–188, 2020.
[63] F. Rangel, A. Giachanou, B. H. H. Ghanem, and P. Rosso, “Overview of
the 8th author profiling task at pan 2020: Profiling fake news spreaders on
twitter,” in Proc. CEUR-WS.org, vol. 2696, 2020, pp. 1–18.
[64] W. Y. Wang, “‘Liar, liar pants on fire’: A new benchmark dataset for fake
news detection,” in Proc. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2017, pp. 422–426.
[65] M.-Y. Chen, Y.-W. Lai, and J.-W. Lian, “Using deep learning models to
detect fake news about COVID-19,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol., vol. 23,
no. 2, 1–23, 2022.
[66] Y. Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification,” in
Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang., 2014, pp. 1746–1751.
[67] A. Praseed, J. Rodrigues, and P. S. Thilagam, “Hindi fake news detection
using transformer ensembles,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, 2023,
Art. no. 105731.

Bingbing Xie received the Master’s degree from
Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Information Management, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, and the School of Computing,
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia. He
has authored or coauthored articles in different journals and conferences, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS,
SSDBM, and NPJ Digital Medicine. His research
interests include data mining, machine learning, deep
learning, and medical AI.

Xiaoxiao Ma received the Master’s degree from The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Computing, Macquarie University,
Sydney, NSW, Australia. He has authored or coauthored papers on top data mining journals and conferences, such as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE
AND DATA ENGINEERING, KDD, WWW, EMNLP,
SSDBM, and ICDM. His research interests mainly include data mining, deep learning, anomaly detection,
and machine learning for health and social networks.

3961

Shan Xue received the Ph.D. degree in information management from the School of Management,
Shanghai University, Shanghai, China, in 2018, and
the second Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
Center for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia, in 2019.
She is currently a Lecturer with the School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW. Her
main research interests include artificial intelligence,
machine learning, and knowledge mining.

Jian Yang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in data integration from The Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia, in 1995. She is
currently a Full Professor with the School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
She has authored or coauthored more than 200 journal
and conference papers in international journals and
conferences, such as IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS, INFORMATION SYSTEMS, DATA AND KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING, VLDB, ICDE, ICDM, and CIKM. Her
main research interests include business process management, data science, and social networks. She is currently an Executive
Committee Member of the Computing Research and Education Association
of Australasia.

Jia Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the University of
Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia. He is
currently an Associate Professor and the Research
Director with the Applied AI Centre, School of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW. Since
2009, he has authored or coauthored more than 200
refereed journal and conference papers, such as IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, KDD, CIKM, WWW, IJCAI, AAAI, and
NeurIPS. His current research interests include data
mining and machine learning.

Hao Fan received the Doctorate degree in computer
and information systems from Birkbeck College, University of London, London, U.K., in 2005. He is currently a Full Professor with the School of Information
Management, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. His
research interests include information content analysis, intelligence mining, text semantic understanding,
knowledge organization, knowledge service, data intelligence, and big data analysis. He is a Doctoral
Supervisor and a Member of the Communist Party of
China.