IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

5504312

Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning-Based
Background Reconstruction for Hyperspectral
Anomaly Detection
Xiaoming Sun, Yuxiang Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, Yanni Dong , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Bo Du , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Deep learning (DL) has received a lot of attention
in hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) in recent years. While
some progress has been made in boosting the generalization of
DL-based HAD methods, existing methods still face limitations
in labeled sample generation or transfer flexibility. To address
these issues, we propose a contrastive self-supervised learningbased background reconstruction method for HAD (CSSBR).
By constructing a self-supervised pretraining model based on
a pixel- and patch-level masking strategy and a dual attention
network (DAN) encoder, the pretraining model can learn general
background representation without labeled sample generation.
The DAN encoder is constructed by the vision transformer
(ViT) and channel attention module (CAM) to extract the
global context information and the correlation between spectra.
A transfer learning model is constructed based on the DAN
encoder and a lightweight decoder, which is simply fine-tuned by
background reconstruction guided (BRG) loss to flexibly transfer
the pretrained model to various HAD tasks. Experiments on
four challenging hyperspectral datasets confirm that the CSSBR
method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods.
Index Terms— Background reconstruction, contrastive learning, hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD), self-supervised
learning (SSL).

I. I NTRODUCTION

H

YPERSPECTRAL imaging technology records both
spectral and spatial information of ground objects [1].
Compared with other remote sensing images, hyperspectral
images (HSIs) contain hundreds or even thousands of
almost continuous spectral bands, which can provide very
detailed spectral information [2]. Therefore, HSI can provide
unique advantages for anomaly detection tasks. Hyperspectral
anomaly detection (HAD) focuses on distinguishing unusual
materials from typical backgrounds in the absence of a priori
Received 10 November 2024; revised 11 January 2025; accepted 21 January
2025. Date of publication 27 January 2025; date of current version
11 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62222116, Grant 62071438, Grant
62225113, and Grant 62171417; and in part by the Major Special Project of
China Innovation Challenge (Ningbo) under Grant 2024T008. (Corresponding
author: Yuxiang Zhang.)
Xiaoming Sun and Yuxiang Zhang are with the School of Geophysics and
Geomatics, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail:
sunxiaoming@cug.edu.cn; zhangyx@cug.edu.cn).
Yanni Dong is with the School of Resource and Environmental Sciences,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail: dongyanni@whu.edu.cn).
Bo Du is with the School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430079, China (e-mail: gunspace@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2025.3534185

knowledge of anomalous targets or backgrounds [3]. In recent
years, HAD has flourished and is widely used in medicine [4],
oil spill detection [5], civilian rescue [6], and other fields [7].
Over the past few decades, numerous traditional methods for
HAD have been proposed. The most classical of these methods
are the statistical assumption-based methods, which assume
that the backgrounds obey a certain statistical distribution
and consider the pixels that deviate significantly from this
distribution as anomalies. The Reed–Xiaoli (RX) detector [8]
is the most widely used algorithm among the statistical
assumption-based methods, which assumes that the backgrounds obey a multivariate Gaussian distribution and utilizes
all the pixels in the image to compute the background statistics.
According to the different ways of background statistical
estimation, various RX-based variants have been proposed,
such as kernel RX [9], subspace RX [10], local RX [11],
local adaptive iterative RX (LAIRX) [12], and two-step
generalized likelihood ratio test (2S-GLRT) [13]. Subsequently, the representation-based methods have gradually
garnered widespread attention, encompassing collaborative
representation [14], [15], [16], low-rank representation [17],
[18], [19], tensor representation [20], [21], and entropy
representation [22]. For example, Li and Du [14] proposed
the collaborative representation-based detector (CRD) to
represent the pixel with the local background dictionary
and separate anomalies from backgrounds by the recovery
residuals. Ma et al. [23] combined the integrating fractional
Fourier transform (FrFT) with the row-constrained low-rank
and sparse matrix decomposition technique. Wang et al.
[20] extended the 3-D tensor low-rank model to separate
the background component. Tao et al. [22] combined FrFT
and Shannon entropy to maximize the distinction between
anomalies and backgrounds. These traditional methods are
generally simple and extract shallow features to distinguish
anomalies from backgrounds.
Recently, deep learning (DL) has gained prominence in
HAD due to its powerful capabilities of feature mining and
feature representation. The most widely used deep neural
networks include convolutional neural network (CNN) [24],
[25], [26], autoencoder (AE) [27], [28], [29], and generative
adversarial network (GAN) [30], [31], [32]. For example,
Li et al. [33] proposed a two-stream CNN with deep support
vector data description that incorporates feature learning and

1558-0644 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5504312

anomaly detection into a unified framework. Wang et al.
[34] proposed an autonomous HAD network based on fully
convolutional AE (Auto-AD), which designs the adaptive
weighted loss function and the anomaly detector in an endto-end manner. Xiang et al. [35] enhanced the ability of
representing the background by introducing a guided model
to the hidden layer of AE. Xie et al. [36] proposed a spectral
adversarial feature learning method for HAD, which uses the
adversarial AE (AAE) as its backbone and introduces the
structure tensor matrix to adaptively calculate the contribution
rate of each feature. Wang et al. [37] proposed an HAD
method based on variational background inference and GAN
(VBIGAN-AD), which establishes the relationship between
data samples and latent samples through two subnetworks
to capture the data distribution. It is worth noting that
self-supervised learning (SSL) with deep neural networks
is gaining attention in the field of HAD. Wang et al.
[38] proposed a pixel-shuffle downsampling masked-spot
reconstruction network (PDBSNet) in a self-supervised operating fashion for HAD, which achieves effective background
reconstruction by means of an AE consisting of centrally
masked and dilated convolutions. Liu et al. [39] proposed a
self-supervised multiscale network (MSNet) for HAD with
enhanced separation training, where the network consists
of convolutional AEs at multiple scales. Wang et al. [40]
proposed a self-supervised HAD transformer (SSHADFormer)
method based on finite spatialwise attention and AE, which
performs background reconstruction via the RGB cube
associated with the given dataset. The DL-based methods
described above are usually trained and tested on the same
scene, which can learn feature representations for a specific
scene and HAD task. The learned feature representations tend
to work poorly when directly transferred to other scenes or
HAD tasks, exhibiting poor generalization.
In order to improve the generalization of DL-based methods,
some scholars have introduced novel methods for HAD, which
are trained in some scenes and transferred to other scenes.
For example, Jiang et al. [41] proposed a weakly supervised
discriminative learning method with spectrally constrained
GAN for HAD (WeaklyAD). This method trains the model
by the labeled samples obtained via coarse anomaly detection
on a specific scene and transfers the trained model to the other
scene obtained from the same sensor. Liu et al. [42] proposed a
dual-frequency AE (DFAE) method, which introduces spectral
domain learning to enhance the separability of backgrounds
from anomalies. This method uses an HSI for training and
transfers the trained model to other HSIs obtained from the
same sensor for testing. Li et al. [43] proposed a general
anomaly enhancement network with generative SSL (GSSL)
for HAD, named AETNet, which was trained on a set of
anomaly-free HSIs with block-level random masks. The best
pretrained model was searched during the transfer learning
stage by using global Mahalanobis distance to adapt the
pretrained model to HAD tasks. In addition, AETNet is trained
and tested on images of the same size, which requires complex
window resizing when transferred to scenes of various sizes.
According to the above analysis, while some progress has
been made in boosting the generalization of DL-based HAD
methods, there is still a pressing need for a DL-based HAD

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

method that can not only perform pretraining without labeled
sample generation but also flexibly transfer the pretrained
model to various HAD datasets without the limitation of image
sensor and image size.
Inspired by the SSL [44], we propose a contrastive SSL
(CSSL)-based background reconstruction method for HAD,
which can be labeled as contrastive self-supervised learning
based background reconstruction method for HAD (CSSBR).
The overall architecture of CSSBR consists of two parts: selfsupervised pretraining and transferring the pretrained model
to HAD tasks. First, the pretraining model is constructed
via a pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy, a dual
attention network (DAN) encoder, and a lightweight decoder.
The pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy is
designed to randomly mask off some pixels or patches of the
original HSI to obtain pixel- and patch-level random masked
image pairs with the same semantic information, which can
help to complete the pretraining task. The DAN encoder
based on vision transformer (ViT) and channel attention
module (CAM) is constructed to extract the global context
information and the correlation between spectra. A lightweight
decoder is introduced to reconstruct the original image
by reverse-mapping the encoded features and the masked
patches. The pretraining model is trained by reconstructing
the backgrounds from the patch-level random masked image
and contrasting between pixel- and patch-level random
masked images. Also, the loss function based on a designed
background reconstruction guided (BRG) loss and a crossentropy (CE) loss is introduced to guide pretraining to obtain
background reconstruction without labeled sample generation
and to learn general background representations for different
downstream HAD tasks. Subsequently, the DAN encoder and
the lightweight decoder are transferred to downstream tasks,
and a simple fine-tuning of the lightweight decoder through
BRG loss can obtain adaptive background reconstruction for
various HAD tasks. Finally, anomaly detection is performed
using reconstruction errors.
The main contributions of our research are summarized as
follows.
1) A novel DAN encoder is proposed based on ViT and
CAM, which can effectively extract the global context
information and the correlation between spectra.
2) A pretraining model is constructed by a CSSL-based
background reconstruction method, where a pixel- and
patch-level random masking strategy is designed to
construct background reconstruction task and contrastive
learning task to learn general background representations
of HSI without labeled sample generation.
3) A transfer learning model is constructed based on the
DAN encoder and a lightweight decoder, where a BRG
loss is proposed to fine-tune the transfer learning model
to obtain adaptive background reconstruction without
labeled sample generation for various HAD tasks.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
briefly analyzes the related work. Section III describes the
details of the proposed CSSBR method in detail. Section IV
analyzes and discusses the experimental results. Finally, the
conclusions are drawn in Section V.

SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Self-Supervised Learning
SSL learns general feature representations of large amounts
of unlabeled data by designing a pretext task [45]. SSL
has been a huge success not only in computer vision (CV)
[46], [47], [48], [49], [50] but also in natural language
processing (NLP) [51], [52], [53] and other areas. Most of
the mainstream SSL methods can be divided into two types:
generative and contrastive. GSSL learns representations by
reconstructing or generating input data [54]. Masked image
modeling (MIM) [55] is a typical pretraining method in
GSSL that learns general and robust representations from
unlabeled image data by masking parts of the input image
and predicting the masked content. On the other hand, CSSL
aims to learn the invariance of differently augmented data to
obtain more discriminative feature representations [56], [57].
In recent years, some CSSL methods have been proposed
in the CV field, such as momentum contrast (MoCo) for
unsupervised visual representation learning [47], bootstrap
your own latent (BYOL) [48], and knowledge distillation with
no labels (DINO) [49]. MoCo uses a momentum encoder to
generate positive and negative sample features and encode
negative sample features as keys to be stored in a dynamic
dictionary to facilitate contrastive learning. BYOL builds on
MoCo by removing negative samples and achieving feature
optimization through the interaction of two neural networks.
DINO introduces knowledge distillation, uses the momentum
average to update the teacher network through the student
network, and uses the CE loss for training.
GSSL has been introduced into HAD fields such as
PDBSNet [38], MSNet [39], SSHADFormer [40], and
AETNet [43]. Among them, only AETNet constructs a
pretraining model via GSSL based on MIM and transfers
the pretrained model to different HAD tasks. CSSL has been
successfully applied in the field of HSI processing, such
as change detection [58], target detection [56], and image
classification [59]. To the best of our knowledge, CSSL is less
explored for HAD tasks. Inspired by current SSL methods,
we integrate the MIM-based GSSL approach with the CSSL
approach to design a CSSL-based background reconstruction
method to construct the pretraining model. Unlike previous
methods, our method implements image masking from pixellevel and patch-level to construct background reconstruction
task and contrastive learning task. The contrastive learning task
is utilized to help the background reconstruction task to obtain
general background representations without labeled sample
generation, which can be flexibly transferred to various HAD
datasets without the limitation of image sensor and image size.
B. Transformer and ViT
Transformer is a DL model designed to process sequence
data, proposed by Vaswani et al. [60]. Transformer was
initially designed for NLP tasks, particularly achieving
significant success in machine translation. Unlike traditional
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and CNNs, transformer is
based on the self-attention (SA) mechanism that computes
the relationship or dependency between each element in

5504312

the sequence and all other elements in the sequence [61].
It can process all elements in the sequence in parallel,
thereby improving training efficiency. The transformer encoder
is composed of multiple identical layers stacked, each
including a multihead SA (MSA) mechanism sublayer and a
fully connected (FC) feedforward network sublayer. Residual
connections are used around the two sublayers followed by
layer normalization [60]. ViT [61] is the first model to
successfully apply the transformer architecture to CV tasks.
Unlike 1-D sequential data in NLP, the data in CV are
usually 2-D or 3-D. Therefore, ViT first splits the image
into nonoverlapping patches of fixed size. Then, these patches
are flattened into 1-D vectors for linear embedding. At the
same time, position embedding is added to preserve the
relative positional relationships between the image patches,
thus capturing the spatial relationships of the image. Finally,
the generated embeddings are input into the transformer
encoder.
ViT-based methods have been successfully applied in
HSI processing, such as image classification [62], anomaly
detection [43], and target detection [63]. Although ViT-based
methods have achieved good performance in anomaly
detection, they still face the problem of insufficient utilization
of spectral information. We designed a novel DAN encoder
based on ViT and CAM to improve the extraction of
spectral features while learning spatial information. Besides,
we construct a pretraining model based on DAN encoder to
obtain general background representations of HSI.
III. M ETHOD
Our method can be divided into two parts: self-supervised
pretraining and transferring the pretrained model to HAD
tasks. The overall architecture of CSSBR is shown in Fig. 1.
A. Self-Supervised Pretraining
The pretraining model aims to learn general background
feature representations of images by CSSL-based background
reconstruction. The pretraining framework is divided into six
parts, namely, pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy,
teacher encoder, student encoder, student decoder, projection
header, and loss function.
1) Pixel- and Patch-Level Random Masking Strategy:
Data augmentation plays a crucial role in SSL and is the
key to improving the performance of model. We design a
pixel- and patch-level random masking strategy, including
pixel-level random masking and patch-level random masking,
to randomly mask off some pixels or patches of the original
HSI. Thus, we can obtain image pairs with the same semantic
information, which helps to complete the pretraining task.
We denote the original pretraining HSI as X ∈ Rb×h×w ,
where b, h, and w represent the number of bands, height, and
width, respectively. The pixel-level random masking employs
a masking ratio of n to randomly mask some pixels of the
original pretraining HSI, generating the pixel-level random
masked image Xt. The number of total pixels is N =
h × w and the number of masked pixels is N ′ = n × N .
Patch-level random masking first follows ViT to divide the

5504312

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Overall architecture of the proposed CSSBR method. (a) Pretraining. (b) Transferring to HAD.

original pretraining HSI into regular nonoverlapping patches
and then employs a masking ratio of m to randomly mask
some patches, generating the patch-level random masked
image Xs. The size of patch is the same as the size of
the patch divided by the ViT in the encoder, which is
experimentally set as p = 4 in this work. The number of
patches is M = h/ p × w/ p and the number of masked
patches is M ′ = m × M. Patch-level random mask images
are used to construct the background reconstruction task,
while pixel- and patch-level random mask images are used to
construct the contrastive learning task. The contrastive learning
task can help the background reconstruction task to obtain
general background representations without labeled sample
generation.
2) Encoder: It consists of two components, teacher encoder
and student encoder. Two encoders maintain the same network
architecture via DAN backbone on different masked images to
learn feature representations. The network architecture of DAN
is shown in Fig. 1. The network includes a spatial branch and a
spectral branch to extract spatial and spectral features through
ViT and CAM. The spatial branch focuses on extracting the
global context information, and the spectral branch focuses on
capturing the correlation between spectra.
The spatial branch uses a three-layer transformer with three
heads. First, the input HSI is divided into nonoverlapping
patches. Second, these patches are flattened and the flattened
patches are mapped using linear projection to obtain patch
embeddings. Finally, the full patch embedding is used as input
to learn the latent feature representation and obtain a spatial
feature vector.
The spectral branch consists of three CAMs, which first
downscales the spectrum with band number of b by using

a 1 × 1 convolutional layer to remove redundant information,
generating a new spectrum with band number of b′ . The
correlation between the remaining spectral bands is then
captured by three CAMs. In order to concatenate with the
output spatial features of the spatial branch, an adaptive
average pooling (AAP) layer operation is performed at the
end of the spectral branch to obtain a spectral feature vector.
The structure of CAM is shown in Fig. 1. First, we reshape
′
′
the input feature A ∈ Rb ×h×w to Rb ×N , multiply matrix A
with the transpose of A, and input their result to a softmax
′
′
layer. Thus, we obtain the channel attention map C ∈ Rb ×b ,
which can be expressed as follows:

exp Ai ATj
c ji = Pb′
(1)

T
i=1 exp Ai A j
where c ji measures the ith channel’s impact on the jth
channel and Ai and A j are the ith and jth row of matrix
A, respectively. Then, we perform a matrix multiplication
between the channel attention map C and the reshaped input
′
feature A and reshape their result to Rb ×h×w . Subsequently,
we multiply the result by the learnable scale parameter β to
perform an element-wise sum operation with the input feature
A to obtain the final output
′

Ij = β

b
X

(c ji Ai ) + A j

(2)

i=1

where I j is the jth row of matrix I and represents the final
feature of each channel, which can be expressed as a weighted
sum of the features of all channels and the original features.
In other words, CAM helps to capture the long-distance

SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD

correlation between spectral features and improve spectral
feature extraction.
Finally, the features obtained from the spatial and
spectral branches are concatenated and the final feature is
320 dimensions, where the spatial and spectral branches output
features with dimensions of 192 and 128, respectively.
3) Teacher Encoder: The teacher encoder takes pixel-level
random masked images as input. The teacher encoder is
constructed based on the state of the student encoder in the
past iterations. A parameter update is performed between the
teacher encoder and the student encoder via the exponential
moving average (EMA), with update rule θt ← λ θt +(1−λ )θs .
θt and θs are the parameters of the teacher encoder and the
student encoder, respectively. λ follows a cosine schedule from
0.9995 to 1 during the training period.
4) Student Encoder: The student encoder takes patch-level
random masked images as input and is trained by cropping the
input and inserting learnable embeddings. Thus, the student
encoder can learn a potential feature representation of the
masked image, which is then used to reconstruct the original
signal of the masked patches. The trained student encoder will
be transferred to HAD tasks as a feature extractor.
5) Student Decoder: The student decoder consists of
three convolutional layers, where each layer contains a 2-D
convolutional operation with a kernel size of 3 × 3 and a step
size of 1. Bilinear interpolation is used for upsampling after the
first two 2-D convolution operations to recover a reconstructed
image of the same spatial resolution as the encoded image. The
student decoder finally converts the encoded features back into
the original feature space to reconstruct the original HSI from
the masked image. Since the student decoder is a sequence of
convolutional layers rather than ViT and CAM, the decoder
is a lightweight structure in order to reduce computational
consumption in pretraining and transferring learning.
6) Projection Head: The projection head consists of a
three-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP), where the first two
layers use the Gaussian error linear unit (GELU) activation
function in order to introduce nonlinear transformations, and
the last layer is a linear layer without activation function but
with an L 2 normalization layer and a weight normalized FC
layer with Z dimensions. The projection head is added after
both the student encoder and the teacher encoder to map the
features output from two encoders into a space suitable for
contrastive learning. The projection head behind the teacher’s
encoder is also updated by EMA.
We denote student encoder, student decoder, and teacher
encoder as Eθs , Dθs , and Eθt , respectively. For the input of
pixel-level random masked image Xt and patch-level random
masked image Xs, both encoder networks finally output
probability distributions on Z dimensions named Ps and Pt ,
which can be expressed as follows:
exp(Dθs (Eθs (Xs)(i) )/τs )
Ps (Xs)(i) = P Z
(z)
z=1 exp(Dθs (Eθs (Xs) )/τs )
exp(Eθt (Xt)(i) /τt )
Pt (Xt)(i) = P Z
(z)
z=1 exp(Eθt (Xt) /τt )

(3)
(4)

5504312

where the temperature parameter τ is commonly used in
knowledge distillation to control the clarity of the output
distribution. The dimension Z of the probability distributions
output by the encoder networks is set to 1024.
7) Loss Function: Considering that the pretraining framework involves contrastive learning task and reconstruction
task, the widely used CE loss and mean square error (mse)
loss can be integrated to train the pretraining model. The
CE loss can constrain the training of contrastive learning
network by aligning the final output probability distributions
of the teacher encoder and the student encoder to learn
discriminative features. The mse loss can constrain the training
of reconstruction network to ensure image reconstruction
quality. With the integration of CE loss and mse loss, the
pretraining framework can capture not only discriminative
features between masked image pairs with the same semantic
information but also overall features of the patch-level masked
image, thus achieving good feature representations of HSI.
However, the learned feature representations of the whole
image are not enough for HAD tasks, where we usually
extract background features to distinguish anomalies from
backgrounds. Inspired by total variation (TV) loss [64],
we propose a BRG loss based on mse loss and TV loss
to boost the background feature learning by guiding the
training of reconstruction network to strengthen background
reconstruction.
The TV loss considers the difference between the pixels
and their surrounding pixels in the image, aiming to smooth
the image by reducing local variations between pixels. The
background is dominant in terms of the pixels number and
there is less spectral feature variation between neighboring
pixels within the same background category. In contrast, the
anomalies are usually smaller and sparser, showing marked
spectral feature differences from the surrounding background.
Based on the above facts, the BRG loss can enhance the
smoothness of the reconstructed background by constraining
the differences between neighboring pixels. Thereby, the BRG
loss can improve the reconstruction network’s ability to extract
background features.
The BRG loss can be calculated as follows:
h

w

L mse =

1 XX
(x i, j − x̃ i, j )T (x i, j − x̃ i, j )
hw i=1 j=1

L TV =

h w−1
X
X
1
x̃ i, j − x̃ i, j+1
h(w − 1)b i=1 j=1

(5)

h−1 w

+

XX
1
x̃ i, j − x̃ i+1, j
(h − 1)wb i=1 j=1

L BRG = L mse + L TV

(6)
(7)

where x i, j ∈ Rb×1 and x̃ i, j ∈ Rb×1 denote the spectral vectors
of pixel with spatial position (i, j) in the original pretraining
HSI and the reconstructed pretraining HSI, respectively.
L mse represents the mse loss between the original HSI and
the reconstructed HSI. L TV represents the TV loss, which
calculates the average difference between the pixels and their
surrounding pixels in the reconstructed image.

5504312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

The CE loss and BRG loss constitute the total loss for the
pretraining phase, which is calculated as follows:
L CE = min H (Pt (Xt), Ps (Xs))

(8)

L Total = L BRG + L CE

(9)

θs

where H (a, b) = −a log b and L CE represents the CE loss,
which calculates the difference between the output probability
distributions of student encoder and teacher encoder.

Fig. 2.

Partial images of pretraining dataset HAD100.

B. Transfer Learning
This section describes how to efficiently transfer the
pretrained model to various HAD tasks without labeled
samples. The transfer learning model contains four parts,
namely, encoder, fine-tuning decoder, loss function, and
anomaly detection.
1) Encoder: We transfer the pretrained student encoder
to downstream HAD task. Feature extraction is performed
on the testing image via the pretrained student encoder,
producing low-dimensional, abstract, and general background
representation. We denote the testing HSI as Y ∈ R B×H ×W ,
where B, H , and W represent the number of bands, height,
and width, respectively.
2) Fine-Tuning Decoder: To reconstruct the background
for the testing image, we transfer the student decoder to
downstream HAD task to reverse-map the encoded features
into the original feature space. During the fine-tuning process,
the encoder parameters are not updated, which can obtain a
general background representation and improve the efficiency
of fine-tuning. Due to the limited pretraining images, the
data distribution of the downstream image may be different
from that of the pretraining images. Therefore, the decoder
should be continuously updated based on the parameters
obtained from pretraining according to the testing image,
which makes the model better adapted to the specific HAD
task and improves the ability of background reconstruction.
3) Loss Function: In order to enable the reconstruction
model to better reconstruct the background of a specific testing
image, we perform a simple fine-tuning through the BRG
loss to efficiently transfer the pretrained encoder and the
lightweight decoder to a variety of HAD tasks without labeled
samples.
4) Anomaly Detection: Once the reconstruction model is
fine-tuned through BRG loss, each testing image is fed into
the pretrained encoder and the fine-tuned decoder, producing
a reconstructed background image. If the tested pixel is
background, the reconstruction error between the testing image
and the reconstructed image is likely to be small; otherwise,
the reconstruction error is likely to be large. The anomaly
detection result can be obtained as follows:
Di, j = yi, j − ỹi, j 2

(10)

where y ∈ R B×1 and ỹ ∈ R B×1 denote the spectral vectors of
the tested pixel with spatial position (i, j) in the testing image
and its reconstructed image, respectively; and Di, j denotes
the anomaly probability of the tested pixel, which ultimately
constitutes the anomaly detection map.

Fig. 3. Pseudo-color images and ground-truth maps of the testing datasets.
(a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.

IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Experiment Details
1) Experimental Datasets: In this work, one hyperspectral
dataset HAD100 with a large scale is used for pretraining,
and four hyperspectral datasets, Pavia, Texas Coast, Cri, and
EI Segundo, are used for downstream HAD tasks. Details of
each dataset are given as follows.
1) HAD100 Dataset [43]: It was acquired by the Airborne
Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer-Next Generation
(AVIRIS-NG) sensor with a total of 100 images, some of
which are shown in Fig. 2. The images were uniformly
cropped into patches of size 64 × 64 with a spectral
range of 377–2500 nm. Original band 425 and 276 bands
reserved. Considering that the dataset includes not
only type-rich background features such as grasslands,
deserts, and lakes but also different anomalous targets
such as vehicles, boats, and buildings, the dataset is used
for pretraining.
2) Pavia Dataset [17]: It was acquired over the northern
Italy city of Pavia using the Reflective Optics System
Imaging Spectrometer (ROSIS) sensor. Fig. 3(a) shows
the pseudo-color image and the ground-truth map. The
data size is 108 × 120 pixels with a spatial resolution of
1.3 m. The spectral coverage spans from 430 to 860 nm,
encompassing 102 bands after the elimination of noise
bands and water vapor absorption bands. The anomalies
are vehicles and piers on the bridge, consisting of
43 anomalous pixels.
3) Texas Coast Dataset [65]: It was acquired over the
coastal region of Texas in the United States using
the AVIRIS sensor. Fig. 3(b) shows the pseudo-color
image and the ground-truth map. The data size is
100 × 100 pixels with a spatial resolution of 17.2 m.
The spectral coverage spans from 450 to 1350 nm,

SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD

5504312

Fig. 4. Detection maps of different methods. (a) Ground-truth maps of Pavia, Texas Coast, Cri, and EI Segundo datasets. (b) GRX. (c) 2S-GLRT. (d) CRD.
(e) FEBPAD. (f) Auto-AD. (g) GAED. (h) PDBSNet. (i) MSNet. (j) AETNet. (k) CSSBR.

encompassing 207 bands. The anomalies are buildings,
consisting of 155 anomalous pixels.
4) Cri Dataset [66]: It was acquired by the Nuance Cri
hyperspectral sensor. Fig. 3(c) shows the pseudo-color
image and the ground-truth map. The size of the data
is 400 × 400 pixels. The spectral coverage spans
from 650 to 1100 nm, encompassing 46 bands. The
anomalies are stones, consisting of 1254 anomalous
pixels.
5) EI Segundo Dataset [67]: It was acquired by the
AVIRIS sensor in the EI Segundo area, CA, USA.
Fig. 3(d) shows the pseudo-color image and the groundtruth map. The data size is 250 × 300 pixels with
a spatial resolution of 7.1 m. The spectral coverage
spans from 366 to 2496 nm, encompassing 224 bands.
The anomalies are tanks and towers in the oil refinery,
consisting of 2048 anomalous pixels.
2) Experimental Settings: To validate the effectiveness of
the proposed method CSSBR, we compare it with nine
HAD methods, including four traditional methods, GRX [8],
2S-GLRT [13], CRD [14], and FEBPAD [23], and five
DL methods, Auto-AD [34], GAED [35], PDBSNet [38],
MSNet [39], and AETNet [43]. Through experiments and
referencing the original paper, all the comparison methods
used the optimal parameters.
For the pretraining network in the CSSBR method, we use
the AdamW optimizer and train for 100 epochs, with the
learning rate increasing linearly to 0.0001 within the first ten
epochs, followed by decaying the learning rate using a cosine
schedule. Temperature τs is 0.1, and a cosine warm-up from
0.04 to 0.07 is used for τt within the first 30 epochs. The
batch size and patch size are set to 16 and 4, respectively. The
patch-level random masking ratio and the pixel-level random
masking ratio are both set to 90% for all datasets.
In the fine-tuning network, the AdamW optimizer is still
utilized with a learning rate of 0.0001 and 200 epochs. The
patch size is still set to 4. All experiments are based on
the PyTorch framework in the 64-bit Windows 10 operating

system, NVIDIA GeForce RTX3060 graphics processing unit
(GPU) with 16 GB of memory.
3) Evaluation Metrics: In order to assess the anomaly
detection performance of different methods, we use a
variety of evaluation metrics, namely, detection map, receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve, area under the curve
(AUC), separability map, and run time.
The detection map is segmented using different thresholds
(τ ) to obtain different false alarm rates (Pf ) and probability
of detection (Pd ). We use the ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) and
(τ , Pd ) to evaluate the effectiveness of anomaly detector and
the anomaly detection ability, respectively. The closer the ROC
curve of (Pf , Pd ) is to the top-left corner, the better the
effectiveness of anomaly detector. The closer the ROC curve
of (τ , Pd ) is to the top-right corner, the higher the anomaly
detection ability.
The AUC value indicates the area under the ROC curve, and
we use a variety of AUC values for overall evaluation [68],
[69]. Specifically, higher values of AUC(Pf ,Pd ) indicate better
detector effectiveness. Higher values of AUC(τ,Pd ) indicate
better anomaly detection ability. Lower values of AUC(τ,Pf )
indicate better background suppression performance. AUCJAD
is AUC(Pf ,Pd ) + AUC(τ,Pd ) , which further indicates the anomaly
detection ability. AUCADBS is AUC(τ,Pd ) − AUC(τ,Pf ) , which
indicates the anomaly detection and background suppression performance. AUCOAD is the sum of AUC(τ,Pd ) and
1 − AUC(τ,Pf ) , which is the second AUCADBS metric derived
from the classification point of view and indicates the overall
anomaly detection performance. AUCSBPR is computed by
AUC(τ,Pd ) /(1−AUC(τ,Pf ) ), which is also an effective detection
metric derived from a widely used idea in communications or
signal processing.
B. Detection Performance Analysis
In this section, we compare the detection performance of the
proposed CSSBR method with other methods on four different
hyperspectral datasets. To mitigate the effects of random
factors, all experiments were run five times consecutively. The
value of the third-ranked AUC(Pf ,Pd ) and its corresponding

5504312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

Fig. 5.

ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) for different methods on four datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.

Fig. 6.

ROC curves of (τ , Pd ) for different methods on four datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.

values of other evaluation metrics were taken as the final
results. The experiment’s purpose is to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our pretrained model in transferring to various
HAD tasks.
Fig. 4 shows the detection maps of different methods on
four datasets. The results show that CSSBR is able to detect
all the anomalies and highlight the anomalies in the first three
datasets, for example, the right anomalies in Texas Coast
dataset and the top-right and bottom-right anomalies in the Cri
dataset are well detected and highlighted. Besides, CSSBR is
able to detect more anomalies in the EI Segundo dataset in
comparison to the other methods.
Fig. 5 shows the ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) for different
methods on four datasets. On Pavia, Texas Coast, and EI
Segundo datasets, the ROC curves of (Pf , Pd ) for CSSBR are
essentially located above that of the other methods. On the
Cri dataset, CSSBR has the highest probability of detection
when the false alarm rate is greater than 0.03. The results
generally show that CSSBR exhibits a better effectiveness of
detector.
Fig. 6 shows the ROC curves of (τ , Pd ) for different
methods on four datasets. On all four datasets, the ROC curves
of (τ , Pd ) for CSSBR are basically located above that of the
other methods. The results show that CSSBR exhibits a higher
anomaly detection ability than other comparison methods on
four datasets.
Table I shows the AUC values for different methods on four
datasets, where the optimal values are shown in bold. CSSBR
was optimal for most AUC values in all datasets. Specifically,
the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values of CSSBR are the highest on all datasets,
validating the effectiveness of the proposed method in anomaly
detection. The AUC(τ,Pd ) and AUCJAD values of CSSBR are
the highest on all the datasets, indicating that the proposed

method has a strong anomaly detection ability. Even though
AUC(τ,Pf ) values of CSSBR are not optimal, the AUCADBS ,
AUCOAD , and AUCSBPR values of CSSBR are the highest in
all the datasets, indicating that the proposed method is able
to achieve better overall results in highlighting the anomalies
and suppressing the background. In summary, in terms of
various AUC values, CSSBR is generally superior to other
methods.
Fig. 7 shows the separability maps for different methods
on four datasets, which can visually reflect the separation
of anomalies and backgrounds. On all the datasets, CSSBR
exhibits larger spacing between the anomaly box and the
background box compared to the other methods, indicating that
CSSBR is able to separate anomalies from backgrounds well.
In addition, the center line of the anomaly box of CSSBR has
a higher position and the bottom of the anomaly box is higher
on all datasets compared to the other methods, indicating that
CSSBR highlights the anomalies well. In summary, in terms
of separability maps, CSSBR outperforms other methods in
distinguishing anomalies from backgrounds.
Table II shows the run times of different methods on
four datasets, where the run time represents the total time
of performing the downstream task. The average run time
indicates the time efficiency of each method on various
datasets. Compared to traditional methods 2S-GLRT and CRD,
CSSBR requires a shorter average runtime. Compared to all
DL-based methods, CSSBR requires the shortest average run
time. Due to the freezing of the encoder, the number of
parameters in the downstream task is significantly reduced,
thus improving the time efficiency of the CSSBR method.
By comparing the proposed CSSBR method and the other
methods on four different hyperspectral datasets, in terms
of detection map, ROC curve, AUC value, separability

SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD

5504312

TABLE I
AUC VALUES FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON F OUR DATASETS

Fig. 7.

Separability maps for different methods on four datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Texas Coast. (c) Cri. (d) EI Segundo.

maps, and run time, we can draw a general conclusion that
CSSBR outperforms the comparison methods, validating the

effectiveness of transferring the pretrained model to various
HAD tasks.

5504312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

TABLE II
RUN T IMES ( IN S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON F OUR DATASETS

TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDIES ON P RETRAINING P HASE

Fig. 8. Parameter analysis on four datasets. (a) Pixel-level and (b) patch-level
random masking ratio.

C. Parameter Analysis
In this section, we discuss the impact of two important
parameters of the CSSBR method on the HAD performance.
The two important parameters are pixel-level random masking
ratio n and patch-level random masking ratio m. The
experiments are conducted on four datasets with the evaluation
metric of AUC(Pf ,Pd ) value.
First, the pixel-level random masking ratio n was set
according to the range [10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%,
70%, 80%, 90%], and the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values for the four
datasets are shown in Fig. 8(a). On Pavia, Texas Coast, and
EI Segundo datasets, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values hardly change as
n increases. On the Cri dataset, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values show
a slowly increasing trend with increasing n, and the best
detection result is achieved at n = 90%. Considering the
overall performance of the four datasets, we set the pixel-level
random masking ratio n as 90%.
Subsequently, the patch-level random masking ratio m was
set according to the range [10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%,
60%, 70%, 80%, 90%], and the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values for the
four datasets are shown in Fig. 8(b). On Pavia, Texas Coast,
and EI Segundo datasets, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values show an
overall increasing trend as m increases. On the Cri dataset,
AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values show a decreasing and then increasing trend
as m increases, but the change of AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values does not
exceed 0.45%. Considering the overall performance of the four
datasets, we set m to 90%.
D. Ablation Study
This section discusses the effectiveness of self-supervised
pretraining, DAN, and BRG loss.
First, we discuss the effectiveness of self-supervised
pretraining. Specifically, we compare the performance of
three cases: 1) without using the pretraining model (UnPretrained); 2) using the pretraining model based on the

MIM-based GSSL approach (GSSL-Pretrained); and 3) using
the proposed self-supervised pretraining model (CSSBRPretrained). We aim to verify that the proposed pretraining
model integrating the MIM-based GSSL approach and the
CSSL approach enables CSSBR to learn general background
representations for various downstream HAD tasks. The
AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values and run times are shown in Table III, with
the optimal value in bold. With the proposed pretraining
model, the AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are better on most datasets,
especially on Cri dataset. The run times are reduced
on all datasets compared to the case without using the
pretraining model. The experimental results illustrate that the
general background representations learned by the proposed
pretraining model can be quickly and efficiently transferred to
various HAD tasks.
Subsequently, we discuss the effectiveness of the DAN.
Specifically, we compare the performance of CAM, ViT, and
DAN. The AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are shown in Table IV. DAN has
better AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values on most datasets compared to CAM
or ViT. The results show that DAN based on CAM and ViT
can indeed improve the feature extraction effect and enhance
the anomaly detection performance.
Finally, we discuss the effectiveness of the BRG loss.
Specifically, we use either the BRG loss or the mse loss
to guide the training of the reconstruction networks in both
the pretraining phase and the transferring learning phase.
The AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are shown in Table IV, with the
optimal value in bold. The AUC(Pf ,Pd ) values are improved
by 0.01%, 0.12%, and 0.46% on the Texas Coast, Cri, and
EI Segundo datasets, respectively. The results show that BRG
loss improves the anomaly detection performance.

SUN et al.: CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING-BASED BACKGROUND RECONSTRUCTION FOR HAD

TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDIES ON D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS

V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, a CSSBR method is proposed for HAD.
By constructing a self-supervised pretraining model based
on a pixel- and patch-level masking strategy and a DAN
encoder, the pretraining model can learn general background
representation without labeled sample generation. The DAN
encoder is constructed by ViT and CAM to extract the
global context information and the correlation between spectra.
The transfer learning model is constructed based on a DAN
encoder and a lightweight decoder, which is simply fine-tuned
through BRG loss and efficiently transferred to a variety of
HAD tasks. Experiments on four challenging hyperspectral
datasets validate that the CSSBR method is capable of
performing various anomaly detection tasks with leading
detection performance and high detection efficiency.
However, the proposed CSSBR method is still deficient
in background suppression. This may be due to the limited
number of pretraining images and the deviation of the
background distribution between the downstream dataset
and the pretraining dataset, resulting in limited background
suppression performance. We will continue to investigate how
to improve the background suppression performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to gratefully thank all the editors
and anonymous reviewers for their careful reading and helpful
remarks.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Hu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using deep learning: A
review,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 9, p. 1973, Apr. 2022.
[2] Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, K. Wu, and T. Chen, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with OTSU-based isolation forest,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 14, pp. 9079–9088, 2021.

5504312

[3] G. Shaw and D. Manolakis, “Signal processing for hyperspectral image
exploitation,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 12–16,
Jan. 2002.
[4] X. Hadoux et al., “Non-invasive in vivo hyperspectral imaging of
the retina for potential biomarker use in Alzheimer’s disease,” Nature
Commun., vol. 10, no. 1, Sep. 2019, Art. no. 4227.
[5] P. Duan, X. Kang, P. Ghamisi, and S. Li, “Hyperspectral remote sensing
benchmark database for oil spill detection with an isolation forest-guided
unsupervised detector,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5509711.
[6] H. K. Jusoff, “Pixel-based airborne hyperspectral sensing technique for
search- and-rescue of the missing RMAF NURI helicopter in Genting–
Sempah, Malaysia,” Disaster Prevention Manag., Int. J., vol. 19, no. 1,
pp. 87–101, Feb. 2010.
[7] M. Borengasser, W. S. Hungate, and R. Watkins, Hyperspectral Remote
Sensing-Principles and Applications. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
2007, 2007.
[8] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
[9] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
[10] A. Schaum, “Joint subspace detection of hyperspectral targets,” in Proc.
IEEE Aerosp. Conf., Dec. 2004, pp. 1818–1824.
[11] J. M. Molero, E. M. Garzón, I. García, and A. Plaza, “Analysis and
optimizations of global and local versions of the RX algorithm for
anomaly detection in hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 801–814, Apr. 2013.
[12] Y. P. Taitano, B. A. Geier, and K. W. Bauer, “A locally adaptable
iterative RX detector,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2010,
no. 1, Dec. 2010, Art. no. 341908.
[13] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel
anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567,
Oct. 2022.
[14] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
[15] R. Wang, H. Hu, F. He, F. Nie, S. Cai, and Z. Ming, “Self-weighted
collaborative representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Signal
Process., vol. 177, Dec. 2020, Art. no. 107718.
[16] Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, P. Ma, and W. Shi, “Collaborative representation
with background purification and saliency weight for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 1–12,
Jan. 2022.
[17] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix
decomposition-based Mahalanobis distance method for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3,
pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2016.
[18] Y. Qu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection through spectral
unmixing and dictionary-based low-rank decomposition,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4391–4405, Aug. 2018.
[19] L. Li, W. Li, Q. Du, and R. Tao, “Low-rank and sparse decomposition
with mixture of Gaussian for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4363–4372, Sep. 2021.
[20] M. Wang, Q. Wang, D. Hong, S. K. Roy, and J. Chanussot, “Learning
tensor low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 679–691, Jan. 2023.
[21] X. Zhang, G. Wen, and W. Dai, “A tensor decomposition-based anomaly
detection algorithm for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 5801–5820, Oct. 2016.
[22] R. Tao, X. Zhao, W. Li, H.-C. Li, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection by fractional Fourier entropy,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 4920–4929, Dec. 2019.
[23] Y. Ma, G. Fan, Q. Jin, J. Huang, X. Mei, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection via integration of feature extraction and background
purification,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 18, no. 8,
pp. 1436–1440, Aug. 2021.
[24] Z. Yang et al., “A multi-scale mask convolution-based blind-spot
network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
no. 16, p. 3036, Aug. 2024.
[25] L. Zhang and B. Cheng, “Fractional Fourier transform and transferred
CNN based on tensor for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 5505505.

5504312

[26] W. Liu et al., “UADNet: A joint unmixing and anomaly detection
network based on deep clustering for hyperspectral image,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5511419.
[27] R. Zhao, Z. Yang, X. Meng, and F. Shao, “A novel fully convolutional
auto-encoder based on dual clustering and latent feature adversarial
consistency for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16,
no. 4, p. 717, Feb. 2024.
[28] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza,
“BS3 LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504218.
[29] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Zhao, and A. Plaza,
“Sliding dual-window-inspired reconstruction network for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5504115.
[30] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 139–144, 2020.
[31] J. Zhong, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Characterization of
background-anomaly separability with generative adversarial network
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 6017–6028, Jul. 2021.
[32] J. Wang, S. Guo, Z. Hua, R. Huang, J. Hu, and M. Gong, “CL-CaGAN:
Capsule differential adversarial continual learning for cross-domain
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5517315.
[33] K. Li et al., “Spectral–spatial deep support vector data description for
hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5522316.
[34] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolutional
autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5503314.
[35] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly
detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818.
[36] W. Xie, B. Liu, Y. Li, J. Lei, C.-I. Chang, and G. He, “Spectral
adversarial feature learning for anomaly detection in hyperspectral
imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 4,
pp. 2352–2365, Apr. 2020.
[37] Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Tan, B. Han, J. Ding, and Z. Liu, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection based on variational background inference and
generative adversarial network,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 143, Nov. 2023,
Art. no. 109795.
[38] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and
A. J. Plaza, “PDBSNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot
reconstruction network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511914.
[39] H. Liu, X. Su, X. Shen, and X. Zhou, “MSNet: Self-supervised
multiscale network with enhanced separation training for hyperspectral
anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5520313.
[40] Z. Wang, D. Ma, G. Yue, B. Li, R. Cong, and Z. Wu, “Self-supervised
hyperspectral anomaly detection based on finite spatialwise attention,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5502918.
[41] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022.
[42] Y. Liu, W. Xie, Y. Li, Z. Li, and Q. Du, “Dual-frequency autoencoder for
anomaly detection in transformed hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5523613.
[43] Z. Li, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, Q. Ling, Z. Lin, and W. An, “You only train
once: Learning a general anomaly enhancement network with random
masks for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5506718.
[44] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2021.
[45] I. Misra and L. van der Maaten, “Self-supervised learning of pretextinvariant representations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 6706–6716.
[46] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 63, 2025

[47] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum
contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 9726–9735.
[48] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to selfsupervised learning,” 2020, arXiv:2006.07733.
[49] M. Caron et al., “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision
transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 9630–9640.
[50] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A
simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Intern. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2020,
pp. 1597–1607.
[51] M. Lee, “A mathematical interpretation of autoregressive generative pretrained transformer and self-supervised learning,” Mathematics, vol. 11,
no. 11, p. 2451, May 2023.
[52] H. Fang, S. Wang, M. Zhou, J. Ding, and P. Xie, “CERT:
Contrastive self-supervised learning for language understanding,” 2020,
arXiv:2005.12766.
[53] Z. Wu, S. Wang, J. Gu, M. Khabsa, F. Sun, and H. Ma,
“CLEAR: Contrastive learning for sentence representation,” 2020,
arXiv:2012.15466.
[54] X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, and B. Du, “Generative selfsupervised learning with spectral–spatial masking for hyperspectral
target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5522713.
[55] H. Bao, L. Dong, S. Piao, and F. Wei, “BEiT: BERT pre-training of
image transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2106.08254.
[56] X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, and B. Du, “Spatial–spectral contrastive
self-supervised learning with dual path networks for hyperspectral
target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5515612.
[57] Y. Wang, C. M. Albrecht, N. A. A. Braham, L. Mou, and X. X. Zhu,
“Self-supervised learning in remote sensing: A review,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 213–247, Dec. 2022.
[58] M. Hu, C. Wu, and L. Zhang, “HyperNet: Self-supervised hyperspectral
spatial–spectral feature understanding network for hyperspectral change
detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5543017.
[59] X. Cao, H. Lin, S. Guo, T. Xiong, and L. Jiao, “Transformer-based
masked autoencoder with contrastive loss for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
Art. no. 5524312.
[60] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” 2017, arXiv:1706.03762.
[61] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[62] D. Ibañez, R. Fernandez-Beltran, F. Pla, and N. Yokoya, “Masked
auto-encoding spectral–spatial transformer for hyperspectral image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5542614.
[63] D. Shen, X. Ma, W. Kong, J. Liu, J. Wang, and H. Wang, “Hyperspectral
target detection based on interpretable representation network,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5519416.
[64] L. I. Rudin, S. Osher, and E. Fatemi, “Nonlinear total variation based
noise removal algorithms,” Phys. D, Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 60,
nos. 1–4, pp. 259–268, 1992.
[65] L. Gao, X. Sun, X. Sun, L. Zhuang, Q. Du, and B. Zhang, “Hyperspectral
anomaly detection based on chessboard topology,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5505016.
[66] Y. Ma, S. Cai, and J. Zhou, “Adaptive reference-related graph embedding
for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504514.
[67] S. Liu, M. Song, B. Xue, C.-I. Chang, and M. Zhang, “Hyperspectral
real-time local anomaly detection based on finite Markov via line-byline processing,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024,
Art. no. 5503520.
[68] C.-I. Chang, “Comprehensive analysis of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5541124.
[69] C.-I. Chang, S. Chen, S. Zhong, and Y. Shi, “Exploration of
data scene characterization and 3D ROC evaluation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 1, p. 135,
Dec. 2023.