Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers & Security
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

Cyberattack event logs classification using deep learning with semantic
feature analysis
Ahmad Alzu’bi a ,∗, Omar Darwish b , Amjad Albashayreh a , Yahya Tashtoush a
a Department of Computer Science, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan
b

Information Security and Applied Computing, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, USA

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Cyberattack
Event logs
Intrusion detection
Deep learning
BERT

ABSTRACT
Event logs play a crucial role in cybersecurity by detecting potentially malicious network activities and
preventing data loss or theft. Previous work did not place a high value on log messages and their impact
on security breach prediction and intrusion detection. This research paper introduces a novel approach for log
message analysis applied to a dataset of event logs collected from various web sources. Event log messages were
analyzed and categorized based on event and attack types with an explainable AI emphasizing the value of its
key data. The study aims to enhance intrusion detection and minimize performance degradation by identifying
suspicious events. In this regard, a new semantic vectorization framework is proposed, leveraging deep learning
architectures to develop semantic discriminating log features, offering a cogent explanation and classification
of event log messages. The use of BERT deep embeddings as a baseline for the prediction model allows for
visualizing and interpreting the formulation of log message semantic features. Several empirical scenarios are
set and conducted extensively to evaluate the performance of the event log classifier, considering the attack
type, event type, and zero-shot logs. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed event log classifier
outperforms state-of-the-art machine learning models, achieving a recall of 99.27% and a precision of 99.29%.
This highlights the model’s ability to accurately identify events of a particular type by detecting as many
suspicious events as feasible while minimizing the misclassification rate.

1. Introduction
The recent growth of the Internet and the rapid expansion of
technologies make a considerable increase in cyberattacks, exposing
individuals and companies to increased security threats. The complexity of the threat landscape has intensified concomitantly with the
escalating frequency of cyberattacks, thereby resulting in an increasing
number of serious threats to critical infrastructure (Zhang et al., 2020).
Much of the useful information related to security threats, vulnerabilities, and attacks can be found in the event log files. Therefore, to tackle
the growing cyber threats, there is a demand to collect the current logs
as soon as feasible and assess the potential impact of the network and
service events that are recorded in the log files. Security event logging
and monitoring are two components of the same process that are crucial
for having a secure infrastructure.
Log files record all the events that occur in a system based on
the log severity level. To accomplish this, the implemented logging
facilities gather, collect, and save logs generated continuously by most
devices and parts of the system (Azahari and Balzarotti, 2024; Satpathi
et al., 2019). This includes getting permission to access, delete, add an

application or file, change the system date, shut down the system, and
modify the configuration settings. Event logs record both user actions
and those performed by processes running on the computer (Satpathi
et al., 2019). The event log is also an important source for evaluating
the system’s safety.
Event logs provide the administrators with critical data to solve any
problem with the system (Ali et al., 2022). This data could be a textual
description of the event, when it occurred, and who was responsible
for it. Moreover, logs enable administrators to validate process performance and identify bottlenecks. Aside from these functional benefits,
since log files include a large number of recurring lines, they can be efficiently compressed and recorded affordably (Landauer et al., 2020b).
Categorizing events based on their types could be helpful with issues
like monitoring critical events, knowing what software and services
are installed on the system, boot events, processing events, types of
crashes, and clearing events that occurred. The primary benefit of the
categorization process lies in its ability to assist in the identification
and classification of attacks. An attacker typically enters the system
with previously stolen credentials from a valid user and thus behaves

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: agalzubi@just.edu.jo (A. Alzu’bi).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104222
Received 8 August 2024; Received in revised form 17 November 2024; Accepted 19 November 2024
Available online 26 November 2024
0167-4048/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.

similarly to a malicious insider 97% of the time (Jaafar et al., 2016).
With the extensive use of computer networks, cyberattacks are becoming increasingly common as attackers exploit system vulnerabilities
for sensitive data theft, monetary gains, or even complete network
infrastructure destruction (Singh et al., 2017). As a result, there is an
urgent need to protect the targeted systems from penetration, which
can be done by monitoring and understanding the systems’ events.
The event log message provides a detailed description of the specific activity that took place. Textual log messages are in a humanreadable, unencoded format, and they encompass information that
can be utilized to ascertain the type of attack that occurred. Consequently, these messages serve as a means to identify, categorize,
and timestamp attacks. Even though log traces are increasingly being
used to detect and prevent unauthorized access to corporate information systems (Padiet et al., 2024), there are limited datasets available
for anomaly-based intrusion detection techniques (Ring et al., 2017).
Moreover, the previous research has not solely relied on semantic
information in log messages, a valuable aspect of the attack detection process. For instance, the researchers in (Landauer et al., 2022;
Lin et al., 2022) obtained multiple network flow features such as
timestamps, byte count, source/destination information, and messages
containing specific parameters as the primary method for identifying
abnormal behavior in the network. Most importantly, previous studies
employed a conventional classification method to assess the normality
or suspicion of event logs and network flows (Satilmiş et al., 2024).
The data originated from a testbed established by the same individuals
who recorded and categorized the events. This led to an expected
manner for managing the attacks and predicting their type based
on the employed hosts and the length of time that the attack was
implemented. This implies that the attacks were captured based on
time-specific scenarios under controlled settings, and the process was
fully supervised (Tovarňák et al., 2020). Furthermore, certain event log
datasets (Tovarňák et al., 2020; MACCDC, 2012) have been introduced
recently by capturing event logs, yet without classifying them into
specific attack types. In contrast, our study uses a variety of data
sources from different operating systems and network traffic types to
categorize events based on attack and event types. Unlike traditional
approaches, our methodology prioritizes semantic features over nonsemantic ones, making the classification process more challenging by
assessing the model’s ability to identify event or attack types solely
from the message text.
Earlier investigations (Kumar et al., 2023; Kalutharage et al., 2023;
Das et al., 2021) employed explainable AI (XAI) techniques to elucidate
the contribution of numeric features in network flows for a specific
type of attack. However, these studies did not delve into the semantic
meaning of the textual content within event logs. The XAI tools aid
in identifying key features in vectorized log message representations,
providing insights into the most influential semantic elements for attack
detection. The interpretability of the vectorization process enhances the
comprehension of how specific text features contribute to categorizing
various types of attacks.
As a result, this study suggests a novel approach for higher-level
data classification, emphasizing the importance of the semantic content
of event messages in detecting intrusion. This is achieved by utilizing
a diverse dataset of log events collected from various source environments, which undergoes systematic processing and analysis intending
to detect attacks. The proposed approach provides detailed information
for classification procedures, aiding in attack-type detection. Different
explainable AI techniques are employed to assess the impact of log
words in the message text for predicting the attack type. Subsequently,
a vectorization framework is established to evaluate the classifier’s
capacity to learn a specific schema for decision-making, enabling it
to scrutinize the semantic content of the message for predicting attack
types. The main contribution of this work is three-fold:

1. Introducing a novel classification approach for event logs based
on the semantics embedded in the log messages. This approach is
validated on a new collection of event logs categorized by event
and attack types.
2. Proposing a semantic vectorization framework based on deep
learning methods as a foundation for developing semantic vectors to provide solid analysis of event log messages, as well as
utilizing BERT capabilities in visualizing the attribution of the
message’s semantic features.
3. Providing a profound XAI-based analysis of the labeled log messages with machine learning algorithms, including a hybrid deep
architecture, CNN with GRU.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the
related work; Section 3 presents a new labeled dataset of event log
messages and the procedure of log labeling and processing. Section 4
discusses the methodology of the proposed work; Section 5 describes
the experimental results with a thorough discussion, and Section 6
concludes this paper.
2. Related work
In recent years, cybersecurity researchers and practitioners have
developed a wide range of methods (Ramish et al., 2022; Landauer
et al., 2020a) that use machine learning to detect and classify intrusions at the network and host levels in a timely and autonomous
manner. Popular research initiatives in cyberattack detection strategies
include: the insider threat analysis technique based on kernel PCA
and LSTM-RNN that was developed by Meng et al. (2018). One of
the newest malicious traffic detection systems is OADSD (Zhang et al.,
2023). OADSD works based on three steps: collecting the network
traffic, extracting the important features, and detecting the anomalies.
CTSCOPY (Mei et al., 2021) is an example as a provenance graphbased technique for cyber threat detection that uses system-level event
data streams to train an anomaly detection model. There was an
primary emphasize on constructing and upholding datasets suitable for
training and evaluating cybersecurity models and algorithms. Datasets
such as ToN IoT dataset (Moustafa et al., 2020), game Theory and
cybersecurity (GTCS) (Mahfouz et al., 2020), and ADFA linux dataset
(ADFA-LD12) (Creech and Hu, 2013) are critical for developing effective cyber defense strategies and assessing the effectiveness of existing
security measures. Table 1 summarizes the research works related to
the scope of this study by grouping them based on their primary
contributions into three categories: event log classification, cyberattack
detection techniques, and the creation of new cyberattack datasets.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing research that
has devised a novel cyberattack detection technique with a newly
diverse dataset of event logs, leveraging the semantic features of event
messages. Furthermore, there is no comprehensive dataset that includes
a wide range of attack types. The majority of the existing data classified
the event as normal or suspicious, and a few datasets classified the
event based on the attack type with limited labels. The research studies
did not examine how much log messages contribute to the prediction
process. Their technical focus was primarily on classifying the logs into
specific attack types. However, no effort was made to understand the
predictive nature of the attack types or the rationale behind classifying
them into specific types as opposed to others. Their attention was
centered on the outcome without delving into the underlying reasons.
Conventional event log classification did not consider the individual
contribution of log messages in generating each label, or how each
word in the entire text of the message contributes to the prediction
process specifically.
In contrast to earlier studies, this paper proposes a new cyberattack detection framework and creates a dataset of log events from
several source environments. This study also distinguishes itself by
incorporating various approaches from previous work, such as categorization schema and semantic log vectorization, and incorporating
2

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.
Table 1
A summary of the recent related works.
Aim
Logs
Classification

Cyberattack
Detection

Cyberattack
Datasets

Ref

Methods

Type of attacks

Limitations

Ramish et al. (2022)
Gunawan et al. (2018)

KNN, RF, SVM, MLP
Kali Linux VM

Brute Force, SQL Injection
SQL Injection, XSS, WPA2

Ceron et al. (2020)

MikroTik honeypot

Brute Force, Botnet

Vu et al. (2019)

LR, NN, LightGBM,
XGBoost

–

Purely based on binary classification
The victim side only contains Windows
event logs.
Attacker avoidance of cloud-based
honeypots and non-router devices
Purely based on binary classification

Zhang et al. (2023)
Sriram et al. (2020)

DDoS, DoS
DoS, Reconnaissance, DDoS

Deep learning not utilized
Purely based on network flow data.

Vinayakumar et al. (2019)

OADSD, SVM, NB
LSTM, RF, DT, NB,
KNN, SVM, LR
DNN

DoS, Probe, R2L, U2R

Mei et al. (2021)

CTSCOPY

Das et al. (2020)
Landauer et al. (2019)
Skopik et al. (2022)

LR, NB, DT, NN, SVM
Netcat Script
AECID approach

Yagemann et al. (2021)

MARSARA

Ransomware, RCE, Phishing, Data
Theft
SQL Injection, CRLF, XSS
Webshell Attack
Outliers, Change in Trends
Anomalies
Spoofing, Delay Attacks

Reliance on predefined features and
labeled data
Limited number of event types

Moustafa et al. (2020)

KNN, LOF, Clustering,
Correlation

Sharafaldin et al. (2018)
Mahfouz et al. (2020)
Ring et al. (2017)
Creech and Hu (2013)

Kali and Windows 8.1 PCs
MLP, NB, DT, LR
Nmap and Python Scripts
Metasploit, TikiWiki tool

Tovarňák et al. (2020)

Kali Linux VMs

Landauer et al. (2020)

Port scanning,smtpuser-enum, hydra tool

Scanning, Ransomware, DoS,
DDoS,
Injection, MITM, XSS
Brute Force, DoS, DDoS
Brute Force, DDoS, Infiltration
Port Scans, Brute Force, DoS
Brute force, password, webshell
Rreconnaissance, DoS, Web,
Phishing,
Ransomware, Data leakage
Port scan, brute force, and
webshell

more data sources in the data analysis procedure. The event logs are
collected from Windows and Linux operating systems to provide a
variety of events with nine types of attacks. The event logs are classified
based on their messages, which is a missing feature in the body of
research. Furthermore, by labeling each event based on its type, this
work determines the attack type from textual messages, which aids
in precisely determining the attack type. In this study, we explore
not only the classification procedure but also how each message contributes to the determination of the attack type. Our approach involves
the utilization of explainable AI techniques to enhance transparency
and comprehension in the decision-making process of identifying the
system’s vulnerability to a specific attack type. Finally, the presented
dataset is employed to evaluate the efficiency of diverse traditional and
deep learning algorithms in the context of detecting cyberattacks.

Using one data source
Limited validity and reliability
Fluctuating data usage and infrastructure
changes
High runtime overhead for PTs
No attack detection experiments

Using a limited number of PCs
Using one dataset
Limited to a fixed number of attacks.
Features lack data richness for reliable
classification.
Lake of attack labels

Services dependency and auto labeling
issue

2012 datasets contain event log messages that are recorded during
cyberattack testbeds without determining the specific attack for each
event message. The ultimate objective is to detect incoming cyberattacks using the acquired knowledge from known attacks to predict and
identify new attacks on the network.
3.1.1. TLDCDE dataset
The TLDCDE dataset has a wide range of event logs captured in
an exercise network deployed in the KYPO cyber range platform. The
captured data was standardized into three unique event categories:
archive of IP flow information export (IPFIX) traffic flows; archive of
Linux Syslog entries with their text-based log messages, and archive
of Windows Event Log entries containing the payload of actual events
in raw XML. Each data type has a different number of samples. IPFIX
traffic flow data was gathered from various protocols; Linux data was
gathered from various domains and applications; and Windows data
was gathered from audit events. The exercise is held between two
teams: the red team and the blue team. A variety of users and twenty
learners were divided into six blue teams to protect an emulated critical
information infrastructure from attackers in the red team. To simulate
an internal environment, private IP ranges are used to address the blue
team networks. Five subcategories represent the blue team network:
the demilitarized zone (DMZ), servers (SRV), operations (OPS), users
(USR), and the virtual private network (VPN). The exercise aims to
expose learners to cybersecurity incidents in a safe, isolated environment. The global gateway is the hub connecting all of the exercise’s
subnetworks. The exercise scenario uses the global network to imitate
the Internet. The service providers and the attackers are the two groups
of devices that make up the global network. The service providers
enable the blue teams and other genuine virtual participants in the
exercise to access legitimate DNS, e-mail, and the web. This network
also includes the hub for the exercise’s routing and address translation.

3. Dataset collection and analysis
3.1. Dataset collection
This study aims to bridge the gap from previous research by following specific patterns to extract significant insights from the available
datasets. Despite having few alternatives, we performed an extensive
web search and ultimately identified three pertinent event log collections containing text messages that align with the objectives of this
study. These datasets are (1) traffic and log data captured during
a cyber-defense exercise dataset (TLDCDE) (Tovarňák et al., 2020),
(2) austrian institute of technology (AIT) log data (Landauer et al.,
2020a), which provides synthetic log events appropriate for analyzing intrusion detection systems, and (3) mid atlantic collegiate cyber
defense Competition (MACCDC) dataset (MACCDC, 2012), collected
during a competitive test between university and college students.
Additionally, a zero-shot dataset of event logs has also been considered
in this study, as described next. Cyber-defense exercise and MACCDC
3

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.

greater control over data management and security, and the ability
to tailor services to meet the specific needs of strategic imperatives.
This dataset did not contain any suspicious events. The vast majority
of the event logs concerned Windows services, boot events, crash
events, and processing events. This dataset is exclusively used for eventtype detection experiments due to its non-suspicious nature. Table 2
provides an overview of the traffic and log data collected from the four
datasets.

3.1.2. AIT log dataset
Another dataset that is used in this work is the AIT dataset. Landauer
et al. (2020a) created a new methodology using model-driven engineering (MDE) techniques to collect a new log dataset. A simulation
of a typical system infrastructure found in many enterprises was constructed. After analyzing usage statistics of some good technologies,
an Apache web server that hosts a mail platform and a content management system (CMS) that is viewed and used by a random number
of people was used. Open-source platforms with vulnerabilities, such
as horde groupware webmail and a web shop provided by OkayCMS,
were used.
This testbed aims to create log data for assessing attack detection
systems. Executing malicious activities on an idle machine, on the other
hand, makes identification very easy because practically all created logs
are likely to be relevant to the intrusion. Using the prominent web
automation tool selenium, a state machine that covers all necessary
functions of the horde webmail and OkayCMS systems was constructed.
The logs were gathered from four different testbeds. Each testbed is
made up of one web server with a database and a different set of linked
host machines, each used by one or more users.
The log data gathered from the web servers contains Apache access,
error logs, syscall logs, authentication logs, daemon logs, mail logs, syslogs, and user logs. In this testbed, two types of attacks were scheduled:
multistep intrusion and webshell injection. The multistep intrusion has
multiple tools generally used to exploit vulnerabilities to gain root
access to a mail server. Scans for open ports and vulnerabilities are
performed as the first two steps. The attacker then employs the SMTPuser-enum tool to discover horde webmail accounts based on a list of
popular names, followed by the hydra tool to brute-force log into one of
the accounts based on a list of standard passwords. The attack continues
with a Horde Webmail exploit that enables the upload of a webshell and
remote command execution.

3.2. The procedure of data labeling
The labeling process is determined by either attack types or event
types. The AIT dataset is already labeled, but the MACCDC dataset
and traffic/log dataset need labeling. The dataset obtained from a
public local server was labeled solely based on event types due to its
lack of suspicious events. A two-stage data labeling process has been
employed, utilizing automated labeling based on message content and
specific time intervals for each dataset. In the initial labeling phase,
all log events generated during the identified attack time intervals has
been classified as either suspicious or non suspicious, in accordance
with the temporal information provided by the datasets. While this labeling method is straightforward due to the ability to derive anomalous
time windows from attack scenario descriptions, it has the drawback of
also categorizing non suspicious events occurring during attack periods
as suspicious. The researchers in AIT employed a timely detection
mechanism for event labeling as a preliminary step, ensuring that this
data was already labeled and eliminating the need for additional labeling. In contrast, the TLDCDE dataset contains time intervals without
corresponding labels. To address this, we applied similar mechanism
to (Landauer et al., 2020a) as initial step to label this data using a
script. Employing automated labeling proves advantageous due to its
speed and reduced effort requirements.
However, the trade-off for this approach is a notable increase in
misclassification, as the code script may struggle to label unseen data.
Samples that are not part of the available dataset may not be labeled correctly. Such untrained or unexpected scenarios can be handled by human professionals. Consequently, resorting to manual labeling emerges as a viable solution, even a time-consuming and laborintensive one, particularly when handling extensive datasets to ensure
accurate classification of the data. Landauer et al. (2020a) had difficulty distinguishing between interleaved malicious and normal processes due to the reliance on the code script in their labeling procedure,
which resulted in misclassification.
On the other hand, Ramish et al. (2022) and Chung et al. (2023),
labeled their data manually to avoid the misclassification that will
result from automatic classification. Therefore, we performed manual
corrections as a second phase to improve the reliability of the labeled
events. The subsequent subsections explain the procedure of manual
correction applied to each attack and event type.

3.1.3. MACCDC 2012 dataset
MACCDC (2012) is a one-of-a-kind opportunity for university and
college students to use their cybersecurity knowledge and skills in a
competitive test. Its distinctiveness lies in its focus on the operational
aspects of safeguarding an already established network infrastructure.
The logs were collected from the SecRepo2 website. The MACCDC
completion has two participating teams and two rounds. Each team alternates between attacking and defending the competition’s network. In
the first round, team A assaults the network while team B defends it. In
the second round, team B assaults the network while team A defends it.
Both sides employ their campaigns to attack the network, evading the
defensive team’s preemptive and preventive strategies. Throughout the
contest, the teams must ensure that the systems provide the required
services when attacked by a volunteer Red Team. Furthermore, the
teams must complete periodic ‘‘injects’’ that imitate business operations
that IT professionals must deal with in the real world. The competition’s
network had 4757 hosts, with 4739 experiencing malicious traffic. This
generated 2,677,375 snort alarms across 25 classes (Peshave et al.,
2022). The malicious network event trajectories were used to construct
sub-sequences of length 10, resulting in 658,343 unique subsequences,
out of a total of 51,606 unique subsequences.

3.2.1. Labeling based on attack types
In this work, a wide range of Windows and Linux event log files
were obtained to classify them based on the attack types. The log
messages were analyzed to discover the threat scenarios followed by
the attackers. However, all the event logs could be suspicious, as they
were captured in a controlled environment under cyber defense attack
conditions. All data was collected when the attacks were actively performed, while users were simultaneously interacting with the system.
So the events in this study were classified into suspicious and nonsuspicious depending on the log message’s semantic meaning and the
recommendations provided in monitoring active directory for signs of
compromise that were documented by Microsoft.
There is a list of events that should be monitored in any environment to ensure security and detect potential threats. By leveraging
established classification methods and industry best practices, the event
logs were categorized into suspicious and non-suspicious events. The

3.1.4. Zero-shot dataset
In contrast to the previous datasets, this data was specifically
gathered from a local server solely for this study. The data collected on
Tuesday, October 25, 2022, from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. includes events
generated using various systems, including service control manager,
Microsoft-Windows-Kernel-General,
Microsoft-WindowsTerminalServices-Printers, and Microsoft Windows WAS. It contains
Windows event logs representing daily activities, information on the
institution’s status, performance, and security, as well as information
on the apps and services that run on that server. This server gives local
hosts quick, dependable access to critical resources and information,
4

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.
Table 2
A description of the traffic and log data collected from the four datasets.
Dataset

Data source

Samples

Info source

TLDCDE

IPFIX traffic flows
Linux
Windows

469,113
6,083,409
2,901,154

DNS, HTTP, DHCP, SSH, andPOP3 protocols.
smbd, cron, sshd, usermod, firewalld,and useradd daemons and apps.
user login/ logout, credentials validation,and privilege escalation audit events.

AIT

Linux

15,817

Apache2, PHP7, Exim, Horde, OkayCMS,Suricata, ClamAV, and MariaDB.

MACCDC

PCAP files

2,677,375

TCP, ICMP, SMP, UDP, HTTP, DHCP,and routing protocols.

Zero-shot

Windows

70,357

User login/ logout, credentials validation,and privilege escalation audit events.

Fig. 1. Example system logs illustrating static and variable message components.

dataset was filtered by removing all the non-suspicious events and
starting a new classification to classify each suspicious event based on
the attack type. Various attempts have been made to carry out illegal
actions while using explicit credentials resulting in many cyberattacks,
including reading administrator credentials, numerous attempts to scan
open ports, receiving spam emails, obtaining permissions for risky
operations, and many more. The event logs were classified into nine
types of attack: network reconnaissance attack (NRA), credential based
attack (CBA), data leakage attack (DLA), brute force attack (BFA),
phishing attack (PHA), pass the ticket attack (PTT), denial of service
attack (DoS), web attack (WA) and privilege escalation attack (PEA).
Network reconnaissance attack. Is the foundational step for most
types of attacks. The attacker attempts to gather critical information
about the victim, such as identifying the system’s weak points, the
open ports, IP addresses, network topology, domain names, user names,
password complexity requirements, and more. As a result, in Windows
data, any attempt to read sensitive information in the system carried
out by a third party or by the admin/administrator was classified as
a network reconnaissance attack because many events in the system
involve other parties reading the administrator’s credentials. About
Linux, all attempts to probe, scan, or send unusual HTTP requests on a
specified host, and all Nmap and Nikto events were incorporated into
the Network Reconnaissance Attack.
Privilege escalation attack. Aims to expand the users’ access permissions for critical tasks such as troubleshooting, financial reporting,
or program installation. There are two types of privilege escalation:
vertical and horizontal privilege escalation. Vertical privilege escalation involves attackers using limited user accounts to increase their
privileges, potentially by assigning special privileges or adding them
to a security group, while still using the same account. On the other
hand, horizontal privilege escalation allows attackers to access higherpriority admin credentials, allowing them to move around the network
without detection. This type of attack found only in Windows event
logs, involves assigning special privileges to new accounts or adding
new members to security groups. These events were not isolated or routine administrative actions. Instead, they occurred frequently alongside
other attack patterns, such as denial-of-service or system exploitation
attempts. This behavior suggests a deliberate effort to exploit vulnerabilities and elevate access rights, which is a hallmark of privilege
escalation attacks.
Brute force attack. Involves an attacker systematically trying all
possible passwords and passphrases until the correct combination is discovered. In Windows data, failed login attempts were classified as brute

force attacks. In Linux, attempts with different credentials, ignored
by the PAM service, and attempts exceeding the maximum allowed
number by an invalid user were classified as brute force attacks. All
authentication failures, attempts taken by an invalid user, and aborted
login attempts were also classified as brute force attacks.
Data leakage attack. Is the disclosure of sensitive data to an
untrustworthy environment. Data leakage occurs due to cyberattacks,
inside job responsibilities, or unintentional data loss or exposure in
an organization. As a result, in Windows data, any attempt to read
sensitive information in the system carried out by a third party or the
admin/administrator was classified as a data leakage attack because
many events in the system involve other parties reading the administrator’s credentials. Due to the reading of credentials by users who
were not the owners, the log-on attempts using explicit credentials were
classified as data leakage attacks. In Linux, all the attempts to load the
host key, all the attempts to check passwords by unknown users, all the
attempts to get a rivest shamir adleman (RSA) certificate, all the TLS
library problems that describe illegal usage of data files or certificates,
and all the attempts to get AFS tokens were classified as a data leakage
attacks.
Pass the ticket attack. Is a cyberattack where an attacker steals
and uses Kerberos tickets, specifically the ticket-granting ticket (TGT)
or Service Tickets, to gain unauthorized access to a network. Kerberos is
an authentication protocol used in enterprise environments to manage
secure access to resources. The attacker compromises a system through
phishing or exploiting vulnerabilities, extracts Kerberos tickets from the
compromised system, and impersonates users to gain access to other
systems or services. An attacker can use a pass-the-ticket attack to get
a Kerberos ticket-granting ticket (TGT) from LSASS memory on one
computer and use it on another to request Kerberos service tickets
(TGS) to access the network resources. So, all the Kerberos service
ticket requests were classified as pass-the-ticket attacks. This type of
attack was found only in the Windows event logs.
Denial of service attack. Is a type of cyberattack in which the
attacker attempts to make a machine or network resource inaccessible
to the end users by causing service crashes for the connected device.
This is done by overwhelming the system with millions of requests
to cause system breakdown or application and service crashes. The
goal of the attacks was to cause system breakdowns or crashes in
applications and services. In Windows, all application or service crashes
were classified as denial of service (DoS) attacks, as they disrupted
critical functionality and aligned with the intent of denying access
to resources. While crashes can sometimes result from software bugs,
5

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.
Table 3
Statistics of attack types dataset.

the consistent targeting of key services indicated a deliberate effort to
compromise system availability. In Linux, several indicators were also
classified as DoS attacks, including any attempts to terminate processes
using SIGKILL, dropped client connections, unresponsive authentication processes, the inability to reach specific hosts, packet loss, and
lost connections after establishing a new connection from an unknown
host. These actions undermined the system’s ability to maintain service
continuity, reflecting the core characteristics of a DoS attack aimed at
overwhelming and destabilizing the environment.
Credential based attack. Involves attackers stealing user credentials to gain access to a network, bypass security measures, and steal
sensitive information, with the initial step being to steal credentials.
In Windows data, all successful or failed login or logout attempts from
suspicious IP addresses in the used dataset have a network logon type.
As a result, these suspicious events were carried out on the network
side. On this side, the attackers have several options for stealing credentials. They can steal them by sending a fake message to trick the
user into giving the attacker access to sensitive information. This fake
message may contain a forward link to a malicious website, a reset
password link, or others. There are a variety of paths the attacker can
take, such as phishing, pass-the-hash, data leakage, brute force, and
more. Concerning Linux, all the connections and disconnections, all
opened and closed sessions, and all the login attempts with the PLAIN
method from suspicious IP addresses were classified as credential-based
attacks.
Phishing attack. Aims to exploit user vulnerabilities by constantly
seeking ways to entice consumers to visit a phishing website. Spoofed
emails are often professionally designed to target users and deceive
them. Therefore, all the attempts that were made by spammers to hit
the mail server with bogus domains were classified as phishing attacks.
This type of attack is found only in the Linux event logs.
Web attack. Is unauthorized third-party access to systems or networks, aiming to destroy or steal sensitive data from information
systems, frameworks, computer networks, or personal devices. All webshell attack events were added to the web attack. Attackers can manipulate GET parameters to inject SQL queries into databases, allowing
unauthorized data access or modification. They can also use POST data
to execute arbitrary commands if the application does not properly
sanitize inputs. therefore, all the successful or failed attempts to connect
to the server, any disconnection from unknown, any suspicious GET
or POST requests, all not permitted operations, all the external client
requests from the server with a reserved local IP address to use it
as a legal client for 24 h, and all the requests that imply opening
new sessions for external clients and providing them with configured
information were classified as a web attack. This type of attack was
found only in the Linux event logs. All the SQL injections and all
the attempts to establish an encrypted connection between a web
server and a web browser using the secure sockets layer (SSL) security
protocol were classified as web attacks.
Table 3 shows the statistics on attack types within the data suggest
that the dataset is predominantly characterized by credential-based
attacks, comprising a total of 7401 messages. Conversely, the phishing
attack represents the smallest number of messages in the dataset. This
can be attributed to the fact that the overwhelming majority of events
in the dataset revolved around the utilization of credentials, such as
log-in and log-out events.

Attack type

Training

Validation

Testing

Total

Credential-Based Attack
Brute Force Attack
Privilege Escalation
Network Reconnaissance
Pass-the-Ticket
Web Attack
Data Leakage
Denial of Service
Phishing

5,599
2,637
1,993
1,795
320
238
202
118
4

623
293
222
200
36
26
22
13
0

1,179
1,000
500
500
150
110
100
42
4

7,401
3,930
2,715
2,495
506
374
324
173
8

Total

12,906

1,435

3,585

17,926

describing the event. On the other hand, network traffic logs, captured
in PCAP files, record network data such as timestamps, source and
destination IPs, ports, protocols (TCP, UDP), and packet content. These
logs focus on raw network traffic and are analyzed with tools such as
Wireshark. Table 4 summarizes the formats for Windows, Linux, and
network traffic. Fig. 1 demonstrates example log messages from the
collected dataset, showcasing both static and variable components.
All the collected system logs whether suspicious or non-suspicious
were manually labeled into eight distinct event types based on the
semantic content of the log messages, as they did not come with
predefined event classification categories, as detailed in Table 5. For
example, events involving account logins, user account creation or
deletion, successful or failed logins, or credential authentication were
classified under Account Usage. System start-up, shutdown, or update
times were categorized as boot events, while the installation of new
applications or services fell under software and service installation.
Crash events included logs detailing application crashes, errors, or
hangs, and actions involving clearing history or files, such as through
hypertext preprocessor (PHP), were labeled as clearing events. Any use
of Internet message access protocol (IMAP) was classified as a Mailing
Event, and logs related to the initiation and completion of processes
were grouped under Processing events. This manual labeling ensured
consistency across the dataset, addressing the variability in log formats
and content. Based on Table 5 that describes the data statistics for the
various types of events, it can be observed that the account usage events
dominate the dataset, with a total of 14,173 messages. In contrast, the
processing events have the fewest messages in the dataset.
Fig. 2 illustrates the event messages (a) and the attack messages
(b). The 𝑥-axis indicates the message number in the dataset, while the
𝑦-axis indicates the number of words in each message. As shown in this
figure, the number of messages in the attack types data reaches more
than 17,500. The length of messages varies with the number of words.
Some of the event messages have more than 5500 words, while others
contain no more than five words. The number of the events’ messages
is enormous; it has surpassed 17,900.
4. Methodology
This section discusses the methodology used to analyze and evaluate
the collected dataset. Fig. 3 shows the general proposed framework
consists of five stages: data collection and preparation which is the
initial step that involves gathering data from various sources, preprocessing, cleaning, and transforming it into a suitable analysis format.
Feature extraction aims to identify key features that improve model
performance and make precise predictions. Architecture construction
involves designing and implementing a model architecture, machine
learning, or deep learning. After training the model, it is crucial to
assess its performance using appropriate metrics to assess its accuracy,
reliability, and generalization capabilities on unseen data. Finally, semantic feature analysis involves analyzing the model’s predictions and
features to comprehend its semantics, interpret results, and provide
insights for decision-making using explainable AI tools.

3.2.2. Labeling based on event types
In this paper, the event logs are obtained from different sources such
as Windows, Linux, and network traffic. Each log source has a distinct
format suited to its environment. Windows logs are structured with
components like Event ID, timestamp, source (e.g., Security, System),
user, and a detailed message, typically stored in the EVTX format,
which requires tools such as Event Viewer to read. Linux logs are
stored as plain text files and follow a simpler format that includes the
timestamp, host, process, log level (e.g., info, error), and a message
6

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.
Table 4
A Summary of Log Formats for Windows, Linux, and Network Traffic.
Log type

Components

Format

Example

Windows

- Event ID
- Timestamp
- Source
- User
- Event Type
- Message

EVTX

An account failed to log on. Subject:
Security ID: S-1-0-0 Account Name:
- Account Domain: - Logon ID:0 × 0
Logon Type:3 Account ForWhich
Logon Failed: Security ID:S-1-0-0
AccountName: User Account Domain:
WORKSTATION Failure Information:
Failure Reason: The specified
account’s password has expired.
Status: 0xC0000224

Linux

- Timestamp
- Host
- Process/Service
- Log Level
- Message

Plain text

Time server_name APPLICATION:
model event Authentication
failed. [pid 12345
on line 678 of
‘‘/path/to/file.php’’]

Network Traffic

- Timestamp
- Source IP/Port
- Destination IP/Port
- Protocol
- Packet Length
- Packet Data

PCAP

Packet No: 1633247 Time:
1706.530000 Source IP:
192.168.X.X Destination IP:
192.168.Y.Y Protocol:
TCP Length: 70 Source Port:
50916 → Destination
Port: 80 [ACK] Sequence No:
306 Acknowledgment:
464 Window Size: 15680 Length:
0 Timestamp Val:
5734915 Timestamp Echo:1882902

Table 5
Statistics of event types dataset.
Event type

Training

Validation

Testing

Total

Account Usage
Mailing Events
Processing Events
Crash Events
Windows Services
Software&Service Installation
Boot Events
Clearing Events

10,636
567
582
624
251
146
76
39

1,182
63
65
70
28
16
8
4

2,355
310
200
400
150
100
40
30

14,173
940
847
1,094
429
262
124
73

Total

12,921

1,436

3,585

17,942

4.1. Data preprocessing
The event logs have been collected from four different sources. The
AIT dataset already had labels. The other datasets were unlabeled, so a
new framework has been created to include a unique phase for labeling
them depending on the attack and event types. The dataset obtained
from the local server has been labeled solely based on event types due
to its lack of suspicious events. However, after gathering data from
several sources, a new dataset that shows a great deal of variety has
been constructed and used to evaluate this framework. Fig. 3 shows
the preprocessing phase consists of four substeps, starting with data
transformation. In this step, the data has several forms. It is converted
from JSON to TXT, then to the XML format, and finally to CSV format.
The second step involves removing duplicates by eliminating identical
events. This step is crucial, given that a substantial portion of the
ground truth data was identified as duplicated. In the third step, the
data is categorized based on event types, with events being reclassified
into suspicious and non-suspicious categories. Finally, the dataset is
filtered by removing all the non-suspicious events to start a new type
of classification based on the attack types.

Fig. 2. Event messages’ words counted by (a) Event and (b) Attack Messages.

event message were included because they were a crucial aspect of
predicting the type of attack or type of event. In the feature extraction
phase, CountVectorizer (Manjunatha and Kempanna, 2022) was used
to convert a given text into a vector based on the number of times
that each word appears across the full text. There were several text
messages with variable lengths that needed to turn each word in them
into a vector to make them more useful in the text analysis process.
On the other hand, the Bag-of-Words technique was employed for deep
learning feature extraction. This approach extracts numerical features

4.2. Feature extraction
The data is primarily composed of event messages and their labels;
therefore, no standard technique is utilized during the feature selection phase. However, all of the words contained in the text of each
7

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.

Fig. 3. A depiction of the generic classification framework.

Fig. 4. A block diagram of semantic feature extraction from log messages.

from text material in various ways, including tokenizing, counting, and
normalizing. This work employed the tokenizing method, which entails
tokenizing strings, assigning a numeric ID to each potential token, and
then generating token separators out of white spaces and punctuation.
Fig. 4 explains how the countVectorizer and tokenization techniques
extract the words from the event message.

complex, high-dimensional datasets. Traditional machine learning algorithms provide robust classification and predictive capabilities by
effectively identifying patterns within event features. These features
often represent distinct aspects of system behavior, such as user login
attempts, access to sensitive files, and changes in system configurations,
each carrying semantic meaning related to user activity and potential
security threats. Also, deep learning models excel in capturing intricate spatial and temporal dependencies in the data. These models are
highly effective in identifying and mitigating potential cyber threats
due to their resilience against overfitting, scalability for large datasets,
and enhanced ability to uncover subtle relationships. Integrating machine learning and deep learning techniques enhances the accuracy of
detection mechanisms, improving cybersecurity strategies for digital infrastructure protection, and promoting a comprehensive understanding
of the semantic meaning behind each feature.
This work used traditional machine learning and deep learning
algorithms. For the traditional machine learning for performance evaluation. Seven standard algorithms were applied: multi-layer perceptron
(MLP), logistic regression (LR), random forest (RF), support vector classifier (SVC), extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), and naive bayes (NB). For deep learning models, we
evaluated the BERT-based model, convolutional neural network (CNN),

4.3. Data split
The data splitting step involved implementing numerous experiments to pick the best data splitting for each used model and get the
best results. The data was split into training, validation, and testing
datasets. A training dataset of 70%, a validation dataset of 10%, and
a testing dataset of 20% were used. Also, a zero random state with
stratification was applied to give all the datasets the same proportions
of class labels.
4.4. ML and DL modeling
The use of various models in cybersecurity and event log attack
detection relies on their unique capabilities to process and analyze
8

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.

bidirectional recurrent neural network (Bi-RNN), long short-term memory (LSTM), bidirectional long short-term memory (Bi-LSTM), bidirectional gated recurrent unit (Bi-GRU), and a hybrid model made up of
a CNN layer and a GRU layer.

5.2. Experimental results
This work conducted three types of experiments: the first was based
on the attack types dataset, the second was based on the event types
dataset, and the last experiment was based on a zero-shot dataset.
A combination of traditional machine learning and deep learning algorithms was employed in all experiments. In each experiment, the
models’ performance was evaluated using four metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, and f1-score. The following subsections present the models’
results based on the dataset types.

4.5. Evaluation metrics
Four distinct metrics were used to evaluate the performance of
the machine learning and deep learning models, which are: accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score. Accuracy denotes the ratio of correct
predictions to total samples, precision indicates the ratio of correctly
classified positive predictions, recall refers to the ratio of the positive
samples that were correctly classified to the total number of positive
samples, and F1-score analyzes the classification accuracy by considering both the precision and recall metrics. The recall measures the
model’s ability to identify relevant events for a specific attack type. It is
the fraction of true positive events out of all actual positive events. The
objective is to maximize true positives while minimizing false negatives
when classifying events based on their actual attack type. High recall
is particularly important because false negatives (events that belong
to an attack type but are misclassified as not belonging to that type)
are costly and potentially harmful. For instance, if a suspicious event is
misclassified as non-suspicious, it may go undetected by administrators,
allowing attackers to continue their activity, potentially causing greater
damage to the system. On the other hand, Precision is the accuracy of
positive predictions, focusing on the proportion of true positive events
out of all classified as positive. High precision is crucial to minimize
false positives, where non-suspicious events are incorrectly flagged as
suspicious, which can overwhelm administrators and reduce system
efficiency. This study emphasizes both recall and precision to ensure
that the model not only captures all relevant events but also minimizes
unnecessary false alarms. A balance between high recall and precision
ensures the model can effectively detect minority classes (i.e., rare
attack types) without overwhelming administrators with false positives,
which is critical in our scenario where both false negatives and false
positives carry significant consequences.

5.2.1. Performance based on attack type
With the best Hyperparameters for each used model, the CNN, BiLSTM, Bi-GRU, and a hybrid model made up of a CNN layer and a
GRU layer were utilized under the same experimental configurations.
These models were trained throughout a 10-epoch session with an
8-batch size. The BERT-Based model were trained throughout a 10epoch session with a 32-batch size. On the other hand, the LSTM
and Bi-RNN models were trained over a 7-epoch session with a batch
size of 32. Tables 7 and 8 summarize the performance of machine
learning and deep learning algorithms in terms of accuracy, weighted
precision, weighted recall, weighted f1-score, macro precision, macro
recall, and macro f1-score. As demonstrated in Table 8, the XGBoost
model obtained the best ML results, with a recall of 98.01, and a
precision of 97.94. The results of the ML models were less efficient
than the results of the DL models. The BERT classifier achieved the
best results, with a recall of 98.77 and a precision of 98.98. The
accuracy metric has a sober limitation since it provides values that
are less distinct and discriminable. As a result, its capabilities to select
and determine the best detection model are hampered. The accuracy
is less informative and biased toward the minority class. Therefore,
the attention is highlighted on recall and precision results, as they
are considered the best discriminators in this context. Recall ensures
that the model identifies as many attacks as possible (minimizing
missed detections), while precision focuses on reducing false positives
(ensuring non-attacks are not mistakenly flagged).
5.2.2. Performance based on event types
With the best hyper parameters for each used model, the CNN, BiLSTM, Bi-GRU, and a hybrid model made up of a CNN layer and a GRU
layer were utilized under the same experimental configurations. These
models were trained throughout a 10-epoch session with an 8-batch
size. The BERT-Based model was trained throughout a 10-epoch session
with a 32-batch size. On the other hand, the LSTM and Bi-RNN models
were trained over a 7-epoch session with a batch size of 32. As shown
in Table 9, the SGD model achieved the best ML results, with a recall of
99.05 and a precision of 99.02. The performance of the ML model was
less effective compared to the results achieved by the DL model. With
a recall of 99.27 and a precision of 99.29, the BERT classifier achieved
the best results.

4.6. Semantic feature analysis
Explainable AI techniques shed light on the decision-making process
of black-box classifiers and help analysts understand and confidently
accept expected outputs (Kasturi, 2024). This work uses explainable
techniques to understand the decision-making process of machine/deep
learning models that got the best results. The decision made by a DL or
ML model has important repercussions in determining the type of attack
that the system is vulnerable to, as well as the approach that administrators will take to deal with such an attack (Alzu’bi et al., 2024). We
used LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) and Captum (Kokhlikyan et al., 2019)
to interpret each word in the event message, to explain its impact on
the final decision, and to discover biases and incorrect decisions in the
predicted data. A thorough study has revealed that these two methods
are highly effective in explaining features and can justify any type of
prediction made by a supervised learning model (Gohel et al., 2021).

5.3. Discussion
5.3.1. Model optimization for attack detection
This study addresses the effectiveness of machine learning and deep
learning algorithms in identifying attacks and events. Transformerbased deep learning models, such as BERT, are especially successful
in combating complex and nuanced cybersecurity attacks because they
can capture greater contextual connections in data, which is critical
for detecting subtle or changing attack trends. Traditional machine
learning models including XGBoost and Random Forest are effective
in detecting attacks, with accuracy close to deep learning models.
These methods allow rapid and resource-efficient detection, making
them ideal for real-time threat monitoring. Balancing detection rates
among attack types is critical, and models excelling in macro measures,
such as BERT, are particularly successful at detecting less common

5. Results and discussion
5.1. Experiments configuration
The experiments were conducted on a professional cloud processing
platform with a powerful GPU. The proposed event log classifier was
implemented using Python and machine learning packages such as
TensorFlow and Keras. The client system was equipped with an Nvidia
T4 Tensor Core GPU, Intel Core i7 processor, and 12 GB RAM. Each
model was trained for a different number of epochs with a learning
rate of 2e−5 regarding BERT. Table 6 summarizes the hyper-parameters
used for each model.
9

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.
Table 6
The hyper-parameters of the implemented DL models.
Hyper-param.

BERT

CNN

Bi-LSTM

LSTM

Bi-GRU

Hybrid

Bi-RNN

Loss
Activation
Optimizer
Epochs
Batch Size
Embedding
Dropout

Entropy
SM,R
Adam
10
32
768
0.2

Entropy
SM,R
Adam
10
8
100
0.2

Entropy
SM
Adam
10
8
32
0.4

Entropy
SM
Adam
7
32
100
0.5

Entropy
SM
Adam
10
8
100
0.25,0.5

Entropy
SM,R
Adam
10
8
100
0.25,0.3,0.5

Entropy
SM/Tanh
Adam
7
32
100
0.2

SM: Softmax, R: ReLU, Tanh: Hyperbolic Tangent.
Table 7
A summary of the ML and DL results.
Data type

Attack
Type
Event
Type

Model

XGBoost
BERT
SGD
BERT

Accuracy

98.01
98.77
99.05
99.27

Table 10
A summary of training and testing times complexity for the DL models.

Weighted average (%)

Macro average (%)

Precision

F1-score

Precision

F1-score

97.94
98.98
99.02
99.29

97.96
98.81
99.03
99.27

96.86
96.86
97.26
97.14

96.27
97.56
96.82
97.51

Model

BERT
BiLSTM
BiRNN
BiGRU
LSTM
CNN
Hybrid

Table 8
A summary of the experimental results for the attack types.
Type

Model

Weighted average (%)

Weighted macro (%)

Precision

Recall

Precision

Recall

ML

MLP
LR
SVC
RF
SGD
NB
XGBoost

97.66
97.69
95.39
97.04
97.51
95.94
97.94

97.68
97.68
95.67
97.01
97.40
95.95
98.01

95.72
95.31
83.70
94.14
94.81
96.26
96.86

95.10
95.27
78.83
93.69
95.23
89.29
95.80

DL

BERT
Bi-LSTM
LSTM
CNN
Bi-GRU
Hybrid
Bi-RNN

98.98
97.92
97.61
96.99
97.11
96.61
96.37

98.77
97.68
97.60
96.51
96.93
96.51
95.98

96.86
96.91
86.45
94.87
96.97
96.42
97.00

98.63
94.84
84.45
96.23
96.42
95.07
82.80

ML

DL

Model

Weighted average (%)

Weighted macro (%)

Precision

Recall

Precision

Recall

MLP
LR
SVC
RF
SGD
NB
XGBoost

98.57
98.64
97.49
98.61
99.02
96.79
98.31

98.57
98.66
97.57
98.63
99.05
96.54
98.38

95.19
97.13
96.89
96.59
97.26
90.90
96.58

94.98
96.03
91.61
95.98
96.42
93.03
94.50

BERT
Bi-LSTM
LSTM
CNN
Bi-GRU
Hybrid
Bi-RNN

99.29
98.89
99.00
99.02
98.22
97.83
96.92

99.27
98.74
98.68
98.77
98.04
97.65
96.40

97.14
96.31
97.01
94.44
96.08
92.96
88.80

98.08
95.62
95.24
95.72
93.44
90.61
89.48

Event type (s)

Training

Inference

Training

Inference

290
32
703
45
1089
7
18

48
2
20
3
32
0.002
1.5

290
176
1523
290
2272
10
95

49
12
141
13
250
1
4

previous work by decreasing the model training time and focusing on
one critical feature, the semantic context of the log message, instead
of relying on numerous numerical features. This approach reduces the
computing costs and training durations and enables a better understanding of patterns and detection of attacks. It also allows for faster
training and inference while maintaining high accuracy in real-time
attack detection.
This technique maximizes computational efficiency and real-time
performance, addressing scaling difficulties in previous approaches. As
shown in Table 10, BERT effectively detects attack and event types, but
its high computational cost makes it less suitable for real-time detection. BiLSTM offers a more efficient alternative with a shorter training
time of 5 min (32 s per epoch) for attack-type detection and 29.3 min
(176 s per epoch) for event-type detection. Its low time complexity
makes it suitable for log attack detection. On the other hand, BiRNN
has higher computational costs with training times of 82 min (703 s
per epoch) for attack type and 177.6 min (1523 s per epoch) for event
type, limiting its applicability in real-time intrusion detection. BiGRU is
a strong candidate for attack and event type recognition, with training
times of 7.5 and 48.3 min, respectively. It incorporates performance
and speed, making it a viable option. LSTM models require longer
training time because to inherent gating mechanisms, but CNNs have
outstanding speed with less training time. CNNs are often employed for
image data, yet they offer the potential for fast anomaly detection in
cybersecurity activities. The hybrid model, which combines complexity
and performance, reaches a compromise, with training durations of
3 min for attack type and 15.8 min for event type detection. The
hybrid technique minimizes training time and solves the problem of
high computational costs in (Sajid et al., 2024), without compromising much performance. This paper uses model design optimization
to achieve a balance between computational efficiency and real-time
performance. The main strategies include decreasing training time,
balancing complexity and speed, and emphasizing scalability.
Models including BiLSTM, CNN, and Hybrid surpass others in terms
of speed while maintaining accuracy. The CNN model takes just
1.16 min to detect attack types, making it perfect for real-time applications. The hybrid model, which keeps the benefits of complex
architectures while reducing computing, has a training period of only
3 min for threat detection, indicating a possible middle ground for realtime cybersecurity applications. Focusing on models that demand fewer
resources allows these models to scale more efficiently in dispersed contexts, managing high quantities of network traffic without bottlenecks.

Table 9
A summary of the experimental results for the event types.
Type

Attack type (s)

but vital attacks, which is necessary for reliable defense systems. In
cybersecurity, it is important to detect anomalies and hostile activity
with minimal delay and high accuracy. Models must balance computing
efficiency and detection performance, especially in real-time networks.
Sajid et al. (2024) outlined the difficulty of using deep learning
models, especially hybrid models, which are accurate but have high
computational costs and data volumes and face challenges in large-scale
networks due to trade-offs between vertical and horizontal scalability.
These models can create processing delays, limiting their usefulness in
high-speed network traffic situations. We addressed the limitations of
10

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.

Fig. 5. Message explanations for each attack class.

Table 11 compares the performance of several models in terms of the
number of classes, training, and inference time.
Our CNN-based detection model surpasses the other models in
terms of training time, taking only 7 s to complete the procedure. In
comparison, the LSTM (Sajid et al., 2024), DCNNBiLSTM (Hnamte and
Hussain, 2023), and ADS (Muna et al., 2018) models require 73.41,
202, and 119.03 s, respectively. This demonstrates how efficient the
CNN model is in learning patterns from data. Inference times differ
greatly between models. The DCNNBiLSTM model has the longest
inference time (95.04 s), while the ADS model has a little longer
inference time (2.25 s) than our CNN model, which takes just 2 ms.
This shows that our CNN model not only trains faster but also predicts
more accurately, making it more suited for real-time applications. Our
CNN model’s performance in terms of training and inference time
shows that it is more scalable and applicable to large-scale or real-time
applications. The short inference time, in particular, makes it perfect for
scenarios requiring rapid decision-making, such as online classification
or real-time monitoring. Previous research (Sajid et al., 2024; Hnamte
and Hussain, 2023; Muna et al., 2018) lacks model interpretability,
which is critical for decision-making. Complex models, such as deep
learning, can provide complex predictions, making it difficult for users
to trust or evaluate the results. This lack of transparency makes it
difficult to explain the origins of some predictions. To solve this issue,
we included XAI tools in our model pipeline, which give clear, transparent explanations for our models’ predictions and insights into the
features that influenced each decision. This boosted trust in the model’s

outcomes and assured decision-makers could depend on them in critical
situations. XAI successfully balances performance and openness, which
are essential to preserving accuracy and accountability in real-time cybersecurity systems, assuring the advancement of sophisticated models
without compromising interpretability.
5.3.2. Semantic message explanation
This study used LIME tool to interpret the XG-Boost model predictions by creating human-readable explanations. Fig. 5 depicts local
explanations for a specific instance of each class label in the data to
identify the input data features that were most important in formulating a given prediction. The highlighted words in the text message
contributed the most to the prediction process. The greater the color
intensity, the stronger the effect. Each word contributes either positively or negatively to the prediction process. If the word appears under
the number of the label class, it has a positive effect. If it is listed
in the NOT label class, it signifies that it perplexed the model and
referred to another class label, which leads to an incorrect prediction.
The class labels are encoded and represented numerically, such that 0
indicates a brute force attack, 1 indicates a credential-based attack, 2
indicates a data leakage attack, 3 indicates a denial of service attack, 4
indicates a network reconnaissance attack, 5 indicates a pass-the-ticket
attack, 6 indicates a phishing attack, 7 indicates a privilege escalation
attack, and 8 indicates a web attack. The labels brute force attack (0),
credential-based attack (1), data leakage attack (2), denial of service
attack (3), and web attack (8), have a vast majority of the words that
11

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.
Table 11
A comparison of model performance with prior works.
Ref

Model

No. of Classes

Training (s)

Inference (s)

Sajid et al. (2024)
Hnamte and Hussain (2023)
Muna et al. (2018)
Ours

LSTM
DCNNBiLSTM
ADS
CNN

5
3
10
9

73.41
202
119.03
7

–
95.04
2.25
0.002

Fig. 6. A representation of the token contribution in BERT layers.

contributed positively to the prediction process. The words ‘‘user’’ and
‘‘invalid’’ contribute the most to the brute force attack, and this label
has a prediction probability of 100%. The most significant word in
credential-based attacks was ‘‘computer’’, which has a weight of 0.47.
The prediction probability for this label is also 100%. Data leakage
attack, network reconnaissance attack, pass-the-ticket attack, and privilege escalation attack have the same prediction probabilities. On the
other hand, denial of service attack, phishing attack, and web attack
have variant probabilities due to the bias for other labels, exhibiting
prediction probabilities of 0.47, 0.87, and 0.90, respectively. Words
such as ‘‘type’’, ‘‘logon’’, and ‘‘logged’’ have a negative impact on the
prediction results in several class labels due to their repetition in event
messages that belong to various attacks.
Fig. 6 depicts a heat map of token attributions for the BERT prediction across all layers. It is worth noting that the word ‘‘authentication’’
has increasing attribution from layer one to layer nine in the BFA class.
This significance is gradually fading in the last three layers. On the
other hand, the word ‘‘credentials’’ in DLA gets an increasing level of
attribution from the first to the last layer.
In contrast to the ‘‘credentials’’ token, the ‘‘account’’ word in the CBA
class continues to decrease. In the first five layers, many tokens in all
classes have negative or near-to-zero attribution. It is possible to begin
noticing slightly higher attribution in tokens crucial after layer five,
such as the PEA class’s ‘‘universal’’ word. In the first nine layers, the
token ‘‘account’’ in the WA class is also granted a high attribution score.
Finally, in the last three layers, the correctly predicted token ‘‘error’’
for the PHA class has increasingly positive attribution. Since the input
text (message) can be handled as a discrete random variable because
it has a finite number of possible values, the probability mass function
(PMF) is calculated using the attribution values of each feature after
extracting the feature importance using a probability distribution on
the input features and scaling the attribution values accordingly.
The PMF is used to comprehend how a particular token contributes
to the model’s output and to understand its relative importance in each

layer. In the context of BERT, PMF refers to the output layer prediction,
where each node indicates the probability of a specific token in the
text given the input. In this study, the PMF is calculated utilizing the
attribution values of the best word that contributed positively in each
class. Fig. 7 shows the PMF for all class labels in the last layer of BERT
is high because this is where the model makes its final prediction.
The output layer is a fully connected layer that computes the
probability distribution over the entire text using a softmax activation
function. The last layer identifies the most likely token (word) given
the input and context provided by the rest of the BERT model. High
PMF values at the BERT’s final layer imply that the model is confident
in its predictions for a certain token in the given text. Attribution
entropy is a measure of feature attribution confusion that can be used
to detect circumstances where a model’s predictions are less accurate
or more difficult to explain. In this work, the attribution entropies are
calculated using the Shannon entropy. The Shannon entropy can be
used in the context of BERT to quantify the randomness or uncertainty
of the model’s predictions for a given token. The amount of uncertainty
in a probability distribution is measured by the Shannon entropy. The
entropy is calculated from a set of probabilities as the negative sum of
the probabilities times their logarithm to base 2.
The probability distribution in the instance of BERT is represented
by the prediction made by the last layer, PMF, for a specific token. The
PMF’s entropy indicates how confident the model is in its prediction
for that token. High entropy indicates uncertainty or less confidence
in a model’s prediction, while low entropy indicates certainty and
confidence. Fig. 8 depicts the attribution entropies for each class label
based on the Shannon entropy measure. The 𝑥-axis represents the
number of layers, while the 𝑦-axis represents the entropy value in each
layer.
5.4. Limitations of the study
There are certain limitations to this study, the most prominent
of which was encountered during the data processing stage. Upon
12

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.

Fig. 7. A representation of the probability mass function (PMF) distributions across BERT layers.

types. By recognizing and monitoring significant events and classifying each event based on the message log, aiding customers in better
understanding their events, strengthening security, and minimizing performance degradation would be guaranteed. The suggested framework
will assist administrators in preventing incoming threats before critical
data is stolen or lost by providing a better understanding of security
events. If the topic of interest is not related to event messages, the
same framework can still be used by modifying the obtained features
and replacing them with other features of events. The results showed
that the BERT-Based model outperformed all the conventional and
deep learning models evaluated in this work with a recall of 99.27%
and a precision of 99.29%. These findings reflect the ideal model’s
ability to properly identify a high proportion of events of a particular
type by detecting as many true positives as possible while avoiding
false negatives. Several fascinating potential future work directions
including collecting more log samples from intrusion detection systems
by developing an attacking simulation session with good system infrastructure. The use of network traffic data and the features of IP flows
could be also investigated.

Fig. 8. Attribution entropies for class labels calculated using the Shannon entropy
measure.

compiling log data from multiple sources, we found plenty of duplicate
messages. The dataset became more noisy due to this redundancy. We
cleaned the data by removing duplicate log entries in order to address
this problem. This reduced the size of the dataset used for model testing and training. Cyberattacks are constantly evolving, and attackers
routinely discover new tactics to evade detection systems. This study’s
reliance on historical log data, which might not detect all new or
developing threats, presents another difficulty. The model’s capacity to
respond to or identify previously unknown threats is restricted unless
it is continuously retrained on up-to-date data. Additionally, since the
primary objective of this study is to analyze the semantic context
of the log message, which focuses on the static parts, the variable
components have not been included in the analysis. A potential solution
to address this limitation could involve adopting a pattern similar to the
one proposed in (Wurzenberger et al., 2024) which presents an eventbased detection mechanism. This method considers all token data types
associated with a specific event type during the log message analysis.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ahmad Alzu’bi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Omar
Darwish: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Resources, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Amjad Albashayreh: Writing – original draft, Software,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Yahya Tashtoush: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal
analysis.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability

6. Conclusion

Data will be made available on request.

This paper presents a new event log dataset that is compiled from
four separate datasets and categorized according to event and attack
13

A. Alzu’bi et al.

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

References

Muna, A.-H., Moustafa, N., Sitnikova, E., 2018. Identification of malicious activities in
industrial internet of things based on deep learning models. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 41,
1–11.
Padiet, P., Islam, R., Khan, M.A., 2024. Users’ scenario-base for analysing insider threat
detection based on user’s downloads activity logs. In: Future of Information and
Communication Conference. Springer, pp. 457–472.
Peshave, A., Ganesan, A., Oates, T., 2022. Predicting network threat events using HMM
ensembles. In: International Conference on Advanced Data Mining and Applications.
Springer, pp. 229–240.
Ramish, M., Sinha, A., Desai, J., Raj, A., Rajawat, Y.S., Punia, P., 2022. IT attack
detection and classification using users event log feature and behavior analytics
through Fourier EEG signal. In: 2022 IEEE 11th International Conference on
Communication Systems and Network Technologies. CSNT, IEEE, pp. 577–582.
Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C., 2016. " why should I trust you?" Explaining the
predictions of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. pp. 1135–1144.
Ring, M., Wunderlich, S., Grüdl, D., Landes, D., Hotho, A., 2017. Flow-based benchmark
data sets for intrusion detection. In: Proceedings of the 16th European Conference
on Cyber Warfare and Security. ACPI. pp. 361–369.
Sajid, M., Malik, K.R., Almogren, A., Malik, T.S., Khan, A.H., Tanveer, J., Rehman, A.U.,
2024. Enhancing intrusion detection: a hybrid machine and deep learning approach.
J. Cloud Comput. 13 (1), 123.
Satilmiş, H., Akleylek, S., Tok, Z.Y., 2024. A systematic literature review on host-based
intrusion detection systems. IEEE Access 12, 27237–27266.
Satpathi, S., Deb, S., Srikant, R., Yan, H., 2019. Learning latent events from network
message logs. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 27 (4), 1728–1741.
Sharafaldin, I., Lashkari, A.H., Ghorbani, A.A., et al., 2018. Toward generating a new
intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization. ICISSp 1, 108–116.
Singh, R., Kumar, H., Singla, R.K., Ketti, R.R., 2017. Internet attacks and intrusion
detection system: A review of the literature. Online Inf. Rev. 41 (2), 171–184.
Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Höld, G., Landauer, M., Kuhn, W., 2022. Behavior-based
anomaly detection in log data of physical access control systems. IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secure Comput. 20 (4), 3158–3175.
Sriram, S., Vinayakumar, R., Alazab, M., Soman, K., 2020. Network flow based
IoT botnet attack detection using deep learning. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications Workshops. INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE,
pp. 189–194.
Tovarňák, D., Špaček, S., Vykopal, J., 2020. Traffic and log data captured during a
cyber defense exercise. Data Brief 31, 105784.
Vinayakumar, R., Alazab, M., Soman, K.P., Poornachandran, P., Al-Nemrat, A., Venkatraman, S., 2019. Deep learning approach for intelligent intrusion detection system.
IEEE Access 7, 41525–41550.
Vu, Q.H., Ruta, D., Cen, L., 2019. Gradient boosting decision trees for cyber security
threats detection based on network events logs. In: 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data. Big Data, IEEE, pp. 5921–5928.
Wurzenberger, M., Höld, G., Landauer, M., Skopik, F., 2024. Analysis of statistical
properties of variables in log data for advanced anomaly detection in cyber security.
Comput. Secur. 137, 103631.
Yagemann, C., Noureddine, M.A., Hassan, W.U., Chung, S., Bates, A., Lee, W.,
2021. Validating the integrity of audit logs against execution repartitioning
attacks. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security. pp. 3337–3351.
Zhang, P., He, F., Zhang, H., Hu, J., Huang, X., Wang, J., Yin, X., Zhu, H., Li, Y., 2023.
Real-time malicious traffic detection with online isolation forest over sd-wan. IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 18, 2076–2090.
Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Liu, Z., Wei, W., 2020. A cyber-insurance scheme for water
distribution systems considering malicious cyberattacks. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur. 16, 1855–1867.

Ali, A., Khan, A., Ahmed, M., Jeon, G., 2022. BCALS: Blockchain-based secure log
management system for cloud computing. Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. 33
(4), e4272.
Alzu’bi, A., Albashayreh, A., Abuarqoub, A., Alfawair, M., 2024. Explainable AI-based
DDoS attacks classification using deep transfer learning. Comput. Mater. Continua
80, 3785–3802. http://dx.doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2024.052599.
Azahari, A., Balzarotti, D., 2024. On the inadequacy of open-source application logs
for digital forensics. Forensic Sci. Int. Digit. Investig. 49, 301750.
Ceron, J.M., Scholten, C., Pras, A., Santanna, J., 2020. MikroTik devices landscape,
realistic honeypots, and automated attack classification. In: NOMS 2020-2020
IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium. IEEE, pp. 1–9.
Chung, M.-H., Wang, L., Li, S., Yang, Y., Giang, C., Jerath, K., Raman, A., Lie, D.,
Chignell, M., 2023. Implementing active learning in cybersecurity: Detecting
anomalies in redacted emails. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00870.
Creech, G., Hu, J., 2013. Generation of a new IDS test dataset: Time to retire the KDD
collection. In: 2013 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference.
WCNC, IEEE, pp. 4487–4492.
Das, S., Agarwal, N., Shiva, S., 2021. Ddos explainer using interpretable machine
learning. In: 2021 IEEE 12th Annual Information Technology, Electronics and
Mobile Communication Conference. IEMCON, IEEE, pp. 0001–0007.
Das, S., Ashrafuzzaman, M., Sheldon, F.T., Shiva, S., 2020. Network intrusion detection
using natural language processing and ensemble machine learning. In: 2020 IEEE
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence. SSCI, IEEE, pp. 829–835.
Gohel, P., Singh, P., Mohanty, M., 2021. Explainable AI: current status and future
directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07045.
Gunawan, T.S., Lim, M.K., Kartiwi, M., Malik, N.A., Ismail, N., 2018. Penetration testing
using kali linux: SQL injection, XSS, wordpres, and WPA2 attacks. Indones. J. Electr.
Eng. Comput. Sci. 12 (2), 729–737.
Hnamte, V., Hussain, J., 2023. DCNNBiLSTM: An efficient hybrid deep learning-based
intrusion detection system. Telematics Inform. Rep. 10, 100053.
Jaafar, F., Nicolescu, G., Richard, C., 2016. A systematic approach for privilege
escalation prevention. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality,
Reliability and Security Companion. QRS-C, IEEE, pp. 101–108.
Kalutharage, C.S., Liu, X., Chrysoulas, C., Pitropakis, N., Papadopoulos, P., 2023. Explainable AI-based DDOS attack identification method for IoT networks. Computers
12 (2), 32.
Kasturi, S., 2024. Predicting Application Security Attack Paths Using Correlation
Analysis, Attack Tree, and Multi-layer Perceptron (Ph.D. thesis). Indiana State
University.
Kokhlikyan, N., Miglani, V., Martin, M., Wang, E., Reynolds, J., Melnikov, A.,
Lunova, N., Reblitz-Richardson, O., 2019. Pytorch captum. GitHub repository.
Kumar, R., Javeed, D., Aljuhani, A., Jolfaei, A., Kumar, P., Islam, A.N., 2023.
Blockchain-based authentication and explainable AI for securing consumer IoT
applications. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron..
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Frank, M., Hotwagner, W., Wurzenberger, M., Rauber, A.,
2022. Maintainable log datasets for evaluation of intrusion detection systems. IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 20 (4), 3466–3482.
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Hotwagner, W., Rauber, A., 2019. A
framework for cyber threat intelligence extraction from raw log data. In: 2019
IEEE International Conference on Big Data. Big Data, IEEE, pp. 3200–3209.
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Hotwagner, W., Rauber, A., 2020a. Have
it your way: Generating customized log datasets with a model-driven simulation
testbed. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 70 (1), 402–415.
Landauer, M., Skopik, F., Wurzenberger, M., Rauber, A., 2020b. System log clustering
approaches for cyber security applications: A survey. Comput. Secur. 92, 101739.
Lin, Y.-D., Wang, Z.-Y., Lin, P.-C., Nguyen, V.-L., Hwang, R.-H., Lai, Y.-C., 2022. Multidatasource machine learning in intrusion detection: Packet flows, system logs and
host statistics. J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 68, 103248.
MACCDC, 2012. Capture files from mid-atlantic CCDC. https://www.netresec.com/
?page=MACCDC. (Accessed on: 2 March 2023).
Mahfouz, A., Abuhussein, A., Venugopal, D., Shiva, S., 2020. Ensemble classifiers for
network intrusion detection using a novel network attack dataset. Future Internet
12 (11), 180.
Manjunatha, K., Kempanna, M., 2022. Count vectorizer model based web application
vulnerability detection using artificial intelligence approach. J. Discrete Math. Sci.
Cryptogr. 25 (7), 2039–2048.
Mei, R., Yan, H.-B., Han, Z.-H., Jiang, J.-C., 2021. CTScopy: hunting cyber threats
within enterprise via provenance graph-based analysis. In: 2021 IEEE 21st International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and Security. QRS, IEEE, pp.
28–39.
Meng, F., Lou, F., Fu, Y., Tian, Z., 2018. Deep learning based attribute classification
insider threat detection for data security. In: 2018 IEEE Third International
Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace. DSC, IEEE, pp. 576–581.
Moustafa, N., Ahmed, M., Ahmed, S., 2020. Data analytics-enabled intrusion detection:
Evaluations of ToN_IoT linux datasets. In: 2020 IEEE 19th International Conference
on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications. TrustCom, IEEE,
pp. 727–735.

Ahmad Alzu’bi (SMIEEE, MACM) received the M.Sc. degree in computer science from
the Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree
in computer science from the University of the West of Scotland (UWS), U.K., in 2016.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer Science, Jordan
University of Science and Technology, Jordan. He has many publications in reputed
journals and conferences. His research interests include computer vision, cybersecurity,
and artificial intelligence.

Omar Darwish (SMIEEE) received the M.S. degree from the Jordan University of
Science and Technology, Jordan, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Western Michigan University, USA. He is an Assistant Professor with the Information
Security and Applied Computing Department, Game Above College of Engineering and
Technology, Eastern Michigan University. He was a Program Coordinator of computer
information systems, and the Director of the IoT and Cybersecurity Laboratory, Ferrum
College. His research interests include cybersecurity, IoT, machine learning, networks,
big data analysis, cloud computing, artificial intelligence, data mining, and information
retrieval.

Amjad Albashayreh received her B.S. degree in Software Engineering from Jordan
University of Science and Technology (JUST), Jordan in 2020, and her M.S. in
14

Computers & Security 150 (2025) 104222

A. Alzu’bi et al.
Computer Science from JUST in 2023. She is currently acting as a lecturer with the
department of Computer Science, JUST, and she is also pursuing her Ph.D. in Computer
Science at The University of Jordan. Her research interests include Cybersecurity,
computer vision, deep learning, federated learning, and artificial intelligence.

Yahya Tashtoush received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from
the Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan, in 1995 and 1999,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the University of
Alabama in Huntsville and the University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA, in 2006.
He is currently a Professor at the College of Computer and Information Technology,
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan. His current research
interests include software engineering, cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, robotics,
and wireless sensor networks.

15