11662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

DDoS Attack Detection in Consumer IoT-Based
Healthcare Systems Using Improved Off-Policy
Proximal Policy Optimization and Generative
Adversarial Network
Jing Yang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Vijay Govindarajan , Lip Yee Por , Senior Member, IEEE,
Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh , Qin Xin , Pronaya Bhattacharya , Member, IEEE,
Abdullah Ayub Khan, and Yiyu Wang

Abstract—Distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks threaten
the reliability of consumer IoT-based healthcare systems.
However, traditional DDoS detection methods often struggle
with feature selection, imbalanced datasets, generalizability,
and hyperparameter optimization. This paper proposes a novel
method for detecting DDoS attacks in healthcare environments.
To enhance feature selection and handle imbalanced data,
we employ the off-policy proximal policy optimization (PPO)
algorithm, which improves sample efficiency by leveraging
past experiences in reinforcement learning. SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations) values are integrated for precise feature
identification, while augmented rewards for underrepresented
classes help mitigate data imbalance. An improved generative
adversarial network (GAN) is used for online data augmentation,
selectively excluding gradients from critical batch elements to
generate more diverse and applicable results. Furthermore, the
Bayesian Optimization Hyperband (BOHB) method accelerates
hyperparameter tuning by combining Bayesian optimization
Received 30 March 2025; revised 21 June 2025 and 3 August 2025;
accepted 25 August 2025. Date of publication 1 September 2025; date of
current version 8 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under Grant NSTC-1142224-E-027-001; private funding (PV009-2023); and in part by the KW
IPPP (Research Maintenance Fee) Individual/Centre/Group Universiti Malaya,
Malaysia, under Grant RMF1506-2021. (Corresponding authors: Yiyu Wang;
Lip Yee Por.)
Jing Yang and Lip Yee Por are with the Center of Research for
Cyber Security and Network, Faculty of Computer Science and Information
Technology, Universiti Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia (e-mail:
s2147529@siswa.um.edu.my; porlip@um.edu.my).
Vijay Govindarajan is with the Distribution and Supply
Technology, Expedia Group, Seattle, WA 98119 USA (e-mail:
vigovindaraja@expediagroup.com).
Zaffar Ahmed Shaikh is with Department of Computer Science and
Information Technology, Benazir Bhutto Shaheed University Lyari, Karachi
75660, Pakistan, and also with the School of Engineering, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail:
zashaikh@bbsul.edu.pk).
Qin Xin is with the Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the
Faroe Islands, 100 Tórshavn, Faroe Islands (e-mail: qinx@setur.fo).
Pronaya Bhattacharya is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Amity School of Engineering and Technology, and the Research
and Innovation Cell, Amity University, Koltata 700135, India (e-mail:
pbhattacharya@kol.amity.edu).
Abdullah Ayub Khan is with the Department of Computer Science,
Bahria University Karachi Campus, Karachi 75260, Pakistan (e-mail:
abdullahayub.bukc@bahria.edu.pk).
Yiyu Wang is with the J.E. Cairnes School of Business and
Economics, University of Galway, Galway, H91 TK33 Ireland (e-mail:
y.wang32@universityofgalway.ie).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3605098

with Hyperband’s scaling capabilities. Our model is evaluated on four datasets: KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, CICDDOS,
and DARPA, achieving superior performance over state of
the art methods, with accuracy and F-measure values of
(90.498%, 89.286%), (93.186%, 91.896%), (92.403%, 90.285%),
and (92.849%, 92.790%), respectively. It demonstrates the
model’s efficiency in delivering timely predictions, supporting
its practical deployment in real-time healthcare cybersecurity
systems.
Index Terms—DDoS attack, proximal policy optimization,
GAN, consumer healthcare.

I. I NTRODUCTION
DOS attacks pose significant risks to networks, potentially disabling them entirely [1], [2]. This often leaves
system administrators preoccupied with mitigating these
attacks, possibly overlooking other malicious activities cooccurring. Recent trends indicate a substantial escalation
in both the frequency and magnitude of these attacks [3].
Moreover, the IoT proliferation has introduced a new wave
of IoT-driven botnets that threaten Internet stability through
DDoS onslaughts. This includes the Internet of Medical Things
(IoMT), which is increasingly essential in delivering health
services. According to Somasundaram and Thirugnanam [4],
DDoS stands out as particularly hazardous within these
networks. Also, numerous organizations integrate additional
IoT devices within their systems without effectively filling the
loopholes of the existing security issues, thus expanding the
scope and scale of IoT botnet attacks. So, it becomes crucial
to design methods of countering such threats, especially in
systems that handle sensitive information, such as healthcare
systems [5].
Recent advances have introduced various machine learning
(ML) [6] and deep learning (DL) methods [7] for DDoS
attack detection. While DL offers advantages over traditional
ML, challenges remain in feature extraction, class imbalance,
generalizability, and hyperparameter tuning. These aspects are
often underexplored in existing studies. Feature selection is
essential for improving DL model efficiency by removing irrelevant variables. Although DL can perform automatic feature
extraction, targeted selection helps prevent overfitting, reduce

D

c 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.

For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS

training time, and enhance adaptability. However, current
selection methods often perform poorly in dynamic environments. Class imbalance is typically handled through data-level
strategies such as SMOTE [8] and NearMiss, which may
cause overfitting or information loss, or through algorithmlevel approaches including cost-sensitive learning, ensemble
models, and threshold tuning. These methods emphasize
minority classes but may reduce performance on majority class
predictions [9].
Advanced deep reinforcement learning (DRL) addresses
challenges in feature selection and class imbalance by applying
reward mechanisms that prioritize critical yet often overlooked
attributes. The integration of explainable artificial intelligence
(AI) techniques, such as SHAP values, enhances the transparency of this process. SHAP quantifies the contribution
of each feature to the model’s output, ensuring focus on
attributes with high explanatory value. This improves feature
selection and promotes trust in AI decisions. DRL further
improves class balance by boosting predictions for underrepresented categories while maintaining overall performance.
However, both RL and DRL face notable limitations. RL
often requires substantial interaction with the environment and
may exhibit instability or slow convergence due to noisy or
sparse rewards. DRL is powerful but has high computational
requirements and sample inefficiency, particularly when it cannot effectively reuse off-policy data. Off-policy PPO improves
DRL by using replay buffers to store previous interactions.
This increases sampling efficiency and lowers the reliance
on constant new data. These enhancements enable DRL to
adapt in dynamic settings, outperforming static conventional
models and maintaining robust performance across various
applications, including DDoS attack detection.
Data augmentation improves classifier performance by artificially expanding the training set, enhancing class balance,
and supporting model generalization [10]. It is typically
categorized into offline and online methods. Offline augmentation enlarges the dataset but increases computational load
and training time. In contrast, online augmentation introduces synthetic samples during training without expanding
the dataset or requiring additional storage. Recent advances
in online augmentation leverage GANs, which provide strong
generalization. However, GANs often face challenges such
as training instability and mode collapse. To address these
limitations, this study proposes a modified GAN that excludes
the gradients of key batch members, helping stabilize training
and enhance sample diversity for healthcare applications [11].
Selecting appropriate hyperparameters is crucial for optimizing deep learning models and preventing both overfitting
and underfitting [12]. Due to the large search space, this
task is complex and requires effective optimization strategies
to address. Various optimization strategies address this issue,
including grid search, Bayesian optimization, evolutionary
algorithms, and Hyperband. Grid search is thorough but
inefficient for large sets. Bayesian optimization offers efficient
sampling but may converge on local optima. Evolutionary
algorithms can handle complex spaces, but they are resourceintensive. Hyperband improves efficiency by focusing on
promising configurations early [13]. This paper utilizes

11663

BOHB for hyperparameter optimization, which combines
the predictive efficiency of Bayesian optimization with the
resource-saving strategy of Hyperband. This method provides
a scalable solution for tuning hyperparameters in complex
tasks such as anomaly detection [14].
This paper proposes a DDoS attack detection model tailored for healthcare systems, incorporating an off-policy PPO
algorithm to facilitate feature selection and mitigate class
imbalance. An enhanced GAN is introduced for online data
augmentation, and BOHB is employed for efficient hyperparameter tuning. The main contributions of this study, which
are considered original within the field, are summarized as
follows:
• We proposed an off-policy PPO algorithm that leverages
past experiences to train policies in accordance with
reinforcement learning principles. By integrating SHAP
values, this approach enhances feature selection, allowing
the model to focus on the most relevant features and
improve overall detection performance.
• We introduced an updated GAN that selectively discards gradients of critical batch members during training,
enabling the generation of diverse and relevant samples to
augment the training set without expanding the database.
• We designed the BOHB method for hyperparameter
tuning, combining the accuracy of Bayesian optimization
with the speed of Hyperband to accelerate convergence
by efficiently discarding suboptimal configurations.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Machine Learning
A range of ML approaches have been employed for DDoS
detection, utilizing algorithms such as decision trees, support
vector machines, random forests, and k-nearest neighbors.
Feng et al. [15] proposed an enhanced KNN algorithm
using a k-dimensional tree for efficient source classification based on IP address risk levels. Tang et al. [16]
adopted a pairwise learning-to-rank (LtR) algorithm to
prioritize flow entries in SDN, aiming to mitigate lowrate DDoS attacks. Xu et al. [17] designed a federated
learning framework incorporating evolutionary game theory
and auction mechanisms for bandwidth optimization under
mobile edge network attacks. Zhao et al. [18] introduced
a machine learning-based scheduling system that encodes
victim-defined traffic preferences without full knowledge of
attack patterns. Mirnajafizadeh et al. [19] proposed a sublinear
ML-based flow prioritization framework for improving DDoS
detection accuracy. Chandak and Ray [1] focused on resourceconstrained environments, integrating edge nodes with a
feature-selected SVM optimized using an information gain
ratio. Altulaihan et al. [6] developed an IoT intrusion detection
system using supervised classifiers (DT, RF, KNN, and SVM)
along with correlation-based feature selection and genetic
algorithms. Setia et al. [20] secured VANET cloud systems
using ML classifiers for predictive analytics on vehicular
network flow. Mahato et al. [21] applied a chaotic grey wolf
optimizer with KNN to detect attacks in healthcare and IoMT
networks. Recent studies have introduced hybrid or scalable

11664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

strategies. Fan et al. [22] utilized an improved distributed
tensor train model with LightGBM to detect attacks across
heterogeneous networks. Belachew et al. [23] deployed SDNenabled ML models at the edge for latency-aware mitigation
policies. Pradeep and Shukla [24] combined feature extraction
via a predefined-mud ring algorithm with deep architectures,
including CAE and GRU. Dilshad et al. [25] adopted federated
learning and Gini-based feature selection for DDoS detection
in the Internet of Vehicles. Hosain and Çakmak [26] developed
an explainable intrusion detection system for IoMT using
recursive feature elimination and XGBoost, integrated with
SHAP and LIME for interpretability. Although ML-based
approaches show promise, they are often constrained by manual feature engineering, limited adaptability to evolving attack
patterns, and performance degradation under data imbalance.
These limitations motivate the adoption of deep learning
and reinforcement learning techniques for more robust and
generalizable DDoS detection frameworks.
B. Deep Learning
DL has significantly enhanced network security by providing advanced solutions for DDoS attack detection. Traditional
methods based on specialized networks such as CNN and long
short-term memory have effectively addressed recognizing
DDoS attacks in various network environments.
Benzaïd et al. [27] proposed a defense framework that
uses a context-gated GRU (CG-GRU) model to learn spatiotemporal patterns and applies transfer learning to detect
economic denial of sustainability (EDoS) attacks in flexible
beyond fifth-generation (B5G) network slicing environments.
Duan et al. [28] proposed a cyber anomaly detection
framework based on a continuous temporal graph neural
network. This network models dynamic interactions and
applies spatio-temporal message aggregation to handle irregular and low-frequency network behaviors. Shieh et al. [29]
introduced a CNN-based method combined with reciprocal
points learning and open-set recognition to detect both known
and unknown DDoS attacks. The lightweight model minimizes
training parameters, offering an efficient and flexible solution
for cybersecurity. Anley et al. [30] developed a DDoS detection method using CNN, adaptive architectures, and transfer
learning. This approach enhances pattern recognition in traffic
data and improves generalization across datasets, facilitating
the distinction between legitimate and malicious behaviors
in network infrastructures. Farzaneh et al. [31] applied deep
transfer learning to improve DDoS detection in 5G networks.
They utilized models such as bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM),
CNN, residual networks (ResNet), and Inception to transfer
knowledge from large datasets to smaller, annotated ones,
which helps overcome challenges related to limited data
availability. Ali et al. [32] proposed a vision transformer
(ViT)-based system that transforms DDoS attack traffic into
images and applies transformer-based deep learning for detecting multi-vector attacks during firmware over-the-air (OTA)
updates. Ullah et al. [33] introduced an explainable hybrid
model that combines CNN for extracting spatial features and
LSTM for learning temporal patterns, with SHAP used to

interpret decisions in DDoS detection for SDN-IoT healthcare
settings. Doménech et al. [34] developed a medical intrusion
detection system for the IOMT to counter DDoS attacks,
employing ML models with feature optimization and domainspecific preprocessing techniques.
C. RL and DRL
Several studies have explored traditional reinforcement
learning (RL) methods, such as Q-learning and adaptive rate
control, to detect and mitigate DDoS attacks in dynamic IoT
environments. Kumar and Singh [35] developed a messagedriven RL (MD-RL) framework for IoT edge security, utilizing
state-action policies for dynamic detection and response
to DDoS threats. Said et al. [36] proposed a quantum
entropy Q-learning (QEQ) framework that extends classical
RL by integrating quantum processing and entropy-driven
exploration, enhancing DDoS mitigation in smart grid environments. Jayakrishna and Prasanth [37] introduced an RL-based
adaptive rate limiting (RL-ARL) technique that adjusts rate
thresholds in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) based on
traffic severity to counter DDoS attacks.
Recent research has increasingly adopted deep reinforcement learning (DRL) techniques, such as deep Q-networks and
policy optimization, to improve DDoS detection in complex
systems. Roy et al. [5] combined a multi-step deep Q-learning
network (MSDQN) with a deep learning network (DLN) to
secure healthcare IoT systems. The DLN verifies IoT device
identities, while MSDQN detects and mitigates malware
and DDoS threats during data transmission. Gai et al. [38]
introduced a defense mechanism using deep Q-learning for
moving target defense in consortium blockchains, dynamically adjusting attack surfaces based on learned policies.
Paidipati et al. [39] proposed a multilayer ensemble DRL
(MEDRL) approach, incorporating metaheuristic tuning via
an improved grasshopper optimization algorithm (IGOA) to
detect and mitigate DDoS attacks in cloud-based softwaredefined networks (SDNs). Shaikh et al. [40] developed a model
for IoMT healthcare networks that integrates CNN, LSTM,
and reinforcement learning, leveraging a deep Q-network and
PPO for robust DDoS countermeasures.
D. Limitations
Deep learning plays a key role in feature extraction for
DDoS attack detection but faces several limitations. It often
requires extensive preprocessing to identify important features.
DDoS datasets are typically imbalanced, with normal traffic
dominating, which can lead to biased predictions. Models
may also struggle to generalize to new or evolving attack
patterns. In addition, hyperparameter tuning is complex and
time-consuming, affecting both performance and scalability.
While RL and DRL models offer dynamic adaptability for
feature selection and classification in imbalanced settings, they
commonly suffer from sample inefficiency, limiting their effectiveness. To overcome these issues, this study introduces an
off-policy PPO algorithm for feature selection and imbalanced
classification, an improved GAN for data augmentation, and
BOHB for efficient hyperparameter optimization.

YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS

11665

Fig. 1. Architecture of the suggested DDoS detection model using off-policy PPO for feature selection and imbalanced classification, an improved GAN
method for online data augmentation, and the BOHB method for hyperparameter optimization.

Algorithm 1 Pseudo-Code for Online Data Augmentation
Algorithm
Input:
p: Threshold probability used to decide whether to retain the original
sample
pI : Computed probability for retaining sample IB: Collection of minibatches from the original dataset
N: The overall number of mini-batches
Bi : A specific mini-batch from BI: An individual sample within minibatch Bi yI : The label associated with sample IIN: A newly generated
sample produced by the GAN with the same label yI Baug : The final
dataset composed of augmented mini-batches
Output: Expanded dataset Baug
Begin with initializing initial batches B = {B1 , B2 , B3 , . . . , BN }
Assign Baug as an empty collection
for each Bi in B:
Compute p for each sample in Bi
for each I in Bi :
if pI < p
Move to the next sample (omit any modifications)
else:
Determine yI
Generate IN
Substitute sample I with IN
Append the possibly modified Bi to Baug
return Baug

III. T HE P ROPOSED M ODEL
A. Online Data Augmentation
In this paper, we propose a GAN-based online data augmentation method that enhances sample diversity by selectively
omitting gradients from key batch elements. As shown in
Algorithm 1, the generator and discriminator are trained in
a two-player minimax game, where the generator aims to
produce realistic synthetic data while the discriminator learns
to distinguish real from fake samples.


min min V(D, G) = Ex∼pdata (x) log(D(x))
D
G


+ Ez∼pz (z) log(1 − D(G(z)))
(1)
Here, x and z represent the input data and random noise,
respectively, while G and D denote the generator and discriminator. pdata (x) and pz (z)are the probability distributions
of input data and noise, and E and log denote expectation and
logarithm. In this study, the generator uses a novel gradient
exclusion strategy to improve generalization and diversity by
removing dominant training signals. It selectively excludes

gradients from the most influential mini-batch elements during
updates, enhancing both stability and sample diversity. The
update process is as follows:

∇θG V(D(zi ), G).
(2)
LG = θG − αG
Zi ∈Z\ topk {D(Z)}

Here, D(Z) represents the discriminator’s response to
each sample in the mini-batch Z. θG is the generator’s
parameter set, and αG is the learning rate. The expression

Zi ∈Z\ topk {D(Z)} ∇θG V(D(zi ), G)computes gradients only from
mini-batch samples excluding the top-k highest-scoring ones
as determined by the discriminator. These top-k samples
strongly align with the target distribution and heavily influence
model updates. To prevent overfitting to such dominant features, our method excludes their gradients, promoting better
generalization and sample diversity. This strategy also mitigates mode collapse and stabilizes training by encouraging the
generator to explore a wider output space, leading to more
diverse and robust results.
B. Feature Engineering
Consider D that includes pairs (x, y), where x is a vector
containing n input features F = {f1 , . . . , fn }, and y represents
the outcome. Each iteration involves randomly selecting a pair
from D, and the agent determines which features to utilize.
In our RL framework, the state space S comprises the data
instance x, its outcome y, and the chosen features F. The
possible actions in our model are part of the set A, which
entails selecting a feature Af or making a prediction Ac . Opting
for a feature from Af adds to the feature set F, thus modifying
the prediction space. The reward for selecting a feature is given
by ∂ ∗ SHAP(fi ), where SHAP(fi ) denotes the SHAP value of
the feature fi , and ∂ is a balancing hyperparameter. Actions
that lead to predictions shift the model to a terminal state,
offering rewards or penalties of ±1 for the majority class and
±μ for the minority class. So, r : S×A → R is mathematically
defined to encapsulate these dynamics:
⎧
∂ ∗ SHAP(fi ) if at ∈ Af , at = fi
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨ +1 if at ∈ Ac , st ∈ CO , y = y
rt = −1 if at ∈ Ac , st ∈ CO , y = y
(3)
⎪
⎪
∈
A
,
s
∈
C
,
y
=
y
+μ
if
a
⎪
t
c
t
N
⎪
⎩
−μ if at ∈ Ac , st ∈ CN , y = y

11666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

where CO and CN represent the minority and majority
classes. The reward mechanism emphasizes accurate recognition across all classes, especially minority ones, to ensure
fairness. Integrating SHAP values into the reward system
enhances transparency and interpretability in DDoS detection
for healthcare. SHAP offers insight into feature contributions,
supporting trustworthy decision-making and helping mitigate
class bias. This improves detection accuracy while ensuring
fairness, providing robust protection for sensitive healthcare
systems against diverse threats.
SHAP values are based on the concept of the Shapley value
from cooperative game theory. The formula for the SHAP
value ∅i for a feature i is:
 |S|!(|F| − |S| − 1)!
∅i =
(v(S ∪ {i}) − v(S)) (4)
|F|!
S⊆F\{i}

where F denotes the full set of features, and S represents
any subset of F that does not include feature i. The notation
|S| refers to the number of elements in subset S, while
|F| represents the total number of features. The value v(S)
indicates the output of the model when only the features in S
are used, and v(S ∪ {i}) represents the prediction of the model
when feature i is added to subset S. Overall, SHAP measures
how much adding feature i to subset S changes the output of
the model, averaged over all possible subsets.
The transition function of the model operates as described
below:
t((x, y, F), a) =

T
if a ∈ Ac
(x, y, F ∪ a) if a ∈ Af

(5)

where T denotes the terminal state. When an action adds a
new feature, it is included in the set F. The episode concludes
when the agent opts to make a prediction. It is crucial to note
that our RL model functions within a discrete-time framework.
The time variable t in st and st+1 marks when decisions to
incorporate features are made. In reinforcement learning, each
decision involves selecting a feature that can enhance future
prediction accuracy, influencing subsequent states and rewards.
Algorithm 2 outlines the learning strategy involving dataset
shuffling, policy-based action selection, model execution, and
feedback-driven updates using the off-policy PPO algorithm.
1) Training: To enhance policy training, we adopt an offpolicy PPO algorithm. This section begins with an
overview of trust region policy optimization (TRPO),
followed by PPO as its foundation, and concludes with
the proposed off-policy PPO approach.
TRPO: To optimize policy performance, we first review
Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO), which maximizes
expected discounted rewards from the initial state st :
E(s0 ,a0 ),...

∞


γ t r(st , at )

(6)

t=0

To ensure stable policy updates, TRPO maximizes a surrogate objective under a Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
constraint:


πθi+1 (a|s)
(7)
Aπi (s, a)
Maximum Es∼ρπθ , a ∈ ππi
i
πθi=1
πθi (a|s)

Algorithm 2 Pseudo-Code for Training the Proposed Model
Input:
D = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xT , yT )}: Training dataset with T
labeled samples
α: Learning rate used for policy update
E: Total number of training epochs
ε: Exploration probability (for selecting random actions)
θi : Parameters of the current policy (old policy)
θi+1 : Parameters of the updated policy (new policy)
φ: Parameters of the value function (critic)
st : State at time tat : Action taken at time trt : Reward received at time
tA(st , at ): Advantage estimation at time t for state-action pair
μ(·|st ): Behavior policy used to sample action at at state st π : The
target policy to be optimized
B: Replay buffer to store transitions
Q: Action-value function approximator (initialized with random
weights)
Initialize θi+1 , θi , φ, A, B, and Q
for e = 1 to E:
Randomize order of D
for t = 1 to T:
Select at with probability ε
Set s1
if action at is feature-related:
Perform action at
Calculate rt using Equation (3)
Determine st+1 from D
Store transition (st , at , rt , st+1 , μ(·|st )) in B
Compute A(st , at ) using value function parameters φ
Update π optimize the objective function via Equation (19):
CLIP
θi+1 ← θi + α∇θ LOff−Policy
PPO (π )

if at is subject-related:
Perform at
Calculate rt using Equation (3)
Determine st+1 from D
Store transition (st , at , rt , st+1 , μ(·|st )) in B

subject to:



Es∼ρπi DistenceKL (πi (.|s)|| πi+1 (.|s)) ≤ ϑ

(8)

where πθi and πθi+1 represent the current and subsequent
policies, respectively. ϑestablishes the threshold for allowable
divergence. DistenceKL measures the KL divergence, showing the extent of deviation between the policies πθi and
πθi+1 at state s. The distribution ρπθi details the probability
distribution of states under the old policy, beginning from the
initial
s0 and adhering to πi , calculated as ρπold (s) =
∞ state
t
t=0 γ P(st = s|s0 , πold ), with Pbeing the transition probability. In the absence of this divergence limit, improving
the surrogate objective could lead to major alterations in the
policy.
PPO: Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) avoids abrupt
policy updates by optimizing a clipped surrogate objective:


πi+1 (a|s)
πi+1 (a|s)
Aπi (s, a), clip(
,1
Es∼ρπi ,a∼πi minimum
πi (a|s)
πi (a|s)

(9)
−ε, 1 + ε)Aπi (s, a)
where ε is a small constant to limit policy deviation and
encourage stability. Aπi (s, a) represents the advantage function, quantifying the extra benefit of taking action a in state

YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS

s according to policy πi . This function evaluates if an action
performs better or worse than what is typically expected by
that policy. In this context, clipping restricts excessive training
updates, promoting more consistent progress. This method is
further detailed below:
clip(p, x, y) = max imum(x, minimum (y, p))

11667

TABLE I
H YPERPARAMETERS AND T HEIR R ANGES FOR O PTIMIZATION IN THE
M ODEL

(10)

where p represents the variable under modification, with x
and y setting the minimum and maximum boundaries for the
allowable range. It is crucial to recognize that the clipped
surrogate objective (Equation (9)) aims to curtail excessively
large updates to the policy by penalizing deviations that
(a|s)
to diverge significantly from 1.
cause the ratio πi+1
πi (a|s)
Nonetheless, a primary issue with PPO is its dependence on
on-policy data, which escalates the sample complexity due
to the restricted utilization of off-policy data, requiring more
frequent interactions between the agent and the environment.
Off-policy PPO: Off-policy PPO improves data efficiency
by learning from past experiences, including historical DDoS
incidents. Unlike on-policy PPO, it uses off-policy data to
recognize evolving attack patterns and adapt to changes.


πi+1 (a|s)
(11)
Aπi (s, a)
maximum Es∼ρμ , a∈μ
π
μ(a|s)
with:
ρμ ,sqrt

ρ ,sqrt

ρ

μ
μ
DistanceKL (μ, πi )DKL
(πi , πi+1 ) + DKL
(πi , πi+1 ) ≤ ϑ (12)
∞

ρμ (s) =
γ t P(st = s|s0 , μ)
(13)

t=0
ρμ

DistanceKL (πold , π )


= Es∼ρμ DistanceKL (πi (.|s) || πi+1 (.|s))
ρμ ,sqrt
DistanceKL (μ, πold )

= Es∼ρμ



DistanceKL (μ(.|s) || πi (.|s))



(14)
(15)

ρμ ,sqrt
DistanceKL (πi , πi+1 )

= Es∼ρμ




DistanceKL ( πi (.|s) || πi+1 (.|s))

(16)

where μ denotes the behaviour policy, showing the typical
decision-making strategy the agent uses in the environment.
Absent the constraints (Equation (12)), efforts to improve
the surrogate function using off-policy data (Equation (10))
could result in significant alterations to the policy. To mitigate
this potential problem, we utilize the PPO clipping method,
modifying the surrogate objective as follows:


π (a|s)
(17)
Aπ (s, a)
Lμ (πi+1 ) = Es∼ρμ , a∈μ
μ(a|s) old
We can specify the clipped surrogate objective for off-policy
data as follows:
Lμ (πi+1 )



C. Hyperparameter Optimization
To address the high cost of evaluations, BOHB integrates
Hyperband to speed up optimization through adaptive resource
allocation and early stopping. It tests multiple configurations,
focuses resources on the most promising, and eliminates
weaker ones, lowering computation time and cost. By combining Bayesian search with Hyperband’s efficiency, BOHB
enables fast and accurate hyperparameter tuning in dynamic
environments like healthcare cybersecurity. This helps ensure
strong model performance across diverse attack scenarios and
improves the protection of sensitive healthcare data. Table I
lists the hyperparameters optimized using BOHB.
IV. E XPERIMENTS



πi+1 (a|s)
Aπi (s, a),
= Es∼ρμ , a∈μ minimum
μ(a|s)

πi+1 (a|s)
, 1 − ε, 1 + ε)Aπi (s, a)
clip(
μ(a|s)

(a|s)
The value πi+1
μ(a|s) often exceeds the boundaries of 1 − ε
to 1 + ε. As a result, the policy πi+1 (a|s) typically stays
consistent when optimizing the clipped surrogate objective. To
counteract this rigidity, the boundaries of the clipped objective,
ranging from 1 − ε to 1 + ε, are adjusted in Equation (18) by
(a|s)
incorporating a corrective factor πi+1
μ(a|s) :

πi+1 (a|s)
Aπi (s, a),
Es∼ρμ , a∈μ minimum[
μ(a|s)



πi (a|s)
πi+1 (a|s) πi (a|s)
,
clip
(1 − ε),
(1 + ε) Aπi (s, a)]
μ(a|s) μ(a|s)
μ(a|s)
(19)

A. Dataset
(18)

To evaluate the proposed DDoS detection model, datasets
such as the KDDcup99 [41], the information security center of excellence at the University of New Brunswick

11668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML, DL AND A BLATED M ODELS U SING THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET

(ISCX-UNB) [42], the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity
DDoS (CICDDoS) [43], and the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) [44] were employed, each contributing values that are pertinent to healthcare industries.
B. Evaluation Metrics
These following metrics used to evaluate the proposed
method:
TP + TN
(20)
Accuracy =
Total
TP
(21)
Precision =
TP + FP)
TP
(22)
Recall =
TP + FN
Precision + Recall
F − Measure = 2 ×
(23)
 Precision + Recall
G − means = Recall × Specificity
(24)
with
Specificity =

TN
TN + FP

(25)

C. Experiment Setting and Main Evaluation Results
The study was conducted on a 64-bit Windows system with
an Intel i7 processor, 32 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 3090
GPU, supporting large-scale data and complex computations.
Python 3.8 was used with PyTorch for deep learning tasks,
including the GAN and off-policy PPO algorithm. Scikit-learn
handled traditional machine learning and data preprocessing. Hyperparameter tuning was performed using BOHB via
the HpBandSter library. SHAP was used to interpret model
predictions by identifying key features.
In the evaluation phase, our model was extensively compared with seven ML models, including DPTCM-KNN [45],
ERF-KMC [46], FSSVM [1], ML-CFS [6], ML-EA [47],

IDAD [22], and SDN-Edge-IoT [23]; nine DL models,
including CNN-RPL [29], CNN-BiLSTM [48], ATL [30],
LSTM-CNN [49], MDDCC [50], DTL-5G [31], FCNN [3],
mGRU [51], and DDoSViT [32]; and four RL models,
including MD-RL [35], Q-learning [38], MEDRL [39], and
RL-ARL [37]. Additionally, we evaluated the impact of
removing critical elements such as data augmentation (DA),
feature selection (FS), off-policy PPO, and hyperparameter
optimization (HO) from our model to understand their contributions to its overall performance. Tables II, III, and IV
show the result details for the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and
CICDDOS datasets.
Component analysis shows that removing data augmentation, feature selection, off-policy PPO, or hyperparameter
optimization leads to noticeable performance declines, highlighting the importance of these elements. Although simplified
versions such as PPO with SHAP provide weaker supervision,
they remain applicable for resource-limited scenarios. A twotailed paired t-test was conducted to verify effectiveness,
with p-values consistently below 0.05 (accuracy p = 0.012,
F-measure p = 0.015, G-means p = 0.009), indicating strong
statistical significance. Confidence intervals further confirm
the observed improvements, supporting the model’s reliability
for DDoS detection in healthcare settings.
Tables II, III, and IV present a comparison of computational efficiency among state-of-the-art DDoS detection
models based on runtime and GPU usage across the
KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. The
proposed model demonstrates improved efficiency, requiring
2726 seconds and 19.6 GB of GPU memory on KDDcup99
and 2587 seconds with 18.4 GB on ISCX UNB. Compared
to the DTL 5G model, which uses 3696 seconds and 25.9
GB, the proposed model reduces runtime by 30.0% and GPU
usage by 28.9%. On the CICDDOS dataset, it completes in
2659 seconds using 18.7 GB of GPU memory. These results
confirm the model’s ability to lower computational overhead.

YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS

11669

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML, DL AND A BLATED M ODELS U SING THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML, DL AND A BLATED M ODELS U SING THE ISCX-UNB DATASET

Fig. 2. Comparative a) ROC-AUC and b) PR-AUC curve analysis of the
proposed model on the KDDcup99 and ISCX-UNB datasets.

Figure 2 shows the ROC and PR curves of the proposed
model on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS
datasets. The ROC AUCs are 0.791, 0.814, and 0.807, while

the PR AUCs are 0.635, 0.665, and 0.652, respectively, indicating strong discriminative ability and consistent precision.
Figure 3 presents the training and validation loss curves over
300 epochs for the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS
datasets. Both curves steadily decline with a narrowing gap,
indicating effective learning, minimal overfitting, and strong
generalization.
Figure 4 presents the decision time distributions of the
proposed model on the KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, and
CICDDOS datasets, providing insight into its suitability for
real-time systems. The histograms display consistent decision
times across multiple runs, with distributions tightly centered around mean values of 62, 60, and 64 milliseconds,
respectively. These results indicate a stable and efficient

11670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. Training and validation loss curves for the a) KDDcup99 an b) ISCXUNB datasets in 300 epochs.

Fig. 6. KL divergence comparison across reinforcement learning algorithms
for the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets in 300
epochs.

Fig. 4. Decision-making time distributions for the proposed model on the
a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets.

Fig. 7. Average reward comparison across reinforcement learning algorithms
for the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets in 100
epochs.

Fig. 8.
Fig. 5. Scalability of the proposed model demonstrated through improvements in a) accuracy, b) F-measure, and c) G-means with increasing training
data from 20% to 100% on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS
datasets.

decision-making process. Figure 5 illustrates the model’s
scalability as training data increases from 20% to 100%
on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets.
Performance improves consistently, confirming the model’s
adaptability, robustness, and suitability for real-world scenarios with growing data volumes.
1) Analysis of generalizability: To validate the broad
applicability of the proposed anomaly detection model,
extensive evaluations were conducted on the DARPA
dataset. As shown in Table XII, the model outperformed traditional machine learning and deep learning
approaches, improving Accuracy by 6.54%, F-measure
by 5.41%, and G-means by 5.35% compared to the
next best model, mGRU. Component ablation analysis showed that removing any module, including
data augmentation, feature selection, off-policy PPO,
or hyperparameter optimization, resulted in noticeable
drops in accuracy. These findings confirm the importance of each component in enhancing robustness,
generalization, and detection performance.
2) Analysis of off-policy PPO: This section evaluates the
stability of the Off-Policy PPO method by comparing
its KL divergence and learning performance with PPO,

Impact of varying reward modifier (μ) on the model performance.

TRPO, and soft actor-critic (SAC). Fig. 6 presents the
KL divergence across policy updates on the KDDcup99,
ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. The KL divergence values of Off-Policy PPO remain consistently
lower than those of SAC, indicating more stable policy
updates and a reduced risk of disruptive shifts during
training. Fig. 7 illustrates the learning curves through
average rewards per episode. Off-policy PPO shows
a smoother and faster increase in rewards compared
to PPO, TRPO, and SAC, highlighting its ability to
maintain consistent learning and adapt quickly.
Figure 8 shows the effect of varying μ (from 0 to 1 in 0.1
increments) on model performance for the KDDcup99, ISCXUNB, and CICDDOS datasets. Performance peaks at μ = 0.3,
0.3, and 0.4, respectively, indicating improved sensitivity to
minority classes without sacrificing accuracy. This underscores
the importance of tuning reward mechanisms in imbalanced
settings and highlights the model’s adaptability to diverse data
distributions.
To enhance interpretability, SHAP was used to assess
feature importance in DDoS detection, as shown in Fig. 9 for
the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. SHAP
values highlight key features influencing model decisions.
Table V further confirms that off-policy PPO effectively handles class imbalance, with minority class accuracy nearing that
of majority classes. High F-measure and G-mean scores reflect

YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS

11671

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE VARIOUS GAN S FOR DATA
AUGMENTATION U SING THE ISCX-UNB DATASET

Fig. 9.
Comparative analysis of feature importance using the SHAP
explanations on the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets.
TABLE V
P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL ON M AJORITY
AND M INORITY C LASSES FOR THE KDD CUP 99, ISCX-UNB, AND
CICDDOS DATASETS

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE VARIOUS GAN S FOR DATA
AUGMENTATION U SING THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET

balanced performance, and the slightly higher MSE for minority classes does not impact overall reliability. These results
affirm the model’s robustness and practical applicability.
3) Analysis of data augmentation: This section evaluates the proposed GAN for online data augmentation
using Fréchet inception distance (FID), maximum mean
discrepancy (MMD), Wasserstein distance, and the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) test. These metrics measure
statistical similarity between real and generated samples.
Tables VI, VII, and X show results for the KDDcup99,
ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. On KDDcup99,
the proposed GAN achieved lower scores with FID of
1.022, MMD of 2.235, Wasserstein distance of 3.124,
and KS value of 0.432. Compared to StyleGAN, this
corresponds to improvements of 82% in FID, 68% in
MMD, 65% in Wasserstein distance, and 29% in KS
value. Similar gains were observed on ISCX-UNB and
CICDDOS, with metric reductions of up to 76%, 64%,
59%, and 32%, respectively. These improvements are
attributed to the selective gradient exclusion strategy,
which enhances sample diversity while maintaining balanced class representation.
Fig. 10 visualizes the alignment between the real and
generated distributions for the original GAN and the improved
GAN on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets.

Fig. 10. Comparison of data distributions generated by the conventional
GAN and the enhanced GAN for the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and
c) CICDDOS datasets.

Fig. 11. Training loss curves for the generator and discriminator in the
proposed GAN model over 300 epochs on the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB,
and c) CICDDOS datasets.

The proposed GAN produces more dispersed distributions
that closely resemble real data, reflecting its effectiveness in
avoiding mode collapse. Figure 11 shows the training loss
curves of the generator and discriminator over 300 epochs on
the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. Both
losses decline steadily, indicating stable convergence. The generator learns to produce realistic data, while the discriminator
improves its accuracy.

11672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER
O PTIMIZATION M ETHODS ACROSS THE KDD CUP 99 DATASET

TABLE XI
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER
O PTIMIZATION M ETHODS ACROSS THE CICDDOS DATASET

TABLE IX

TABLE XII
C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF C OMPUTATIONAL E FFICIENCY ACROSS
VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER O PTIMIZATION A LGORITHMS ON THE
KDD CUP 99, ISCX-UNB, AND CICDDOS DATASETS

P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON OF VARIOUS H YPERPARAMETER
O PTIMIZATION M ETHODS ACROSS THE ISCX-UNB DATASET

TABLE X
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE VARIOUS GAN S FOR DATA
AUGMENTATION U SING THE CICDDOS DATASET

Fig. 12. Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis of BOHB versus conventional
tuning on the a) KDDcup99, b) ISCX-UNB, and c) CICDDOS datasets.

4) Analysis of BOUB: This section evaluates BOHB against
three traditional methods: random search, grid search,
and Bayesian optimization, along with six evolutionary
algorithms: white shark optimizer (WSO) [52], whale
optimization algorithm (WOA) [53], puma optimizer

(PO) [54], covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) [55], artificial bee colony (ABC) [56],
and differential evolution (DE) [56]. All model variables
were standardized for fair comparison. As shown in
Tables VII, IX, and X, BOHB achieves faster convergence and strong performance across the KDDcup99,
ISCX-UNB, and CICDDOS datasets. Its effective balance between exploration and exploitation demonstrates
robustness and efficiency for real-world hyperparameter
tuning tasks.

YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS

11673

TABLE XIII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AGAINST ML AND DL M ODELS U SING THE DARPA DATASET

Fig. 13. Comparative performance of the proposed model vs. best-existing
models on the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, DARPA, and CICDDoS datasets.

Figure 12 shows that BOHB achieves lower hyperparameter
sensitivity than traditional methods on the ISCX UNB and
KDDCup99 datasets, indicating greater model stability. Key
improvements are seen in learning rate, batch size, dropout,
and number of layers. BOHB effectively reduces overfitting
and enhances generalization, making it suitable for complex
datasets. Figure 13 compares the proposed model with top
existing methods on the KDDcup99, ISCX UNB, and DARPA
datasets using Accuracy, F-measure, G-means, and MSE.
The proposed model consistently outperforms others, showing
notable accuracy gains across all datasets.
V. C ONCLUSION
This research proposes a novel solution for DDoS attack
detection in healthcare by integrating off-policy PPO, an

improved GAN, and the BOHB algorithm. The approach
effectively addresses imbalanced data and hyperparameter
tuning, which are key challenges in real-world detection. Offpolicy PPO improves classification on imbalanced data using
experience updates and SHAP-based feature selection. The
enhanced GAN with selective gradient exclusion generates
diverse and relevant samples, increasing model robustness.
BOHB accelerates hyperparameter tuning, which is essential
for time-sensitive healthcare environments. Experiments on
the KDDcup99, ISCX-UNB, CICDDOS, and DARPA datasets
confirm the model’s high accuracy and F-measure, highlighting its potential to strengthen DDoS detection and safeguard
healthcare systems. Moreover, while the proposed system is
tailored to consumer IoT in healthcare, its modular architecture
and reliance on packet-level features make it adaptable to other
IoT-based domains such as smart cities and industrial IoT.
With minor adjustments in feature engineering and retraining,
the framework can generalize well to diverse deployment
scenarios.

R EFERENCES
[1] A. V. Chandak and N. K. Ray, “DDoS attack detection in smart
home applications,” Softw., Pract. Exp., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 2086–2101,
2024.
[2] J. Deng et al., “FIDSUS: Federated intrusion detection for
securing UAV swarms in smart aerial computing,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 11312–11328, May 2025,
doi: 10.1109/jiot.2025.3549508.
[3] A. Bhatt, A. Gohil, S. Vaghasiya, R. Gupta, S. Tanwar, and J. Bhatia,
“DL-based DDoS attack detection in SDN-assisted heathcare 4.0
telesurgery networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Emerg. Technol. (INCET),
2024, pp. 1–7.
[4] M. Wazid, A. K. Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchain-enabled
security framework against ransomware attacks for smart healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28,
Feb. 2023.

11674

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2025

[5] P. P. Roy, V. Teju, S. R. Kandula, K. V. Sowmya, A. I. Stan, and
O. P. Stan, “Secure healthcare model using multi-step deep Q learning
network in Internet of Things,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 3, p. 669,
2024.
[6] E. Altulaihan, M. A. Almaiah, and A. Aljughaiman, “Anomaly detection
IDS for detecting DoS attacks in IoT networks based on machine
learning algorithms,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 2, p. 713, 2024.
[7] M. F. Saiyed, I. Al-Anbagi, and M. S. Hossain, “Interactive and
explainable optimized learning for DDoS detection in consumer
IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2,
pp. 6839–6853, May 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2024.3482092.
[8] J. Manokaran and G. Vairavel, “GIWRF-SMOTE: Gini impurity-based
weighted random forest with SMOTE for effective malware attack and
anomaly detection in IoT-Edge,” Smart Sci., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 276–292,
2023.
[9] T. Sun, X. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Zhuang, and Z. He, “Traffic
intrusion detection of medical consumption electronics in the
field of medical management based on integrated learning” IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1334–1341,
Feb. 2024.
[10] R. Jiao, C. Li, G. Xun, T. Zhang, B. B. Gupta, and
G. Yan, “A context-aware multi-event identification method
for nonintrusive load monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron.,
vol.
69,
no.
2,
pp. 194–204,
May
2023,
doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3236452.
[11] K. Li, Z. Dai, X. Wang, Y. Song, and G. Jeon, “GAN-based controllable
image data augmentation in low-visibility conditions for improved
roadside traffic perception,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 3, pp. 6174–6188, Aug. 2024.
[12] C. Zhan, D. Yin, Y. Shen, and T. Hao, “GMINN: A generative moving
interactive neural network for enhanced short-term load forecasting in
modern electricity markets,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 3, pp. 5461–5470, Aug. 2024.
[13] L. P. S. Rao and S. Jaganathan, “Adaptive Bayesian contextual hyperband: A novel hyperparameter optimization approach,” Int. J. Artif.
Intell., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 775–785, 2023.
[14] M. Cao, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, and Z. Shi, “A Bayesian optimization
hyperband-optimized incremental deep belief network for online battery
behaviour modelling for a satellite simulator,” J. Energy Storage, vol. 58,
Feb. 2023, Art. no. 106348.
[15] Y. Feng, J. Li, D. Sisodia, and P. Reiher, “On explainable and
adaptable detection of distributed denial-of-service traffic,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2211–2226,
Jul./Aug. 2024.
[16] D. Tang, Y. Yan, C. Gao, W. Liang, and W. Jin, “LtRFT: Mitigate the
low-rate data plane DDoS attack with learning-to-rank enabled flow
tables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 3143–3157,
2023.
[17] Y. Xu, S. Zhang, C. Lyu, J. Liu, Y. Shen, and S. Norio, “Mitigating
distributed DoS attacks on bandwidth allocation for federated learning
in mobile edge networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1941–1960, May/Jun. 2025.
[18] Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, H. Chen, F. Zhang, Z. Song, and Z. Li, “Effective
DDoS mitigation via ML-driven in-network traffic shaping,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4271–4289,
Jul./Aug. 2024.
[19] S. M. M. Mirnajafizadeh, A. R. Sethuram, D. Mohaisen, D. Nyang, and
R. Jang, “Enhancing network attack detection with distributed and innetwork data collection system,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp.
(USENIX Secur.), 2024, pp. 5161–5178.
[20] H. Setia et al., “Securing the road ahead: Machine learning-driven DDoS
attack detection in VANET cloud environments,” Cyber Secur. Appl.,
vol. 2, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 100037.
[21] S. Mahato, M. S. Obaidat, S. Dutta, D. Giri, and M. S. Hossain,
“Enhancing malicious activity detection in IoT-enabled network and
IoMT systems through meta-heuristic optimization and machine learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 24, pp. 39958–39970,
Dec. 2024.
[22] Q. Fan et al., “IDAD: An improved tensor train based distributed
DDoS attack detection framework and its application in complex networks,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 162, Jan. 2025,
Art. no. 107471.
[23] H. M. Belachew, M. Y. Beyene, A. B. Desta, B. T. Alemu, S. S. Musa,
and A. J. Muhammed, “Design a robust DDoS attack detection and mitigation scheme in SDN-edge-IoT by leveraging machine learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 13, pp. 10194–10214, 2025.

[24] K. J. Pradeep and P. K. Shukla, “Designing a novel network anomaly
detection framework using multi-serial stacked network with optimal
feature selection procedures over DDOS attacks,” Int. J. Intell. Netw.,
vol. 6, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2025.
[25] M. Dilshad, M. H. Syed, and S. Rehman, “Efficient distributed denial of
service attack detection in Internet of Vehicles using Gini index feature
selection and federated learning,” Future Internet, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 9,
2025.
[26] Y. Hosain and M. Çakmak, “XAI-XGBoost: An innovative explainable
intrusion detection approach for securing internet of medical things
systems,” Sci. Rep., vol. 15, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. 22278.
[27] C. Benzaïd, T. Taleb, A. Sami, and O. Hireche, “FortisEDoS: A
deep transfer learning-empowered economical denial of sustainability detection framework for cloud-native network slicing,” IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2818–2835,
Jul./Aug. 2024.
[28] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, G. Feng, and X. Li, “Practical cyber
attack detection with continuous temporal graph in dynamic network
system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 4851–4864,
2024.
[29] C.-S. Shieh, F.-A. Ho, M.-F. Horng, T.-T. Nguyen, and P. Chakrabarti,
“Open-set recognition in unknown DDoS attacks detection with
reciprocal points learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 56461–56476,
2024.
[30] M. B. Anley, A. Genovese, D. Agostinello, and V. Piuri, “Robust
DDoS attack detection with adaptive transfer learning,” Comput. Secur.,
vol. 144, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 103962.
[31] B. Farzaneh, N. Shahriar, A. H. Al Muktadir, M. S. Towhid, and
M. S. Khosravani, “DTL-5G: Deep transfer learning-based DDoS attack
detection in 5G and beyond networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 228,
Dec. 2024, Art. no. 107927.
[32] M. Ali, Y. Saleem, S. Hina, and G. A. Shah, “DDoSViT: IoT
DDoS attack detection for fortifying firmware Over-The-Air (OTA)
updates using vision transformer,” Internet Things, vol. 30, Mar. 2025,
Art. no. 101527.
[33] Z. Ullah et al., “Hybrid CNN-LSTM model for DDoS attack
detection in Internet of Things-based healthcare industry
5.0,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, May 13, 2025,
doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3569610.
[34] J. Doménech, O. León, M. S. Siddiqui, and J. Pegueroles, “Evaluating
and enhancing intrusion detection systems in IoMT: The importance
of domain-specific datasets,” Internet Things, vol. 32, Jul. 2025,
Art. no. 101631.
[35] A. Kumar and D. Singh, “Detection and prevention of DDoS attacks on
edge computing of IoT devices through reinforcement learning,” Int. J.
Inf. Technol., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1365–1376, 2024.
[36] D. Said, M. Bagaa, A. Oukaira, and A. Lakhssassi, “Quantum entropy
and reinforcement learning for distributed denial of service attack
detection in smart grid,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 129858–129869,
2024.
[37] N. Jayakrishna and N. N. Prasanth, “Detection and mitigation of
distributed denial of service attacks in vehicular ad hoc network
using a spatiotemporal deep learning and reinforcement learning
approach,” Results Eng., vol. 26, Jun. 2025, Art. no. 104839.
[38] K. Gai, G. Zhang, P. Jiang, L. Zhu, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A
moving target DDoS defense approach in consortium blockchain,” IEEE
Tran. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4362–4378,
Jul./Aug. 2025.
[39] K. K. Paidipati, C. Kurangi, J. Uthayakumar, S. Padmanayaki,
D. Pradeepa, and S. Nithinsha, “Ensemble of deep reinforcement learning with optimization model for DDoS attack detection and classification
in cloud based software defined networks,” Multimedia Tools Appl.,
vol. 83, no. 11, pp. 32367–32385, 2024.
[40] J. A. Shaikh et al., “A deep reinforcement learning-based robust intrusion
detection system for securing IoMT healthcare networks,” Front. Med.,
vol. 12, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 1524286.
[41] Y. Geng, Y. Du, and J. Li, “The support vector machine model and
application based on particle swarm optimization algorithm,” in Proc.
IEEE 2nd Int. Conf. Image Process. Comput. Appl. (ICIPCA), 2024,
pp. 898–902.
[42] A. Farah, M. Nielsen, and E. Vasilomanolakis, “Improving synthetic
network attack traffic generation,” in Proc. 9th Int. Workshop Traffic
Meas. Cybersecur., 2024, pp. 326–334.
[43] D. Kapil, V. Mittal, and D. P. Gangodkar, “Evaluating machine learning
approaches for DDoS attack detection using CIC-DDoS2019,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Commun. Technol. (ICACCTech), 2024,
pp. 762–767.

YANG et al.: DDoS ATTACK DETECTION IN CONSUMER IoT-BASED HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS

[44] W. Mason, “The future of infrared efforts at DARPA,” in Proc. Infrared
Technol. Appl., 2024, Art. no. 130460U.
[45] G. Kaur and P. Gupta, “Detection of distributed denial of service attacks
for IoT-based healthcare systems,” Comput. Assist. Methods Eng. Sci.,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 167–186, 2023.
[46] A. A. J. Al-Abadi, M. B. Mohamed, and A. Fakhfakh, “Enhanced
random forest classifier with K-means clustering (ERF-KMC) for detecting and preventing distributed-denial-of-service and man-in-the-middle
attacks in Internet-of-Medical-Things networks,” Computers, vol. 12,
no. 12, p. 262, 2023.
[47] F. Talpur, I. A. Korejo, A. A. Chandio, A. Ghulam, and
M. S. H. Talpur, “ML-based detection of DDoS attacks using evolutionary algorithms optimization,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 1672,
2024.
[48] I. Jebril et al., “Deep learning based DDoS attack detection in Internet of
Things: An optimized CNN-BiLSTM architecture with transfer learning
and regularization techniques,” Infocommun. J., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 2–11,
2024.
[49] B. Habib and F. Khursheed, “Time-based DDoS attack detection through
hybrid LSTM-CNN model architectures: An investigation of many-toone and many-to-many approaches,” Concurr. Comput., Pract. Exp.,
vol. 36, no. 9, 2024, Art. no. e7996.
[50] K. Wang, Y. Fu, X. Duan, and T. Liu, “Detection and mitigation of
DDoS attacks based on multi-dimensional characteristics in SDN,” Sci.
Rep., vol. 14, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 16421.

11675

[51] A. D. Aguru and S. B. Erukala, “A lightweight multi-vector
DDoS detection framework for IoT-enabled mobile health informatics systems using deep learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 662, Mar. 2024,
Art. no. 120209.
[52] M. Braik, A. Hammouri, J. Atwan, M. A. Al-Betar, and
M. A. Awadallah, “White shark optimizer: A novel bio-inspired metaheuristic algorithm for global optimization problems,” Knowl. Based
Syst., vol. 243, May 2022, Art. no. 108457.
[53] M Jafari, M. H. B. Chaleshtari, H. Khoramishad, and
H. Altenbach, “Minimization of thermal stress in perforated
composite
plate
using
metaheuristic
algorithms
WOA,
SCA and GA,” Composite Struct., vol. 304, Jan. 2023,
Art. no. 116403.
[54] B. Abdollahzadeh et al., “Puma optimizer (PO): A novel
metaheuristic optimization algorithm and its application in
machine learning,” Clust. Comput., vol. 27, pp. 5235–5283,
Jan. 2024.
[55] N. Sinha and K.-W. Chen, “Neural architecture search
using covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy,” Evol.
Comput., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 177–204, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1162/evco_a_00331
[56] S. V. Moravvej, S. J. Mousavirad, D. Oliva, G. Schaefer, and
Z. Sobhaninia, “An improved de algorithm to optimise the learning
process of a BERT-based plagiarism detection model,” in Proc. IEEE
Congr. Evol. Comput. (CEC), 2022, pp. 1–7.