5106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Deep Graph Anomaly Detection: A Survey and New
Perspectives
Hezhe Qiao , Hanghang Tong, Fellow, IEEE, Bo An , Senior Member, IEEE, Irwin King , Fellow, IEEE,
Charu Aggarwal , Fellow, IEEE, and Guansong Pang , Member, IEEE
(Survey Paper)

Abstract—Graph anomaly detection (GAD), which aims to identify unusual graph instances (e.g., nodes, edges, subgraphs, or
graphs), has attracted increasing attention in recent years due to
its significance in a wide range of applications. Deep learning approaches, graph neural networks (GNNs) in particular, have been
emerging as a promising paradigm for GAD, owing to its strong
capability in capturing complex structure and/or node attributes
in graph data. Considering the large number of methods proposed
for GNN-based GAD, it is of paramount importance to summarize
the methodologies and findings in the existing GAD studies, so that
we can pinpoint effective model designs for tackling open GAD
problems. To this end, in this work we aim to present a comprehensive review of deep learning approaches for GAD. Existing GAD
surveys are focused on task-specific discussions, making it difficult
to understand the technical insights of existing methods and their
limitations in addressing some unique challenges in GAD. To fill this
gap, we first discuss the problem complexities and their resulting
challenges in GAD, and then provide a systematic review of current
deep GAD methods from three novel perspectives of methodology,
including GNN backbone design, proxy task design for GAD, and
graph anomaly measures. To deepen the discussions, we further
propose a taxonomy of 13 fine-grained method categories under
these three perspectives to provide more in-depth insights into the
model designs and their capabilities. To facilitate the experiments
and validation of the GAD methods, we also summarize a collection
of widely-used datasets for GAD and empirical performance comparison on these datasets. We further discuss multiple important

Received 6 November 2024; revised 12 April 2025; accepted 10 June 2025.
Date of publication 23 June 2025; date of current version 24 July 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation, Singapore and
CyberSG R&D Programme Office under its Translation and Innovation under
Grant CRPO-GC4-SMU-001, in part by the Ministry of Education, Singapore
under its Tier 1 Academic Research Fund under Grant 24-SIS-SMU-008, and in
part by the Lee Kong Chian Fellowship under Grant T050273. Recommended
for acceptance by Guoren Wang. (Corresponding author: Guansong Pang.)
Hezhe Qiao and Guansong Pang are with the School of Computing and
Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 188065
(e-mail: gspang@smu.edu.sg).
Hanghang Tong is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61801 USA.
Bo An is with the College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798.
Irwin King is with the Department of Computer Science & Engineering,
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
Charu Aggarwal is with IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights,
NY 10598 USA.
A continuously updated repository for GAD datasets, links to the codes of
GAD algorithms, and empirical comparison is available at https://github.com/
mala-lab/Awesome-Deep-Graph-Anomaly-Detection.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2025.3581578, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2025.3581578

open research problems in GAD to inspire more future high-quality
research in this area.
Index Terms—Graph anomaly detection, graph neural networks, anomaly detection, graph representation learning.

I. INTRODUCTION
RAPH anomaly detection (GAD) aims to identify graph
instances (e.g., node, edge, sub-graph, and graph) that
do not conform with the normal regime. It has been an active
research area with wide application in detecting abnormal instances in a variety of graph/network data, e.g., abusive user
behaviors in online user networks, fraudulent activities in financial networks, and spams in social networks. Furthermore, since
the relations between data samples can be modeled as similarity
graphs, one can also use GAD methods to discover anomalies
in any set of data objects (as long as an appropriate pairwise
similarity function is available).
Due to the complex structure of graphs, traditional anomaly
detection methods cannot be directly applied to graph data. In
recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown promising capabilities in modeling and learning the representation of
graphs by capturing structural patterns, inspiring a large number
of GNN-based approaches for GAD. However, the popular GNN
designs, such as aggregation of node representations and optimization objectives, may lead to over-smoothing, indistinguishable representations of normal and abnormal graph instances,
which significantly limits their applications in real-world use
cases. Many novel GNN-based approaches specifically designed
for GAD have been proposed to tackle the these challenges. In
this work, to summarize the current methodologies and findings,
we provide a systematic and comprehensive review of current
deep GAD techniques and how they may tackle various types
of challenges in GAD. We also propose several important open
research problems in GAD to inspire more future research in
this area.
Related surveys: There have been several reviews on anomaly
detection in recent years, e.g., [2], [4], [78], [87], [102], [112],
but most of them are focused on non-deep-learning-based methods for GAD [2], [4], [102], or on general data rather than
graph data [7], [87]. The studies [61], [78], [112] are on deep
GAD, but the reviews are limited to a relatively narrow point
of view. For example, Ma et al. [78] focus on task-specific
discussions, with limited reviews on the technical development,

G

1041-4347 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

5107

TABLE I
A COMPARISON OF OUR WORK TO EXISTING SURVEYS ON ANOMALY DETECTION

while Liu et al. [61] and Tang et al. [112] focus on establishing a
performance benchmark for unsupervised and supervised GAD
methods respectively. Although these surveys provide useful
guidelines for the development of methods for GAD, it is difficult to understand the technical insights of existing methods
and their limitations in addressing some unique challenges in
GAD.
Our work: To fill this gap, we aim to offer a distinctive
review on GAD to discuss these insights, the limitations, and the
future research opportunities in this crucial topic. Specifically,
we start with the discussion on the problem complexities and
their resulting unique challenges in GAD. We then provide a systematic review of current deep GAD methods from three novel
perspectives of methodology, including GNN backbone design,
proxy task design for GAD, and graph anomaly measures. To
deepen the discussions, we further propose a taxonomy of 13
fine-grained method categories under these three perspectives to
provide more in-depth insights into the model designs and their
capabilities. To facilitate the experiments and validation of the
GAD methods, we also summarize a collection of widely-used
datasets for GAD and empirical performance comparison on
these datasets. A comparison of our work to these related surveys
is summarized in Table I.
In summary, our major contributions are as follows:
r The survey provides important insights into the problem
complexities and the resulting challenges that are unique
for the task of GAD (Section II).
r We introduce a novel taxonomy of current deep GAD methods, which offers in-depth understanding of the methods
from three technical design perspectives, including GNN
backbone design, proxy task design, and graph anomaly
measures (Section III).
r We then introduce 13 fine-grained method categories under
these three perspectives to provide more in-depth insights
into the model designs (i.e., key intuition, assumption,
learning objectives, advantages and disadvantages) and
their capabilities in addressing the unique challenges in
GAD (Sections IV, V, and VI).
r We further discuss multiple important future research directions that involve largely unsolved open problems in
GAD. Solutions in these directions would open up new
opportunities for addressing the unique challenges in GAD
(Section VII).
r We also summarize a large number of representative deep
GAD methods from the 13 categories and a large collection

of GAD benchmark datasets, and further provide quantitative comparison results on these datasets (Appendices A,
B, and C).
II. PROBLEMS AND CHALLENGES IN GAD
This section discusses some unique complexities and challenges in GAD.
A. Major Problem Complexities
The complexities in GAD can be summarized in two
ways. One source of the complexities lies in some inherent
characteristics of graph data.
r P1. Structural dependency: The samples are typically correlated/connected with each other instead of being independent. The connections are of different semantics, e.g.,
it could be a purchase relationship in a social network, or a
citation relationship in a citation network. The complexity
of graph structure is reflected in connectivity patterns,
dependency, or influence at different levels of graph data,
which play a significant role in defining what is abnormal
on graphs [4]. For example, different from i.i.d. data, where
the anomalies are independent of the context, the anomalies
in graphs often depend on the context of a graph data
instance, e.g., the neighboring nodes of a node. Anomalies
may be considered as normal in one context but abnormal
in another.
r P2. Diverse types of graph: There are many types of
graphs in the real world, each serving different purposes
and applications. Graphs can be categorized into static
and dynamic types, depending on whether they change
over time. It can also be divided into heterophilic and homophilic graphs according to the type of connection [150],
[160]. The definition of anomaly in one type of graph can
differ significantly from that in other types of graph. In
particular, a graph instance (e.g., node/edge/graph) that is
clearly abnormal in a dynamic graph at a specific time step
(i.e., a static graph) can demonstrate strong normality when
looking at the evolution of the graph; similarly, we can have
opposite abnormality of a graph instance in a homophilic
graph vs. in a heterophilic graph. Dealing with diverse
types of graphs requires the GAD methods to adapt its
learning strategy based on its unique properties of graphs.
r P3. Computational complexity in handling large-scale
graphs: With the increasing amount of online data, modern

5108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

applications can include very large-scale graph data with
millions/billions of nodes and/or edges [41], [45], [97],
[112], such as those in web-scale social networks, financial transaction networks, cyber networks, user-product
e-commerce networks, and citation networks. To identify
anomalies using global structural contexts, it is essential
to consider the full graph structural information, or a large
proportion of the structural relations. The key complexity
here is to deal with the time and space complexities when
loading such large-scale structural relation data.
Another source is from the variety of graph abnormalities.
r P4. Diverse graph anomaly instances: In contrast to
anomaly detection in other forms of data, anomalies within
graph data can arise from different components, such as
nodes, edges, sub-graphs, or the entire graph [78]. Moreover, graph anomalies can manifest themselves in diverse
ways, depending on the structure and attribute information
of graph data. This highlights the need for GAD methods
to incorporate a range of techniques focused on identifying
irregular patterns across nodes, edges, subgraphs, and the
entirety of the graph.
r P5. Large variation in graph abnormality: Anomalies in
graphs can manifest in different forms, including abnormality in graph attributes, graph structure, or the composition of graph attributes and structure [4]. Some exemplars
include attribute anomalies (i.e., graph instances that are
exceptional in a graph attribute set) [3], [87], structural
anomalies (i.e., graph instances that connect different communities, forming dense connections with others) [18],
[78], contextual anomalies (i.e., graph instances that have
different attribute values compared to other nodes in the
same community) [18], [78], and local affinity anomalies
(i.e., graph instances that demonstrate significantly weak
affinity to their connected instances compared to other
instances [66], [97]). Also, graph abnormality may vary
from a local context to a global context, e.g., the node
attributes in a 1-hop neighborhood vs. that in the full
graph. This can lead to a highly complex composition
set of graph abnormalities, i.e., abnormality in attributes,
structure, or both attributes and structure conditioned on
a certain context, having very different definitions to the
conventional anomaly types – point, conditional, and group
anomalies [3], [11], [87] – in general AD.
In addition, there are some complexities inherited from general AD but amplified in GAD:
r P6. Unknowingness of abnormality: Many abnormalities
remain unknown until they actually occur [87], in which no
prior knowledge about the abnormality is available for the
modeling. Further, one type of abnormality can show very
different behaviors to the other types of abnormality in a
single graph, e.g., the heterogeneous abnormality in graph
attributes vs. that in graph structure, in a node set vs. in an
edge or subgraph set, in a 1-hop local structure context vs.
in a higher-order structural context. Thus, knowing one or
more types of graph anomalies may not be generalize to
the other types of anomalies.
r P7. Data imbalance: Due to the rare occurrence of anomalies, there is typically a large sample imbalance between

normal and anomaly classes [3], [11], [87]. This also
applies to GAD, but this complexity is largely amplified
in GAD due to potential long-tailed distributions in graph
structure/attributes [2], [68], in addition to the imbalance
in the class sample size.
r P8. Abnormality camouflage: Bad actors may adjust their
behaviors to camouflage the abnormality of the anomalous
instances, making them difficult to detect using popular
AD methods. The anomaly camouflage in GAD refers to
the phenomenon where anomalous graph instances disguise themselves as normal within a local neighborhood
or the global graph. This may be done through various
mechanisms, e.g., attribute manipulation and structural
manipulation in a graph [23], [70], [98], [136].
B. Major Challenges
The aforementioned problem complexities lead to the following largely unsolved challenges in GAD, which deep GAD
approaches can tackle to various extent:
r C1. Graph structure-aware GAD: As discuss in P1, graph
anomalies are not solely determined by their own attributes
but also by their structural context. Thus, the GAD methods
are required to effectively capture those structural dependency in their anomaly scoring functions. The effect of
this dependency in anomaly scoring may vary significantly
from homophilic graphs to heterophilic graphs, and from
static graphs to dynamic graphs (P2). On the other hand,
oversmoothing is a common issue when modeling the
graph structure information, which is referred to as a
phenomenon in graph representation learning where the
learned representations of different nodes become overly
similar due to the iterative aggregation of representations
of neighboring nodes to obtain the representations of the
target nodes. In GAD, this can lead to node/subgraph representations that smooth out anomalies as well, making them
indistinguishable between normal and abnormal graph instances [23], [97]. Therefore, it is challenging to model
diverse structural influences in the anomaly scoring on
graphs, while avoiding adverse effects like representation
oversmoothing.
r C2. GAD at scale: As discussed in P3, large-scale graphs
with millions or even billions of nodes/edges presents a
significant computational challenge to GAD methods that
aim to model global or higher-order structure information [112]. Existing large-graph modeling methods are
challenging to apply directly to GAD due to the extreme
imbalance in the data (P7). While some subgraph and
sampling techniques have been proposed to address this
issue, they often fail to capture the full structural information, resulting in sub-optimal performance [23], [66],
particularly for unsupervised GAD. Consequently, performing anomaly detection on large-scale graphs remains
a long-standing challenge in the area.
r C3. Generalization to different graph anomalies: As discussed in P4, there are various types of graph anomaly
instances, making it hard to apply a one-for-all approach.
Achieving this requires a combination of robust feature

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

extraction and versatile detection models. Further, the
anomalies can manifest in various forms, ranging from
attributes, structure and their composition (P5). However,
most existing methods are designed for a specific type
of anomaly in an unsupervised manner, which typically
have a low recall rate [18], [66], [97]. The challenge is
amplified when the training data does not illustrate every
possible class of anomaly (P6), regardless of unsupervised
or supervised methods [1], [16], [88], [89], [90], [119],
[158].
r C4. Balanced GAD: As discussed in P7, since the number of normal instances is significantly larger than that
of abnormal instances, the models tend to bias towards
the majority class during the training, i.e., they perceive
the normal patterns more frequently. Consequently, the
models might be overly specialized in recognizing normal
instances while generalizing poorly on the anomalies. Often the detection decision thresholds are crucial for making
predictions for some methods [23], [112], and poorly chosen thresholds can worsen the effects of data imbalance.
Thus, the challenge is to avoid biased GAD.
r C5. Robust and interpretable GAD: GAD in real applications needs to be robust against various adverse conditions,
such as abnormality camouflage (P8) [23], [34], [112] and
unknown anomaly contamination [97], [98]. Addressing
the abnormality camouflage or anomaly contamination
may require models that can capture subtle differences between normal graph instances and camouflaged instances,
and complex relationships within the graph as well. Besides, an explanation of why a graph instance is detected as
an anomaly can be crucial for the utility of the predictions
in real applications [59], [105], [105], but it is a largely
unexplored area. For example, in bank fraud detection, it
is essential to provide a comprehensive explanation of the
detected fraudulent activity for facilitating the subsequent
investigation, but it is challenging to link the fraud to
specific attributes of particular transactions (nodes) and
their relations (edges) at a specific time period.
III. CATEGORIZATION OF DEEP GAD
A. Preliminaries
GAD aims to recognize the anomaly instances in graph data
that may vary from nodes, edges to subgraphs by learning an
anomaly scoring function. Traditional GAD methods achieve
anomaly detection using matrix decomposition and residual
analysis [4]. However, their performance is often bottlenecked
due to the lack of representation power to capture the rich
structure-attribute semantics of the graph data and to handle
high-dimensional node attributes. In recent years, GNNs have
been widely used in GAD due to their powerful representation
learning ability. Some representative GNNs like GCN [51],
GraphSage [37], and GCL [135] attract much attention in node
representation learning in graphs. These GNNs can be leveraged
to learn the expressive representation of different graph instances
for GAD.
Definition and Notation: In this section, we introduce the
definitions and notations used throughout the paper. We denote

5109

a graph by G = (V, E) where V and E denote the node set and
edge set respectively. For the graph G, we use X ∈ RN ×M to
denote the matrix of node attributes and xi ∈ RM is the attribute
vector of vi ∈ V, and A ∈ {0, 1}N ×N is the adjacency matrix
of G with Aij = 1 iff (vi , vj ) ∈ E, where N is the number of
node.
Problem Statement: GAD can be divided into anomaly detection at the node-level, edge-level, sub-graph level and graphlevel settings. The node-, edge- and subgraph-level AD tasks
are typically performed within a single large graph G, where the
input samples are nodes v ∈ G, edges e ∈ G, and subgraphs
s ⊂ G, respectively. For the graph-level AD task, the input
samples are a set of graphs G = {G1 , G2 , · · · }. For the sake
of simplicity and generality across different levels of GAD, we
uniformly denote the input samples as o, i.e., o can denote a
node v, an edge e, a subgraph s, or a full graph G, depending on
their use in specific algorithms or models. Then GAD aims to
learn an anomaly scoring function f : {o1 , o2 , · · · } → R, such
that f (o) < f (o ), ∀o ∈ On , o ∈ Oa , where On and Oa denote
the set of normal and abnormal graph instances, respectively.
Since anomalies are rare samples, it is typically assumed that
|On |  |Oa |.
B. Categorization of Deep GAD Methods
In order to facilitate a comprehensive understanding of the research progress in GAD, we introduce a new taxonomy that categorizes current GAD methods into three main groups,including
GNN backbone design, proxy GAD task design, and graph
anomaly measures, depending on the insights offered by each
method. This enables us to review the GAD methods from three
different technical perspectives. To elaborate the insights in each
perspective, we further categorize the methods into fine-grained
13 groups. An overview of the taxonomy is shown in Fig. 1.
More specifically, general GNNs can not be directly applied
to GAD due to the aforementioned problem complexities, and
thus, there is a group of studies that focus on designing suitable
GNN backbones for GAD. The design of the GNN backbones
can be divided into discriminative GNNs and generative GNNs
according to the improvement of different modules in GNNs.
The second main category of methods is on the GAD models
constructed by optimizing a diverse set of well-crafted learning
objective functions to form a proxy task that can guide the
GAD models to capture diverse graph anomaly/normal patterns without the need for ground-truth labels. This category
of methods can be further divided into five subcategories based
on the modeling in the proxy tasks. Lastly, there is a group of
methods that build GAD models based on anomaly measures
that are designed specifically for graph data. These methods
can be further grouped into four subcategories depending on
the type of graph anomaly measures used. A summarization of
representative algorithms for each type of GAD approaches is
presented in Table 1 in Appendix A, available online.
IV. GNN BACKBONE DESIGN
This category of methods aims at leveraging GNNs to learn
effective representations of graph instances for downstream

5110

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Overview of the proposed taxonomy of deep GAD from three high-level and 13 fine-grained technical perspectives.

anomaly detection tasks. Due to its strong capability to represent graph-structured data, GNNs can effectively obtain expressive node representations through aggregation among the connected nodes. However, unlike general node/graph classification
datasets, GAD datasets are often extremely class-imbalanced,
which prevents GNNs from being directly applied to GAD
datasets. Therefore, several GNNs have been proposed to handle
the imbalance problem for more effective GAD. Concretely, this
type of methods can be roughly divided into discriminative- and
generative-based GNNs for GAD.
A. Discriminative GNNs
Discriminative GNN-based GAD methods refer to a GNN architecture specifically designed for discriminating normal graph
instances from the abnormal ones, where the discrimination is
typically achieved through a supervised learning manner. Thus,
the discriminative GNNs are typically trained on the labeled
graph dataset containing examples of both normal and abnormal
instances. The core idea in these methods is to adapt the conventional GNN backbones in a way so that the message passing in
GNNs can capture the majority patterns or the deviation patterns
better.

Let hi be the feature representation of a graph instance oi
that is obtained through l layers of feature aggregation (FAG)
in a GNN, i.e., hi = FAG1 :l (oi , Ni ) where Ni represents the
neighbor set of a graph instance oi , these methods are typically
optimized via a general cross-entropy loss to train the discriminative GAD model.

[yi log pi + (1 − yi ) log(1 − pi )],
(1)
Lcls = −
oi ∈G

where yi denotes the class label of the instance oi and pi =
MLP1 :m (hi ) is the output of a mapping function that goes
through m layers of multiple perceptrons (MLP) to project the
feature hi to a probability of the sample being abnormal/normal.
During inference, given a graph instance, oj , pj or its inverse
1 − pj can be used as its anomaly score.
Different GNN-based encoders can be used to obtain the
feature representation h, such as graph convolutional networks
(GCNs) [51], graph attention networks (GAT) [116], or GraphSage [37]. Depending on which part of the learning pipeline is
focused, we group the existing methods in this category into
two sub-categories, including the methods that focus on the
GNN neighborhood aggregation design, i.e., FAG1 :l (oi , Ni ),
and that focus on feature transformation with the raw attributes

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

or node embeddings as input, i.e., Transformation(hi ) or
Transformation(xi ). Below we introduce each of them in
detail.
1) Aggregation Mechanism: As a simple and effective way
to obtain the representation of nodes in GNNs, feature aggregation plays a crucial role in learning node representations by
aggregating information from neighboring nodes in a graph.
Thus, to create GNN-based methods for GAD, one principled
approach is to craft suitable feature aggregation FAG designs
that are sensible for graph anomaly instances.
Assumption: The GAD methods in this line assume that the
connected instances from the same class in graphs have similar
characteristics, from which we can perform feature aggregation
to obtain discriminative normality/abnormality patterns.
A widely-used FAG mechanism is as follows [51]:




(l)
(l−1)
(l−1)
+ AGG hj
| o j ∈ Ni
,
hi = σ W(l) hi
(2)
(l)
where hi is the feature representation of instance i in the
l-th layer, σ is an activation function, and W(l) is the training
parameters in the l-th layer. The graph instance oi is often set
as a node vi , and Ni is typically the 1-hop neighborhood of the
node vi . AGG(·) is implemented using sum or mean aggregation,
which sums or averages the representations of neighbor features.
More advanced aggregation methods, such as attention-based
aggregation [29] and LSTM [149], are also widely used. However, due to the oversmoothing representation issue (C1 in
Section II-B), directly applying such neighborhood aggregation
mechanism can largely reduce the discriminability of of graph
anomalies, especially for those whose abnormal behaviors are
subtle (C3 in Section II-B). Therefore, a variety of methods were
proposed to enforce distinguishable representations for normal
and abnormal graph instances throughout a number of feature
aggregation iterations. These methods can be summarized via
the following principled framework:


(l)
(l−1)
| oj ∈ Φ (Ni ) ∪ Ψ(V) ,
ĥi = AGG hj



(3)
(l)
(l−1)
(l)
,
hi = σ W(l) hi
+ ĥi
where Φ(·) and Ψ(·) represent a filtering function on the neighborhood set N and an edge synthesizer on the full node set V,
respectively. Depending on how the methods specify the Φ or
Ψ function, we further categorize them into two fine-grained
groups – hard/soft edge selection and edge synthesis – to gain
better insights into these existing methods.
• Hard Edge Selection: Popular aggregation mechanisms in GNN methods are built upon a homophily assumption
that connected nodes come from the same class.
Thus, the existence of non-homophily edges (i.e., edges that
connect nodes of different classes, also referred to as heterophily
edges below) in a GAD dataset can greatly hinders the discriminability of the learned feature representations. As shown in
Fig. 2(a), one popular strategy is to instantiate Φ(Ni ) that prune
the heterophily edges w.r.t. the normal class, referred to as hard
edge selection. Below we review the methods in this line.
In order to enhance the homophily relations, CARE-GNN [23]
devises a label-aware similarity measure to find informative

Fig. 2.

5111

Three categories of aggregation mechanism.

neighboring nodes during the aggregation where Φ(Ni ) is instantiated by a node selector that chooses the neighbors with
high similarity. Moreover, a reinforcement learning module is
also used in [23] to find the optimal amounts of neighbors to
be selected. MITIGATE [12] implements Φ(Ni ) via a masked
aggregation mechanism that utilizes the distance-based clustering algorithm to choose a subset of high-representative nodes,
in which the nodes that are closest to the cluster centers are
chosen. GmpaAD [79] takes a similar clustering-based approach
as MITIGATE, but it uses a differential evolutionary algorithm
to find the optimal mapping strategy and generate the representative nodes given the selected candidates from a clustering
method. On the other hand, H2-FDetector [107] categorizes the
edges into homophily and heterophily connections in the graph,
and further designs a new information aggregation strategy to
ensure that the homophily connections propagate similar information while the heterophily connections propagate different
information.
In addition to using distance, Φ can also be specified via
meta learning or reinforcement learning. BLS [20] is the representative method that enhances the FAG mechanism under
imbalanced and noisy scenarios by selecting important nodes
via a meta-learning gradient of the learning loss. AO-GNN [43]
employs a reinforcement learning method supervised by a surrogate reward based on AUC performance to prune the heterophily
edges. NGS [99] takes a meta-graph learning approach that
devises a differentiable neural architecture to determine a set
of optimized message passing structures and then combines
multiple searched meta-graphs in FAG.
• Soft Edge Selection: Another research line is
adopting an attention mechanism in GNNs by assigning the
weights for each edge for soft edge selection for GAD, rather
than hard edge selection, as demonstrated in Fig. 2(c). This
weight is generally obtained through the relationship between
node embeddings, which serves as an effective way to enforce
the importance of some specific edge relations in the feature
aggregation. GAT [116] is widely used as the basic backbone,
on top of which a variety of designs is introduced in the methods
of this category for GAD. Specifically, the general attention
mechanism in GAT can be formulated as:
⎞
⎛

(l)
(l)
(4)
Φ (hi , hj ; θ) Whj ⎠ ,
hi = σ ⎝
oj ∈N(i)

where Φ indicates a weight learning function with parameters θ
applied on the embedding of a graph instance oi and its neighbors
oj . It represents the contribution of relations/neighbors to the

5112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

target instance oi , where the instance oi is often specified as a
node vi . For instantiating Φ, GraphConsis [70] reveals an inconsistency phenomenon in node connections that abnormal nodes
can have a high likelihood of being connected to normal nodes
to camouflage their abnormality. It then introduces a consistency
scoring-based method based on node embedding similarities
and a self-attention mechanism to assign weights for different
connections in the aggregation in Φ. FRAUDRE [140] extends
the inconsistency-based scoring method to include three types
of graph inconsistencies in features, topology, and structural
relations to consider the importance of different connections.
On the other hand, PMP [162] introduces a partitioning message
passing to independently handle the heterophily and homophily
neighbors preventing the gradients in the optimization from
being dominated by normal nodes. To achieve this, Φ is implemented by a weight generator function to adaptively adjust
the influence of neighbors from different classes to the target
node.
• Edge Synthesis: The edge selection function Φ focuses on local structure only. Edge synthesis function Ψ can
often be used to complement Φ in capturing more global patterns for GAD, as demonstrated in Fig. 2(b). For example,
GHRN [33] prunes the inter-class edges by emphasizing and
delineating the high-frequency components of the graph. Apart
from edge reduction, the indirect link between nodes can also
be beneficial for the normality representation learning [33]. To
this end, GHRN introduces a global node selector Ψ(V) that
chooses nodes beyond the neighboring nodes of the target node
to introduce this information into the feature aggregation, which
can be seen as an edge synthesizer that connects distant nodes to
a target node. PCGNN [63] specifies Ψ(V) using a subgraph
construction method consisting of class-label-balanced node
and edge samplers to tackle potential issues arising from the
skewed class distribution. To this end, it incorporates the label
information into the sampling process to choose nodes and edges
for its sub-graph construction. A distance function is also used
to simplify the neighborhood in the sub-graphs. NSReg [119]
leverages a novel normal structure regularization method where
the normal-node-oriented relation is used to enforce strong
normality into the representation learning to avoid overfitting
to the labeled abnormal nodes.
The relation representations are generated through a learnable transformation that fuses the representations of relevant
nodes, which are subsequently used to optimize the normalnode-oriented relation prediction and the representation learner.
Advantages: The key advantages of discriminative GNNbased GAD methods are as follows. (i) Treating anomaly detection as an end-to-end imbalanced classification task simplifies
the GAD problem, allowing the use of available abnormal samples to detect known graph anomaly instances. (ii) This approach
does not rely on the reconstruction of the graph structure, which
significantly reduces memory usage and enhances its scalability
for large-scale graphs.
Disadvantages: They also have some major disadvantages. (i)
Since these methods require some labeled graph data as supervision information, they become inapplicable or less effective
in practical applications where such data is difficult to obtain.

Fig. 3.

Two categories of feature transformation.

(ii) Edge selection may lead to the loss of important structure
information while edge synthesis may introduce noise or some
irrelevant structure information into the message passing in
GNNs.
Challenges Addressed: The tailored GNNs for GAD enable
effective modeling of graph structure and its interaction with
graph attribute information (C1). They may also be able to
learn more discriminative features for detecting subtle anomalies
that are similar to labeled abnormal samples (C3). Since these
methods require local feature aggregation, they can often scale
up to large graphs (C2).
2) Feature Transformation: In addition to the efforts on
the aggregation mechanism, another popular approach to obtain discriminative features for GAD is to perform feature
transformation on either the graph instance representations
from GNNs, i.e., Transformation(hi ), or raw attributes, i.e.,
Transformation(xi ). This is crucial since datasets used in GAD
can often contain a substantial proportion of feature information
that is irrelevant, or even noisy, to GAD. There are two popular
approaches to instantiate this Transformation(·) function: one
is to use gradient information and another is to use spectral graph
filters.
Assumption: It is assumed that there is irrelevant or noisy
information in the raw attributes or graph structure w.r.t. GAD,
which should be discarded during feature aggregation.
• Gradient-based Feature Scoring: Extracting
class-related features specific to the characteristics of a particular class is one straightforward way to obtain discriminative features. Inspired by variable decomposition [30], gradient
information-based methods have been emerging as one main approach to obtain discriminative representations from GNNs [75].
The key idea here is to select features from the representation
hi based on the gradient backpropagated from the softmax
probability of being a specific class, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a).
Let αkc be the gradient score of an anomaly class c w.r.t. a feature
k, then it represents the contribution of this feature to anomaly
detection, which can be formulated as follows:
αkc =

N
1  ∂y c
,
N i=1 ∂hk,i

(5)

where y c is the predicted probability of being the anomaly class
c and hk,i is the k-th feature of the representation of node i from
a hidden layer. After obtaining a gradient score for each feature
dimension, the top K features with the largest gradient scores
are selected to represent the nodes in a reduced feature space.
This gradient score-based approach is used in GDN [32] to select

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

abnormal and normal features in a supervised manner, and these
features are found often to be invariant to structure distribution
shift. It helps reduce the negative influence of irrelevant features
while preserving the extracted abnormal/normal graph patterns,
thus enhancing the overall performance of GAD. Similarly,
GraphENS [92] determines the importance of each node feature
via a gradient score-based method. Apart from gradient score,
existing feature selection methods for anomaly detection or
imbalanced classification [54], [84], [85], [86], [91] may be
adapted for GAD.
• Spectral Graph Filter: Spectral graph filter,
which combines the strengths of spectral graph theory and
GNNs, is widely applied to capture and analyze the structural
properties of graphs for GAD tasks. This approach utilizes a
set of graph filters to transform the raw attributes to latent
space to extract discriminative graph representations, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). Each graph filter assumes that normal nodes
tend to have similar features with their neighbors, which can
be regarded as low-frequency information, whereas abnormal
nodes in the graph are characterized by deviations from the
norm, which are often accompanied by high-frequency information since abnormal nodes often have different characteristics
from surrounding nodes. The distinction between low-frequency
and high-frequency information is closely related to the spectral properties of the graph. In particular, the low-frequency
and high-frequency variations on the graph can be effectively
captured by the lower and higher eigenvalues of the graph
Laplacian matrix, respectively. To leverage this information for
GAD, graph Fourier transformation [109] based graph filtering
operation is often used. Formally, let L be the symmetrically
normalized Laplacian, with eigen decomposition L = UΛUT ,
where Λ = diag[λ1 , . . . , λn ], then a signal x ∈ Rn is transferred by using a graph filter g, Transformation(x) = g  x =
Ug(Λ)UT x, and thus, the graph signal filtered by the k-th filter
can be defined as
hi,k = Ugk (Λ)UT xi = Udiag [gk (λ1 ) , . . . , gk (λn )] UT xi .
(6)
To better capture the feature separability, a set of multifrequency filters is often employed to learn the node representations [10]. Accordingly, the final representation hi of node vi
can be obtained by


hi =
αi,k hi,k = U
αi,k gk (Λ)UT xi ,
(7)
k

k

where αi,k is an important score for the graph filter gk (Λ).
Various spectral graph filters utilizing the frequency at different level have been proposed for GAD. Specifically, AMNet [10]
is an early work that adaptively integrates different graph signals
with mixed frequency patterns via a multi-frequency graph
filter group. It uses a restricted Bernstein polynomial parameterization method to approximate filters in multi-frequency
groups. BWGNN [113] reveals a ‘right-shift’ phenomenon in
GAD datasets with synthetic or real-world anomalies, i.e., lowfrequency energy is gradually transferred to the high-frequency
part when the degree of anomaly becomes larger. According to
this phenomenon, they justify the necessity of spectral localized

5113

band-pass filters in GAD. Current GNNs with adaptive filters
cannot guarantee to be band-pass or spectral localized. Therefore, they build on top of Hammond’s graph wavelet theory [38]
to develop a new GNN architecture with a Beta kernel to better
detect higher-frequency anomalies.
The aforementioned filters can be challenged by heterophily
graphs since homophily graphs are assumed in these filters.
To tackle this challenge, SEC-GFD [131] employs a hybrid
band-pass filter to partition the graph spectrum into hybrid
frequency bands, while SplitGNN [123] combines a band-pass
graph filter with a tunable Beta Wavelet GNN to address the
heterophily issue in node representation learning for GAD (C1
in Section II-B).
Advantages: (i) The feature transformation approach supports
the extraction of discriminative features from data with various
amount of irrelevant/noisy information. (ii) It can also provide
rich and informative graph representations capturing beyond
local graph properties, such as connectivity, centrality, and community structure, for more effective GAD.
Disadvantages: (i) Depending on what criterion or spectral
filter is used, this approach might overlook some important
information in feature transformation that could be crucial for
GAD, since one feature scoring criterion or filter often fails to
capture all possible discriminative features. (ii) The approach
may confined to a specific type of graph. For example, spectral
GNNs are primarily designed for homogeneous graphs, and thus,
it may not be suitable for a heterogeneous graph with different
types of nodes.
Challenges Addressed: The feature transformation approach
enhances GNNs by focusing them on specific types of discriminative features, thereby providing effective solutions to the graph
structure-aware anomaly detection problem (C1). Furthermore,
this approach focuses on discriminative features and does not
require costly graph structure reconstruction, and thus, it is often
good for GAD on large-scale graph data (C2).
B. Generative GNNs
Generative GNN-based methods focus on synthesizing new
graph instances to augment the existing graph data for enhancing
model training on the new graph for GAD. This approach is
motivated by the problem complexities like the scarcity of graph
anomaly instances and their large variations (P5 and P7 in
Section II-B). The underlying key idea in these GAD methods
is to synthesize outliers that can simulate graph anomalies in
some specific properties to provide pseudo anomaly information
for training the GAD models. In general, these methods can be
summarized by the following formulation:
= gφ (oi , X, A; ),
onew
i

(8)

where oi is an existing graph instance, gφ is a graph instance
generator with parameters φ that uses oi , existing attribute information X, graph structure information A, and some auxiliary
.
information  to generate the augmented graph instance, onew
i
It is then followed by a one-class or binary classification loss
Lcls defined as

Lgen =
(Y, fθ (Xnew
, Anew
)),
(9)
i
i

5114

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Two categories of generative GNNs.

where Xnew and Anew are the augmented version of X and
A, Y represents the label set of the graph instances consisting
of pseudo labels of the generated anomaly instances (and the
labels in the original graph if any), and f is a GAD model.
Depending on the source of  in gφ in (8), these methods can
be categorized into feature interpolation and noise perturbation
generation methods. The former focuses on specifying  using
data from existing graphs, while the latter focuses on utilizing
prior distribution to specify .
1) Feature Interpolation: Feature interpolation is a commonly employed technique in imbalance learning for augmenting data, where the representations of synthesized graph instances are created by interpolating the representations of existing graph instances. It has been explored in popular algorithms
like SMOTE [31] and Mixup [142] to oversample the minority
classes or generate diverse, large-scale samples for training deep
models. The approach can be generally formulated as follows:
(j)

hnew = (1 − λ) · h(i)
a + λ · hb ,

(10)

where hnew is the representation of the generated graph instance
using a convex combination of the representations of two existing graph instances from the same class, ha and hb , as illustrated
in Fig. 4(a).
Assumption: The interpolated feature representations between
graph instances can well align with those of the instances from
the anomaly class.
GraphSMOTE [147], GraphMixup [124] and GraphENS [92]
are representative methods that utilize feature interpolation to
address the challenge of biased GAD (C4 in Section II-B). These
methods are designed for imbalanced node classification, which
can be considered as supervised GAD in a closed-set setting
since they do not consider the detection of novel/unknown
anomaly types that are not illustrated by the labeled training anomaly examples [1], [16], [88], [90], [119], [158]. In
particular, GraphSMOTE [147] extends SMOTE to synthesize
new nodes and edges in graph data. Different from generic
data, generating new nodes in a graph requires the connections
of these nodes to existing nodes. Thus, an edge generator is
trained simultaneously in GraphSMOTE to model the relations
between existing and new nodes when using the SMOTE-style
approach to generate the new nodes. A similar work is done
in AugAN [156] that performs interpolation on the feature
representations of the nodes that are similar to labeled anomalies
to increase the number of training anomaly examples. However, directly performing the interpolation may produce outof-domain samples due to the extreme sparsity of the minority

classes. To alleviate this issue, GraphMixup [92] is introduced
to construct semantic relation spaces that allow the interpolation
to be performed at the semantic level. In GraphENS [92], the
synthesized nodes are created using an adaptive interpolation
rate that is determined by the distance between the minority and
majority class nodes, and its neighborhood is built in a stochastic
manner based on the distance between the ego-network nodes
of a minority node and a target node. BAT [69] generates virtual
nodes for each class as “shortcuts” connecting to the other nodes
based on posterior likelihoods, where the representation of the
generated nodes is generated based on a feature interpolation
operation.
Advantages: (i) Feature interpolation is a simple yet effective
way to create more samples for the under-represented anomaly
classes. (ii) Mixing up feature representations from different
classes can diversify the training data, enhancing the training of
a more generalized GAD model.
Disadvantages: (i) Feature interpolation focuses on generating node representations but lacks the ability to generate graph
structural information. Typically, the methods in this category
require the incorporation of an additional local structure generator to address this limitation. (ii) Feature interpolation also has
the risk of producing some ambiguous graph samples which may
lead to harder separation between normal and anomaly classes.
Challenges Addressed: Feature interpolation provides a simple but effective way to augment the anomaly data, which helps
mitigate the bias due to data imbalance (C4). Further, it may generate abnormal graph instances that are dissimilar to the training
anomaly instances, thereby improving the generalization ability
of GAD models to some unknown anomalies (C3).
2) Noise Perturbation: Unlike the feature interpolation
methods that generate new graph instances based on interpolation between representations of existing instances, the noise
perturbation generation methods aim to generate graph instances
using prior-driven noise perturbation, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
This approach can incorporate prior knowledge of the graph
normality/abnormality into the generation process for more effective GAD. The generated graph samples as abnormal graph
instances, combined with the given labels for existing nodes,
can then be leveraged to guide the training of a discriminator for
GAD.
The approach can be generally formulated as follows
Xnew , Anew = gφ (X, A; ),
Lcls =

N


(yi , fθ (Xi , Ai ))

i=1

+

M


(1, fθ (Xnew
, Anew
)) ,
i
i

(11)

i=1

where  is noise perturbation typically generated from a probability distribution, such as a Gaussian distribution, gφ (·) is a
generation function parameterized by φ, and M is the number
of generated graph instances.

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

5115

Assumption: Certain prior distributions can be used as a
source of noise perturbation to generate pseudo-abnormal graph
instances and/or diversify normal graph instances.
One group of methods in this category [8], [14], [57], [98]
takes a representation permutation approach, which focuses
on applying permutation to graph representations to instantiate
gφ (·), i.e., Permutation(Z). It first utilizes a GNN to obtain
the representations from the original graph data X and A. Then
it applies the permutation to the representations to generate the
representation of anomalous samples, denoted as Z̃.
Z̃ = Permutation(Z; ), Z = GN N (X, A)

(12)
Fig. 5.

where  are the hyperparameters of permutation. For example,
DAGAD [57] employs the permutation and concatenates on
the representation learned from a limited number of labeled
instances to generate the anomalous sample, thereby enriching
the knowledge of anomalies captured in the training set. On
the other hand, GGAD [98] aims to generate outlier nodes
that assimilate anomaly nodes in both local structure and node
representations by leveraging the two priors of anomaly nodes,
including asymmetric local affinity and egocentric closeness,
to impose constraints the representations. SDGG [8] takes a
similar approach as GGAD, but it is focused on generating
abnormal graphs that closely resemble fringe normal graphs,
which are then used to train graph-level anomaly detectors.
Unlike GGAD and SDGG that work on exclusively normal
training data, ConsisGAD [14] focuses on unlabeled nodes. It
creates a noise version of the unlabeled nodes by injecting noise
into their representations to synthesize instances that maintain
high consistency with the original instances while involving as
much diversity as possible. This operation helps mitigate the
scarcity of abnormal node instances while also enriching the
diversity of normal nodes.
Apart from the representation permutation-based generation,
denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [40] have
recently been emerging as another major approach to generate
anomalous graph instances [62], [77]. The diffusion process is
defined as a Markov chain that progressively adds a sequence of
scheduled Gaussian noise to corrupt the original data x:
Zs = Z0 + σ(s)ε, ε ∼ N(0, I),

(13)

where Z0 is the feature representations of the graph instances
and the variance of the noise (the noise level) is exclusively
determined by σ(s). The full denoising process is equivalent
to a reverse Markov chain that attempts to recover the original
data from noise. It iteratively denoises Ẑs to obtain Ẑsi−1 via
denoising function. The estimated Ẑ0 is then fed into a graph
instance generator to generate anomalous graphs for GAD. In
particular, GODM [62] employs iterative denoising to synthesize
pseudo anomalous graph instances that have close distribution
with the real anomalies in a latent space. DIFFAD [77] leverages
the generative power of denoising diffusion models to synthesize
training samples that align with the original graph instance in
egonet similarity. The generation of supplementary and effective
training samples is utilized to mitigate the shortage of labeled
anomalies.

Five categories of proxy task design.

Advantages: (i) The graph instance generation may allow the
synthesis of novel anomalies that facilitate the identification of
unseen anomalies. (ii) Noise perturbation generation can create
more diversified training samples, making the trained models
less sensitive to small changes in the input data. Disadvantages:
(i) The generated instances can inevitably include some outof-domain examples, which may deviate from the optimization
objective, rendering the detection models less effective. (ii)
Determining the optimal level of noise in the noise perturbation
can be challenging and may require extensive experimentation.
Challenge Addressed: The generation of instances can enhance the generalization of detecting different graph anomalies
(C3). It also helps achieve a balanced GAD by enhancing the
training samples through the GAD-oriented generation (C4).
V. PROXY TASK DESIGN
The proxy task design-based approaches aim to capture diverse normal/abnormal graph patterns by optimizing a wellcrafted learning objective function that aids the detection of
anomalies in the graph data without the use of human-annotated
labels. One of the crucial challenges in proxy task design is
to guarantee that i) the proxy task is associated with GAD,
and ii) it can deal with rich structure information and complex
relationships in graphs. We roughly divide the methods in this
group into five categories according to the employed proxy
tasks, including reconstruction, contrastive learning, knowledge
distillation, adversarial learning, and score prediction. Their
respective framework is shown in Fig. 5. Below we introduce
each of them in detail.
A. Graph Reconstruction
Data reconstruction aims to learn low-dimensional feature
representations of data for reconstructing given data instances,
which is widely used in tabular data, and image/video data to detect anomalies [89]. Given that the normal samples often occupy
most of the dataset, it helps guarantee that the representations can
retain the normal information, and thus, normal samples will be
reconstructed with a smaller reconstruction error than anomaly
samples. As a commonly used technique in this category, Graph
autoencoder (GAE) [39] consists of a graph encoder and a graph
decoder and it is easy to implement the reconstruction process.

5116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

As shown in Fig. 5(a), given a graph with X and A, the graph
reconstruction can be formulated as
Z = GN Nenc (X, A; Θenc ) ,
X = GN Ndec (Z, A; Θdec ) ,



Aij = p Aij = 1 | zi , zj = sigmoid zi zTj ,

(14)

where the GNN encoder and decoder, which typically follow
the general form of the FAG mechanism in (2), are designed to
obtain the feature representation for each node by aggregating
the representations of its neighbors. They are parameterized
by ΘEnc and ΘDec respectively. Z are the representations of
the nodes in the latent space. X̂ and A are the reconstructed
attributes and graph structure respectively. The optimization
objective of the methods in this group can be unified as follows
Lreconstruction = R(A, A) + S(X, X)) + Φ(A, X; Θ), (15)
where R(·) and S(·) are two reconstruction functions on graph
attributes and structure respectively, and Φ(A, X; Θ) is an auxiliary optimization task to enhance the reconstruction for better
GAD. A general assumption underlying the methods of this
approach is as follows.
Assumption: Normal graph instances can be well reconstructed while reconstructing the anomalies in terms of graph
attributes and/or structure will lead to a large error.
There have been many GAE-based GAD methods, among
which early methods typically instantiate the encoder parameter
Θenc and decoder parameter Θdec using different GNN models [5], [18], [29], [42], [55], [74], [94], [138]. DOMINANT [18]
is among the seminal studies applying GAE to detect anomalies,
in which both Θenc and Θdec are specified by a three-layer graph
convolution. The optimization terms R and S are specified using
the pointwise difference between matrices:
Lreconstruction = (1 − α)||A − Â||2F + α||X − X̂||2F , (16)
where α represents the adjustment ratio between attribute and
structure reconstruction. The anomaly score is often defined by
the mean squared errors (MSE):
Score(vi ) = (1 − α)||ai − âi ||2 + α||xi − x̂i ||2 ,

(17)

where ai and âi are the original and reconstructed structure
associated with node vi , xi and x̂i are the original and reconstructed attributes of node vi . Later studies explore the use of
more advance GAE by incorporating attention, spectral information, etc [29], [74], [94]. For example, AnomalyDAE [29]
and GUIDE [139] employ a graph attention network (GAT) or
an attention module to evaluate the significance of neighbors
to nodes to enhance the reconstruction of the specific nodes
during the training. HO-GAT [42] develops a hybrid order
GAT network to specify the Θenc that can detect abnormal
nodes and motif instances simultaneously. Different from the
focus on the importance of neighboring nodes, ComGA [74] is
focused on enhancing node representations for more effective
reconstruction. It achieves this by utilizing a community-aware
GNN that propagates a community-specific representation of
each node into the feature representations to encode and decode

the modularity matrix of the graph. Besides node reconstruction,
some methods explore node relation construction, e.g., GADNR [103] that aims to reconstruct the neighborhoods’ structure
and attributes. GAE can also be extended to perform multi-view
graph reconstruction for learning more expressive representations from heterogeneous attributes [94]. Despite their simplicity, such GAE-based methods have shown effective performance
in not only anomalous node detection but also anomalous edge
detection [24], [138].
Another line of research is to complement the reconstruction loss with some auxiliary tasks, i.e., Φ(A, X; Θ) in (15),
to capture additional information for GAD, since the reconstruction task is often too simple and vulnerable [49], [55],
[81], [144]. In SpecAE [55], it integrates a density estimation into the reconstruction by leveraging Laplacian sharpening
to amplify the distance between representations of anomalies
and the majority of nodes. MSAD [49] employs a number
of weighted meta-paths, e.g., unknown-anomaly-unknown and
anomaly-unknown-unknown node paths, to extract contextaware information of nodes as an auxiliary task. In HimNet [81],
hierarchical memory learning is incorporated via Φ(A, X; Θ),
where the node-level and graph-level memory modules are
jointly optimized to detect both locally and globally anomalous
graphs. Netwalk [138] incorporates clustering as an auxiliary
task in the reconstruction to learn the representation of nodes
for streaming graph data. On the other hand, Φ(A, X; Θ) is
specified using adversarial learning in DONE [5] to generate
node embeddings with an objective to minimize the adverse
effects from outlier nodes.
Advantages: (i) Data reconstruction is a simple but effective
way to detect anomalies in graph data. Meanwhile, it does not
require labeled data for training. (ii) The data reconstruction
models can be generalized to detect anomalies at different
levels of graph instances, e.g., anomalous nodes, edges, and
graphs.
Disadvantages: (i) To perform the reconstruction of graph
structure and attributes, it is necessary to load the entire graph,
which may require significant computing resources. (ii) The
reconstruction is vulnerable to noisy or irrelevant attributes. The
presence of noisy or erroneous graph instances can disrupt the
reconstruction process, resulting in false positives or diminished
detection accuracy.
Challenge Addressed: Reconstruction methods model the
entire graph structure, capturing complex structural patterns for
GAD (C1). Due to simplicity and straight intuition, they are also
applicable to the detection of different levels of graph anomalies
(C3).
B. Graph Contrastive Learning
Graph contrastive learning (GCL) aims to learn effective
representations without human annotated labels so that similar
graph instances are pulled together in the representation space,
while dissimilar instances are far apart. A principled GCL
framework for GAD is to devise a self-supervised contrastive
learning task with suitable positive and negative pairs to learn the
underlying dominant (normal) patterns in graph-structured data.

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

As shown in Fig. 5(b), the framework generally first utilizes a
GNN network to learn the representations of graph instances and
build the positive pair and negative pair based on the structure,
and then employs a contrastive loss function Lc to maximize the
similarity of the positive views while minimizing the similarity
of the negative pairs [117]:
hi = GN N (xi , X, A; Θ) ,
si = P ositive(vi ,A,X;Ωp ),s̃i = N egative(vi ,A,X;Ωn ),
Lc = E(X,A) [log D (hi , ˜si ) + log (1 − D (hi , s̃i ))] , (18)
where hi is the representation of target node vi , si and s̃i
are the graph instances generated from two sampling functions
P ositive(·) and N egative(·) with parameters Ωp and Ωn that
are used to sample the positive and negative sample pairs for
the target node vi . One key assumption made in the GCL-based
GAD methods is that non-neighboring nodes can be treated as
‘anomalous’ graph instances relative to a target node:
Assumption: Non-neighboring nodes to a target node are dissimilar, and thus, they can serve as effective negative (‘anomalous’) samples to the target node.
This assumption works in that the datasets typically contain
a substantial number of normal graph instances. Effective GCL
training would enable the learning of the majority patterns on
the deviated non-neighboring nodes w.r.t. the target nodes. Built
upon this assumption, GCL-based methods are focused on how
the positive and negative graph instances s and s̃ can be generated
to be more aligned with the GAD task.
One group of methods in this line aims to generate node-level
contrastive sample pairs [13], [121]. In particular, motivated by
the success of the popular GCL method DGI [117], DCI [121]
formulates the GCL objective as the classification of the pairs of
target nodes and the nodes under perturbation against the pairs of
target nodes and cluster-based global representations. Unlike the
cluster-based representation, GCCAD [13] specifies s using the
neighbors of target normal nodes and s̃ using the representations
of abnormal nodes. During inference, the anomaly score may be
defined in various ways, e.g., via the classification probability [121] or similarity between the target node’s representation
and the graph representation [13].
In addition to the node-level contrasts, other methods use
subgraphs as the target of contrastive learning to help the model
learn better representations for GAD. CoLA [66] is an early
GCL framework for GAD that learns the relations between each
node and its neighboring substructures. Given a target node, s is
a subgraph generated by a random walk around the target node,
while the negative subgraph is generated using the random walk
around the other nodes. Let hi and Ei be the representations of
a target node and a subgraph, in which Ei is often obtained by
a readout function as follows
si = Readout (Ei ) =

ni

vk
k=1

ni

,

(19)

where ni is the number of nodes in Ei , vk is the embedding
of node k in the subgraph, then a Bilinear(·) function is often

5117

used to combine the representations of the node and the subgraphs [66], [151]:

yi = Bilinear (hi , si ) = σ hi Wsi ,
(20)
ỹi = Bilinear (hi , sj ) = σ hi Wsj ,
parameterized by W, in which yi and ỹi are the predicted results
for positive pairs (hi , si ) and negative pairs (hi , sj ) (i.e., sj acts
as s̃i here), respectively. The anomaly score in CoLA is defined
as the difference between the positive and negative pairs:
1
Score (vi ) =
(ỹi,r − yi,r ),
R r=1
R

(21)

where R is the number of node-subgraph pairs sampled during
inference to obtain a stable anomaly score. This framework
inspires a number of follow-up methods, including the use of
prior knowledge of different anomaly types to generate the
negative samples [133], supervised positive/negative subgraph
pairs [154], and multi-view/scale subgraph generation [25], [48],
[130], [151]. The above methods are focused on node-level
anomaly detection in static graph data. Contrastive learning is
also used in dynamic GAD or graph-level anomaly detection.
For example, TADDY [67] applies a dynamic graph transformer
that aggregates spatial and temporal knowledge simultaneously
to learn the representations of edges. It specifies si and s̃i by
constructing the positive edge using the existing edges in the
training set and generates the anomalous edges via negative
sampling. SIGNET [64] is designed for graph-level anomaly
detection, which first constructs two different views using dual
hypergraph transformation and then maximizes the mutual information between the bottleneck subgraph from two views.
The estimated mutual information can be used to evaluate the
graph-level abnormality.
Advantages: (i) Many existing GCL approaches and theories
may be adapted to enable GAD. (ii) The rich graph structure
information provides flexible options to generate diverse positive/negative views for effective GAD. (iii) Since many methods
rely on only local graph information in their training, they can
handle very large graph data.
Disadvantages: (i) Since GCL is focused on representation
learning, it is crucial to develop an effective anomaly scoring method based on the learned representations. (ii) As GCL
methods rely on GNNs without class information, the problem
of over-smoothing between normal and abnormal instances remains prevalent. (iii) The subgraph generation in some methods
may incur significant computational costs due to the need to
traverse numerous nodes and edges.
Challenge Addressed: Contrastive learning models can be
designed to capture different levels of graph structure and graph
anomalies (C1, C3). Without the need to load the full graph
structure information, they can often scale up to large-scale
graph data (C2).
C. Graph Representation Distillation
Knowledge Distillation (KD) [35] aims to train a simple
model (student) that distills feature representations from a large
(teacher) model while maintaining similar accuracy as the large

5118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

model. The key intuition of KD-based GAD is that the representation distillation can capture the majority patterns of graph
instances and the difference in the distillation can be used to
measure the abnormality of samples.
Assumption: The graph representation distillation can be seen
as a process of extracting the prevalent patterns of the graph
instances, representing the normal patterns for GAD.
As shown in Fig. 5(c), this category of methods learns the
representation from a teacher model initialized by a GNN. Subsequently, a GNN-based student network is trained to replicate
the representation outputs of the teacher model. The GNN-based
teacher and student networks are formulated as follows
hi = GN Nteacher (x
 i , X, A; Θ),

ĥi = GN Nstudent xi , X, A; Θ̂ ,

(22)

where Θ and Θ̂ are respectively the training parameters of
student and teacher networks, hi and ĥi are the representations
learned by the two networks respectively. Both representations
are then integrated into the loss function which can be formulated
as the following:
N


1 
KD hi , hi ; Θ̂, Θ ,
LKD =
N i=1

(23)

where KD(·) is a distillation function that measures the difference between the two feature representations. Overall, the
goal of the distillation-based GAD is to make the student model
as close as possible in predicting the corresponding outputs
of the teacher model that is built upon normal graph data.
Therefore, the anomaly score can be defined as the difference in
the representations between the teacher and student models.


 


Score vi ; Θ̂, Θ = hi − hi  .
(24)
2

GlocaKD [76] is an early framework, in which the teacher
model GN Nteacher is implemented using a random GCN. Then
the distillation function KD(·) is instantiated using KL divergence to minimize the graph- and node-level prediction errors of
the representations yielded by the random GCN. The anomaly
score in GlocaKD is defined as the prediction error at the graph
and node levels. To support better distillation of the normal graph
representations, several distillation models have been proposed
for GAD with new architectures. For example, the dual-studentteacher model, called GLADST, consists of one teacher model
and two student models [56], in which the teacher model, trained
with a heuristic loss, is designed to make the representations
more divergent. Unlike the traditional teacher-student model,
GLADST trains the two student models on normal and abnormal
graphs separately to capture the normality and abnormality
better. Unlike GlocalKD that uses a random GNN to be the
teach network, the approach FGAD uses a pre-trained anomaly
detector as the teacher [9]. Then the student is designed with
a graph isomorphism network (GIN) and a projection head to
improve the robustness of GAD.
Advantages: (i) The distillation from the teacher model into a
simpler student model provides a new way to extract the normality of graph instances. (ii) Distillation enables the development

of smaller, more efficient models by transferring knowledge
from a larger model. This compression speeds up inference
and reduces computational resource requirements for normality
extraction. (iii) Distilling knowledge from a well-trained teacher
model enables the student model to better generalize across
various types of graphs and quickly adapt to new data or target
domains.
Disadvantages: (i) Choosing an appropriate teacher model
can be challenging. If the teacher model is too complex or not
well-suited to GAD, the knowledge distilled to the student model
may not be optimal. (ii) The student model may fail to capture
all the nuances and intricacies in the teacher model, which can
impact the extraction of normality.
Challenge Addressed: GNN-enabled knowledge distillation
enhances the ability of addressing graph structure-aware GAD.
(C1). By distilling knowledge from a well-trained teacher, the
student gains improved generalization across different GAD
scenarios, showcasing enhanced robustness in GAD (C5).
D. Adversarial Graph Learning
Generative adversarial learning (GAN) provides an effective
solution to generate realistic synthetic samples, which can be
used for normal pattern learning for GAD. The key intuition
of this group of methods is to learn latent features that can
capture the normality perceived in a generative GNN network.
Specifically, the GANs employ a generator network aiming to
generate samples that are statistically similar to the real data
while the discriminator network learns to distinguish between
real and generated graph instances [15], [17]. The normal data
with a prior distribution can be easily captured by the generator
network while the anomalies struggle to be simulated by the
generator due to the nature of the distribution.
It is worth mentioning that the purpose of generation is
different from the noise perturbation generation in the generative
GNNs in Section IV-B. The former mainly uses the graph structure information and interpolation operations in the latent space
to generate new node representations without using adversarial
learning process, while the latter is focused on generating node
representations from a prior distribution through the adversarial
learning to learn the latent normality.
Assumption: A generator GNN can capture the majority of
patterns in the graph data if it can generate instances that closely
resemble the distribution of real graph instances.
This group of methods (see Fig. 5(d)) typically employs
GNNs to learn the representations of graph instances and a
generator network for generating graph instances based on a
prior. The discriminator is utilized to distinguish whether a graph
instance comes from the generator or the original data. Formally,
these methods follow the following framework:
hi = GN N (xi , A, X; Θ) ,
h̃i = G (z̃i ; ) , z̃i ∼ p(z̃),

(25)

where h is the feature representation of a node learned by GNN
with parameter Θ, h̃ is the representation of a generated node,
and p(
z) is the prior distribution. The generator G(·) takes
noises sampled from the prior distribution p(z̃) as the input and

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

generates synthetic pseudo abnormal graph instances via:

5119

predict the anomaly score

min max Eh∼p(h) [log D(h)] + Ez̃∼p(z̃) [log(1 − D(G(z̃; )))],

Score(si ) = fpred (xi , A, X; Θp ),

(26)
where the discriminator D(·) is often specified by a classifier
that tries to distinguish whether an input is the representation
of a normal node or a generated anomaly. The anomaly score is
typically defined based on the output of the discriminator:

where Θp is the training parameters of the score prediction
network. DevNet [89] is a seminal work for score prediction
network, which was originally proposed to identify anomalies
in tabular data. It employs a Z-score-based deviation loss to learn
the anomaly scores in an end-to-end manner:

Score(si ) = 1 − D(hi ).

Ldeviation = (1 − yi ) · |Dev(si )| + yi · max (0, m − Dev(si )) ,
(29)
where yi is the class label, m is a pre-defined margin based on
the prior distribution, and Dev(si ) is defined as follows

G

D

(27)

AEGIS [17] and GAAN [15] are two representative works
that apply GANs to GAD by generating node representations
from Gaussian noise. The discriminator is trained to determine whether nodes are real or generated pseudo abnormal
instances. Some graph adversarial learning methods are also
proposed to address the multi-class imbalance problem at the
node level [101], [108]. They incorporate adversarial training to
make the model learn robust representations for both majority
and minority classes, thereby benefiting the separation of the
nodes from different classes. This graph adversarial learning is
also applied to anomalous edge detection. GADY [73] employs
an anomaly generator to generate abnormal interactions through
input noise. The generated interactions are then combined with
normal interactions as the input of a discriminator network
trained to determine whether the interaction is normal or abnormal.
Advantages: (i) GANs provide a distinctive method for learning structural normality by utilizing their graph structure-aware
generation capability. (ii) Its adversarial training can generate
realistic samples from noise, enabling the detection models to
learn beyond the abnormal samples in the graph.
Disadvantages: (i) It is difficult to generate samples that
accurately simulate real graph instances in terms of both graph
structure and attributes, and thus, the generated graph instances
may impair the detection performance. (ii) The training of GANs
is relatively less stable compared to the GNN training in other
groups of methods.
Challenge Addressed: GANs can model and generate different types of abnormal graph instances, facilitating the detection
of different graph anomalies, e.g., anomalies that are unseen during training (C3). Also, GANs can generate extensive abnormal
samples for more balanced GAD (C4).
E. Score Prediction
The score prediction based-methods focuses on how to make
full use of labeled data to build an end-to-end anomaly score
prediction model, as shown in Fig. 5(e). Unlike approaches that
directly apply GNNs for classification with labeled abnormal
and normal nodes, this method is designed for the scenarios
where only some graph instances are known to be normal and
abnormal instances.
Assumption: The anomaly scores of normal graph instances
follow a prior distribution while those for abnormal instances
significantly deviate from the distribution.
The score prediction-based methods refer to training a predictor fpred : G → R which is instantiated with GNNs to directly

Dev (si ) =

Score(si ) − μr
,
σr

(28)

(30)

where μr and σr are the estimated mean and standard deviation
of the anomaly scores based on the prior N(μ, σ).
Meta-GDN [19] applies the deviation loss to the graph data
that leverages a small number of labeled anomalies to enforce
significant deviation of the anomaly scores of the normal nodes
from the abnormal nodes. SAD [115] adapts DevNet to dynamic
graph data, in which contrastive learning is also used to fully
exploit the potential of labeled graph instances on evolving graph
streams. In WEDGE [154], the deviation loss function is defined
for at the subgraph level. By minimizing the deviation loss, the
score network predictor will enforce a large positive deviation
of the anomaly score of an anomalous subgraph from that of the
prior-based reference scores.
Advantages: (i) By integrating the prior distribution into the
model’s learning process, it can produce more interpretable
anomaly scores compared to other detection methods. (ii) The
studied scenarios where some labeled normal and anomalous
graph instances are available are often common in real-world
applications.
Disadvantages: (i) The performance of the score prediction
model is dependent on the prior and the predefined margin used
during training. (ii) The score prediction network is better suited
for tabular data because the samples are independent, but a
single prior distribution may not be able to effectively capture
the dependent scores across the graph instances.
Challenge Addressed: The score prediction provides a GNNbased end-to-end anomaly score learning framework for GAD,
having good scalability to large-scale graph data (C1, C2). It
also provides an effective way to achieve generalized GAD in
the application scenarios where part of the graph instances are
labeled (C3).
VI. GRAPH ANOMALY MEASURES
This category of methods aims to discuss GAD methods
that focus on designing anomaly measures for evaluating the
abnormality of instances in the graph. These methods generally
perform anomaly scoring by incorporating some key abnormal
graph characteristics. As shown in Fig. 6, they can be generally
divided into four categories, including one-class distance measure, local affinity measure, community adherence measure, and
graph isolation-based approaches.

5120

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Four categories of graph anomaly measure.

A. One-Class Classification Measure
One-class classification measures refer to evaluating the distance between each instance and a one-class center of the instances for anomaly scoring [104]. This method can be applied
to graph data, with the GNNs trained to minimize the volume
of a hypersphere that encloses the representations of the graph
instances. As illustrated in Fig. 6(a), the key intuition is that
anomalous graph instances differ significantly from the normal
ones, causing them to fall outside the hypersphere that encompasses most of the normal graph instances.
Assumption: Normal graph instances exhibit similar patterns
that can be encapsulated via a one-class hypersphere, from which
anomalies show largely deviated patterns.
The one-class classification on the graph can be generally
formulated as the following
1 
||φ (Xi , Ai ; W) − c||2 + Φ(Θ), (31)
N i=1
N

Lone−class =

where c is the central representation of the one-class hypersphere, φ(Xi , Ai ; W∗ ) is the representation of graph instance
si learned by GNN, and Φ(Θ) is a regularization term or auxiliary task which can benefit the one-class distance measure.
Anomalies are expected to samples that have a large distance to
the center. Thus, the anomaly score can be determined by the
distance of a graph instance to the center of the hypersphere:
Score(si ) = φ (Xi , Ai ; W∗ ) − c 2 ,

(32)

where W∗ are the parameters of the trained one-class model and
c is the representation of the one-class center.
There have been some methods that adopt this one-class
classification approach for GAD [120], [157]. OCGNN [120]
applies a one-class SVM to graphs, leveraging the powerful
representation capabilities of GNNs. The objective of OCGNN
is to generate node embeddings that are close to the center. Since
the feature representations are crucial in one-class learning,
various methods have explored the use of GNNs from different
perspectives to enhance the representation learning for one-class
GAD. For example, AAGNN [157] designs a subtractive aggregation [157] rather than the commonly used summation-based
aggregation for one-class GNN learning. DOHSC [146] adds
an orthogonal projection layer [146] to ensure the training data
distribution is consistent with the decision hypersphere. Other

methods optimize the one-class learning with some auxiliary
tasks, such as node feature reconstruction [114], relation prediction [53], and self-supervision [100], to avoid notorious issues
in this approach like model collapse.
Advantages: (i) One-class classification does not require labeled anomaly data for training, making it suitable for the scenario where such data is scarce or unavailable. (ii) The one-class
measure can handle isolated nodes well.
Disadvantages: (i) Normal graph patterns can manifest in
various ways, making it challenging for a one-class hypersphere
to capture the full spectrum of normality. (ii) Learning the
one-class hypersphere is prone to model collapse.
Challenge Addressed: One-class classification with appropriate GNNs enables the learning of the majority structural pattern
in the graph data (normal graph instances) (C1). This approach
also does not require the full graph structure information during
training, resulting in good scalability to large-scale graphs (C2).
B. Community Adherence
Community adherence-based GAD [138], [155] aims to identify the anomalies based on the adherence of instances to graph
communities. The key intuition is that anomalies are not welldistributed and exhibit weak adherence to the communities,
whereas normal graph instances typically have strong adherence
to at least one community.
Assumption: Normal instances adhere to at least one community, whereas anomalies are unfit to any community.
This type of methods first leverages a mapping function to
learn the representation of instances. A clustering or community
discovery method is then applied to group the graph instances,
as shown in Fig. 6(b), where the instances are grouped into three
distinct clusters. Since anomalies generally exhibit significantly
weaker community adherence, the anomaly score can be defined
by the minimum distance to the centers of the communities.
Score (si ) = min φ (xi , X, A; W∗ )−cj 22 , ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , p},
(33)
where p is the number of communities, cj is the center of
community Cj , and W∗ is the optimal parameters of the mapping
function.
This approach is analogous to clustering-based anomaly detection in non-graph data [87], but here it needs to capture the
graph characteristics for GAD. To this end, MHGL [155] utilizes
GNNs and a multi-hypersphere learning objective to learn multiple groups of fine-grained normal patterns, enclosing each group
using a corresponding hypersphere in the latent space while
simultaneously pushing labeled anomalies far away from these
hyperspheres. The anomaly score is defined as the Euclidean
distance between a test instance and the nearest hypersphere
center. Netwalk [138] is a method for both anomalous node and
edge detection where k-means clustering was applied to group
the existing node/edge into different groups. The anomaly score
of node/edge is measured as its distance to the center of its closest
cluster.
Advantages: (i) By utilizing graph communities, the normality of data beyond one-hop graph structures can be more
effectively captured. (ii) The community adherence enables

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

a fine-grained modeling of normal patterns, which could be
important for identifying some types of graph anomalies that
depend on the context of graph communities.
Disadvantages: (i) Community adherence-based methods are
sensitive to hyperparameters like the number of clusters. (ii)
Community adherence measures rely heavily on the effectiveness of the community detection methods.
Challenge Addressed: Graph communities can be useful for
discovering important structural contexts (e.g., those beyond a
fixed-hop neighborhood) to detect anomalies that deviate from
the communities (C1). Community adherence can provide one
way for interpreting anomalies based on deviations from expected community-based behaviors (C5).
C. Local Affinity
There are many graph properties that can be important for
GAD, such as connectivity, degree distribution, and clustering
coefficient. Local affinity is a graph property that integrates
multiple properties for evaluating the normality and abnormality
of graph instances. As shown in Fig. 6(c), the affinity may be
defined in various ways, such as the number of connections
of a graph instance to neighboring instances, the similarity
with neighbors, or the clustering coefficient of the connected
subgraphs. The key intuition is that the normal graph instances
typically have a strong affinity with their neighbors, whereas an
anomalous instance has a significantly weaker affinity with its
neighbors. Thus, the local affinity can serve as the inverse of the
anomaly score.
Assumption: Normal instances are connected with other normal instances with similar attributes while anomalies are often
graph instances that are less similar to their neighbors.
Formally, the local affinity τ (si ) of an instance si can be
defined based on its average similarity to its neighbors:

1
sim (hi , hj ) ,
(34)
τ (si ) =
|N (si )|
sj ∈N(si )

where hi and hj are the representation of instance si and sj ,
N(si ) represents the neighboring instance si .
TAM [97] is a seminal work that introduces local affinity as an
anomaly measure. It aims to learn tailored node representations
for GAD by maximizing the local affinity of nodes to their neighbors. It is optimized on truncated graphs where non-homophily
edges are removed iteratively to mitigate its adverse effects on
the local affinity measure. The learned representations result in
a significantly stronger local affinity for the normal nodes than
the abnormal nodes. CLAD [50] instead measures the affinity
based on the discrepancy between a node and its neighbors
using Jenson-Shannon Divergence. The anomaly score is obtained from the affinity for each node in terms of both graph
structure and attributes. PREM [83] eliminates the messagepassing propagation in regular GNNs by using an ego neighbor
matching-based contrastive learning module. It aims to learn
discriminative patterns between the local ego network and the
neighboring instances. These GAD methods are focused on the
anomaly score of a node based on its affinity to its neighboring
nodes. Similar ideas have also been explored in very recent

5121

prompt tuning or in-context learning methods for GAD [65],
[82], [96]. Exploring beyond the node-level affinity can be
one potential approach for subgraph- or graph-level anomaly
detection.
Advantages: (i) The local affinity measure offers a novel way
to quantify the abnormality of graph instances at a local scope.
(ii) The measure provides a principled framework for evaluating
the normality from both the graph structure and attributes. (iii)
It can be more interpretable than those identified through task
proxy-based GAD methods.
Disadvantages: (i) Its effectiveness may vary if the affinity
is specified differently. (ii) It is often designed based on predefined graph properties, making it difficult to generalize to the
anomalies that do not conform to the properties.
Challenge Addressed: Local affinity-based GAD methods can
adapt to and leverage various structural properties for the detection of various types of anomalies (C1, C3), though the prior
knowledge about the properties is required. Local affinity also
provides a way to explain why a node is considered anomalous
based on the local context, enhancing the interpretability of GAD
(C5).
D. Graph Isolation
Isolation-based methods [58] is among the most popular
methods for anomaly detection. Due to its general effectiveness
across different datasets, it is also applied to identify anomalous
graph instances [132], [161]. Its use for GAD is based on the
isolation of graph instances in a feature representation space.
Assumption: Anomalous graph instances can be isolated more
easily than normal instances in the representation space.
As shown in Fig. 6(d), the methods in this group need to first
learn the representations of the instances using a graph encoder
GN Nenc :
hi = GN Nenc (si , X, A; Θenc ),

(35)

where hi is the representation of the graph instance si . An
isolation mechanism is then applied on the representations,
i.e., Isolation(hi ), where the split process is formulated as the
following


(j )
P2k ← hi | hi k ≤ ηk , hi ∈ Pk ,


(j )
P2k+1 ← hi | hi k > ηk , hi ∈ Pk ,
(36)
where Pk is the node set of in the k-th binary partition tree and
j is the dimension in h used to partition the feature space. The
abnormality of a graph instance s is evaluated by the isolation
difficulty in each tree of the tree set T:
F (s | T) = Ωτi ∼T I (s | τi ) ,

(37)

where I(s | τi ) denotes a function to measure the isolation
difficulty in tree τi and Ω denotes an integration function.
DIF [132] presents a new representation scheme that combines data partition and deep representation learning to perform isolation in randomly projected deep representations for
anomaly detection, showing good effectiveness in anomaly detection in various data types, including graph-level anomaly

5122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

detection. GCAD [161] uses isolation forest for anomalous
node detection. It uses the node representations after subgraph
normalization as the input to graph isolation. The anomaly score
is defined using a depth-based weighted score that aggregates
scores from various associated subgraphs. If we treat isolationbased measures as simpler alternatives to density estimation,
there have been multiple other extensions [28], [28], [55], [148]
that leverage the learned graph representations to estimate a
density-based anomaly score for GAD.
Advantages: (i) Graph isolation measures are built on well
established isolation-based methodology for anomaly detection.
(ii) Many existing isolation-based methods may be adapted to
anomaly detection on graph data.
Disadvantages: (i) The isolation measure operates on a continuous feature space, so its effectiveness relies on the learning of
an expressive representation space. (ii) The heuristic of isolation
is difficult to be incorporated into GNN-based representation
learning, leading to less effective feature representations for the
subsequent isolation mechanism.
Challenge Addressed: This measure can adapt traditional
anomaly measures to GAD with the power of GNN-based
representation learning (C1). The isolation mechanism is highly
efficient, allowing good scalability on large graphs (C2).
VII. RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES
Despite the remarkable success of numerous existing GAD
methods, there are a range of research opportunities that could
be explored to tackle some largely unsolved GAD problems.
Advanced Graph Anomaly Measures: Most GAD methods
are built upon proxy tasks or focused on the GNN backbones
using traditional non-graph anomaly measures, as summarized
in Table 1 in Appendix A, available online. Consequently,
they may fail to learn feature representations that encapsulate
holistic graph structure and attributes specifically for GAD.
Therefore, it is crucial to devise anomaly measures that go
beyond traditional anomaly measures and proxy tasks, such as
local node affinity [97], for developing more dedicated methods
for GAD.
GAD on Complex Graphs: Most existing GAD methods are
focused on small-scale (e.g., less than millions of nodes/edges),
static, or homogeneous graph data, as shown in Tables 2 and
3 in Appendix B, available online. However, many realworld graphs can involve millions/billions of heterogeneous
nodes/edges [53], such as real-life citation networks, social
networks, and financial networks. The nodes/edges may appear
in a streaming fashion, where the models can access to only
limited graph data at one time step and may need to adapt to new
normal/abnormal patterns as the graph evolves [102]. Current
methods may be adapted to handle these graphs, but their performance would become less effective since their primary design
do not consider those complexity. GAD methods designed for
graphs with two or more of these complexities are required.
Handling Anomaly Camouflage and Contamination: In GAD,
anomalies might easily hide their abnormal characteristics by
mimicking the structure and attributes of their neighboring instances. There have been some approaches for addressing this

problem, e.g., via selecting relevant features, incorporating domain knowledge, or using adversarial training [23], [98], but they
often rely on the prior knowledge about what specific features
the attackers may use in the camouflage. A related problem is
anomaly contamination in the training data. Current methods
are mostly unsupervised, working on anomaly-contaminated
training data, but the anomalous instances in the graph can
largely bias the message-passing [97], leading to less expressive
representations. Recent approaches, such as semi-supervised
GAD on a small set of labeled normal instances [98] or training
GNNs using truncated graph data [97], may offer effective
methodologies for handling these issues.
Interpretable GAD: As shown by the summarized detection
performance results in Tables 4, 5, and 6 in Appendix C,
available online, current GAD methods have shown impressive
success in detecting anomalous graph instances, but they generally ignore the interpretability of their detection results. In
addition to accurate detection, interpretable GAD also requires
an explanation about why a graph instance is identified as
anomalous within a given graph structure, making it different
from explaining anomalies in non-graph data. Exploring information such as local graph structure, human feedback, and/or
domain knowledge [64] would be some interesting directions
for providing the structure-aware anomaly explanation. Also, the
obtained anomaly explanation may in turn be further leveraged
to improve the detection performance.
Open-set Supervised GAD: As shown in Table 1 in Appendix A, available online, there have been many supervised
GAD methods, most of which essentially tackle an imbalanced
binary classification problem. Such formulation is often questionable since anomalies per se can draw from very different
distributions and cannot be treated as from one concrete class.
Open-set supervised GAD also trains the detectors with labeled
normal and anomalous examples (i.e., seen anomalies), but it
assumes an open set of anomaly classes (i.e., there are anomaly
classes that are not illustrated by the training anomaly samples) rather than the closed-set assumption in most existing
studies [119]. Thus, it is a more realistic supervised GAD
setting. Methods for this setting have shown significantly better
performance than unsupervised and fully supervised methods on
visual data [1], [16], [134], [158] and tabular data [88], [89], [90].
Recent studies also show similar advantages on graph data [119],
[155]. Exploring better modeling of the normal patterns while
fitting the seen anomalies could be an effective approach to avoid
overfitting of the seen anomalies (i.e., reducing misclassification
of the unseen anomalies as normal).
Foundation Models for GAD: Leveraging foundation models
(FMs) for downstream tasks has been emerging as one effective
direction to empower the sample-efficient performance in the
downstream tasks, including graph-related tasks [59], [110],
[111], [128], owing to their superior generalization ability. Two
main directions for the GAD task involve the training of graph
foundation models (GFMs) for GAD and the exploitation of
large language models (LLMs) for GAD. There have been a
number of successful tuning of FMs for anomaly detection
on image data [47], [152], [159] and video data [106], [125],
[126], [127] via proper prompt crafting, prompt learning, or

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

in-context learning. Similar approaches may be explored for
GAD. For example, inspired by [159], an in-context residual
learning-based method is explored for few-shot GAD [65];
general abnormality/normality graph patterns and prompts are
learned for zero/few-shot cross-dataset GAD in [82], [96]. This
new paradigm is plausible for GAD in several aspects, such as
zero/few-shot detection on target graph data, inductive GAD,
and interpretable GAD with text description.

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this survey, we first discuss the complexities and existing
challenges in GAD. Then we present a novel taxonomy for deep
GAD methods from three new perspectives, including GNN
backbone design, proxy task, and graph anomaly measures.
We further deepen the discussions in each perspective by discussing more fine-grained categories of methods. Along with
each fine-grained methodology category, we not only review
the associated GAD methods, but also analyze their general
assumption, pros and cons, and their capabilities in addressing
the unique challenges in GAD. We lastly discuss six important
directions for future research on GAD. By tackling the problems
in these six directions, we expect a more advanced generation
of methods for solving real-life GAD tasks.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Acsintoae et al., “Ubnormal: New benchmark for supervised open-set
video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2022, pp. 20 143–20 153.
[2] C. Aggarwal and K. Subbian, “Evolutionary network analysis: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2014.
[3] C. C. Aggarwal, Outlier Analysis. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017.
[4] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection and
description: A survey,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, pp. 626–
688, 2015.
[5] S. Bandyopadhyay, L. N, S. V. Vivek, and M. N. Murty, “Outlier resistant
unsupervised deep architectures for attributed network embedding,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2020, pp. 25–33.
[6] Y. Bei et al., “Reinforcement neighborhood selection for unsupervised
graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2023,
pp. 11–20.
[7] A. Boukerche, L. Zheng, and O. Alfandi, “Outlier detection: Methods,
models, and classification,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1–37,
2020.
[8] J. Cai, Y. Zhang, and J. Fan, “Self-discriminative modeling for anomalous
graph detection,” 2023, arXiv:2310.06261.
[9] J. Cai, Y. Zhang, Z. Lu, W. Guo, and S.-K. Ng, “FGAD: Self-boosted
knowledge distillation for an effective federated graph anomaly detection
framework,” 2024, arXiv:2402.12761.
[10] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks,”
in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 23–29.
[11] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, 2009, Art. no. 15.
[12] W. Chang, K. Liu, K. Ding, P. S. Yu, and J. Yu, “Multitask active learning
for graph anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2401.13210.
[13] B. Chen et al., “GCCAD: Graph contrastive learning for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8037–8051,
Aug. 2023.
[14] N. Chen et al., “Consistency training with learnable data augmentation
for graph anomaly detection with limited supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2023.
[15] Z. Chen, B. Liu, M. Wang, P. Dai, J. Lv, and L. Bo, “Generative
adversarial attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf.
Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 1989–1992.

5123

[16] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 7388–7398.
[17] K. Ding, J. Li, N. Agarwal, and H. Liu, “Inductive anomaly detection
on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 1288–1294.
[18] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, SIAM, 2019,
pp. 594–602.
[19] K. Ding, Q. Zhou, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Few-shot network anomaly
detection via cross-network meta-learning,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
pp. 2448–2456.
[20] L. Dong et al., “Bi-level selection via meta gradient for graph-based fraud
detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Database Syst. Adv. Appl., Springer, 2022,
pp. 387–394.
[21] X. Dong, X. Zhang, Y. Sun, L. Chen, M. Yuan, and S. Wang,
“SmoothGNN: Smoothing-based GNN for unsupervised node anomaly
detection,” 2024, arXiv:2405.17525.
[22] X. Dong, X. Zhang, and S. Wang, “Rayleigh quotient graph
neural networks for graph-level anomaly detection,” 2023,
arXiv:2310.02861.
[23] Y. Dou, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Deng, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Enhancing graph
neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters,” in
Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 315–324.
[24] D. Duan, L. Tong, Y. Li, J. Lu, L. Shi, and C. Zhang, “AANE: Anomaly
aware network embedding for anomalous link detection,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1002–1007.
[25] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive
learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance.
Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 7459–7467.
[26] J. Duan, B. Xiao, S. Wang, H. Zhou, and X. Liu, “ARISE: Graph
anomaly detection on attributed networks via substructure awareness,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 18172–18185,
Dec. 2024.
[27] J. Duan et al., “Normality learning-based graph anomaly detection via
multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
2023, pp. 7502–7511.
[28] M. Ester et al., “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in
large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[29] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “AnomalyDAE: Dual autoencoder for
anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust.
Speech Signal Process., 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
[30] S. Fan, X. Wang, C. Shi, K. Kuang, N. Liu, and B. Wang, “Debiased graph neural networks with agnostic label selection bias,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4411–4422, Apr.
2024.
[31] A. Fernández, S. Garcia, F. Herrera, and N. V. Chawla, “Smote for
learning from imbalanced data: Progress and challenges, marking the
15-year anniversary,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 61, pp. 863–905, 2018.
[32] Y. Gao et al., “Alleviating structural distribution shift in graph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2023,
pp. 357–365.
[33] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Addressing heterophily in graph anomaly detection: A perspective of graph spectrum,”
in Proc. Web Conf., 2023, pp. 1528–1538.
[34] Z. Gong et al., “Beyond homophily: Robust graph anomaly detection
via neural sparsification,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023,
pp. 2104–2113.
[35] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
[36] R. Guo, M. Zou, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Yu, and Z. Feng, “Graph local
homophily network for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2024, pp. 706–716.
[37] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation learning
on large graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
pp. 1025–1035.
[38] D. K. Hammond, P. Vandergheynst, and R. Gribonval, “Wavelets on
graphs via spectral graph theory,” Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal., vol. 30,
no. 2, pp. 129–150, 2011.
[39] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of
data with neural networks,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
2006.
[40] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 6840–6851.

5124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

[41] W. Hu, M. Fey, H. Ren, M. Nakata, Y. Dong, and J. Leskovec,
“OGB-LSC: A large-scale challenge for machine learning on graphs,”
2021, arXiv:2103.09430.
[42] L. Huang et al., “Hybrid-order anomaly detection on attributed networks,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12249–12263,
Dec. 2023.
[43] M. Huang et al., “AUC-oriented graph neural network for fraud detection,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1311–1321.
[44] T. Huang, Y. Pei, V. Menkovski, and M. Pechenizkiy, “Hop-count based
self-supervised anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Joint
Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, Springer, 2022,
pp. 225–241.
[45] X. Huang et al., “DGraph: A large-scale financial dataset for graph
anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022,
pp. 22 765–22 777.
[46] Y. Huang, L. Wang, F. Zhang, and X. Lin, “Are we really making much
progress in unsupervised graph outlier detection? Revisiting the problem
with new insight and superior method,” 2022, arXiv:2210.12941.
[47] J. Jeong, Y. Zou, T. Kim, D. Zhang, A. Ravichandran, and O. Dabeer,
“WinCLIP: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 19 606–
19 616.
[48] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Anemone: Graph
anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[49] H. Kim, J. Kim, B. S. Lee, and S. Lim, “Deep semi-supervised
anomaly detection with metapath-based context knowledge,”
2023, arXiv:2308.10918.
[50] J. Kim, Y. In, K. Yoon, J. Lee, and C. Park, “Class label-aware graph
anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 4008–
4012.
[51] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[52] X. Kong et al., “Federated graph anomaly detection via contrastive selfsupervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36,
no. 5, pp. 7931–7944, May 2025.
[53] J. Li, G. Pang, L. Chen, and M.-R. Namazi-Rad, “HRGCN: Heterogeneous graph-level anomaly detection with hierarchical relationaugmented graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Data
Sci. Adv. Analytics, 2023, pp. 1–10.
[54] J. Li et al., “Feature selection: A data perspective,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1–45, 2017.
[55] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “Specae: Spectral autoencoder
for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2019, pp. 2233–2236.
[56] F. Lin et al., “Discriminative graph-level anomaly detection via dualstudents-teacher model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Data Mining Appl.,
Springer, 2023, pp. 261–276.
[57] F. Liu et al., “DAGAD: Data augmentation for graph anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 259–268.
[58] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[59] J. Liu et al., “Towards graph foundation models: A survey and beyond,”
2023, arXiv:2310.11829.
[60] J. Liu, X. Shang, X. Han, W. Zhang, and H. Yin, “Spatial-temporal
memories enhanced graph autoencoder for anomaly detection in dynamic
graphs,” 2024, arXiv:2403.09039.
[61] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detection
on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2022, pp. 27 021–27 035.
[62] K. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. Hu, F. Wang, and P. S. Yu, “Data augmentation
for supervised graph outlier detection with latent diffusion models,”
2023, arXiv:2312.17679.
[63] Y. Liu et al., “Pick and choose: A gnn-based imbalanced learning approach for fraud detection,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021, pp. 3168–3177.
[64] Y. Liu, K. Ding, Q. Lu, F. Li, L. Y. Zhang, and S. Pan, “Towards selfinterpretable graph-level anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 8975–8987.
[65] Y. Liu, S. Li, Y. Zheng, Q. Chen, C. Zhang, and S. Pan, “ARC:
A generalist graph anomaly detector with in-context learning,”
2024, arXiv:2405.16771.
[66] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
Jun. 2022.

[67] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12 081–12 094,
Dec. 2023.
[68] Z. Liu, Y. Li, N. Chen, Q. Wang, B. Hooi, and B. He, “A survey
of imbalanced learning on graphs: Problems, techniques, and future
directions,” 2023, arXiv:2308.13821.
[69] Z. Liu et al., “Topological augmentation for class-imbalanced node
classification,” 2023, arXiv:2308.14181.
[70] Z. Liu, Y. Dou, P. S. Yu, Y. Deng, and H. Peng, “Alleviating the inconsistency problem of applying graph neural network to fraud detection,”
in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Informat. Retrieval, 2020,
pp. 1569–1572.
[71] Z. Liu, C. Cao, and J. Sun, “Mul-GAD: A semi-supervised graph
anomaly detection framework via aggregating multi-view information,”
2022, arXiv:2212.05478.
[72] Z. Liu, C. Cao, F. Tao, and J. Sun, “Revisiting graph contrastive learning
for anomaly detection,” 2023, arXiv:2305.02496.
[73] S. Lou, Q. Zhang, S. Yang, Y. Tian, Z. Tan, and M. Luo,
“GADY: Unsupervised anomaly detection on dynamic graphs,”
2023, arXiv:2310.16376.
[74] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022, pp. 657–
665.
[75] J. Ma, P. Cui, K. Kuang, X. Wang, and W. Zhu, “Disentangled graph
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2019,
pp. 4212–4221.
[76] R. Ma, G. Pang, L. Chen, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep graph-level
anomaly detection by glocal knowledge distillation,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Web Search Data Mining, 2022, pp. 704–714.
[77] X. Ma, R. Li, F. Liu, K. Ding, J. Yang, and J. Wu, “New recipes for graph
anomaly detection: Forward diffusion dynamics and graph generation,”
2023.
[78] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with
deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12012–
12038, Dec. 2023.
[79] X. Ma, J. Wu, J. Yang, and Q. Z. Sheng, “Towards graph-level anomaly
detection via deep evolutionary mapping,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1631–1642.
[80] L. Meng, H. Mostafa, M. Nassar, X. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Generative
graph augmentation for minority class in fraud detection,” in Proc. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 4200–4204.
[81] C. Niu, G. Pang, and L. Chen, “Graph-level anomaly detection via hierarchical memory networks,” in Proc. Joint Eur.
Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, Springer, 2023,
pp. 201–218.
[82] C. Niu, H. Qiao, C. Chen, L. Chen, and G. Pang, “Zero-shot generalist graph anomaly detection with unified neighborhood prompts,”
2024, arXiv:2410.14886.
[83] J. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, and S. Pan, “PREM: A simple
yet effective approach for node-level graph anomaly detection,”
2023, arXiv:2310.11676.
[84] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, D. Lian, and H. Liu, “Sparse modelingbased sequential ensemble learning for effective outlier detection in
high-dimensional numeric data,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif.
Intell., 2018, pp. 3892–3899.
[85] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Unsupervised feature selection
for outlier detection by modelling hierarchical value-feature couplings,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 410–419.
[86] G. Pang, L. Cao Longbing, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning homophily
couplings from non-IID data for joint feature selection and noise-resilient
outlier detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 2585–
2591.
[87] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–
38, 2021.
[88] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep weaklysupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2023, pp. 1795–1807.
[89] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection with
deviation networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2019, pp. 353–362.
[90] G. Pang, A. van den Hengel, C. Shen, and L. Cao, “Toward deep
supervised anomaly detection: Reinforcement learning from partially
labeled anomaly data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2021, pp. 1298–1308.

QIAO et al.: DEEP GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION: A SURVEY AND NEW PERSPECTIVES

[91] G. Pang, H. Xu, L. Cao, and W. Zhao, “Selective value coupling learning
for detecting outliers in high-dimensional categorical data,” in Proc. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2017, pp. 807–816.
[92] J. Park, J. Song, and E. Yang, “GraphENS: Neighbor-aware ego network
synthesis for class-imbalanced node classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Learn. Representations, 2021.
[93] Y. Pei, T. Huang, W. van Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “ResGCN:
Attention-based deep residual modeling for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” Mach. Learn., vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 519–541, 2022.
[94] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multi-view
framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, Jun. 2022.
[95] T. Pourhabibi, K.-L. Ong, B. H. Kam, and Y. L. Boo, “Fraud detection: A systematic literature review of graph-based anomaly detection
approaches,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 133, 2020, Art. no. 113303.
[96] H. Qiao, C. Niu, L. Chen, and G. Pang, “AnomalyGFM: Graph foundation
model for zero/few-shot anomaly detection,” 2025, arXiv:2502.09254.
[97] H. Qiao and G. Pang, “Truncated affinity maximization: One-class homophily modeling for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 49490–49512.
[98] H. Qiao, Q. Wen, X. Li, E.-P. Lim, and G. Pang, “Generative semisupervised graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 10–15.
[99] Z. Qin, Y. Liu, Q. He, and X. Ao, “Explainable graph-based fraud detection via neural meta-graph search,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage.,
2022, pp. 4414–4418.
[100] C. Qiu, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Raising the bar in graphlevel anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2205.13845.
[101] L. Qu, H. Zhu, R. Zheng, Y. Shi, and H. Yin, “ImGAGN: Imbalanced
network embedding via generative adversarial graph networks,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 1390–1398.
[102] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos, and N. F.
Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: A survey,” Wiley
Interdiscipl. Rev.: Comput. Statist., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 223–247, 2015.
[103] A. Roy et al., “GAD-NR: Graph anomaly detection via neighborhood
reconstruction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2024,
pp. 576–585.
[104] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[105] B. Sanchez-Lengeling et al., “Evaluating attribution for graph neural
networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 5898–
5910.
[106] F. Sato, R. Hachiuma, and T. Sekii, “Prompt-guided zero-shot anomaly
action recognition using pretrained deep skeleton features,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 6471–6480.
[107] F. Shi, Y. Cao, Y. Shang, Y. Zhou, C. Zhou, and J. Wu, “H2-FDetector:
A GNN-based fraud detector with homophilic and heterophilic connections,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1486–1494.
[108] M. Shi, Y. Tang, X. Zhu, D. Wilson, and J. Liu, “Multi-class imbalanced
graph convolutional network learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2020, pp. 2879–2885.
[109] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst,
“The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending highdimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular domains,” IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, May 2013.
[110] X. Sun, H. Cheng, J. Li, B. Liu, and J. Guan, “All in one: Multi-task
prompting for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2023, pp. 2120–2131.
[111] J. Tang et al., “HiGPT: Heterogeneous graph language model,”
2024, arXiv:2402.16024.
[112] J. Tang, F. Hua, Z. Gao, P. Zhao, and J. Li, “GADBench: Revisiting and benchmarking supervised graph anomaly detection,”
2023, arXiv:2306.12251.
[113] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2022,
pp. 21 076–21 089.
[114] X. Teng, M. Yan, A. M. Ertugrul, and Y.-R. Lin, “Deep into hypersphere:
Robust and unsupervised anomaly discovery in dynamic networks,” in
Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 2724–2730.
[115] S. Tian et al., “SAD: Semi-supervised anomaly detection on dynamic
graphs,” 2023, arXiv:2305.13573.
[116] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y.
Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.10903.
[117] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R. D.
Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv: 1809.10341.

5125

[118] Q. Wang, G. Pang, M. Salehi, W. Buntine, and C. Leckie, “Cross-domain
graph anomaly detection via anomaly-aware contrastive alignment,” in
Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 4676–4684.
[119] Q. Wang et al., “Open-set graph anomaly detection via normal structure
regularisation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025.
[120] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph
neural networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural
Comput. Appl., vol. 33, pp. 12 073–12 085, 2021.
[121] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Guo, H. Yin, C. Li, and H. Chen, “Decoupling representation learning and classification for GNN-based anomaly detection,”
in Proc. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Informat. Retrieval, 2021,
pp. 1239–1248.
[122] Y. Wang et al., “Label information enhanced fraud detection against low
homophily in graphs,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2023, pp. 406–416.
[123] B. Wu, X. Yao, B. Zhang, K.-M. Chao, and Y. Li, “SplitGNN: Spectral
graph neural network for fraud detection against heterophily,” in Proc.
Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 2737–2746.
[124] L. Wu, J. Xia, Z. Gao, H. Lin, C. Tan, and S. Z. Li, “GraphMixup:
Improving class-imbalanced node classification by reinforcement mixup
and self-supervised context prediction,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach.
Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, Springer, 2022, pp. 519–535.
[125] P. Wu et al., “Open-vocabulary video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 18 297–18
307.
[126] P. Wu et al., “Weakly supervised video anomaly detection and localization
with spatio-temporal prompts,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
2024, pp. 9301–9310.
[127] P. Wu et al., “VadCLIP: Adapting vision-language models for weakly
supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance.
Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 6074–6082.
[128] L. Xia, B. Kao, and C. Huang, “OpenGraph: Towards open graph foundation models,” 2024, arXiv:2403.01121.
[129] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual
graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023.
[130] F. Xu, N. Wang, X. Wen, M. Gao, C. Guo, and X. Zhao, “Few-shot
message-enhanced contrastive learning for graph anomaly detection,”
2023, arXiv:2311.10370.
[131] F. Xu, N. Wang, H. Wu, X. Wen, and X. Zhao, “Revisiting
graph-based fraud detection in sight of heterophily and spectrum,”
2023, arXiv:2312.06441.
[132] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12591–
12604, Dec. 2023.
[133] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed
network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Proc. PacificAsia Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Springer, 2022, pp. 444–457.
[134] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary guided
semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 24
490–24 499.
[135] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive
learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2020, pp. 5812–5823.
[136] H. Yu, Z. Liu, and X. Luo, “Barely supervised learning for graph-based
fraud detection,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 16
548–16 557.
[137] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media
anomaly detection,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 1–14, 2016.
[138] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang,
“NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection
in dynamic networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2018, pp. 2672–2681.
[139] X. Yuan, N. Zhou, S. Yu, H. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Xia, “Higher-order
structure based anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Big Data, 2021, pp. 2691–2700.
[140] G. Zhang et al., “FRAUDRE: Fraud detection dual-resistant to graph
inconsistency and imbalance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining,
2021, pp. 867–876.
[141] G. Zhang et al., “Dual-discriminative graph neural network for imbalanced graph-level anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 24 144–24 157.
[142] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “Mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.09412.

5126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 37, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

[143] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,”
2022, arXiv:2205.04816.
[144] L. Zhang, J. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Pei, and L. Wang, “A robust embedding
method for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint
Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
[145] R. Zhang et al., “Generation is better than modification: Combating high class homophily variance in graph anomaly detection,”
2024, arXiv:2403.10339.
[146] Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Cai, and J. Fan, “Deep graph-level orthogonal hypersphere compression for anomaly detection,” 2023, arXiv:2302.06430.
[147] T. Zhao, X. Zhang, and S. Wang, “GraphSMOTE: Imbalanced node
classification on graphs with graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Web Search Data Mining, 2021, pp. 833–841.
[148] T. Zhao, B. Ni, W. Yu, Z. Guo, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “Action sequence
augmentation for early graph-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 2668–2678.
[149] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Li, and A. Lu, “One-class adversarial nets
for fraud detection,” in Proc. Conf. Assoc. Advance. Artif. Intell., 2019,
pp. 1286–1293.
[150] X. Zheng et al., “Graph neural networks for graphs with heterophily: A
survey,” 2022, arXiv:2202.07082.
[151] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, “Generative
and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
Dec. 2023.
[152] Q. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Tian, S. He, and J. Chen, “AnomalyCLIP: Objectagnostic prompt learning for zero-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
[153] Q. Zhou et al., “Graph anomaly detection with adaptive node mixup,” in
Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 3494–3504.

[154] Q. Zhou, K. Ding, H. Liu, and H. Tong, “Learning node abnormality with
weak supervision,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 3584–
3594.
[155] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, Q. Tan, and F.-L. Chung, “Unseen anomaly
detection on networks via multi-hypersphere learning,” in Proc. SIAM
Int. Conf. Data Mining, SIAM, 2022, pp. 262–270.
[156] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, H. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and L.-K. Huang,
“Improving generalizability of graph anomaly detection models via
data augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12721–12735, Dec. 2023.
[157] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-L. Chung, “Subtractive
aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
[158] J. Zhu, C. Ding, Y. Tian, and G. Pang, “Anomaly heterogeneity learning
for open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 17 616–17 626.
[159] J. Zhu and G. Pang, “Toward generalist anomaly detection via in-context
residual learning with few-shot sample prompts,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 17 826–17 836.
[160] J. Zhu, Y. Yan, L. Zhao, M. Heimann, L. Akoglu, and D. Koutra, “Beyond
homophily in graph neural networks: Current limitations and effective
designs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 7793–
7804.
[161] Z. Zhuang, K. M. Ting, G. Pang, and S. Song, “Subgraph centralization:
A necessary step for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf.
Data Mining, SIAM, 2023, pp. 703–711.
[162] W. Zhuo et al., “Partitioning message passing for graph fraud detection,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
[163] D. Zou, H. Peng, and C. Liu, “A structural information guided hierarchical
reconstruction for graph anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
Manage., 2024, pp. 4318–4323.