IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

6443

D EEP DRAC: Disposition Recommendation for
Alert Clusters Based on Security Event Patterns
Yang Liu , Member, IEEE, Gaofei Ruan , Zian Luo , Shilong Zhang, Donghao Liu, Xin Fan,
Yadong Zhou , Member, IEEE, and Ting Liu , Member, IEEE
Abstract—In the security operation center, false positive alerts
generated by security devices overwhelm security operators,
leading to alert fatigue and inefficiency in identifying real threats.
This paper introduces D EEP DRAC, a disposition recommendation method for alert clusters that is based on security event
patterns. Our main idea is to reconstruct isolated alerts into security events and capture their essential threat characteristics as
patterns. By recommending pattern information, we enable batch
interpretable disposal of alerts. First, D EEP DRAC aggregates
correlated alerts to a graph, representing a security event. Then,
it extracts the features of the security event from two aspects:
basic features via statistical methods and detailed features via
a carefully designed Graph Neural Network (GNN) that focuses
on edge features. Since many false alerts triggered by the same
cause often recur in a fixed pattern, D EEP DRAC translates
basic features into interpretable descriptors to define the basic
pattern, whereas GNN embeddings complement detailed semantic
information, serving as the detailed pattern, together forming the
pattern of the security event. The pattern describes the critical
information of the security event, so security events with the
same pattern are clustered for batch processing. Finally, with
few manually labeled security events, D EEP DRAC can conduct
automatic disposition recommendations for newly arrived alerts,
significantly reducing the workload of alert analysis. We evaluate
our approach on two benchmark datasets (i.e., DARPA 1999
and CIC-IDS2017) and a real-world dataset from a large power
company. The extensive experimental results demonstrate that
our approach can alleviate alert fatigue more efficiently and
accurately than the two state-of-the-art defense approaches can.
Index Terms—False positive alerts, alert fatigue, pattern recognition, graph neural networks, semi-supervised learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the advancement of information technology,
enterprise networks are facing increasingly complex
cyberattacks. To safeguard network security, operators in
Received 19 January 2025; revised 10 June 2025; accepted 12 June 2025.
Date of publication 16 June 2025; date of current version 1 July 2025. This
work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2703500; in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62293500, Grant 62293501,
Grant 62293502, and Grant 62272373; and in part by the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Guan Gui.
(Yang Liu and Gaofei Ruan contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding
author: Ting Liu.)
Yang Liu, Gaofei Ruan, Zian Luo, Shilong Zhang, Yadong Zhou, and Ting
Liu are with the MOE KLINNS Laboratory, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an,
Shaanxi 710049, China (e-mail: tingliu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).
Donghao Liu and Xin Fan are with State Grid Information and Telecommunication Company, Shaanxi Electric Power Corporation Ltd., Xi’an, Shaanxi
710048, China.
Data is available on-line at http://github.com/Gaofei-Ruan/DEEPDRACAppendix
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3580337

the Security Operations Center (SOC) analyze alerts from
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention
Systems (IPS) before taking further security actions [1]. In this
process, operators must use their knowledge of cyberattacks
and normal traffic to determine whether an alert represents a
real threat manually. However, a serious issue of alert fatigue
has arisen [2], [3], [4], where operators are overwhelmed
by a large number of false positives, making it difficult to
detect and respond to real attacks promptly [5], [6]. A 2019
Cisco survey revealed that 41% of the 3,540 organizations
surveyed receive more than 10,000 alerts per day. Among these
alerts, only 50.7% were investigated and analyzed owing to the
limited disposal capabilities of the SOC, and only 24.1% of
the investigated alerts were considered real attacks [7]. These
observations highlight the pressing need for efficient, contextaware alert disposition methods to help SOC operators identify
real threats from massive alert volumes with minimal manual
effort.
To address the issue of alert fatigue, researchers have
conducted numerous approaches, which can be categorized
into two main types. The first type enhances security devices
to improve the quality of alerts while reducing the total
number of alerts [5], [8], [9], [10], [11]. However, updating
various types of legacy security devices in an organization has
become challenging [12]. The second type designs automated
alert validation solutions to alleviate the burden on operators
[13], which is more practical for alleviating alert fatigue. The
alert validation methods can be categorized into three types
based on how they capture alert relationships: spatial-based,
temporal-based, and spatiotemporal-based methods. Spatial
methods [14], [15] aggregate alerts with similar fundamental
attributes, such as IP addresses or host information, into
higher-level meta-alerts. Temporal methods [12], [16] generate
event sequences by aggregating alerts that occur in close
temporal proximity, based on the premise that alerts occurring
nearly simultaneously are likely to be related. Spatiotemporal
methods [2], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21] combine spatial and
temporal correlations to integrate alerts, preserving more complete contextual information than the previous two methods do.
Modeling alerts as graphs is a representative spatialtemporal
method, where the IP addresses of the alert are usually used as
nodes, and an alert exists between two nodes to generate edges.
Following the correlation of alerts, alert validation methods
typically employ representation and classification techniques
to guarantee that critical alerts receive immediate attention
and response from operators. Unfortunately, existing alert
validation methods still have several limitations.

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

First, most alert validation methods face significant challenges in accurately reconstructing security events from raw
alerts. Spatial or temporal approaches often rely on one-sided
relationships, limiting their ability to capture the full event
context. While spatiotemporal methods combine spatial and
temporal features into graphs, they usually merge multiple
distinct events into a single graph. Spatiotemporal methods
typically adopt node-level, edge-level, or graph-level strategies: the node-level and edge-level methods directly perform
node classification or link prediction without considering event
semantics [2], [21]. On the other hand, graph-level methods
decouple events through graph partitioning, but they are typically based solely on topology. This approach fails to fully
exploit the semantic and contextual attributes of alerts, which
leads to incomplete event reconstruction [20].
Second, most alert validation methods rely heavily on
labeled samples. An increasing number of alert validation
methods leverage deep learning techniques for their effectiveness in representing and classifying correlated alerts [12],
[18], [20], [22], [23]. These methods typically require many
labeled samples for model training, which is particularly
challenging in the security domain. As a result, the dependence
on labeled samples severely limits the capabilities and practical
applicability of these methods.
Third, most alert validation methods lack interpretability,
which limits their practical application [2], [12], [18], [20].
Deep learning approaches for alert representation and classification often produce outputs, such as predicted categories or
anomaly scores, without providing explanations. As a result,
operators cannot understand the rationale behind the model’s
decisions. This lack of interpretability undermines trust in
the system and hinders its usability in critical operational
environments.
In this paper, we present a semisupervised alert validation method, D EEP DRAC (DEEP learning Disposition
Recommendation for Alert Clusters), which recommends risk
levels and disposition information for alerts based on the
patterns, aiming to alleviate alert fatigue. First, to recover
contextual information on security events, we model alerts
within a time window as an alert graph. Second, we apply a
carefully designed community detection algorithm to the alert
graph to obtain subgraphs (i.e., communities of related alerts).
These subgraphs preserve contextual information on security
events, including spatial correlations (such as relationships
between IP addresses and ports) and temporal correlations
(since alerts occur within the same time window). We treat
these subgraphs as security events for further analysis. Third,
we extract features of the security event, which consists of both
basic features via statistical methods and detailed features from
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Then, we translate the event
features into patterns, and the security events with the same
patterns are clustered together. Finally, we recommend patterns
for security events and automate the filtering of false-positive
alerts via a semisupervised approach. With D EEP DRAC,
operators can efficiently dispose of all alerts by analyzing a
small subset of security events for each pattern, significantly
reducing their workload. In summary, the contributions of this
paper are as follows:

• A novel semisupervised deep learning-based alert validation method called D EEP DRAC is proposed, which can
correlate isolated alerts into security events and describe
the critical information that triggers the events, called the
pattern. D EEP DRAC processes alerts in an interpretable
manner based on recommendations, providing specific
event descriptions while filtering false-positive alerts.
• When training the GNN module of D EEP DRAC, we
design a training framework consisting of self-supervised
pretraining and supervised fine-tuning, which greatly
reduces the dependence on ground truth labels.
• We evaluate D EEP DRAC on two public datasets (DARPA
1999 and CIC-IDS2017) as well as a real-world dataset
collected from a large power grid company, and show that
D EEP DRAC outperforms state-of-the-art alert reduction
methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
explains the motivation of D EEP DRAC through an example.
Section III provides a detailed description of the three components of D EEP DRAC. Section IV shows the performance of
D EEP DRAC on two public datasets and a real-world dataset,
comparing it with that of state-of-the-art alert reduction methods. Section V discusses additional aspects of D EEP DRAC,
such as its time efficiency and robustness. Finally, Section VI
presents the conclusions.
II. M OTIVATION
We explain the motivation for using pattern recommendation
methods to dispose of alerts via an example.
In real-world scenarios, many alerts are false-positives triggered by normal business activities. For example, routine asset
scans conducted by IT operations teams are often misclassified as port-scanning attacks; simulated brute-force attempts
during password strength testing are flagged as real credential
attacks; and cross-regional traffic between branch offices and
headquarters, owing to its nonstandard network characteristics,
is frequently misdetected as anomalous traffic. Although these
alerts may seem isolated at first glance, multiple alerts often
belong to a single security event, such as “asset scanning
events,” “password testing events” or “cross-regional access
events.” Additionally, many security events triggered by the
same business frequently occur in a fixed pattern. Security
events with the same pattern typically differ only in certain
noncritical features, such as whether IT operations teams
scanned two assets versus four assets.
Fig. 1 illustrates an example of correlated alerts in a real
enterprise intranet. The example includes four security events,
where event 1 and event 3 share the same pattern. This pattern
similarity indicates that these events, despite occurring in
different subnets, can be handled via a unified disposition
strategy. The ability to identify and group such events is
critical for reducing alert fatigue and improving operational
efficiency. However, accurately reconstructing security events
from a vast number of raw alerts is challenging due to the
complexity of business logic. For example, “asset device
scanning” and “port scanning attacks” may trigger identical
alert types, making it difficult to distinguish legitimate activities from actual threats. Without advanced methods to analyze

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS

6445

TABLE I
N OTATIONS AND D ESCRIPTIONS

Fig. 1. Example of correlated alerts in a real enterprise intranet. Arrows in
different colors represent different types of alerts. The example covers three
subnets and four security events, where events 1 and 3 share the same pattern
and belong to the same category of security events.

the context and relationships between alerts, SOC operators
must manually investigate each alert, leading to inefficiency
and potential oversight of critical issues.
To address these challenges, this paper introduces a pattern
recommendation approach that accurately reconstructs security events from raw alerts and recommends corresponding
patterns. For example, in Fig. 1, related alerts are grouped
into four security events by correlation features, including
spatial correlation (e.g., relationships between IP addresses
and ports), temporal correlation (e.g., alerts occurring within
the same time window), and alert categories (e.g., identifying
whether alerts correspond to scanning, brute-force attacks, or
anomalous traffic). Then, event 1 and event 3 are classified in
the same pattern, as their features are highly similar correlation
features. By clustering similar security events into the same
pattern, SOC operators can focus on analyzing a small subset
of representative security events for each pattern, significantly
reducing the workload.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
We propose a method based on event reconstruction and
pattern recommendation, D EEP DRAC, which helps operators
quickly dispose of alerts. The framework of D EEP DRAC
is shown in Fig. 2, which consists of three components:
the Event Graph Builder for reconstructing security events
(Section III-B), the Pattern Generator for generating patterns
(Section III-C), and the SemiAutomatic Decision for alert
disposal by recommending patterns (Section III-D). Notably,
the Pattern Generator uses the GNN to extract the semantic
details of security events. We employ a self-supervised learning approach to alleviate the dependency on labeled samples
during GNN training (Section III-E).
A. Data Preprocessing on Alerts
As the data fields of alerts from different security devices
are not unified and there are large amounts of duplicate alerts,
we need to preprocess alerts before analysis.
First, we unify the data fields of all alerts referring to the
alert fields of popular open-source network IDSs (e.g., Snort
and Suricata). Taking the alert generated by Snort 3.1.18 as
an example, it includes 44 fields in JSON format, whose main

data fields are shown in Table II. The semantic information
contained in these data fields can be classified into three
types: 1) Information about the network activity, including the
timestamp, the source IP address (src addr), the destination
IP address (dst addr), and the protocol (proto); 2) Information about the activity’s traffic, including the packet length
(pkt len), the packet number (pkt num), the TCP sequence
number (tcp seq), and the TCP window size (tcp win); and
3) Anomaly information of the alert generated by the IDS,
including the matched rule ID (rule), the anomaly category
(category), the anomaly message (message), etc. In this work,
we select a subset of the data fields (i.e., the highlighted fields
in Table II), which is important for alert analysis and available
in most security devices.
Second, for alerts that have timestamps within the same time
window T, if the values of the fields (src addr, dst addr,
dst port, proto, rule, category and priority) are identical,
they are premerged to reduce duplicate alerts. The number
of merged alerts is denoted as warn num, and the alert fields
used for constructing the alert graph are given by (timestamp,
src addr, dst addr, dst port, proto, rule, category, priority,
and warn num). Here, the timestamp refers to the start time
of the time window T.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

1 Event graph builder: An alert graph is built based on the alerts where the
Fig. 2. Framework of D EEP DRAC that shows the three main components. O
edge denotes alerts from one host (i.e., the node in the alert graph) to another host. Then, a community detection algorithm is applied to the alert graph,
2 Pattern Generator: Patterns of security events are generated based on statistical features
generating security events that contain contextual information. O
and GNN embeddings. On the one hand, statistical features are extracted and discretized to form the basic pattern, which intuitively describes the security
event. On the other hand, GNN embeddings capture detailed features as supplements, together forming a comprehensive pattern. This pattern encapsulates
3 Semiautomatic decider: First, security events with the same patterns are grouped. Second, a small number
the critical information of the security event. O
of labeled security events are introduced to generate a pattern knowledge base, which is used to identify patterns for subsequent alerts. With this decider,
frequently occurring false alerts can be automatically filtered while maintaining good interpretability.

TABLE II
E XAMPLE OF THE M AIN F IELDS F ROM THE A LERT OF S NORT 3.1.18. T HE
B OLDED A LERT F IELDS A RE U SED BY D EEP DRAC

B. Event Graph Builder
After alerts are unified and premerged, they are input
into the event graph builder to mine the spatial correlation
relationships between alerts.
Definition 1 (Alert Graph G)The alert graph is a directed
attributed graph G = (V, E, AN , AE , AG , T ) formed by alerts
within a time window T. Node v ∈ V represents a host with a
unique IP address, indicating either a suspicious attacker or a
potential victim in the network. The edge ei j ∈ E represents the
merged alerts from the attacking IP address i (src addr) to the
victim IP address j (dst addr). Since the dst port, category,
and other features may differ, there can be multiple edges
between two nodes, with each edge representing a specific type
of network activity. AN and AE represent the node and edge
feature matrix, respectively, whereas AG denotes the graphlevel features.

In one time window, alerts may contain multiple unrelated
security events. The connections between alerts belonging to
the same security event are close-knit, whereas the connections
with alerts from other events are loose, this results in a clear
community structure on the alert graph. Communities are
subgraphs composed of a group of nodes and edges, which
may share common features or be closely related in the graph
[24]. The nodes and edges in the same community are more
likely to connect. D EEP DRAC employs an enhanced Louvain
algorithm based on alert categories and attempts to group alerts
belonging to the same security event into one community. This
community is referred to as the security event and its detailed
definition is as follows.
Definition 2 (Security Event G s ) Security event G s is a
specific type of alert cluster that consists of alerts triggered
by the same root cause, such as a single attack event or a
business operation. It is represented as a subgraph obtained
through community detection on the alert graph G and contains
contextual information of the corresponding event. Formally,
G s = {Alert1 , Alert2 , . . ., Alertn }, where each Alerti represents
an individual alert associated with the same attack event or
business operation.
There are several issues when traditional community detection algorithms are applied to alert graphs. First, current
community detection algorithms [25], [26], [27], [28] split the
graph into multiple communities (i.e., node sets) by cutting
some edges, which may split the attacker and the victim of
some alerts into two communities. Second, few community
detection algorithms consider node or edge features, resulting
in imprecise alert communities. To solve these issues, we introduce alert categories into community detection algorithms,
achieve edge-based alert graph clustering and propose the
enhanced Louvain algorithm, as shown in Fig. 3.
The details of the enhanced Louvain algorithm are illustrated in Algorithm 1, which includes two steps: initial
partitioning based on connectivity and correction based on
alert categories. We first apply the Louvain algorithm to obtain
the initial set of communities C of the alert graph (Line 1).
We mine the frequent combinations of alert categories in C.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS

6447

Fig. 3. Enhanced Louvain algorithm based on alert categories. Implementation consists of two steps. 1) In Step 1, the Louvain algorithm is employed to
divide the alert graph, generating two communities C1 and C2 in the example. 2) In Step 2, these communities are further split based on alert categories.
First, C1 and C2 are decomposed into six subcommunities S C1 − S C6, where each subcommunity has only one central node and the same category (i.e.,
a, b, c, d, e, f ). Then, subcommunities within the same community that meet the merging rules are combined to form the final security event graph.

Algorithm 1 Enhanced Louvain Algorithm Based on Alert
Categories
Input: Alert graph G
Output: Security events G s
1 C ← The set of initial communities from the Louvain
algorithm on G
2 FP ← Mine frequent combinations of alert categories in
C
3 for community C ∈ C do
4
if C is the single-center topology of the same alert
category then
5
Leave C unchanged
6
else
7
Select node v with the highest degrees
8
Collect alert categories, src addr, and dst addr
related to v
9
while highest degree of remaining nodes >2 do
10
Identify alerts with the same attack direction and
the highest number of categories.
11
Split them into subcommunities
12
end while
13
for frequent combination p ∈ FP with high confidence do
14
Merge subcommunities containing frequent combination p
15
end for
16
for subcommunity SC with the same central node
and a category do
17
Merge SC into one community
18
end for
19
for subcommunity SC with only two hosts do
20
Merge SC with an adjacent subcommunity
21
end for
22
end if
23 end for
24 return: G s

The results are used in the subsequent algorithm (Line 2).
After that, we iterate through each community in the set C
and split the community into subcommunities with the singlecenter topology of the same alert category (Lines 3–12). In
this context, a single-center topology denotes a community
with exactly one node directly connected to all other nodes,

which is called the central node. Finally, we merge some of
the subcommunities according to the preset rules to obtain
the community result: security events G s (Lines 13–23). The
specific principle of the algorithm is as follows.
1) Community Initialization Based on Connectivity: To
divide the original alert graph into different communities,
we initially employ the Louvain algorithm, which is one of
the most widely used community detection algorithms and
is based on modularity maximization [27]. The modularity
measures the density of edges inside communities compared
with edges between communities, which can be defined as:
Q=




ki k j
1 X
Wi j −
δ ci , c j
2m i, j
2m

(1)

where m represents the sum of all of the edge weights in the
graph, Wi j denotes the weight between node i and node j, ki
and k j represent the sum of the weights of the edges attached
to vi and v j , respectively. ci and c j are the communities to
which vi and v j belong, respectively. δ denotes the Kronecker
delta function, where δ(ci , c j ) is 1 if ci and c j are the same
community, and 0 otherwise. A larger Q indicates a more
compact community structure after aggregation. The Louvain
algorithm seeks to divide the graph into communities by
maximizing the modularity Q on the basis on a greedy strategy.
2) Community Correction Based on Alert Categories:
Some communities generated by the Louvain algorithm exhibit
complex topologies, with numerous alerts intertwined, making
it difficult to accurately reflect the information of a single
security event. Therefore, it is necessary to further correct the
clustering results.
We find that 82.71% of security events consist of alerts
of the same category and exhibit a single-center topological
type when analyzing real-world datasets. Based on the above
analysis, for single-center communities of the same alert
category identified by the Louvain algorithm, we consider the
clustering results to be satisfactory and leave them unchanged.
For other communities with more complex topologies, several
scenarios may guide us in optimizing the complex topological
communities:
• Some sporadic alerts link multiple originally unrelated
alert communities together.
• The attacker triggered multiple categories of alerts via
various attack methods.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

• Complex normal network activities trigger various categories of false positive alerts.
To improve the precision of community detection, we
first apply the FP-tree algorithm [29] to discover frequent
combinations of alert categories in the Louvain algorithm’s
clustering results. For example, alerts indicating exploitation
behaviors of different common exposures and weaknesses
(CVEs) may appear simultaneously, which are attack attempts
before a successful invasion. The temporal correlation between
these behaviors indicates a high-security threat. Hence, these
alerts should be clustered into the same community. Based
on the results of frequent combination mining, we refine the
multicenter topologies in the Louvain algorithm’s clustering
results as follows:
1) We first divide each community obtained from the Louvain algorithm into subcommunities with single-center
topology and the same alert category.
2) Based on the frequent combinations of alert categories, we merge subcommunities whose categories
often appear together. These highly-confident combinations may indicate a highly threatening network attack
or a specific normal network activity.
3) We merge single-center topology subcommunities of the
same alert category with the same central node. Singlecenter topology communities of the same alert category
with the same central node might represent multiple
attack attempts by the same attacker, and the resulting
topology after merging is simpler and easier to analyze.
4) We merge subcommunities containing only two hosts
with their adjacent subcommunities. As subcommunities
with only two hosts lack contextual information for
alerts and are difficult to analyze effectively, we merge
them with adjacent subcommunities.
By incorporating domain-specific knowledge alongside the
topological structure of the alert graph, the enhanced Louvain
algorithm improves the traditional Louvain algorithm in two
main aspects. First, a decoupling mechanism is introduced
based on alert categories to avoid clustering semantically
unrelated alerts. Second, a merging mechanism informed by
frequent co-occurrence patterns captures behaviorally correlated alerts that tend to occur together in practice. With these
improvements, we can produce community partitions that
better align with real-world security event boundaries, thereby
addressing the tendency of the traditional Louvain algorithm
to overfit purely structural connections.
C. Pattern Generator
Definition 3 (Security Event Pattern G pat tern) The security event pattern (abbreviated as pattern) is a vector with
semantic information, representing the critical information
of the security event, which is defined as G pat tern =
(center num, central ip label, nonCentral ip label,
topo type, category, Gembed ).
The security event pattern consists of two parts: the basic
pattern derived from statistical features and the detailed pattern
represented by GNN embeddings Gembed . The basic pattern
provides a rough description of critical information about the

TABLE III
F EATURES OF S ECURITY E VENT G s

security event, such as the number of primary targets involved
in the attack. On the other hand, Gembed captures contextual
semantic and structural information on G s , enhancing the
expressiveness and distinguishability of G pat tern.
1) Basic Pattern: The security event G s is a subgraph
composed of alerts, with its main features coming directly
from alert attributes or their statistical summary, as shown in
Table III. The basic pattern is derived from the transformation of these features and provides fundamental information
about G s . The edge features are directly from the alerts,
and here we discuss only the node-level and graph-level
features. The features of node vi ∈ V include ip labeli and
high degree labeli , where ip labeli indicates the asset type
associated with vi , and high degree labeli indicates whether
vi holds a significant degree in G s .
A high-degree node is defined as a node whose degree
is relatively large compared with other nodes in the graph.
Specifically, nodes are labeled “high-degree” if their degrees
collectively account for at least 50% of the total degree sum
of G s . Nodes with high degree labeli = 1 are referred
to as central nodes, which play a crucial role in network
connectivity and information propagation.
At the graph level, the features include center num, which
represents the number of central nodes, and the distributions
of three-node motifs within the graph. To analyze the topological characteristics of G s , we examine the distribution of
these motifs. As defined in [30], motifs are small recurring
subgraphs that occur significantly more often in G s than in
random graphs. These motifs provide insights into the structural properties of G s , such as attack directions or clustering
patterns. We use the FANMOD algorithm [31] to mine 13
three-node motifs (as shown in Fig. 4) and calculate their
percentage in G s .
The basic pattern is derived from the discretization and
classification of features and is specifically defined as follows:
(center num, central ip label, nonCentral ip label,
topo type,
category). center num represents the
number of central nodes in G s , and central ip label
is the set of ip label corresponding to these
central
nodes.
nonCentral ip label
is
the
set

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS

Fig. 4. 13 types of three-node motifs. If the proportion of motifs of types
1–5 is greater than τmoti f , the security event is defined as the corresponding
topology type; otherwise, it is the other type. divergent0 and converged0 are
weakened (or generalized) forms of divergent and converged, respectively.

Fig. 5. Workflow for generating detailed patterns via the GNN. (a) Inputting
the security event and generating position encodings (PEs) via random walks;
(b) Combining the Transformer layer and GINE layer for message propagation
to update node states, with this module stacked for L layers; (c) Aggregating
node states based on a global attention mechanism and concatenating the
projected graph features to generate Gembed .

of ip label corresponding to noncentral nodes.
topo type describes the topology type of the security
event G s . If G s has only two nodes, i.e., |V| = 2, then the
topology type is defined as simple. If |V| ≥ 3, it is determined
based on the proportion of three-node motifs. As shown in
Fig. 4, if the proportions of motifs 1—5 are greater than the
threshold τmoti f , topo type correspond to “diverging type,
converging type, weak diverging type, weak converging type,
and bidirectional type”, respectively. Otherwise, topo type is
defined as other types. category is the set of alert categories
for all alerts in G s . If the cardinality of this set exceeds three,
it is defined as multicategory. The basic pattern roughly
describes the topological structure (e.g., number of central
nodes, attack direction) and the attributes (e.g., types of assets
associated with the main IPs, attack types) of the security
event G s , providing fundamental information about G s .
2) Detailed Pattern Based on GNN Embedding: Motivated
by the ability of machine learning technologies to identify
complex and subtle pattern information [23], we employ the
GNN model [32] to embed the security event G s , aiming to
generate a detailed pattern for describing G s . As shown in
Fig. 5, the process of embedding G s can be roughly divided
into three steps as follows.
a) Input: The security event G s contains node features
ai ∈ AN , edge features ai j ∈ AE , and graph features AG ,
which serve as the inputs of the GNN model. Additionally,
because our GNN module includes a Transformer component,
to enable it to sense the positional relationships between nodes,
we generate node Position Encodings (PE) pi ∈ P based on
random walks [33]. Then, we concatenate the node features
with the projected PE, incorporating the positional information
into the node features as:
ail = ail ⊕ Θ0 pi

(2)

6449

where Θ0 is a learnable parameter implemented through a
linear layer.
b) Update Node States Based on GraphGPS: We design
a GNN convolutional layer based on the GraphGPS framework
[34] to update node states, which includes a graph Transformer
layer and a GINE layer [35]. Most traditional GNNs (such as
GCN [36] and GAT [37]) are designed for node-centric tasks,
and edge features are usually ignored in message propagation
and aggregation [38]. However, in the security event G s ,
the edges contain important alert attribute information (such
as destination port, anomaly category, etc.), which plays an
irreplaceable role. In addition, traditional GNNs suffer from
the problem of oversmoothing, which limits the model capacity. Therefore, we design a convolutional layer based on the
GraphGPS framework, which combines a GINE layer sensitive
to edge features and a graph Transformer layer that alleviates
the oversmoothing problem. The convolution is calculated as
follows:
l
aiT
= Transformer(ail )
1
0
X
l
ReLU(a lj + a ji )A
= Θ1 @ ail +
aiM

(3)
(4)

j∈N (i)
l
+ a lMi )
ail+1 = ail + Θ2 (aTi

(5)

where ail is the state of node vi ∈ V after the l-th layer of the
GraphGPS convolution operation, L ≥ l ≥ 0. N (i) is the set
of one-hop neighbors of vi . Θ1 , Θ2 are both linear layers.
c) Readout the Security Event Embedding: After L layers
of node updates via GraphGPS convolution, we aggregate
the information from all nodes in the graph via a global
attention mechanism and combine it with the graph features
to generate the security event embedding Gembed . Because not
all security events are perfect, some might include irrelevant
nodes, and the influence of nodes in a security event is not
uniform. Therefore, we employ the attention mechanism to
assign weights to different nodes to measure their influence
and filter out irrelevant nodes during the readout stage [39].
X

G readout =
softmax Θ q (aiL )|
Θv aiL
(6)
vi ∈V

aiL , Θv aiL correspond to the query, key, and value

where Θ q ,
vectors in the attention mechanism, respectively. Specifically,
Θ q and Θv are learnable parameters. Θ q is used to compute
the attention coefficients, learning which nodes are relevant
to the current task and filtering out irrelevant information. Θv
projects the final layer node states aiL into a suitable space to
better generate the graph embedding. denotes the Hadamard
product, and the softmax function normalizes the attention
coefficients. Through node updates and global aggregation,
G readout contains the node features, edge features, and graph
structure information of the security event, but it still lacks the
graph feature AG . Therefore, we project AG into the feature
space of G readout and then concatenate to generate the final
security event embedding.
Gembed = G readout ⊕ Θ out AG

(7)

where Θ out is a learnable parameter, implemented through a
linear layer.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

By aggregating information from neighboring nodes and
edges, the detailed patterns generated via GNN embeddings
effectively capture global correlations and latent semantics
among alerts. This structure-aware capability allows security
events with different patterns to form clearer boundaries in the
embedding space, thereby improving the clustering model’s
ability to differentiate them. To leverage both semantic breadth
and resolution, we represent each security event via both
basic patterns and GNN-based detailed patterns: the basic
patterns define a coarse-grained semantic space, whereas the
detailed patterns refine distinctions among similar cases. The
integration of both yields more accurate and semantically
coherent clustering of security events.
D. Semiautomatic Decider
Definition 4 (Pattern Cluster Pc ) Pattern cluster Pc is a
collection of security events that share the same pattern. Each
security event within the cluster exhibits similar semantic
characteristics and originates from a common root cause, such
as repeated instances of the attack category. Formally, a pattern
cluster is defined as Pc = {G s1 , G s2 , . . ., G sn }, where each G si
denotes a security event that shares the same pattern.
In the previous discussion, we obtained the pattern G pat tern
for each security event G s . In fact, many security events
triggered by the same cause do not occur just once but often
appear repeatedly in a fixed pattern. We expect to aggregate
security events with a consistent pattern together for batch
processing. We relax the definition of security events with the
same pattern to “same basic pattern, similar detailed pattern”
because even security events triggered by the same cause can
exhibit subtle differences in their patterns, such as 10 port
scans versus 11 port scans. Nevertheless, security events with
the same pattern share at least the same disposition method and
risk level. In the implementation, we first use the basic pattern
to divide the security event space and filter out subspaces
containing fewer than Nbaisc security events to ensure consistency and frequency in the basic pattern. Second, within each
subspace defined by the basic pattern, we apply DBSCAN to
cluster the GNN embeddings of security events, generating
pattern clusters Pc . Pc is a set composed of security events,
all of which share the same pattern. After that, we label pattern
clusters to create a pattern knowledge base (manual analysis).
Finally, new incoming alerts are organized into security events
and matched with the corresponding recommended disposition
methods based on the identified patterns (automated analysis).
1) Stage 1—Manual Analysis: In this stage, to build the
initial pattern knowledge base, we incorporate a small amount
of expert knowledge to label the risk levels and disposal
information of pattern clusters. To ensure the accuracy of
pattern knowledge, we sample multiple security events from
each Pc for labeling.
In the ideal case, all security events in a pattern cluster
Pc represent the same pattern, and analyzing a single security event from Pc is sufficient to label the entire cluster.
However, there is always the possibility of errors in all
the models. D EEP DRAC employs a sampling approach to
reduce the possibility of model errors. D EEP DRAC expects
operators to analyze N s security events, which are sampled

without replacement of each Pc . If their patterns are the
same, the entire cluster is labeled at once, with the labeling
information including the pattern description and the corresponding disposal method. If different risk levels of security
events are discovered during the sampling process, all security
events in the cluster will be handed over to operators for
processing. In practice, the risk level of a pattern cluster is
assessed according to the nature of its constituent security
events: pattern clusters triggered by benign configurations or
routine operations (e.g., internal scanning, whitelisted IPs)
are labeled false-positives; clusters caused by nonmalicious
external behaviors such as low-frequency scans are labeled
low risk; those involving clearly malicious but early-stage
attacks such as Nmap scans and SQL injection attempts are
marked medium risk; and clusters where the attacker has
gained internal access and conducted harmful actions (e.g.,
such as executing unauthorized code) are labeled high risk.
The more samples we select, the more accurate the labeling
results will be. A detailed discussion on the number of samples
is presented in Section IV-B1b. Based on the capabilities of our
approach, almost all security events can be handled through a
small number of sampling analyses, significantly reducing the
workload of operators. Manually labeled results are stored in
the pattern knowledge base, providing the foundation for the
subsequent automated analysis stage.
2) Stage 2—Automated Analysis: In this stage, the pattern
knowledge base generated during the manual analysis stage is
used to automatically recommend risk levels and disposition
information for security events. Specifically, when a new
security event enters the decider, it undergoes incremental
clustering to match known pattern clusters. If a match is found,
its risk level and disposition information are obtained, and an
automatic response action is performed (such as filtering false
positives, reporting high-risk hosts, etc.). If no matched pattern
clusters are found, the security event is temporarily stored,
awaiting the arrival of other security events to potentially form
a new pattern cluster. Operators can set the allowed waiting
time for generating a new pattern cluster. After this time, if
no match is found with an existing pattern cluster and no new
pattern cluster is formed, the security event will be considered
an emergency and prioritized for pushing to the operators.
E. Training of the GNN
To alleviate the dependency on many labeled samples,
we adopt a pretraining and fine-tuning (P&F) strategy for
training the GNN [40]. In the pretraining stage, we employ
a contrastive learning paradigm for self-supervised training of
the GNN model. The primary goal of contrastive learning is to
maximize the agreement of two jointly sampled positive pairs
(G si , G s j ) and minimize the agreement of two independently
sampled negative pairs (G si , G sk ) [41]. In the fine-tuning stage,
the pretrained parameters are used as the initial parameters of
the GNN, which is then fine-tuned with a supervised task.
1) Pretraining of the GNN: We generate two types of
positive and negative sample pairs, which are based on the
basic pattern and the graph kernel method, respectively. We
generate many security events via historical data and divide
them into two sets: DBbase and DBsearch . For each sample

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS

G si ∈ DBbase , we generate two types of positive and negative
sample pairs. The first type is based on whether the samples
G si share the same basic pattern. A positive sample G s j1 with
the same basic pattern and a negative sample G sk1 with a
different basic pattern are sampled from DBsearch . For the
second type, we employ a graph kernel method to generate
positive and negative samples inside a single basic pattern
space, enhancing the GNN model’s capacity to capture subtle
differences. Specifically, we use the Neighborhood Subgraph
Pairwise Distance Kernel (NSPDK) method [42] to compute
the graph kernel distance for the sample pair (G si , G s0i ), where
G s0i ∈ DBbase and shares the same basic pattern as G si . The
NSPDK computes the graph kernel distance by comparing the
subgraph node and edge encodings in the sample pair and
is an efficient graph kernel method. We calculate the graph
kernel distance for each basic pattern in DBbase and generate
the probability density distribution. The lowest point of the
probability density distribution in the middle part (0.4—0.6)
implies a transition from similar to dissimilar sample pairs
and is more suitable as a threshold than 0.5. Therefore, we
adopt this strategy to generate the threshold ρ for each basic
pattern. Then, we randomly select samples from DBsearch
with the same basic pattern as G si and compute the graph
kernel distance. Pairs with a graph kernel distance below ρ
are considered positive sample pairs, whereas those above ρ
are considered negative sample pairs.
After positive and negative sample pairs are obtained
through the two aforementioned methods, we train the GNN
via triplet loss [43]:
˚


1X
max 0, d G si , G s j − d G si , G sk + γ
(8)
Ltriplet =
m
where G si ∈ DBbase is the anchor graph, G s j ∈ DBsearch is the
positive sample, G sk ∈ DBsearch is the negative sample, m is
the number of triplets in the dataset, and γ > 0 is the margin
parameter. d(·, ·) is a similarity measure that uses the Euclidean
distance as follows:
d(G si , G s j ) = ||Gembed i − Gembed j ||2

(9)

where Gembed i and Gembed j are the GNN embeddings of G si
and G s j , respectively.
2) Fine-Tuning of the GNN: Although pretraining allows
learning the features and structural information of the security
event G, it may miss some information relevant to downstream
tasks. Thus, we fine-tune the GNN parameters via a limited
set of labeled security events by conducting a classification
task, which identifies the risk levels of security events (i.e.,
false-positives, low-risk, medium-risk, and high-risk events).
Specifically, the pretrained GNN parameters are used as the
initialization parameters of the GNN and are jointly trained
with the prediction head consisting of a linear layer and a
softmax function. Because false-positive and low-risk events
are much more common than other risk levels in security
events are, we use a cost-sensitive cross-entropy loss function
to address the class imbalance issue.
Nc

LCE = −

1 XX
ci · log(ŷi j )
Nb
j∈s
i=1

i

(10)

6451

where Nb , Nc are the number of security events and number
of classes in a batch, respectively. ci is the cost coefficient
of class i, which is the inverse of the proportion of class i
samples in the total samples. si is the set of samples predicted
by the model as class i, and ŷi j is the predicted probability of
sample j being in class i.
IV. E VALUATION
In this section, we first present our experimental settings in
Section IV-A. We evaluate D EEP DRAC and compare it with
three baseline methods by answering three research questions.
RQ1: Can our approach effectively and interpretably reduce
the workload of alert analysis?(Section IV-B)
RQ2: Can our approach remain effective with a few
labeled samples, without relying on many labeled samples?(Section IV-C)
RQ3: Can our approach accurately reconstruct security
events from raw alerts?(Section IV-D)
A. Experimental Settings
1) Study Setup: Our experiments are conducted on a server
running the Ubuntu 18.04.6 operating system and equipped
with an Intel Xeon 3.00 GHz CPU, NVIDIA GeForce RTX
3090 GPU with CUDA 11.1, and 1024 GB of memory. The
hyperparameter settings are determined as follows. As most
security event graph diameters are less than 2, we adopt
two GraphGPS layers (i.e., L = 2). Each GraphGPS layer
takes as input the projected node features (30 dimensions),
positional encodings (walk length = 2), and projected edge
features (30 dimensions), and outputs updated node states
(30 dimensions). After L layers of GraphGPS convolution,
all node states are aggregated to obtain a 30-dimensional
graph-level representation G readout , which is concatenated with
a 2-dimensional projected graph feature to form the final
32-dimensional GNN embedding Gembed . We trained the model
for 100 epochs via the Adam optimizer, with a learning rate
of 0.001 for pretraining and 0.00001 for fine-tuning.
2) Evaluation Datasets: We evaluate the performance of
D EEP DRAC in alleviating alert fatigue via three datasets:
a real-world dataset from a power grid company and two
publicly available and widely used benchmark datasets (i.e.,
the DARPA’99 dataset [44] and CIC-IDS2017 dataset [45]).
a) EIPGC Dataset: This dataset consists of 182,640
alerts from the Enterprise Intranet of a Power Grid Company.
There are approximately 3,000 physical hosts and 1,500 virtual
hosts in the enterprise network, with an average traffic rate
of 1.2 GB/s and a maximum of 1.9 GB/s. Traffic monitoring
probes are deployed at more than 20 critical branch nodes,
generating over 50,000 alerts per day, with an initial falsepositive rate exceeding 90%. These alerts are aggregated and
forwarded to the enterprise’s SOC for further disposal. To
ensure data quality, we manually labeled most alerts in this
dataset based on their attributes, and these labels were further
verified by SOC operators, resulting in a total of 170,710
(93.47%) labeled alerts. The remaining 11,930 (6.53%) alerts
are unlabeled due to insufficient alert information.
The labeled data include various security events with different risk levels. Among them, 38,817 (22.74%) false-positive

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

alerts are triggered by normal business, such as internal vulnerability scanners and video conferences; 112,972 (65.18%)
low-risk alerts are triggered by suspicious behaviors, such as
port scans and DNS server version queries; 13,336 (7.30%)
medium-risk alerts are triggered by behaviors, such as file
detection and vulnerability exploitation, and 5,585 (3.06%)
high-risk alerts like WebLogic command execution vulnerability and the exploitation of common exposures and weaknesses
(CVEs).
b) DARPA’99 Dataset: This dataset is a mixture of
normal and real attack traffic in the network testbed of the
Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), covering 58 typical
attack methods that can be classified into five major categories,
including scanning and probing (probe), denial of service
(DOS), remote to local (R2L), user to local (U2L), and data
exfiltration (Data). As one of the most comprehensive attack
testing datasets, it has been widely used in the research
community as a benchmark dataset. In this work, we utilize
the traffic data from the last two weeks of the DARPA’99
dataset and generate alerts via Snort 3.1.18. The alerts are
then labeled via the ground truth provided in the dataset,
resulting in a total of 585,925 fully labeled alerts. Although
the DARPA’99 dataset does not provide risk levels for each
attack event, for subsequent risk level experiments, we classify
all alerts triggered by attacks as high-risk and those triggered
by normal traffic as false-positives.
c) CIC-IDS2017 Dataset: The CIC-IDS2017 dataset,
released by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC),
was generated by simulating realistic background traffic and
recent network attacks such as Brute Force FTP and DoS.
It contains five days of traffic in pcap format, with ground
truth labels provided based on flow 5-tuples and timestamps.
We convert the 59 GB of traffic into 685,560 alerts via
Snort 3.1.18. Except for Heartbleed, Snort successfully detects
the remaining 13 categories of attacks. Among them, the
most prevalent alert types are DoS Hulk and false positives,
accounting for 50.95% and 28.98% of all alerts, respectively.
For consistency, we assign risk levels to alerts following the
labeling strategy used in the DARPA’99 dataset.
The three datasets are divided into two parts: a training set
for training GNNs and a test set for evaluating the effectiveness
of automatic alert filtering. For the EIPGC dataset, we use the
first two days with a total of 86,398 alerts as the training set
and the last day with 41,403 alerts as the test set. For the
DARPA’99 dataset, we use a total of 165,795 alerts in the
fourth week as the training set and a total of 86,007 alerts
on the first two days of the fifth week as the test set. For the
CIC-IDS2017 dataset, since each category of attack occurs
only during a specific time period and does not reappear later,
we sort all alerts chronologically and use the first 70% of each
attack category as the training set and the remaining 30% as
the test set.
3) Baseline Defense Methods: We use two typical alert
reduction methods and the incomplete D EEP DRAC (i.e., nonGNN, Non-Pretrained, Unsupervised) as baselines.
a) Alert Throttling: In the context of alert throttling,
when an event is repeatedly triggered within a specific time
frame, only one consolidated alert is presented to the operator.

For example, if the equivalent alert Y is triggered 10 times
during the throttling interval, the operator will only receive a
single alert after the first occurrence. Equivalent alert Y refers
to the alert where all key fields are the same. All subsequent
instances of Equivalent alert Y within that period are merely
appended as supplementary details to the initial alert.
b) DeepCASE: Unlike traditional methods, such as alert
throttling, DeepCASE is a state-of-the-art (SOTA) method for
alert reduction based on deep learning [12]. DeepCASE is
a semi-supervised learning method based on alert sequences,
which mainly includes four modules. First, the SEQUENCING
EVENTS MODULE collects and analyzes security events to
identify relevant contextual events. The CONTEXT BUILDER
module uses a deep learning model with an attention mechanism to identify relevant contextual events and build an
attention vector. Next, the INTERPRETER module groups
the sequences into clusters based on total attention for each
distinct contextual event in a sequence. Finally, DeepCASE
is also divided into manual analysis and automated matching
stages. The manual analysis module presents each cluster
of similar event sequences to an operator who decides how
it should be treated. The semiautomatic analysis module
compares the attention-weighted events of a new sequence to
known clusters and automatically warns the operator in case
of a match.
c) Ablation Study: We conduct extensive ablation experiments to validate the effectiveness of the enhanced Louvain
algorithm, GNN module, and the training strategy. During the security event reconstruction phase, we compare
the enhanced Louvain algorithm with the standard Louvain
algorithm in terms of reconstruction accuracy and time consumption. During GNN training, we construct two versions
using only pretraining (i.e., unsupervised) or fine-tuning (i.e.,
non-pretrained) to validate the indispensability of both stages.
Additionally, we build a version where the GNN module is
completely removed to validate the importance of embedding
in providing detailed patterns (i.e., non-GNN). Because the
non-GNN version only contains basic patterns, the semiautomatic decider differs between the two stages. In the manual
analysis stage, the basic pattern is used directly as the pattern,
and the highest risk level found during the sampling process
is still taken as the risk level of the pattern cluster. In the
automated analysis stage, the security event is matched to the
pattern cluster with the same basic pattern for processing.
B. RQ1: Can Our Approach Effectively and Interpretably
Reduce the Workload of Alert Analysis?
To answer RQ1, we evaluate the workload reduction effects
of our approach in both the manual analysis stage and the
automated analysis stage. The metrics for evaluating reduction
effectiveness in the manual analysis stage include the percentage of alerts covered by the model’s capability (coverage), the
workload reduction rate for the covered portion (reduction),
and the overall workload reduction rate, including uncovered
alerts (overall). Furthermore, we evaluate performance in the
automated analysis stage in terms of accuracy, recall, precision, the F1-score, and the percentage of alerts where the
model underestimates the risk level (underestimation). The

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS

6453

TABLE IV
W ORKLOAD R EDUCTION R ESULTS . T HE AVERAGE W ORKLOAD R EDUCTION OF D EEP DRAC C OMPARED WITH BASELINE M ETHODS . OVERALL
R EPRESENTS THE OVERALL W ORKLOAD R EDUCTION R ATE D URING THE M ANUAL A NALYSIS S TAGE . U NDERESTIMATION (U NDER .) I NDICATES
THE P ROPORTION OF A LERTS W HOSE R ISK L EVELS A RE I NCORRECTLY U NDERESTIMATED D URING THE AUTOMATED F ILTERING S TAGE .
T HE F ORMULAS FOR OVERALL AND U NDER . A RE D EFINED B OTTOM THIS TABLE . H IGHLIGHTED A RE THE T OP F IRST (RED),
S ECOND (YELLOW), AND T HIRD (GREEN) R ESULTS

experimental results on the DARPA’99 and EIPGC datasets are
presented in Table IV. The following subsections detail how
these results are obtained and provide corresponding analyses.
1) Manual Analysis Stage: In this subsection, we evaluate
D EEP DRAC starting without any prior knowledge of the
pattern clusters. In the manual analysis stage (Section III-D),
D EEP DRAC reduces the workload by allowing operators to
analyze a small number of security events within pattern
clusters rather than examining all alerts.
a) Coverage: For D EEP DRAC, the coverage is the percentage of alerts contained in the pattern cluster and the two
outlier types not covered by the model: (i) Those where the
basic pattern contains fewer than Nbasic security events lack
generality and are more likely to have been formed by chance.
(ii) Noise points generated during the initial clustering process.
Setting Nbasic = 5 to identify outliers, D EEP DRAC achieves
coverage rates of 89.17%, 89.37%, and 95.86% on the CIC-

IDS2017, EIPGC, and DARPA’99 datasets, respectively. A
detailed evaluation of the pattern clustering quality under this
setting is provided in Supplementary Material Appendix A.
b) Number of Samples: For a single risk level pattern
cluster, operators can dispose of the entire cluster by sampling
any security event. However, there are also pattern clusters
containing different risk levels, which we refer to as bad
pattern clusters. For bad pattern clusters, a single sample
analysis is not sufficient to address the whole cluster, but
requires further investigation by the operator. Operators need
to analyze a certain number of samples to identify bad pattern
clusters, ensuring the reliability of the alert disposition results.
The probability of successfully identifying whether a pattern
cluster is a bad pattern cluster is as follows:

X N|r|
s

(11)
P(bad|N s ) = 1 −
Ne
r∈Pc

Ns

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

captures both temporal and spatial correlations among alerts,
enabling more efficient compression. This advantage results
in fewer security events that require manual analysis, as
evidenced by the “Events” column in Table IV. In particular,
for the EIPGC dataset, which contains alerts generated in a
complex network topology, D EEP DRAC demonstrates a clear
advantage over DeepCASE by leveraging spatial information.
This leads to a significant performance improvement, achieving a 19.08% higher overall workload reduction compared
with the second-best method, DeepCASE.
Fig. 6. Probability of identifying bad pattern clusters (pattern clusters
containing security events with different risk levels), which varies with the
number of samples taken by the operators for each cluster.

where Ne is the number of security events contained in a pattern cluster Pc , r ⊂ Pc represents a set of security events within
a single risk level and |r| ≥ N s ; otherwise, P(bad|N s ) = 1.
According to (11), the change in the probability of identifying
bad pattern clusters as the number of samples increases on
the EIPGC dataset is shown in Fig. 6. D EEP DRAC can
successfully identify bad pattern clusters with a probability
of 96.20% by sampling eight security events for each pattern
cluster on the EIPGC dataset. If the number of sampling events
is 18, the probability of successfully identifying bad pattern
clusters reaches 98%. Additionally, in the experiments, the
highest risk level is used as the risk level of bad pattern
clusters, which is consistent with the way alerts are processed
in reality.
c) Workload Reduction: We conduct a real-world simulation of D EEP DRAC. To ensure a fair comparison with
other methods, we set the sampling number of all methods
to the minimum value at which the probability of identifying
the bad pattern cluster exceeds 96%. For the covered alerts
of D EEP DRAC, the reduction is the percentage reduction in
workload when alerts are disposed of based on pattern clusters:
N s × Nclusters
(12)
Ncover
where N s , Nclusters and Ncover are number of security events
sampled from each pattern cluster Pc , the number of Pc
and the number of covered alerts, respectively. D EEP DRAC
achieves a reduction of 98.85%, 97.77%, and 99.75% in analysis workload on the DARPA’99, EIPGC, and CIC-IDS2017
datasets, respectively. For all alerts, the overall work reduction
is measured as follows:
N s × Nclusters + Nuncover
(13)
Overall = 1 −
Nall
where Nall is the total number of alerts, and Nuncover refers to
the number of security events that are not covered.
As shown in Table IV, D EEP DRAC consistently achieves
the highest overall reduction in alert analysis workload across
all three datasets, with reductions exceeding 95%. The effectiveness of D EEP DRAC in reducing alert analysis workload
primarily stems from its two-stage alert compression process:
first aggregating raw alerts into security events, and then
grouping these events into pattern clusters. Compared to alert
throttling based on alert similarity and DeepCASE based
on event sequences, the graph-based design of D EEP DRAC
reduction = 1 −

2) Automated Analysis Stage: In the automated analysis
stage (Section III-D), the newly arrived alerts are processed
by D EEP DRAC to generate security events and patterns.
Then, D EEP DRAC recommends disposition methods and
event descriptions for the new alerts by matching with the
pattern knowledge base, enabling automatic disposition. It is
important to note that misclassifications in the recommendation results include both overestimations and underestimations.
Although overestimating risk will reduce workload reduction,
it is generally preferable to underestimating, as missing true
threats can lead to more serious consequences in real-world
security scenarios. Table IV lists the matching results of
D EEP DRAC and the two baseline methods, from which we
draw the following conclusions:
(i) D EEP DRAC provides the most accurate recommendations for alert disposition. Across all three datasets,
D EEP DRAC nearly always achieves the best performance in terms of accuracy, recall, precision, and F1
score. The only exceptions are recall on the EIPGC and
CIC-IDS2017 datasets (0.47% and 0.01% below the top
performer, respectively) and precision on EIPGC (0.69%
lower than the top performer).
(ii) D EEP DRAC captures more attacks within the alerts
while maintaining an extremely low underestimation
rate. Although D EEP DRAC does not achieve the lowest
underestimation rate, it consistently maintains a low rate
of no more than 0.04% across all datasets. Meanwhile,
except for slightly fewer matched attack counts than
Alert throttling (which has limited accuracy) on CICIDS2017, D EEP DRAC captures the most attacks among
the three methods when matching the same number of
alerts on the other two datasets. The ability to maintain
an underestimation rate below 0.04% and an accuracy
rate exceeding 97% while capturing more attack alerts
indicates that the recommendations of D EEP DRAC are
more precise and robust. In contrast, although DeepCASE attains a slightly lower underestimation rate, it
captures significantly fewer attacks and exhibits much
lower accuracy (80.77% on EIPGC and 61.94% on CICIDS2017), indicating that it tends to overestimate the
severity of alerts excessively.
(iii) The GNN module, pretraining strategy and fine-tuning
strategy of D EEP DRAC are all effective and indispensable. D EEP DRAC(non-GNN) shows severe degradation,
with a recommendation accuracy of only 14.99% on
the DARPA’99, far below the 97.96% achieved by
D EEP DRAC. Similarly, D EEP DRAC(non-pretrained)

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS

6455

Fig. 7. Performance of D EEP DRAC (both pretrained and non-pretrained versions) when fine-tuned with labeled samples of different sizes on the DARPA’99
and EIPGC datasets. 1) D EEP DRAC has the ability for unsupervised learning. When the train data size is 0, the pretrained model achieves over 90% accuracy
and recall on both datasets. 2) D EEP DRAC can learn from a few labeled samples. When the train data size is 1%, 5% and 10%, the pretrained model shows
improvements in both accuracy and recall (in contrast, the non-pretrained model does not show such improvements on the EIPGC and CIC-IDS2017 datasets).
3) D EEP DRAC can quickly approach the model’s performance limit. When the training data size reaches 20%, the pretrained model reaches its performance
limit on the EIPGC dataset, and on the other two datasets, both its accuracy and recall are within 3% of the best results.

and D EEP DRAC-unsupervised (non-finetuned) also fail
to reach the performance of D EEP DRAC.
Answer to RQ1: D EEP DRAC can effectively reduce the
workload of alert analysis and significantly outperforms the
two baseline defense methods. In addition to recommending
disposal methods, D EEP DRAC also provides descriptions
of security events, maintaining interpretability. The practical
implications of D EEP DRAC for SOC operators are illustrated
in Appendix B of the Supplementary material.
C. RQ2: Can Our Approach Remain Effective With a Few
Labeled Samples Without Relying on a Large Number of
Labeled Samples?
To answer RQ2, we evaluate the effectiveness of D EEP DRAC using different sizes of labeled samples, with a
particular focus on its performance when only a few labeled
samples are available. It should be noted that due to the attack
alerts in CIC-IDS2017 being concentrated in several DoS
security events, and both pretrained and non-pretrained models
being able to effectively identify these events, the performance
difference between the two models at the alert level is minimal.
Therefore, we further evaluate them at the event level for the
CIC-IDS2017 dataset, while retaining alert level evaluation for
the other two datasets.
As shown in Fig. 7, we fine-tune D EEP DRAC using labeled
samples ranging from 0% to 100% and evaluate the performance of the pretrained model and the non-pretrained model
in the automated analysis stage. First, the experimental results
show that D EEP DRAC has the ability for unsupervised learning. When the training data size is 0, meaning that no labeled
samples are involved in the training, the pretrained model
achieves accuracy and recall rates above 90% on both datasets
and even approaching the performance of the non-pretrained
model with 100% train data size. Since the non-pretrained
model starts with randomly initialized parameters and lacks
the ability to perform meaningful matching at 0%, we begin
its evaluation from the 1% setting. Second, the experimental
results show that D EEP DRAC can learn from a few labeled
samples, whereas the non-pretrained model struggles to do so.
When the training data size is less than or equal to 10%, the

non-pretrained model fails to learn meaningful information on
the two more complex datasets, showing improvement only
on the relatively simpler DARPA’99 dataset. In contrast, the
pretrained model can effectively leverage a small number of
labeled data, achieving significantly improved accuracy and
recall across all three datasets with only 5% or 10% of
the labeled data. Third, the experimental results show that
D EEP DRAC can quickly reach the model’s performance limit.
When the train data size is 20%, the pretrained model reaches
its performance limit on the EIPGC dataset, and on the other
two datasets, both its accuracy and recall are within 2% and
3% of the best results, respectively.
Answer to RQ2: Benefiting from the pretraining strategy,
D EEP DRAC remains effective with a few labeled samples
and can quickly reach its performance limit as the number
of samples increases without relying on a large amount of
labeled data.
D. RQ3: Can Our Approach Accurately Reconstruct Security
Events From Raw Alerts?
To answer RQ3, we evaluate the quality of the security
events generated based on the partitioning of the alert graph.
We conduct comparisons across three datasets via several community detection algorithms, including Girvan-Newman (GN),
Label Propagation Algorithm (LPA), Louvain, and Leiden.
Since the enhanced Louvain algorithm applies a secondary
refinement over the Louvain results, we additionally include
a nested application of the Louvain algorithm (denoted as DLouvain) as a comparative baseline.
A necessary condition for alerts contained in a security
event being part of the same security event is that these alerts
share the same risk level. The distribution of risk levels for
the security event in three datasets is shown in Table V.
Across all three datasets, D EEP DRAC achieves high-quality
reconstruction of security events from raw alerts: over 98% of
the constructed events consist of alerts sharing the same risk
level, and these events collectively contain more than 95% of
all alerts. When we relax the constraint to allow grouping
alerts with adjacent risk levels (e.g., low and medium, or
medium and high), this percentage increases to over 96%.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE V
Q UALITY E VALUATION OF S ECURITY E VENT R ECONSTRUCTION F ROM
R AW A LERTS

further clusters events into three clusters (pattern clusters)
using GNN embeddings, which capture detailed information
such as the distribution (distri.) of attacks and the number of
compromised nodes, making cluster boundaries more distinct.
By sampling eight security events from each cluster, SOC
operators determined that pattern clusters #1 and #2 are
triggered by internal personnel accessing websites potentially
containing XSS vulnerabilities via the NAT server, which are
non-malicious and thus classified as low-risk (monitor but
no action required). In contrast, pattern cluster #3 involves
attackers using distributed IP addresses for frequent XML
injection attempts, indicating clear malicious intent, prompting
IP blocking. The triggering causes and disposal strategies are
stored in D EEP DRAC’s pattern knowledge base. Finally, when
new security events match pattern clusters #1 and #3, D EEP DRAC immediately recommends corresponding risk levels
and disposal strategies for operators’ reference. If operators
trust D EEP DRAC’s strategies for these clusters, D EEP DRAC
can automatically deploy the response actions.
V. D EFENSE AND D ISCUSSION
A. Time Efficiency Analysis

Overall, D EEP DRAC consistently delivers the best performance among all the evaluated methods, with particularly large
margins over the second-best approaches on the EIPGC and
CIC-IDS2017 datasets. In fact, on the CIC-IDS2017 dataset,
the time intervals between different categories of attacks are
relatively long, and there are only two risk levels: false positive
and high risk (corresponding to attacks). Therefore, security
events composed of alerts of a single risk level are equivalent
to those composed of alerts with the same triggering cause,
and D EEP DRAC achieves 96.58% accurate reconstruction on
them. The primary reconstruction challenges for the CICIDS2017 dataset arise from botnet events. Among all 59
security events involving two risk levels, 41 events (accounting
for 69.49%) are composed of botnet alerts and false positive
alerts. The potential impact of these mixed events is further
discussed in Section V-B.
Answer to RQ3: D EEP DRAC can accurately reconstruct
security events from raw alerts, achieving over 95% recovery
accuracy for single-risk security events on all datasets.
E. From Pattern to Disposition: A DeepDRAC Case Study
We present a representative case from the EIPGC dataset to
illustrate how D EEP DRAC provides interpretable descriptions
for security events and enables automated alert disposition
through pattern-based analysis.
First, D EEP DRAC categorizes security events reconstructed
from raw alerts into basic patterns, each of which provides an
overview of the event. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the basic pattern
in this case indicates that multiple unknown IP addresses
attempted XSS and injection attacks targeting an internal
NAT server. Second, within this basic pattern, D EEP DRAC

To evaluate the practical feasibility of D EEP DRAC in
real-world scenarios, this section presents an analysis of its
runtime performance and scalability when dealing with alerts
of different scales. We use the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, which
contains a diverse range of attack categories, as the source
of alert data. To assess time consumption, we evaluate both
the model inference and training stages across varying alert
scales, with Nalert = 1 ∼ 500K. The results show that during
the model training stage, even when trained with 500K alerts,
the GNN can complete training on a single NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 3090 GPU in 27.8 minutes (compared to 35 minutes for
DeepCASE). This is because that the GNN model is designed
as a lightweight model with only 71,719 parameters. During
the model inference stage, D EEP DRAC achieves efficient processing of large-scale alerts while maintaining near-linear time
complexity. Additionally, compared to the standard Louvain
algorithm, it exhibits better scalability under high alert volumes. Relevant experimental results and theoretical analyses
are provided in Appendix C of the Supplementary material.
B. Detection Performance Across Attack Categories
This section discusses the attack-specific detection performance of D EEP DRAC to provide deeper insights into its
strengths and limitations. We evaluate D EEP DRAC across all
attack scenarios in the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, focusing on the
recall and false-positive rate (FPR) for each attack category.
The FPR refers to the proportion of samples that do not belong
to a given attack category but are incorrectly predicted as that
category.
Table VI in the Supplementary material presents the performance of D EEP DRAC across different attack scenarios.
Since Snort3 detected only a very limited number of SQL
injection alerts (19 out of 685,560), no recommendation could
be matched for this category. For the remaining 12 attack categories, recommendations were successfully generated during

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DEEPDRAC: DISPOSITION RECOMMENDATION FOR ALERT CLUSTERS

6457

Fig. 8. A case study in D EEP DRAC: Pattern-based analysis and automated disposition in D EEP DRAC. An example from the EIPGC dataset illustrates
how D EEP DRAC provides summary descriptions for security events through basic patterns, clusters them into three fine-grained pattern clusters using GNN
embeddings, and recommends appropriate risk levels and disposal strategies.

testing. The recommendation results show that D EEP DRAC
performs excellently in five attack categories: PortScan, SSHPatator, Web-Brute Force, DoS Slowloris, and FTP-Patator,
achieving a 99% recall rate while maintaining an FPR below
0.1%. For the remaining seven attack categories with relatively
lower performance, we analyze the sources of false positives
and the types of missed predictions, as detailed in Table
VII in the Supplementary material. The analysis leads to the
following conclusions:
(i) D EEP DRAC confuses four categories of DoS attacks
(DDoS, DoS Hulk, DoS Slowhttptest, and DoS GoldenEye) but can distinguish DoS from other attack
scenarios. Four DoS attack categories serve as the primary sources of false positives, and the categories of
missed predictions are the same. Owing to attack characteristics similar to DoS (a large number of requests
in a short time), a small number of PortScan events are
also confused with DoS attacks.
(ii) Limited by the extremely scarce training data for the
Web-XSS and infiltration attack categories, D EEP DRAC
has very limited detection capabilities for them.
(iii) D EEP DRAC performs the worst on botnet (Bot) attacks,
failing to distinguish them from BENIGN alerts. Further
analysis reveals that D EEP DRAC reconstructs 56 security events containing Bot alerts, among which 41 are
mixed with BENIGN alerts. This causes these security
events to exhibit characteristics of both BENIGN and
botnet alerts, making it difficult for D EEP DRAC to
differentiate between them.
C. Robustness and Stability of the Model
In the historical alerts of the SOC, there may be mislabeled
data. This section analyzes the impact of mislabeled data on
D EEP DRAC. We simulate the process of operators labeling
security events via D EEP DRAC by introducing controlled
label noise into the CIC-IDS2017 training set. Specifically,
we randomly select between 1% and 100% of the data for
corruption, employing the following strategy: 1) If a BENIGN
security event is selected, it is randomly relabeled as an
arbitrary attack category; 2) if an attack security event is
selected, it has a 50% chance of being mislabeled as another

attack category and a 50% chance of being mislabeled as
BENIGN. We then retrain the best performing D EEP DRAC
model from Section IV-B using the corrupted training set and
evaluate its performance in terms of overall alert reduction,
recommendation accuracy, and recommendation recall. Fig.
11 in the Supplementary material presents the performance of
D EEP DRAC under varying proportions of mislabeled data:
(i) Recommendation Accuracy: When the mislabeled data
size is ≤ 10%, fine-tuning still has a positive effect,
resulting in higher accuracy than the model without finetuning. When the mislabeled data size exceeds 10%,
fine-tuning begins to negatively impact accuracy. However, even with 100% mislabeled data, the pretrained
knowledge remains effective: GNN embeddings still
contribute positively, and the accuracy remains higher
than that of the non-GNN model.
(ii) Recommendation Recall: The recall is barely affected by
the mislabeled data size and remains consistently above
99%.
(iii) Although the ability of D EEP DRAC to reduce the alert
analysis workload decreases as the amount of mislabeled
data increases, D EEP DRAC still reduces the analysis
workload by 97% even when the mislabeled data size is
100%. This capability comes mainly from reconstructing
raw alerts into security events, which greatly compresses
the analysis scale. In particular, the event reconstruction
stage is entirely based on unlabeled data and is decoupled from GNN training.
Overall, even in the presence of mislabeled data, D EEP DRAC still performs effectively. This robustness benefits
from the combined effect of multiple D EEP DRAC modules,
including unsupervised security event reconstruction, the GNN
pretraining strategy, and hierarchical clustering of security
events (which first requires matching basic patterns before
clustering based on GNN embeddings).
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we develop a novel alert validation method,
D EEP DRAC, which quickly disposes of alerts through event
reconstruction and pattern recommendation. We confirm the
efficiency of alert disposal via event reconstruction and pattern recommendation while preserving interpretability well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Extensive experimental results demonstrate that D EEP DRAC
can reduce the workload of alert analysis more effectively
than the two baseline methods can. In addition, the fact that
D EEP DRAC does not rely on expert knowledge or extensive
labeled training data highlights its potential as a useful tool
for real-world security operations centers. In the future, we
plan to enhance the recognition of rare categories by leveraging synthetic sample generation techniques and refining the
enhanced Louvain algorithm to better handle complex attack
scenarios such as Botnets.
R EFERENCES
[1]

F. B. Kokulu et al., “Matched and mismatched SOCs: A qualitative
study on security operations center issues,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2019, pp. 1955–1970.
[2] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
2019, pp. 1–15.
[3] K. Bhukar et al., “Dynamic- X-Y: A tool for learning dynamic alert
suppression policies in AIOps,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Commun. Syst.
Netw. (COMSNETS), Jan. 2024, pp. 291–293.
[4] T. Ahmed, A. Shah, M. Kolla, and R. Yellasiri, “Reduction of alert
fatigue using extended isolation forest,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Forensics,
Anal., Big Data, Secur. (FABS), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–5.
[5] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2783–2800.
[6] X. Wang, X. Yang, X. Liang, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, and X. Gong,
“Combating alert fatigue with AlertPro: Context-aware alert prioritization using reinforcement learning for multi-step attack detection,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103583.
[7] CISCO.(2019). Anticipating the Unknowns–chief Information Security Officer (CISO) Benchmark Study. [Online]. Available: https://
ebooks.cisco.com/story/anticipating-unknowns/
[8] G. Ho, A. Sharma, M. Javed, V. Paxson, and D. Wagner, “Detecting
credential spearphishing in enterprise settings,” in Proc. 26th USENIX
Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 469–485.
[9] T. E. T. Djaidja, B. Brik, S. M. Senouci, A. Boualouache, and Y. GhamriDoudane, “Early network intrusion detection enabled by attention
mechanisms and RNNs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 7783–7793, 2024.
[10] J. He, C. Tang, W. Li, T. Li, L. Chen, and X. Lan, “BR-HIDF: An
anti-sparsity and effective host intrusion detection framework based
on multi-granularity feature extraction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 19, pp. 485–499, 2024.
[11] C. Zha et al., “A-NIDS: Adaptive network intrusion detection system
based on clustering and stacked CTGAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 20, pp. 3204–3219, 2025.
[12] T. V. Ede et al., “DEEPCASE: Semi-supervised contextual analysis of
security events,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2022,
pp. 522–539.
[13] N. Hubballi and V. Suryanarayanan, “False alarm minimization techniques in signature-based intrusion detection systems: A survey,”
Comput. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1–17, Aug. 2014.
[14] A. A. Ramaki, A. Rasoolzadegan, and A. G. Bafghi, “A systematic
mapping study on intrusion alert analysis in intrusion detection systems,”
ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 1–41, May 2019.
[15] M. Husák, M. Cermák, M. Laštovicka, and J. Vykopal, “Exchanging
security events: Which and how many alerts can we aggregate?,” in
Proc. IFIP/IEEE Symp. Integr. Netw. Service Manage. (IM), May 2017,
pp. 604–607.
[16] X. Luo et al., “BiCAM: A bidirectional contextualized attentive model
for analyzing the correlation of heterogeneous security events,” IEEE
Trans. Rel., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 2640–2654, Jun. 2025.
[17] Y. Liu, X. Shu, Y. Sun, J. Jang, and P. Mittal, “RAPID: Real-time
alert investigation with context-aware prioritization for efficient threat
discovery,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022,
pp. 827–840.
[18] J. Liu et al., “Context2 Vector: Accelerating security event triage via
context representation learning,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 146, Jun.
2022, Art. no. 106856.

[19] A. AlEroud and G. Karabatis, “Beyond data: Contextual information
fusion for cyber security analytics,” in Proc. 31st Annu. ACM Symp.
Appl. Comput., Apr. 2016, pp. 73–79.
[20] Q. Cheng, C. Wu, and S. Zhou, “Discovering attack scenarios via
intrusion alert correlation using graph convolutional networks,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1564–1567, May 2021.
[21] Y. Liu et al., “A context-aware clustering approach for assisting operators
in classifying security alerts,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 51, no. 1,
pp. 153–171, Jan. 2025.
[22] M. E. Aminanto, L. Zhu, T. Ban, R. Isawa, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue,
“Combating threat-alert fatigue with online anomaly detection using
isolation forest,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process., Sydney,
NSW, Australia. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Jan. 2019, pp. 756–765.
[23] J. Mink et al., “Everybody’s got ML, tell me what else you have:
Practitioners’ perception of ML-based security tools and explanations,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2023, pp. 2068–2085.
[24] S. Fortunato, “Community detection in graphs,” Phys. Rep., vol. 486,
nos. 3–5, pp. 75–174, Feb. 2010.
[25] U. N. Raghavan, R. Albert, and S. Kumara, “Near linear time algorithm
to detect community structures in large-scale networks,” Phys. Rev. E,
Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat. Interdiscip. Top., vol. 76, no. 3, Sep.
2007, Art. no. 036106.
[26] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, “Community structure in social
and biological networks,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 99, no. 12,
pp. 7821–7826, Jun. 2002.
[27] M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan, “Finding and evaluating community
structure in networks,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat.
Interdiscip. Top., vol. 69, no. 2, Feb. 2004, Art. no. 026113.
[28] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast
unfolding of communities in large networks,” J. Stat. Mechanics: Theory
Exp., vol. 2008, no. 10, Oct. 2008, Art. no. P10008.
[29] J. Han, J. Pei, and Y. Yin, “Mining frequent patterns without candidate
generation,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 1–12, May 2000.
[30] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii,
and U. Alon, “Network motifs: Simple building blocks of complex
networks,” Science, vol. 298, no. 5594, pp. 824–827, 2002.
[31] S. Wernicke and F. Rasche, “FANMOD: A tool for fast network motif
detection,” Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1152–1153, May 2006.
[32] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
“Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. 34th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learning, vol. 70, 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
[33] V. P. Dwivedi, A. T. Luu, L. Thomas, Y. Bengio, and X. Bresson, “Graph neural networks with learnable structural and positional
representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021,
pp. 1–15.
[34] L. Rampásek, M. Galkin, V. P. Dwivedi, A. T. Luu, G. Wolf, and
D. Beaini, “Recipe for a general, powerful, scalable graph transformer,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Jan. 2022, pp. 14501–14515.
[35] W. Hu et al., “Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–18.
[36] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[37] P. Velič kovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lió, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., Jan. 2017, pp. 1–12.
[38] Z. Wang, J. Chen, and H. Chen, “EGAT: Edge-featured graph attention
network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Bratislava, Slovakia.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, Sep. 2021, pp. 253–264.
[39] Y. Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. S. Zemel, “Gated graph
sequence neural networks,” in Proc. ICLR, Jan. 2015, pp. 1–20.
[40] W. Jin et al., “Self-supervised learning on graphs: Deep insights and
new direction,” 2020, arXiv:2006.10141.
[41] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning
on graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023.
[42] F. Costa and K. D. Grave, “Fast neighborhood subgraph pairwise
distance kernel,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jun.
2010, pp. 255–262.
[43] Y. Li, C. Gu, T. Dullien, O. Vinyals, and P. Kohli, “Graph matching
networks for learning the similarity of graph structured objects,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 3835–3845.
[44] (1999). DARPA Intrusion Detection Evaluation Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://archive.ll.mit.edu/ideval/data/1999data.html
[45] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), vol. 1, 2018,
pp. 108–116.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 01,2026 at 02:04:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.