IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

2511614

Detecting Multivariate Time Series Anomalies With
Cascade Decomposition Consistency
Ruoheng Li , Zhongyao Liu , Xi Zhu , Lin Li , and Xianbin Cao , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract— Multivariate time series anomaly detection is crucial
in sensitive domains such as cybersecurity and grid monitoring, significantly contributing to the reliability and safety
of system operation. However, current methods suffer from
inadequate utilization of decomposed time series, insufficient
mining of contextual dependencies within the time series, and
limited robustness against anomalies during training. To address
these limitations, we propose the consistency-enhanced normalizing flow (ConFlow) model, which utilizes the consistency of
decomposed time series and contextual temporal embedding
to enhance the discriminative ability of the flow model. First,
to refine the extraction of time series components, we propose
a cascade decomposition and mixing module that iteratively
decouples the time series. Second, these components are mapped
to Gaussian distributions through the context-aware normalizing
flow, incorporating both inter- and intra-series information into
the density estimation. Third, the density consistency among
decomposed time series is measured to reweight the estimation,
while highly inconsistent series are viewed as anomalies and
masked during training to improve model robustness. Finally,
anomalies are detected using reweight density estimation. Experiments on five widely used datasets in the time series anomaly
detection field demonstrate the superiority of our method over
state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches.
Index Terms— Consistency measurement, density estimation,
normalizing flow, time series anomaly detection, time series
decomposition.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

IME series exist in various forms in different domains,
such as electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings [1],
industrial sensor outputs [2], and flight trajectories [3]. The
ability to detect anomalies in time series data is paramount for
ensuring operational efficiency and reliability [4]. For example, in motor fault diagnosis [5], time series anomaly detection
facilitates the early identification of irregular motor behaviors,
preventing unexpected downtime and reducing maintenance
Received 1 August 2024; revised 30 October 2024; accepted 10 November
2024. Date of publication 3 March 2025; date of current version 13 March
2025. This work was supported in part by Beijing Natural Science Foundation
under Grant 4254101 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62373029. The Associate Editor coordinating the review
process was Dr. Mahnoosh Tajmirriahi. (Corresponding author: Xi Zhu.)
Ruoheng Li, Zhongyao Liu, Xi Zhu, and Xianbin Cao are with the School of
Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191,
China, also with the Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology of Near Space
Information System, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of
China, Beijing 100191, China, also with the National Engineering Laboratory
for Comprehensive Transportation Big Data Application Technology, Beijing
100191, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of CNS/ATM, Beijing
100191, China (e-mail: ruohengli@buaa.edu.cn; zhongyaoliu@buaa.edu.cn;
zhuxi@buaa.edu.cn; xbcao@buaa.edu.cn).
Lin Li is with the National Computer Network Emergency Response
Technical Team, Coordination Center of China, Beijing 100029, China
(e-mail: lilin@cert.org.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2025.3547479

costs through predictive maintenance. Similarly, in healthcare,
the early detection of anomalies in heart rate variability, blood
glucose levels, and respiratory patterns can be lifesaving for
patients, facilitating timely medical interventions [6].
The early methods of anomaly detection relied on statistical techniques such as extreme value theory [9] and
statistical tests [4], [10]. However, as data has become
high-dimensional and non-stationary, these statistical methods
have become less effective due to their strict assumptions about
data distribution. To overcome these drawbacks, predictionbased [11], [12] and reconstruction-based methods [13] that
are empowered by deep learning methods have emerged. These
techniques rely on clean data to learn normal representations
and identify data with significant prediction or reconstruction errors as anomalies. However, labeled data is costly,
and clean datasets are often difficult to obtain, which limits
the adaptability of these methods. In contrast, density-based
methods are less dependent on labels and quality of training
data, identifying data distributed in the sparse regions as
anomalies through density estimation. Nevertheless, classical
techniques in this category, such as kernel density estimation
(KDE) [10] and Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) [14],
face challenges in effectively managing high-dimensional
time series.
In recent years, density-based approaches have turned to
normalizing flow models, a type of deep generative model
that enables flexible density estimation through an invertible
transformation [16], [17]. Normalizing flows were first introduced for time series anomaly detection by GANF [18], which
augments the flow model with a directed acyclic graph to better
capture temporal dependencies, thus improving the accuracy
of the estimation. However, GANF estimated the density for
all series using a unified distribution, ignoring the specific
characteristics of individual series. To address this limitation,
MTGFLOW [19] was proposed, mapping different time series
into distinct Gaussian distributions. However, MTGFLOW
overlooked intra-series temporal information, limiting the estimation accuracy of the normalizing flow. The above methods
still share some limitations that need improvement.
1) Insufficient utilization of decomposed time series: Time
series can be decomposed into low-frequency trend
and high-frequency seasonal components (as shown in
Fig. 1) [20], offering detailed and diverse views for
temporal analysis [21]. However, effectively utilizing
decomposed components to enhance anomaly representation in density-based methods remains under-explored.
2) Insufficient mining of contextual dependencies in time
series: Anomalies typically exhibit different correlations

1557-9662 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

2511614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Fig. 1. Original time series as well as the trend and seasonal components
extracted from it through seasonality-trend decomposition [7]. Both of the
original series are selected from the PSM dataset [8].

This article is organized as follows. Section II reviews
the related work on time series decomposition and anomaly
detection. Section III details our findings on the density
inconsistency of anomalous time series and provides some
background information on the normalizing flow models.
Section IV presents a detailed description of the proposed
model, followed by extensive experiments that demonstrate
the performance of the proposed model in Section V. Finally,
Section VI summarizes this article and presents some limitations of our work.
II. R ELATED W ORKS

with their adjacent time points [22]. Current anomaly
detection methods primarily focused on modeling temporal correlation between different series but overlooked
the contextual information within individual time series,
degrading the accuracy of density estimation and
anomaly detection.
3) Limited robustness against anomalies during model
training: Normalizing flows do not depend heavily on
a clean training set. However, a training set with many
abnormal time series may cause models to misinterpret
frequent anomalous patterns as normal. Therefore, the
strategy should be designed to enhance model tolerance
against anomalies.
To address the above challenge, we propose consistencyenhanced normalizing flow (ConFlow). Compared with
previous works that based on the normalizing flow
model [18], [19], we further utilize time series decomposition
and find that abnormal decomposed time series often show
poor consistency in density estimation (details elaborated in
Section III). We utilize this generalizable characteristic of
anomalies and design a consistency-mask loss reweight module to enhance model robustness and discriminative ability.
Additionally, we encode contextual relevance within individual
time series using self-attention, which captures subtle variations in time series so as to help anomaly detection. Overall,
our model contains three key innovative components. First,
a cascade decomposition and mixing module to iteratively
refine the discriminative decomposed components. Second,
context-aware normalizing flow that embeds both inter- and
intra-series correlation for accurate density estimation. Third,
a consistency-mask loss reweight module that utilizes the
consistency of decomposed components to enhance model
robustness and discriminative ability.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
1) We propose an enhanced normalizing flow model that
utilizes cascade decomposition consistency and contextual dependencies within time series to improve
detection accuracy and robustness.
2) We incorporate a self-attention mechanism to capture
contextual correlations and design a loss reweight and
mask module that utilizes the density inconsistency of
anomalies to enhance model performance.
3) We validated the effectiveness of our approach on
five benchmark datasets, demonstrating superior performance compared to eight state-of-the-art (SOTA) time
series anomaly detection methods.

Considering that time series decomposition serves as the
foundation of ConFlow, we survey the approaches of time
series decomposition before reviewing the time series anomaly
detection methods.
A. Time Series Decomposition
Time series typically consist of multiscale periods and
diverse underlying patterns [20]. Decomposition techniques
can help to separate these patterns [23], thereby improving
data utility and feature representation quality. In recent years,
decomposition has become integral to various time series tasks
such as forecasting, classification, and anomaly detection,
contributing to several SOTA methods like TimeMixer [24]
and FEDformer [25].
Commonly used time series decomposition methods include
discrete wavelet transformation [26] and seasonality-trend
decomposition [27], both of which divide time series into
high-frequency seasonal components and low-frequency trend
components [28]. Wu proposed a seasonality-trend decomposition block [7] using moving average pooling to separate trend
and seasonal components. This method is simple to implement
and integrate with deep learning models, offering a fast and
scalable solution for time series decomposition.
Recently, the time series decomposition module has been
incorporated into several prediction-based and reconstructionbased time series anomaly detection methods, such as
MEGA [20] and TimesNet [29], achieving improved performance by combining anomaly scores across different decomposed components. However, effectively utilizing decomposed
time series in density-based anomaly detection methods
remains a challenge. Decomposition often leads to varying
density estimations and inconsistent anomaly scores, as shown
in Fig. 2. Simply combining derived anomaly scores from the
original series and its decomposed components can produce
confounded results and achieve poor anomaly discriminative
ability [as shown in Fig. 2(d)]. Thus, exploring a generalizable anomaly representation of decomposed series is
essential to enhance the discriminative ability of density-based
methods [30].
B. Time Series Anomaly Detection
Generally, time series anomaly detection models can be
classified into supervised and unsupervised ones. Supervised models rely on high-cost human labels, thus making

LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY

2511614

Fig. 2. Normalized anomaly scores on PSM test set [8] achieved by the MAF [15] for (a) original, (b) trend, and (c) seasonal time series. (d) Score
accumulation depicts the normalized score sum of (a)–(c). The overlap (magenta) between the normal (indigo) and abnormal (salmon) histograms indicates
the discriminative ability of the model.

unsupervised methods preferable in most cases. Specifically, unsupervised methods can be broadly classified into
three types.
1) Prediction or reconstruction-based methods, which aim
to learn representations of normal sequences and identify
anomalies based on prediction [31] or reconstruction
errors [32], [33]. Recent advanced architectures like
Transformer enhance these methods with improved
global and local perception ability on time series,
thereby boosting anomaly detection performance. Examples include TranAD [34] and DTADD [35]. Generative
models, such as autoencoder [20], [33], [36] and generative adversarial network (GAN) [37], [38], [39], also
demonstrate their strong ability in representation learning and reconstruction. However, these models often
rely on a training set without anomalies to learn normal representation [37], which can reduce the general
applicability of these methods.
2) Distance-based methods, such as local outlier factors
(LOFs) [40] and isolation forests [41], which identify
anomalies by high pairwise distances between series
features. However, these methods struggle to handle
complex, high-dimensional data due to the curse of
dimensionality. As the dimensionality increases, the
pairwise distance between any two points becomes
nearly equal, making it difficult to distinguish between
normal and anomalous points. Although some methods,
such as DeepSVDD [42] and DeepSAD [43], extend the
traditional distance-based approaches by incorporating
deep learning methods, they still face challenges in
handling extremely high-dimensional spaces and need
a relative clean training set to learn a hypersphere to
separate anomalies from normal data.
3) Density-based methods, which identify anomalies as
observations with low density by density estimation. These approaches do not impose restrictions on
data distribution and offer high adaptability. Classical
density-based methods such as kernel density estimate [10] and GMMs [44] struggle with complex,
high-dimensional data. DAGMM [14] improves the
GMMs by combining it with autoencoder but still has
limitations when applied to multivariate time series.
Normalizing flows can address these issues [17], leveraging reversible and differentiable transformations to

map complex distributions into standard ones, thereby
facilitating density estimation and anomaly detection [18], [19]. However, the performance of normalizing flow on time series detection has not been fully
exploited. Further efforts should be made by exploring
more temporal features of series and improving model
robustness.
III. P RELIMINARY
In this section, we present our experiments and findings
on the consistency feature of anomalies within decomposed
series and provide some background information about normalizing flow.
A. Consistency Among Decomposed Time Series
We measured the density consistency among time series
and their decomposed components. The density was estimated
using masked autoregressive flows (MAFs) [15], a variant of
normalizing flow. Specifically, we first progressively decomposed the series in each detection window (set to 60 timestep)
into trend and seasonal components using average pooling [7].
The original series and their decomposed components were
input into MAF to map distributions. We used the trained
model to estimate the density of both the original and decomposed series. We then calculated the Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence between their density estimation, with higher KL
divergence indicating lower consistency. Experiments were
conducted on five datasets: PSM [8], SWaT [45], WADI [46],
MSL [31], and SMD [32].
We applied the bootstrap method [47] to calculate 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) of the KL divergence sum of normal
and abnormal series. The number of bootstrap samples was set
to align with the number of specific series. We recorded the
CIs, means, and medians of the KL divergence sums in Table I.
Additionally, Fig. 3 provides a comparative visualization for
normal and abnormal series. The scatterplot compares detailed
KL divergence between the different components. The boxplot
compares the KL divergence sum between normal and abnormal series.
Overall, the results show that the density consistency
for normal time series is significantly higher than that for
anomalous series. As shown in Table I and Fig. 3, normal time series generally exhibit lower KL divergence with

2511614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE I
S TATISTIC OF KL D IVERGENCE S UM A MONG D ECOMPOSED T IME S ERIES

Fig. 3. Comparison of KL divergence among normal and abnormal decomposed series on PSM, SWaT, SMD, MSL, and WADI datasets. The 3-D scatterplot
shows the KL divergence of density estimation between trend/original, seasonal/original, and seasonal/trend series. Boxplot compares the KL divergence sum
for normal (blue) and abnormal (orange) series, with extreme outliers filtered out and box width proportional to the number of series. (a) PSM. (b) SWaT.
(c) SMD machine-1-1. (d) MSL. (e) WADI.

narrower CIs, indicating higher density consistency. For example, in the PSM dataset, the mean of KL divergence sum
for normal series is 0.226, with 95% CI of 0.208–0.245,
while the mean for anomalous series shows a significant
increase as 5.017, with 95% CI as 3.248–7.134. Similar
trends are observed in the SWaT, SMD, MSL, and WADI
datasets. In some datasets, the mean of KL divergence for
anomalous series can be significantly affected by extreme
outliers, resulting in a high mean value while the median
remains much lower. For instance, the median for anomalous
series in MSL is 0.086, similar to that of normal series
(0.081). This occurs because anomaly labels are applied
to entire windows of multivariate series instead of individual series. As shown in Fig. 4(a), several series (such as
Features 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7) are labeled as anomalous but display
the same pattern and exhibit low KL divergence.
We also find that density consistency has limitations in helping discriminate anomalies within the datasets where normal
series exhibit inconsistent patterns. For instance, in Fig. 4(b),
Feature 6 is a normal series but displays inconsistent spikelike patterns, resulting in high KL divergence among the

data density distribution of its decomposed components.
In these cases, the decomposed components of a normal
series may also show low-density consistency due to their
inherent instability, which reduces the effectiveness of using
density consistency as a distinguishing factor of an anomaly.
Despite this limitation, density consistency can differentiate frequency variations of the spike-like signals, measuring
13.82 for the higher-frequency spike [Feature 6 in Fig. 4(a)]
and 8.18 for the lower-frequency spike [Feature 6 in Fig. 4(b)].
This also indicates the effectiveness of density consistency
in detecting frequency-related anomalies within spike-like
signals.
To conclude, although using density consistency among
decomposed series to represent anomalies has certain limitations, it remains a valuable and generalizable representation
to identify anomalies.
B. Normalizing Flow Models
Density-based methods identify anomalies as data points
with low density in the data distribution. Normalizing flow

LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY

2511614

Fig. 4. Illustration of (a) abnormal and (b) normal series selected from MSL dataset, with KL divergence sum among their decomposed series marked above
figures. In MSL, the time series are named by features, labeled as Feature 1, Feature 2, Feature 3, Feature 4, and so on, corresponding to different sensor
measurements.

w and trend components x w . These
Fig. 5. Overview of ConFlow. Time series in a detection window xow are first decomposed and mixed to extract seasonal xmh
ml
components are then processed to encode conditional information Csw between and within series, followed by MAF that is used for mapping distributions.
s ∈ {o, ml, mh} represents the original, trend, and seasonal components, and Agg. denote aggregate information from different series. After that, density
consistency among decomposed series is measured and used for loss reweight and training mask, where the reweight loss represents anomaly scores.

models facilitate this process by mapping data from complex distribution x ∈ R D into simpler standard distribution
z ∈ R D , resulting in more straightforward density estimation [48] and easier anomaly detection. By normalizing flow,
we can transform the observed data and compute its likelihood
using the change of variable formula
PX (x) = PZ (z) det

∂ fθ
∂xT

(1)

where PZ (z) is the target distribution, z = f θ (x) is the
transformation function, and | det(∂ f θ /∂ x T )| is the Jacobian
determinant of the transformation. Anomalies can be detected
when the likelihood PX (x) falls below a threshold ζ
PX (x) = PZ (z) det

∂ fθ
<ζ
∂xT

(2)

where ζ is chosen based on the expected density of normal
data.
IV. P ROPOSED M ODEL
A. Problem Statement
We focus on unsupervised multivariate time series anomaly
detection. The dataset consists of multiple unlabeled time
series X = [X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X K ], where K denotes the number

of series. No restrictions are placed on the training data.
Detection is performed on a detection window of size T ,
sliding with a step size of S. If any point within the sliding
window w is anomalous, the window is marked as anomalous. Our goal is to learn the conditional normalizing flow
F : (X |C) → Z (C is the conditional information) to estimate
the density of time series. The estimated density is used for
anomaly detection.
B. Overall Structure
Fig. 5 illustrates the proposed model, comprising three
primary components.
1) Cascade decomposition and mixing module: This module aims to extract refined trend and seasonal time series
components from the original time series xow ∈ R K ×T .
It first decomposes xow into trend and seasonal components through a multilevel decomposition. Then, the
decomposed trend and seasonal time series at different
decomposition levels are combined to represent each
component.
2) Context-aware normalizing flow model: This module
aims to encode information and mapping distributions
for time series. First, the temporal embedding of series is

2511614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

encoded through a long short-term memory (LSTM) network. The series relationship is then quantified by their
similarity, constructing a graph that is used for aggregating inter-series information. Next, a self-attention
mechanism is applied to the temporal embedding to
extract intra-series contextual information. Finally, this
information is integrated as the conditional input for
MAF, used for mapping Gaussian distributions Z o , Z ml ,
and Z mh .
3) Consistency-mask loss reweight module: This module
aims to utilize the density inconsistency of anomalies
to enhance model robustness and discriminative ability.
Since anomalous time series shows lower density consistency among its decomposed components, consistency
is directly used for loss reweight to enhance representation of anomalies. Additionally, series with extremely
high inconsistency scores are masked during training to
enhance model tolerance against anomalies.
The detailed descriptions of these modules are provided as
follows.
C. Time Series Cascade Decomposition and Mixing
Inspired by Autoformer [7], in each detection window w,
we decompose the series xow into trend and seasonal components using average pooling. This process separates the
low-frequency trend and high-frequency seasonality, formulated as

xlw = Avg Pool Padding xow
(3)
x hw = xow − xlw .
(4)
Here, xlw and x hw represent the trend and seasonal components, Avg Pool(·) denotes average pooling, Padding(·)
represents reflection padding, which handles boundary conditions by mirroring edge values.
We perform a cascade decomposition to distill more
nuanced information. Specifically, low-frequency series are
decomposed to yield smoother patterns, while high-frequency
series are further decomposed to extract more fluctuating
patterns

xlwi = Avg Pool Padding xlwi−1
(5)

w
w
w
x h i = x h i−1 − Avg Pool Padding x h i−1
(6)
where xlwi and x hwi represent the trend and seasonal components
achieved at the ith decomposition level. The decomposed
components across different levels are finally combined to
represent the specific components

D. Context-Aware Normalizing Flow
After decomposition, time series and their decomposed
components are processed through context-aware normalizing
flow, which first captures information between and within time
series. The embedded information is then input into MAF to
map distributions.
For each detection window w, LSTM is first applied on
series to obtain a temporal encoding

w
w
w
.
(9)
Hs,t
= LSTM xs,t
, Hs,t−1
w
Hs,t
∈ R K ×D represents the temporal encoding at t, with
s ∈ {o, ml, mh} representing the original, trend, and seasonal
time series, t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T } representing the time step, and
D representing the hidden dimension.
To quantify the relationships among multivariate series,
we follow MTGFLOW [49] and model series as nodes and
similarities between nodes as directed edges, which composes
a directed graph allowing for self-loops. For each pair of series
w
xs,i
, xs,w j ∈ RT (where i, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K }), the similarity
directed from node i to node j is given by

⊤ √ 
 w
w
exp xs,i Ms,i xs, j Ms, j / T
w

(10)
es,i
=
 w
⊤ √ 
j
PK
w
/ T
k=1 exp x s,i Ms,i x s,k Ms,k

where Ms,i , Ms, j , Ms,k ∈ RT ×T are learnable matrices for
linear projection, and T is for numerical stability. The function
exp(·) transforms the similarity scores into positive values,
w
facilitating normalization. The similarity values es,i
j form the
adjacency matrix of the graph

 w
w
w
es,11
es,12
· · · es,1K
w
w
w

 es,21
es,22
· · · es,2K


w
.
(11)
As =  .
.
.
.
..
..
.. 

 ..
w
w
w
es,K
es,K
· · · es,K
K
1
2
We use the adjacency matrix to aggregate temporal information from high-related series, defined as
w
C gws,t = Aw
s Hs,t .

(12)

Considering anomalies typically exhibit different correlation
with their adjacent timesteps compared with the normal ones,
a self-attention mechanism is applied on the window-level
temporal embedding Hsw ∈ R K ×T ×D to capture the intra-series
contextual information within each series. For series k, its
contextual information can be formulated as
 w w ⊤ !
w
w
H
Q
Hs,k K s
s
s,k
w
C hws,k = softmax
Hs,k
Vsw
(13)
√
D

i=1

w
w
D×D
where Q w
are the learnable matrices of
s , K s , Vs ∈ R
linear transformation, and D is the model dimensionality and
used for numerical stability.
The final conditional information at time t is obtained by
integrating the above information

w
w
Cs,t
= ReLU C gws,t Ws,1 + Hs,t−1
Ws,2 + C hws,t Ws,3 Ws,4 (14)

where α = 1/c represents the weighting factor for each level,
and c is the number of decomposition levels.

w
where Cs,t
∈ R K ×T ×D , and Ws,1 , Ws,2 , Ws,3 , Ws,4 ∈
D×D
R
represent the weights for inter-series aggregation,

w
xml
=

w
xmh
=

c
X
i=1
c
X

αxlwi

(7)

αx hwi

(8)

LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY

temporal information, intra-series information, and sum of the
embedding, respectively.
Based on the conditional encoding, we stack MAF models
to map distribution for each series. The density estimation for
series k in detection window w is given by
w
PX s,k (xs,k
)=

T
Y



w
PZ s,k,t f θs,k xs,k,t
| Cs,k,t · Js,k,t

(15)

t=1

!

∂ f θs,k

Js,k,t = det

w
∂ xs,k,t

⊤

.

(16)

Here, f θs,k represents the autoregressive function of MAF,
Js,k,t is the Jacobian determinant of f θs,k , and Cs,k,t represents
the conditional information for series k at t. Z s,k is the target
mapping distribution that follows a normal distribution:
Z s,k ∼ N (µs,k , I ),

µs,k ∼ N (0, 1)

(17)

with mean µs,k sampled from a standard normal distribution,
and I representing the identity covariance matrix.
E. Consistency-Mask Loss Reweight
The training objective of flow models is to maximize the
joint probability of observed data, aligning the generative
distribution closer to the true distribution. Therefore, the basic
loss function in each mini-batch can be formulated as
N

min Ls (ϑ) =
ϑ

K


1 XX
w
− log PX s,k xs,k
N K w=1 k=1

(18)

where s ∈ {o, ml, mh}, ϑ represents all model parameters, N is
the batch size, and K is the number of multivariate series.
For each detection window, we get three density estimations
w
(original, trend, and seasonal). Density consistency for xo,k
is
measured by summing the KL divergences between the density
estimations of original, trend, and seasonal components
X


w
w
KL PX i,k xi,k
PX j,k x wj,k . (19)
Lkl (xo,k
)=
i, j∈{o,ml,mh}
i̸= j

Since anomalous decomposed series often exhibit inconsistent density estimation, consistency is directly used for loss
reweight, penalizing inconsistency and enhancing the anomaly
score. The reweight loss function can be denoted as
N

minLr w (ϑ) =
ϑ

K



1 XX
w
w
.
− log PX o,k xo,k
+ Lkl xo,k
N K w=1 k=1
(20)

Even though flow models can be built with contaminated
training data, we found that clean training data can still
improve the performance of the model with one-class classification [49]. To mitigate the impact of extremely anomalous
samples during training, we propose a mask strategy based on
the density inconsistency of anomalies. In each mini-batch,
w
series with high consistency loss Lkl (xo,k
) are masked during
training to reduce their impact. The masking threshold β
can be set as a fixed value or percentile value. Specifically,

2511614

Algorithm 1 Training Process of ConFlow
N
Input: Training set {X }i=1
, window size T , stride size S,
decomposition level c, learning rate η, mask
threshold β, and epoch_num;
Output: Optimized parameters θ and anomaly scores for
each detection window;
Initialize: Parameters θ; detection windows (based on T
and S);
for e ∈ [1, epoch_num] do
1) Use cascade decomposition and mixing module to
w
w
generate time series set {xow , xml
, xmh
} via Eqs.(3)
to (8);
2) Encode inter- and intra-series information using
the context-aware encoder for time series via Eqs.(9)
to (14);
3) Generate the density estimations PX o , PX ml , and
PX mh for time series using MAF via Eqs.(15) to (17);
4) Measure the consistency Lkl among the density
estimations based on Eq.(19);
5) Reweight the loss Lo with Lkl based on Eq.(20).
The reweight loss serves as the anomaly score;
6) Mask series with Lkl exceeds the threshold β, and
update the model parameters θ;

a Boolean tensor Mb is generated to mask series with a
consistency score exceeding β during training.
Therefore, in each mini-batch, the final loss can be formulated as
N
K


1 XX
w
w
min L f (ϑ) =
Mb −log PX o,k xo,k
+Lkl xo,k
.
ϑ
N K w=1 k=1
(21)
F. Training and Testing
The training process of ConFlow can be summarized in
Algorithm 1.
The anomaly score of each series at time t is measured by
its reweight density


w
w
w = − log P
Sxk,t
+ Lkl xo,k,t
.
(22)
X o,k x o,k,t
The anomaly score for each detection window is the average
of the series involved
K


1 X
w
w
− log PX o,k xo,k
Sw =
+ Lkl xo,k
.
(23)
K k=1
Anomalies can be identified by setting a threshold ζ . The
series with scores exceeding ζ are classified as anomalies. ζ is
determined based on the overall scores of the training series,
for instance, by using the interquartile range (IQR) method,
setting ζ as Q 3 + 1.5 × (Q 3 − Q 1 ). Q 3 and Q 1 represent the
75th and 25th percentiles of the overall score, respectively.
G. Complexity Analysis
We measure the asymptotic upper bound of computational
complexity for each detection window using big O notation [50], represented by a function of the input and omitting

2511614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

constant factors and lower order terms. For each detection
window, the input of the model is related to the number of
series K , the window size T , and the model dimension D.
We first analyze the time complexity of ConFlow, denoted
as T (K , T, D). The cascade decomposition and mixing
module has a time complexity linear with the input
time series, represented as O(K × T ). The context-aware
encoding module encompasses several operations having
certain time complexity: temporal encoding by LSTM
O(K × T × D 2 ) [51], graph construction via similarity calculation O(K 2 × T × D), inter-series information
aggregation O(K 2 × T × D), and intra-series correlation
using self-attention O(K × T 2 × D) [52]. Subsequently, the
MAF maps the distributions with a time complexity of
O(K × T × D 2 ) [53]. The consistency-mask loss reweight
module involves: mask generation O(K × T × log(K T ))
and loss reweight operations O(K × T ). The dominant terms
in the time complexity depend on the relative sizes of
K , T , and D, and can be denoted as: T (K , T, D) =
O(max(K × T 2 × D, K 2 × T × D, K × T × D 2 )).
Space complexity measures the storage usage
as the input increases. The cascade decomposition
and mixing module requires O(K × T ) space. The
context-aware encoding module involves: temporal
encoding by LSTM O(K × T × D) [51], graph
construction O(K 2 × T × D), inter-series information
aggregation O(K × T × D), and intra-series correlation
calculation O(K × T 2 × D). The MAF module utilizes
O(K × T × D) space. Both the mask generation and
the loss reweight module require O(K × T ) space. The
dominant terms in the space complexity also depend on the
relative sizes of K , T , and D, which can be denoted as:
S(K , T, D) = O(max(K × T 2 × D, K 2 × T × D)).
V. E XPERIMENTS
This section presents various experiments that answer the
following questions about our model ConFlow.
Q1: Accuracy: How accurately does our method detect
anomalies compared to other baselines? Can our model
pinpoint anomalous portions of the time series?
Q2: Robustness: How robust is our model when dealing
with contaminated data with different ratios? How do
different hyperparameters impact model performance?
Q3: Explainability: How and why do the modules designed
in our model improve anomaly discriminative ability?
A. Experimental Details
We begin by detailing our experimental setup, covering
dataset configurations, baseline models, and related settings
in experiments.
1) Dataset Setup: We selected five publicly available
datasets to evaluate model performance. SWaT [45] measures
51 sensors from a real-world industrial water treatment facility.
PSM [8] comprises 25 distinct features of server nodes from an
eBay application. MSL [31] consists of data from 55 sensors
on NASA’s Mars rover. SMD [32] contains 38 small-scale

TABLE II
DATASET I NFORMATION

datasets collected from 38 machines within an internet company. WADI [46] includes data from 123 actuators in a water
distribution testbed.
Instead of using the conventional clean training set in
most previous work [22], we followed the dataset partitioning
strategy proposed by GANF [18] to obtain a contaminated
but realistic training set. Specifically, we divided the original
test set into training, validation, and testing sets by a ratio
of 6:2:2. In this way, all datasets contain both normal and
abnormal sequences, better reflecting real-world scenarios.
Detailed statistics on the training and testing datasets, including timestamps and anomaly ratios, are provided in Table II.
2) Baselines: To assess the performance of ConFlow,
we compared it against eight SOTA methods commonly used
in multivariate time series anomaly detection. These baselines
were selected to represent three core categories of anomaly
detection techniques mentioned in Section II: distance-based,
reconstruction-based, and density-based methods. Specifically,
DeepSVDD and DeepSAD are distance-based methods that
map normal time series into a hypersphere, identifying the
data outside the hypersphere as anomalies. ALOCC, USAD,
and FITS are reconstruction-based methods that trained on
clean data to learn normal representations, detecting anomalies by reconstruction errors. Lastly, DAGMM, GANF, and
MTGFLOW are density-based methods that align closely
with ConFlow by identifying the data points distributed in
low-density regions as anomalies. These methods were chosen
for their representativeness and evaluated under a unified
dataset setting.
A brief introduction to each baseline is as follows.
1) DeepSVDD [42]: A distance-based method that maps
normal data into a predefined hypersphere using a deep
neural network, with data outside this boundary detected
as anomalies.
2) DeepSAD [43]: An extension of DeepSVDD utilizes
labeled data to enhance anomaly detection performance.
3) ALOCC [54]: A reconstruction-based approach uses
GANs to reconstruct time series so that anomalies are
identified based on reconstruction error.
4) USAD [55]: A reconstruction-based method employs a
two-phase autoencoder architecture, detecting anomalies
based on reconstruction deviations.
5) FITS [56]: A reconstructed-based methods that empowered by representation ability of frequency interpolation.
6) DAGMM [14]: A density-based method that combines
a deep autoencoder with a GMM to enhance the density
estimation ability.

LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY

2511614

TABLE III
E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS OF C ON F LOW IN C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTS

7) GANF [18]: A density-based model that integrates
Bayesian Networks with flow models, identifying data
in low-density regions as anomalies.
8) MTGFLOW [19]: An improved variant of GANF, mapping different time series into different distributions to
improve detection accuracy.
3) Experimental Setting: All experiments were conducted
on an Ubuntu 20.04.5 LTS server with 192 GB of memory,
an Intel Xeon Gold 6242R CPU at 3.10 GHz, and a GeForce
RTX 3090 graphics card. In the comparison study, we set
the anomaly detection window size to 60 and the stride size
to 10 for all experiments. Our model was implemented in
PyTorch version 1.7.1 with CUDA 12.4. Each model was
trained for 40 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a learning
rate of 0.002 and a weight decay of 0.0005. The hidden
dimension for all modules was set to 32. For the batch size,
we used 512 for the SWaT dataset and 256 for the other
datasets. Similarly, the decomposition level was set to 3 for
both SWaT and WADI datasets, and to 2 for the others.
Detailed parameter settings of our model are provided in
Table III. For the baseline methods, we used publicly available
implementations under the contaminated training setting. The
code for DeepSVDD, DeepSAD, ALOCC, and GANF was
obtained from [57], while the code for USAD, DAGMM,
FITS, and MTGFLOW was obtained from [58], [59], [60],
and [61], respectively. We retained their original network
parameters and trained them for 40 epochs to ensure a fair
comparison.
For the parameter selection of our model, we aligned
the general parameters such as window size, stride size,
learning rate, weight decay, batch size, block size, and
hidden dimension with those of the SOTA density-based
method MTGFLOW (as recorded in Table III). After fixing
these parameters, we treated others, such as decomposition level and mask ratio, as tunable hyperparameters,
whose values are optimized through extensive experiments.
Specifically, we evaluated decomposition levels from the set
{1, 2, 3, 4} on all datasets, while the mask ratio was chosen
from {Q 2 , Q 3 , Q 3 + 1.5 × IQR} for each mini-batch. The
optimal decomposition levels identified were 3 for SWaT and
WADI, and 2 for PSM, MSL, and SMD. The best mask
ratio was consistently found to be Q 3 + 1.5 × IQR for all
datasets. Besides, in our parameter study, we show how block
size, window size, decomposition level, and mask ratio affect
performance of our model.
4) Evaluation Metrics: We assessed model performance
using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve

(AUC-ROC), precision (P), recall (R), and F1 score (F1),
evaluating different aspects of model performance. AUC-ROC
captures the trade-off between true positive and false positive
rates across different thresholds, with higher values indicating
better discriminative performance. AUC-ROC is evaluated
based on the anomaly scores assigned by the model. Following
the methodology of MTGFLOW [19], we reported the average
and standard deviation of AUC-ROC over five random seed
settings.
In contrast, precision (P), recall (R), and F1 score (F1)
evaluate model detection performance based on a specific
point-level threshold. A detection window is classified as
abnormal if any timestep within the window exceeds the
threshold. Consistent with MTGFLOW [19], we set the threshold as Q 3 + 1.5 × (Q 3 − Q 1 ) of the anomaly scores from the
training sets. Point-adjusted strategy was employed [20], [56]
when evaluating P, R, and F1.
B. Performance Comparison
1) Performance Analysis: We compared ConFlow with
eight baselines, and the results are recorded in Table IV
(AUC-ROC) and Table V (P, R, and F1 scores). ConFlow
consistently outperformed all baselines in AUC-ROC across all
datasets, achieving improvements over the second-best method
(MTGFLOW) of 5.5% on SWaT, 2.6% on PSM, 1.1% on
MSL, 1.0% on SMD, and 0.7% on WADI. ConFlow also
demonstrated stable performance across five random experiments, with the standard deviation of AUC-ROC remaining at
a low level. In terms of F1 score (Table V), ConFlow achieved
competitive performance against the best-performing baselines
(FITS and MTGFLOW), with improvements of 6.03% on
SWaT, 0.75% on MSL, 0.32% on SMD, and 1.14% on
WADI. ConFlow attained the best recall across all datasets
by leveraging the inconsistency feature of anomalies, without
sacrificing much precision.
We further analyzed the performance of the models according to their categories. First, distance-based methods such
as DeepSVDD and DeepSAD showed poor performance on
all metrics across datasets because they lacked mechanisms
to encode temporal dependencies. Moreover, DeepSVDD
requires clean datasets to learn a hypersphere that surrounds
normal representations. However, the contaminated training
sets in our setting disrupted the construction of a discriminative hypersphere. Second, reconstruction-based methods
like ALOCC and USAD also exhibited poor performance as
they lacked the ability to capture subtle variations among
time series. Conversely, FITS outperformed ALOCC and

2511614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF AUC-ROC (%) B ETWEEN C ON F LOW AND BASELINE M ODELS

TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF P RECISION (%), R ECALL (%), AND F1 S CORES (%) B ETWEEN C ON F LOW AND MTGFLOW

Fig. 6. Comparison of anomaly scores rated by MTGFLOW and ConFlow for four selected series segments. True classification consists of the segments
of true positive and true negative. Anomaly thresholds for ConFlow (blue) and MTGFLOW (black) are marked in each sub-figure. (a) SWaT Segment 1.
(b) SWaT Segment 2. (c) PSM Segment 1. (d) PSM Segment 2.

USAD by leveraging the robust representation capabilities
of frequency interpolation, achieving the highest F1 score
on the PSM dataset. However, its discriminative ability on
different thresholds (AUC-ROC) remained unsatisfactory, primarily because a contaminated training set compromised its
discriminative performance. Third, density-based methods,
with the exception of DAGMM, showed good discriminative
performance (AUC-ROC). The unsatisfactory performance of
DAGMM was mainly due to its shortcomings in capturing
relationships between time series. GANF and MTGFLOW
exhibited threshold-invariant discriminative ability since they
assign anomaly scores based on the probability of the time
series. However, these methods had limitations in exploring
the generalizable and contextual features of anomalies, degrading the detection ability. ConFlow outperformed GANF and
MTGFLOW on both F1 scores and AUC-ROC across all five
datasets, attributed to its utilization of cascade decomposition
consistency and contextual information embeddings. Furthermore, ConFlow demonstrated consistent performance across

five different random seeds (standard deviation of AUC-ROC
decreases 0.9% on SMD compared with MTGFLOW), primarily due to the consistency-mask strategy that enhance model
robustness.
We further visualized the normalized anomaly scores rated
by ConFlow and MTGFLOW in selected time segments,
as illustrated in Fig. 6. In each sub-figure, the true anomalous segments are highlighted with a red background. The
blue and black dashed lines represent the anomaly scores
from MTGFLOW and ConFlow, with horizontal dashed lines
denoting the anomaly thresholds. False positives and false
negatives are marked in orange and red for MTGFLOW,
and yellow and brown for ConFlow. As shown in Fig. 6(a),
ConFlow was more sensitive to anomalies with more true
positives and true negatives, which is due to the contextual
embedding that models intra-series dependency. MTGFLOW
had a higher false positive rate and a false negative rate [as
shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c)] due to the lack of representation
of anomalies.

LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY

Fig. 7. Performance comparison of AUC-ROC between MTGFLOW and
ConFlow under different training contamination ratios. Line represents the
mean value and shadow represents the standard deviation. (a) SWaT. (b) PSM.

2) Robustness Comparison Under Different Contaminated
Ratios: We divided the training data of SWaT and PSM into
training sets with varying contamination ratios to evaluate the
model’s robustness under different contamination rates, while
keeping the testing set fixed. The training set anomaly ratio
for SWaT ranges from 5.2% to 17.6%, and for PSM, it ranges
from 23.2% to 38.7%. The anomaly ratios of the testing sets
are 5.2% for SWaT and 30.2% for PSM.
We compared the model performance of ConFlow with
MTGFLOW under training set with different contamination ratios. The results are shown in Fig. 7. The shaded
areas in the figures indicate the standard deviations of
model performance across five random seeds. Generally, ConFlow demonstrates more robust and superior performance.
Compared to MTGFLOW, our model consistently maintains
higher AUC-ROC scores. In the SWaT dataset [Fig. 7(a)],
as the contamination ratio increases, the standard deviation of
MTGFLOW shows an increasing trend, while that of ConFlow
remains low. In PSM dataset [Fig. 7(b)], the performance of
ConFlow is more stable compared to MTGFLOW, with the
standard deviation consistently remaining at a low level.
C. Result Visualization
Anomalies can be traced back to individual sensors based
on anomaly scores. We selected six sensors in SWaT and
visualized their anomaly scores and corresponding original
time series (Fig. 8). The thresholds are marked on the right
side of each subplot. Notably, some sensors exhibited similar
responses to the same anomaly. For example, AIT502 and
FIT504 showed related analogous reactions. This similarity
may suggest that these sensors were highly connected to
each other and experienced cascade failures. Additionally,
anomalies do not occur across all sensors. For example,
LTT101 shows an anomalous pattern on the first and fourth
true labels, while others do not. LIT301 shows an anomalous
pattern on the last true label, whereas other sensors remain
unaffected.
D. Module Ablation and Visualization
In this section, we perform an ablation study to evaluate the
effectiveness of the module design.
1) Module Ablation: We evaluated the effectiveness of
the modules designed in ConFlow by testing various combinations on the PSM and SWaT datasets. The modules
include context-aware encoding (C), loss reweight (L), and
consistency-mask (M). ConFlow without specific modules
is denoted as ConFlow/(module abbreviation). For example,

2511614

ConFlow/(C, L, M) indicates the model without all three
modules.
The ablation results are presented in Table VI. The base
model, ConFlow/(C, L, M), achieved performances of 84.7%
on SWaT and 85.3% on PSM. Among the individual modules,
incorporating only the loss reweight module [ConFlow/(C,
M)] provided the most significant improvement, enhancing
performance by 3.5% on SWaT and 1.7% on PSM. This
indicates that the loss reweight module (L) is the most effective
single module, especially on the SWaT dataset. Combining the
loss reweight module with the context-aware encoding module
[ConFlow/(M)] resulted in further improvements, achieving
a 4.6% increase on SWaT and 2.1% on PSM. Including
all modules (ConFlow) yielded the best performance, with
improvements of 5.6% on SWaT and 3.0% on PSM compared to the base model. These results demonstrate that
the loss reweight module significantly enhances performance,
and combining it with other modules leads to further gains,
particularly on the SWaT dataset.
2) Visualization of Context-Aware Encoding Module: We
visualized the intra-series contextual encoding of four selected
series (Series 1, Series 2, Series 3, and Series 24) from
the PSM dataset, as shown in Fig. 9. For each detection
window, the attention embeddings were calculated using the
normalized sum of the attention scores. As depicted in the
figure, different segments of the time series exhibited distinct
patterns, and their contextual embeddings evolved over time.
Notably, the context-aware encoding for anomalies displayed
different patterns.
Specifically, for Series 1, both the time series values and
the attention embeddings showed a relatively stable pattern
most of the time. However, the attention scores significantly increased during certain time intervals (i.e., timestamps
13 000–14 000, 16 000–17 000, and 28 000–29 000), where a
potential contextual and point anomalies appeared during these
periods. Similarly, Series 2, 3, and 24 also exhibit unique
attention embeddings when anomalies occur.
E. Parameter Study
We tested different hyperparameters to evaluate the robustness of the model.
1) Decomposition Level, Window Size, and Flow Block:
We analyzed the impact of various hyperparameters, including
decomposition level, window size, and the number of flow
model blocks.
First, we fixed the window size at 60 and varied the
decomposition levels and the number of flow blocks to assess
their effects on model performance. The results are shown
in Table VII. A larger model (with more flow blocks) may
lead to overfitting and does not necessarily improve detection
performance, especially when the number of blocks exceeds
two. Moreover, a higher decomposition level does not always
enhance model performance, and the optimal decomposition
level varies across datasets. Specifically, with a fixed number
of flow blocks, a two-level decomposition is optimal for the
PSM dataset, while a three-level decomposition is best for the
SWaT dataset.

2511614

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

Six series selected from SWaT and their corresponding anomaly scores.

TABLE VI
S TUDY OF M ODULE A BLATION

TABLE VII
PARAMETER S TUDY OF B LOCK N UMBER AND D ECOMPOSITION L EVEL

TABLE VIII
PARAMETER S TUDY OF B LOCK N UMBER AND W INDOW S IZE

Fig. 9. Four series selected from PSM test set and corresponding attention
embedding.

Next, we fixed the decomposition level (3 for SWaT and
2 for PSM) and conducted experiments with various detection
window sizes and number of flow blocks to assess model
robustness. The results are presented in Table VIII. For the
PSM dataset, detection performance degrades as the window
size increases, whereas for the SWaT dataset, performance
improves with larger window sizes. Specifically, PSM achieves

the best performance with four flow blocks and a window size
of 40, while SWaT demonstrates optimal performance with
two flow blocks and a window size of 100. These findings
suggest that selecting an appropriate window size is crucial
and should be tailored to the characteristics of each specific
dataset.
2) Consistency-Mask Ratio Analysis: We further evaluated
the model’s performance using different consistency mask
ratios (Table IX). Q 2 represents the 50th percentile of the
consistency score in each mini-batch, while Q 3 represents the

LI et al.: DETECTING MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALIES WITH CASCADE DECOMPOSITION CONSISTENCY

TABLE IX
PARAMETER S TUDY OF M ASK R ATIO

75th percentile. For both datasets, increasing the mask ratio (in
other words, lowering the mask threshold) does not improve
model performance. The model achieves the best performance
when the mask threshold is set at Q 3 +1.5 × (Q 3 − Q 1 ). This
phenomenon may be attributed to the contamination ratio of
the original training set. The training set contamination ratio is
23.1% for PSM and 17.7% for SWaT. A high mask ratio may
reduce the proportion of normal series in training, leading to
performance degradation.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed ConFlow, an unsupervised
anomaly detection approach for multivariate time series. ConFlow is a density-based approach that utilizes the density
inconsistency and contextual features of anomalies to enhance
the discriminative ability of the Flow model. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms other
baselines in detecting anomalies in multivariate time series.
ConFlow can accurately pinpoint anomalous positions within
time series and maintains stable performance across varying
contamination ratios.
While ConFlow demonstrates good performance across
most datasets, we identified a limitation when applied ConFlow to datasets where normal time series exhibit inconsistent
patterns (such as spike-like signals in MSL). Future work will
focus on enhancing the model’s robustness to such natural
inconsistencies. Additionally, we are exploring methods for
detecting early anomalies which are similar with normal
behavior.
R EFERENCES
[1] X. Chen et al., “Removal of muscle artifacts from the EEG: A review
and recommendations,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 19, no. 14, pp. 5353–5368,
Jul. 2019.
[2] R. Huang, J. Li, W. Li, and L. Cui, “Deep ensemble capsule network
for intelligent compound fault diagnosis using multisensory data,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2304–2314, May 2020.
[3] J. Chen et al., “Deep reinforcement learning based resource allocation
in multi-UAV-aided MEC networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71,
no. 1, pp. 296–309, Jan. 2023.
[4] V. Barnett and T. Lewis, Outliers in Statistical Data, vol. 3, no. 1.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1994.
[5] G. Niu, X. Dong, and Y. Chen, “Motor fault diagnostics based on
current signatures: A review,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–19, 2023.
[6] H. Cui, C. Li, A. Liu, R. Qian, and X. Chen, “A dual-branch interactive
fusion network to remove artifacts from single-channel EEG,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–12, 2024.
[7] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Autoformer: Decomposition
transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting,” in
Proc. NIPS, vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 22419–22430.

2511614

[8] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Singapore, Aug. 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
[9] L. Haan and A. Ferreira, Extreme Value Theory: An Introduction, vol. 3.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2006.
[10] M. Rosenblatt, “Curve estimates,” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 42, no. 6,
pp. 1815–1842, Dec. 1971.
[11] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024.
[12] K. Guo, N. Wang, D. Liu, and X. Peng, “Uncertainty-aware LSTM based
dynamic flight fault detection for UAV actuator,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[13] Z. Zhang et al., “STAD-GAN: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series with self-training generative adversarial networks,”
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1–18, Oct. 2023.
[14] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
Feb. 2018, pp. 1–11.
[15] G. Papamakarios, T. Pavlakou, and I. Murray, “Masked autoregressive
flow for density estimation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 30, Dec. 2017, pp. 2338–2347.
[16] C. Horvat and J.-P. Pfister, “Denoising normalizing flow,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 9099–9111.
[17] I. Kobyzev, S. J. Prince, and M. A. Brubaker, “Normalizing flows: An
introduction and review of current methods,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 3964–3979, Nov. 2021.
[18] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
Jan. 2022, pp. 1–20.
[19] Q. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Liu, S. He, and W. Meng, “Detecting multivariate
time series anomalies with zero known label,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4963–4971.
[20] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[21] L. Shen, Z. Yu, Q. Ma, and J. T. Kwok, “Time series anomaly detection
with multiresolution ensemble decoding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., May 2021, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 9567–9575.
[22] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2021, pp. 1–17.
[23] Z. Li, H. Yan, F. Tsung, and K. Zhang, “Profile decomposition based
hybrid transfer learning for cold-start data anomaly detection,” ACM
Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1–28, Dec. 2022.
[24] S. Wang et al., “TimeMixer: Decomposable multiscale mixing for
time series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
May 2024, pp. 1–7. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?
id=7oLshfEIC2
[25] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FedFormer:
Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286.
[26] Z. Chen, Y. Lou, P. He, P. Xu, and X. Zhang, “Magnetic anomaly
detection based on attention-Bi-LSTM network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–11, 2024.
[27] Q. Wen, J. Gao, X. Song, L. Sun, H. Xu, and S. Zhu, “RobustSTL: A robust seasonal-trend decomposition algorithm for long time
series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, no. 1, Jul. 2019,
pp. 5409–5416.
[28] Z. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhang, G. Trajcevski, T. Zhong, and F. Zhou,
“Learning latent seasonal-trend representations for time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022,
pp. 38775–38787.
[29] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet:
Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[30] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[31] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.

2511614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 74, 2025

[32] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Min., Anchorage, AK, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[33] Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Yang, Z. Zhao, and X. Chen, “Unsupervised machine
anomaly detection using autoencoder and temporal convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[34] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
[35] L.-R. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention networks
for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based
Syst., vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849.
[36] X. Huang, F. Zhang, R. Wang, X. Lin, H. Liu, and H. Fan, “KalmanAE:
Deep embedding optimized Kalman filter for time series anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[37] S. Liu et al., “Time series anomaly detection with adversarial reconstruction networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 4293–4306, Apr. 2023.
[38] B. Du, X. Sun, J. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Wang, and L. Sun, “GAN-based
anomaly detection for multivariate time series using polluted training
set,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12208–12219,
Dec. 2023.
[39] H. Liang, L. Song, J. Du, X. Li, and L. Guo, “Consistent anomaly detection and localization of multivariate time series via cross-correlation
graph-based encoder–decoder GAN,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[40] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[41] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Aug. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[42] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[43] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., Jan. 2019, pp. 1–9.
[44] D. A. Reynolds, “Gaussian mixture models,” Encyclopedia Biometrics,
vol. 741, nos. 659–663, pp. 1–5, 2009.
[45] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastruct. Secur., vol. 10242, G. Havarneanu, R. Setola,
H. Nassopoulos, and S. Wolthusen, Eds., Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2017, pp. 88–99.
[46] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
systems,” in Proc. Int. Workshop CySWater, Apr. 2017, pp. 25–28.
[47] T. Hesterberg, “Bootstrap,” Wiley Interdiscipl. Rev., Comput. Statist.,
vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 497–526, 2011.
[48] J. Ren et al., “Likelihood ratios for out-of-distribution detection,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, Jan. 2019, pp. 1–9.
[49] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng, “Label-free multivariate
time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36,
no. 7, pp. 3166–3179, Jul. 2024.
[50] I. Chivers, J. Sleightholme, I. Chivers, and J. Sleightholme, “An introduction to algorithms and the big O notation,” in Introduction to
Programming With Fortran: With Coverage of Fortran 90, 95, 2003,
2008 and 77. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2003, pp. 359–364.
[51] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[52] F. D. Keles, P. M. Wijewardena, and C. Hegde, “On the computational
complexity of self-attention,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Algorithmic Learn.
Theory, Jan. 2022, pp. 597–619.
[53] G. Papamakarios, E. Nalisnick, D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and
B. Lakshminarayanan, “Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling
and inference,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 22, no. 57, pp. 1–64,
Jan. 2021.
[54] M. Sabokrou, M. Fathy, G. Zhao, and E. Adeli, “Deep end-to-end oneclass classifier,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 675–684, Feb. 2021.
[55] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.

[56] Z. Xu, A. Zeng, and Q. Xu, “FITS: Modeling time series with
10k parameters,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2024,
pp. 1–17.
[57] E. Dai and J. Chen. (2022). GANF. [Online]. Available: https://github
.com/EnyanDai/GANF
[58] M. A. Z. F. Galati and J. Audibert. (2020). USAD—Unsupervised
Anomaly Detection on Multivariate Time Series. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/manigalati/usad
[59] D. S. Tan and Y. Li. (2018). Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture
Model for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in PyTorch. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/EnyanDai/GANF
[60] Z. Xu. (2024). FITS: Frequency Interpolation Time Series Analysis
Baseline. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/VEWOXIC/FITS
[61] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, J. Chen, and W. Meng. (2023). MTGFLOW.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/username/repository_name
Ruoheng Li received the B.S. degree from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing, China, in 2020, the B.S. degree from the
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology University,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 2020, and the M.S.
degree with Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, in 2023. She is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree with Beihang University, Beijing,
China.
Her current research interests include data science
and intelligent transportation.
Zhongyao Liu received the B.E. degree from
the School of Mechanical and Power Engineering,
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China, in 2024.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing, China.
His current research interests include deep
learning.

Xi Zhu received the B.E. degree in electronic and
information engineering and the M.E. degree in control science and engineering from Beijing University
of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2010 and 2013,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in signal and
information processing from Beihang University,
Beijing, in 2018.
He is currently an Associate Researcher with the
School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
Beihang University. His research interests include
multivariate time series analysis, spatiotemporal data
mining, and target behavior cognition.
Lin Li received the Ph.D. degree in electronic
science and technology from Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 2018.
He is currently a Senior Engineer with CNCERT,
Beijing. His current research interests include AI and
network information security.

Xianbin Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and M.E. degrees in computer applications and
information science from Anhui University, Hefei,
China, in 1990 and 1993, respectively, and the Ph.D.
degree in information science from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, in 1996.
He is currently a Professor with the School of
Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang
University, Beijing, China. His current research
interests include intelligent transportation systems,
air traffic management, and intelligent computation.