1070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Detecting Smart Home Device Activities Using
Packet-Level Signatures From Encrypted Traffic
Mohammad Shamim Ahsan , Md. Shariful Islam , Md. Shohrab Hossain, Member, IEEE,
and Anupam Das , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Despite the significant benefits of the widespread
adoption of smart home Internet of Things (IoT) devices, these
devices are known to be vulnerable to active and passive attacks.
Existing literature has demonstrated the ability to infer the activities of these devices by analyzing their network traffic. In this study,
we introduce a packet-based signature generation and detection
system that can identify specific events associated with IoT devices
by extracting simple features from raw encrypted network traffic.
Unlike existing techniques that depend on specific time windows,
our approach automatically determines the optimal number of
packets to generate unique signatures, making it more resilient
to network jitters. We evaluate the effectiveness, uniqueness, and
correctness of our signatures by training and testing our system
using four public datasets and an emulated dataset with varying
network delays, verifying known signatures and discovering new
ones. Our system achieved an average recall and precision of 9899% and 98-100%, respectively, demonstrating the effectiveness
and feasibility of using packet-level signatures to detect IoT device
activities.
Index Terms—Network traffic analysis, packet-based signature.

I. INTRODUCTION
HE use of Internet of Things (IoT) devices (e.g., light sensors, cameras, door locks, thermostats, etc.) has increased
rapidly in recent years. IoT provides a flexible and scalable platform that can support various applications within a home setting,
e.g., enhance security, enable eldercare or childcare, save energy,
and automate appliances [35]. However, IoT devices also create
new attack vectors. For example, simply knowing what devices
reside inside a household can pose both security and privacy
risks. Knowing that there is a smart lock can enable an adversary
to launch targeted attacks, e.g., exploit unpatched vulnerabilities.
Similarly, knowing that there is a sleep monitoring device inside
the home can reveal the sleeping patterns of residents.
While most IoT devices encrypt traffic using standard protocols such as WPA2, such encryption only hides the payload,
that is, the contents of the exchanged messages or commands.

T

Manuscript received 1 August 2023; revised 28 June 2024; accepted 1 July
2024. Date of publication 11 July 2024; date of current version 14 March 2025.
(Corresponding author: Anupam Das.)
Mohammad Shamim Ahsan, Md. Shariful Islam, and Md. Shohrab Hossain
are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Bangladesh
University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh
(e-mail: shamim19119@gmail.com; sharifulislam08031998@gmail.com; ms
hohrabhossain@cse.buet.ac.bd).
Anupam Das is with the Department of Computer Science, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, NC 27695 USA (e-mail: anupam.das@ncsu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2024.3424299

However, the related meta-data (e.g., packet lengths, traffic rate)
of the network traffic still leaks some information about the
messages exchanged [38]. Existing works in this domain have
looked at extracting statistical features from traffic metadata to
detect device events [1], [10], [11], [37], but such approaches are
prone to background traffic noise and thus harder to generalize
across varying settings [4]. Moreover, most existing passive
inference techniques can only identify the device type and
whether there is device activity (i.e., an event), but not the exact
type of event or command [2], [3], [22], [23], [24], [25]. The
state-of-the-art work on packet-level signatures for IoT devices
is PINGPONG [28], which relies on the packet arrival time window to detect device activities. This time-window dependency
can result in inaccurate detection whenever the traffic rate significantly changes; because the number of packets considered in a
specific time interval for matching signatures will be drastically
more or less than that considered during training. Also, such
time delays can vary significantly depending on the underlying
internet connection. Furthermore, for IoT devices that have more
than two forms of device status (e.g., STANDBY, ACTIVE,
QUICKRUN, STOP), PINGPONG considers separate events as
binary type and trains them independently, rather than training
all the events of the device at a time, resulting in additional
overhead.
Our work aims to address the existing limitations of state-ofthe-art techniques to determine user activities on IoT devices
solely using encrypted network traffic. In particular, we seek
to answer the following questions: RQ1: Can we develop an
activity detection system that is independent of time-window?
We develop a methodology where we depend on a threshold
of packets rather than time-window for detecting events in any
network traffic. RQ2: How can we generate packet-level signatures for devices with multi-type events without prior knowledge
about a device’s behavior? We analyze how to automatically
construct signatures from devices with multi-type events using
different features extracted from the network traffic. RQ3: How
well do the generated signature(s) of a specific device maintain
uniqueness and correctness across independent datasets? We
evaluate to what extent the signatures of a device are unique and
generalizable across various datasets collected from different
locations and under different settings.
In summary, we introduce a packet-based signature generation and detection system that does not consider a temporal
threshold and can efficiently handle both binary and multitype events. Our system overcomes these limitations as we

1545-5971 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

AHSAN et al.: DETECTING SMART HOME DEVICE ACTIVITIES USING PACKET-LEVEL SIGNATURES FROM ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC

experiment with a diverse range of smart home devices and
use only the packet length and direction for a specific number
of packets, simplifying the detection technique and achieving
higher recall and precision rates. We make the following contributions:
r To generate and detect packet-level signatures, we establish
a threshold on the number of packets instead of relying
on time windows. Time window-based methods are less
effective across different datasets as they can be easily
impacted by traffic rate changes. Our approach is more
resilient to temporal fluctuations caused by network jitters, as demonstrated through experiments on real-world
datasets.
r To the best of our knowledge, we have obtained the highest
average recall and precision of 98−99% and 98−100%, respectively, for any packet-level signature detection system
to date. We have also open-sourced our codebase.1
r Our automated process captures new signatures from existing datasets, verified through cross-data validations.
This method systematically generates signatures for both
binary-type and multi-type events without prior knowledge
of the device’s behavior.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Key Components of IoT-Based System
A typical IoT system has four key components that work
together to provide the desired functionalities. An essential
component of an IoT system is sensors or end devices that
observe and capture environmental and physical changes. All
the collected data can be used in various domains and might
have various degrees of complexity. The second key component of IoT is connectivity. The collected data needs to be
sent to a cloud-based infrastructure so that it can be processed
and analyzed. Based on the scale of the implementations, IoT
components can be connected over LANs, MANs, or WANs.
It can also be connected through Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, telephone
networks like LTE (popularly known as 4 G Network), or
light-based technologies like Li-Fi (where light is used as a
mode of communication to maintain interconnections) [7]. The
gathered data from sensors are transmitted over the internet
using one of these technologies. The analytic component starts
functioning once the data is collected and delivered to the cloud.
IoT analytics are utilized here to get a sense of the gathered
data and to prevent it from getting corrupted. Last but not least,
the main internal key component of IoT is the user interface
which allows humans to interact with IoT devices and systems.
The collected information from the previous components can be
made available to users either in report format or in the form of
some actions like triggering an alarm, notifying them through
emails or texts, etc.
B. Data Communication Model for IoT
There are three different methods of communication between
an IoT device and the backend cloud. First, an IoT device can
1 https://github.com/MdShamim097/Packet-based-IoT-Event-Detection/

1071

directly communicate with the cloud (i.e., Device ↔ Cloud).
Second, the companion mobile app can exchange information
with the IoT device directly (i.e., Phone ↔ Device). Lastly, the
companion mobile app can communicate with the cloud (i.e.,
Phone ↔ Cloud). IoT manufacturers typically create companion mobile apps to configure, control, and interface with their
corresponding devices. Therefore, data from the IoT device can
also reach the IoT cloud via the companion app installed on a
smartphone [36].
C. Related Works
There is a large body of work in the network measurement
community that uses traffic analysis to fingerprint applications [5], [9], [12], identify anomalies [13], [21], attacks [32], or
malware [31]. In recent years, there have been multiple studies
to characterize traffic from IoT devices and develop techniques
to fingerprint their activities.
Hafeez et al. propose IoTGUARD [10], a self-adaptive semisupervised learning-based classification scheme for real-time
activity detection of IoT devices in edge networks. It predicts
malicious traffic based on the network activity of the device
generating the traffic. Peek-a-Boo [1] introduces a multi-stage
privacy attack utilizing machine-learning approaches for detecting and identifying the types of IoT devices, their states, and
ongoing user activities by only passively sniffing the network
traffic. IOT-KEEPER [11] detects malicious IoT network activity
using a combination of fuzzy k-means clustering and a fuzzy
interpolation scheme for online traffic analysis at the edge gateways. HomeSnitch [37] classifies IoT device semantic behavior
such as heartbeat, firmware check, and motion detection using
statistics derived from the entire client-server dialog. PINGPONG [28] explores the sequential and directional “ping/pong”
behavioral patterns in IoT data communication. Interestingly,
the most important feature used in HomeSnitch is the average
number of bytes sent from the IoT device to the server per
turn, whereas PINGPONG uses packet lengths and directions
of individual requests (and replies) to uniquely identify device
events.
A recent paper by Ren et al. [15] presents a large-scale and
multidimensional analysis of information exposure from IoT
devices and reveals how these devices operate differently due to
different privacy regulations in the US and U.K.. The paper also
presents a classifier to infer event types spanning many device
categories. Researchers have also used DNS queries to infer
IoT devices [23], [30]. They also model traffic characteristics
to infer device-level activities. Sivanathan et al. [2], [3] also
leverage network traffic and uniquely build a multi-layer model
to fingerprint IoT devices. Ahmed et al. [4] present the largest
to-date study of IoT device fingerprinting in which they consider
multiple factors such as fingerprinting across time, region, and
different datasets and under different constraints. Others have
utilized data from different layers of the system stack to identify
IoT devices [18], [34].
Limitations of Existing Works: Most event inference techniques rely on machine learning [1], [2], [3], [10], [17] or
statistical analysis of traffic time series [6], [11], [15], [37].

1072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

TABLE I
COMPARISON WITH RELATED WORK ON IOT DEVICES

These techniques have different limitations as they use different
approaches. IoTGUARD [10] cannot detect the event of a device;
rather, it can only tell whether an attack is going on or not.
Besides, the aggregated features used here are not always appropriate for all scenarios; for instance, the total amount of data
transferred and the total number of connections made depend on
higher-level user activity rather than device activity. Unsupervised learning techniques may be hard to interpret, especially for
large feature sets (e.g., 197 features in Peek-a-Boo [1]). HomeSnitch [37] lacks resistance to traffic fluctuations. Moreover, it
uses statistics (average, min, max) derived from the entire clientserver dialog, which may lead to false positives at a large scale.
Signature generation and detection in PINGPONG [28] depends
on time-window, which may result in incorrect detection if the
traffic rate slows down or speeds up. IOTKEEPER [11] uses
statistical approaches that may reduce clustering performance
when dealing with a large number of features.
Moreover, these machine-learning approaches have limitations in differentiating event types (e.g., distinguishing ON from
OFF). Especially, [2], [3], [17] use features like sleep time, flow
volume-duration, average packet size, peak-to-mean ratio, DNS
queries, and cipher suites, or uses source port, destination port,
direction, payload, window size and timestamps, which can only
identify the IoT devices; not the specific events of those devices.
Statistical analysis approaches depending on time series also
lack resistance to traffic fluctuations [6], [11], [15], [37]. A
series of papers by Apthorpe et al. [22], [23], [24], [25] use
traffic volume-based signatures to infer IoT device activity, but
cannot always determine the exact type of the event. Arguably,
by observing changes in traffic rates, it is only possible to identify
whether any user interaction occurs or not; but not which kind
of interaction has occurred.
Distinction from Prior Work: Our work is inspired by the
aforementioned work, especially PINGPONG [28], which detects user activity of IoT devices using packet-level signatures.
Our primary and differentiating goal is to overcome the limitations of existing works by implementing a “packet-based signature generation and detection system,” which depends on packet
counts instead of time-window, making it more resilient against
time delays and network jitters. We also focus on handling multitype events rather than only binary (ON/OFF) events as analyzed
by PINGPONG [28]. Through comprehensive evaluation, we
see that our proposed approach performs better in detecting
activities of IoT devices and sensors, as described in Section IV.

Moreover, we discover some new signatures that are not only
different from the existing ones but also smaller in size, indicating the efficiency of our packet-based approach. Furthermore,
the development of the multi-event detection technique makes
our system more resource-efficient since it requires only O(x)
computational overhead; whereas PINGPONG requires O(xn),
where, x and n are the number of devices and the number of
event types for each of the devices, respectively. Table I provides
an in-depth comparison with related works, highlighting the
contributions of our work over existing studies.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
In this section, we describe our system architecture, methodologies, algorithms, and heuristics for generating signatures.
A. Threat Model
Our setup accounts for a passive adversary capable of monitoring network traffic from smart home devices. We consider
two types of adversaries: a WAN sniffer and a Wi-Fi sniffer,
as seen in previous works [28]. The WAN sniffer observes
network traffic between the home router and the ISP network
(or beyond), while the Wi-Fi sniffer monitors encrypted IEEE
802.11 wireless traffic. The WAN sniffer can inspect IP headers
but lacks device MAC addresses for traffic identification. The
Wi-Fi sniffer lacks the WPA2 key and can only access clear
text information, including MAC addresses, packet lengths, and
timing data. Both adversaries are aware of the smart home
device type they want to target and passively monitor. Thus,
they can train the system on a similar device offline, extract
its signature, and use it to detect the targeted device’s signature
from the monitored traffic. It is assumed that the devices encrypt
their communication, preventing adversaries from accessing
clear-text communication.
B. Architecture
In this paper, we focus on improving the state-of-the-art work,
PINGPONG [28], to automatically and accurately unveil user
activities from smart home network traffic logs. Our system
includes three key stages: i) Input processing, ii) Training, and
iii) Activity detection. In the first stage, we take necessary
annotated inputs, such as a device’s event types and triggered
events. Then, the training stage begins, where we analyze network traffic, extract features, make a pair of relevant packets,

AHSAN et al.: DETECTING SMART HOME DEVICE ACTIVITIES USING PACKET-LEVEL SIGNATURES FROM ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC

1073

Fig. 1. Our System Architecture. At first, a device’s event types and triggered events are taken as input. Then, we collect network traffic, extract features, and
make a pair of relevant packets. After that, we generate signatures that consist of a particular number of ordered sequences of packet pairs. Next, we validate each
event’s signatures. At last, we test our system to detect activity on independent network traffic. In the last two stages, we use our heuristic.

generate signatures using some particular ordered packet pairs,
and cross-validate our generated signatures. In the final stage,
we test our system on independent network traffic to detect the
activities of a given device. In the last two stages, we use our
proposed heuristic. The architecture of our system is depicted
in Fig. 1.
➊ Input Processing: At first, we take a device’s event types
and trigger events of that type as input. For convenience, we
consider each event type as an integer at the time of training, as
illustrated in Fig. 1.
➋ Training: We utilize the PINGPONG dataset [28] to generate and test packet-level signatures. We will also demonstrate
generalizability using other public datasets [3], [14], [27].
Trace Filtering: We filter the collected raw training set (a set
of pcap files and event-based timestamps) to discard unrelated
traffic. We discard the packets where neither the source nor
destination IP matches. Also, the packets beyond a number
of packets, n (a threshold we described later on), after each
timestamped event is discarded.
Pair Clustering: In this step, we separate relevant packet
pairs (i.e., those that consistently occur after an event) from
irrelevant ones. Since we do not know in advance the packet
lengths in pairs, we use an unsupervised learning algorithm,
called DBSCAN [19] that makes clusters of similar data points,
where the similarity is determined by the euclidean distance
between the points. In this algorithm, we mark some points as
core points if they have a certain amount of points (amount may
be number or percentage) within a particular distance d from
them. If two core points are situated within d from each other,
they will be in the same cluster. Finally, the non-core points (i.e.
leftover points) will join any cluster if that particular cluster is
at most d distance from them. However, the points without any
cluster are treated as noise or outliers that can be ignored.
Signature Creation: Signatures in this paper are identified
based on only two parameters: packet-length and direction. To
create a signature, we concatenate packet pairs in the clusters to
reassemble the longest packet sequences possible. Packet pairs
in clusters x and y are concatenated if, and only if, for each
packet pair px in x, there exists a packet pair py in y such that
px and py occurred consecutively in the same TCP connection.

If there are more pairs in y than in x, the extra pairs in y are
discarded. Finally, this system sorts the sets of packet sequences
based on the total number of packets to form a list of packet
sequence sets.
Signature Validation: The signatures are validated by running
the detection algorithm at layer 3 using the dataset on which signatures are created. Suppose the system detects at most n events,
and the timestamps of detected events match the timestamps for
events recorded during training. In that case, the signature is
finalized as a valid packet-level signature.
Heuristic: Heuristic is used in both signature generation and
detection. At first, we find out the number of packets, ni , of each
triggered event within a specific time interval ‘t’ (empirically
set to 15 milliseconds). Here, i presents different instances of
the event and i = 1, 2, . . . , m as the training dataset generally
supports 100 instance per event. Then, we calculate the geometric mean considering all the ni for a given event. If an
event is triggered m times during the training phase and the
number of packets observed in each instance is n1 , n2 , . . . , nm ,
respectively,
then the number of packets to be considered will
be: n = m m
i=1 ni . Importantly, we determine the value of n
using a controlled setup (lab settings), where no delay exists.
For this reason, this is essentially dependent on time. But, since
our main goal is to apply our methodology to a real-world
scenario, where network traffic contains unavoidable delays, we
use there the same n that is not dependent on the time frame
anymore, irrespective of datasets and environments. We prove
the correctness of our methodology in Section IV-C-2.
We opt for the geometric mean to accommodate unforeseen
fluctuations in the traffic rate. If, instead, we use the arithmetic
mean and the traffic rate experiences extreme fluctuations, the
values of ni for m number of events will vary significantly,
leading to an inappropriate threshold, n. Consequently, this will
result in inaccurate detection.
➌ Activity Detection: Detection is done on independent
datasets from which we did not generate signatures. We treat
a network trace as a stream of packets. Each packet is presented
to a set of state machines. A state machine is maintained for
each packet sequence of the signature for each flow, i.e., TCP
connection for the WAN sniffer or layer-2 flow for the Wi-Fi

1074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

sniffer (both adversaries have been described in Section III-A).
A state machine advances to its next state if the packet matches
the next packet in the modeled packet sequence. Our heuristic
(i.e., Equation III-B) is used here too.
Signature matching: There are two signature matching strategies: exact matching and range-based or relaxed matching. In
exact matching, only the packets whose lengths exactly match
the packet lengths that were observed during training are considered to be valid. On the other hand, in range-based matching,
the packet lengths are allowed to lie between a minimum and
maximum packet length (i.e., within a small delta, ) observed
during training. We set  = 10 as existing work [28]. Now, if the
signatures during training are <C-136, S-780> and <C-700,
S-511>, the range-based matching will consider client-to-server
packets with lengths in [126, 710] and server-to-client packets
with lengths in [501, 790] as valid. We used exact matching when
no variations in packet lengths were observed during training,
otherwise, range-based matching is used. A signature match
is searched within n packets (i.e., the heuristic described in
Section III-B).
C. Packet-Based Signature Generation and Detection
We develop a new packet-based signature generation and
detection system that relies on the total number of packets to
make signatures and detect activities. Algorithm 1 shows the corresponding pseudocode for signature generation and detection
of a single event of a given device. At first, we take all packets
(packets) from the pcap file (F ), events supported by a device
(E), and the IP address (IP ) of a device as input. Then, we take
a list of timestamps (T S) of the occurred event which is stored
as separate files. After that, we discard the packets where neither
the source nor destination address matches with IP and take the
number of packets (ni ) occurring within a specific time-window
(twindow ) of each time the event is triggered and calculate the
heuristic, nheu , using equation III-B. Since during training, we
determine the value of nheu in controlled lab settings having no
delays in traffic, it is dependent on time in essence. However,
once we get nheu , any real-time inference is not dependent on
the time frame anymore. We set twindow = 15 milliseconds
so that we can compare our system with PINGPONG [28].
The detailed procedure is described in Section III-B. Next, we
re-iterate the traffic and consider nheu number of packets per
event. Finally, we use the DBSCAN clustering algorithm to
generate clusters (clusters) and concatenate packet pairs in
the clusters to reassemble the longest packet sequences possible
for creating signatures (signatures) of that event. Finally, we
output the signatures into a file. Using these signatures and nheu ,
we match signatures and detect activities in any independent
dataset, as described in Section III-B.
D. Handling Multi-Type Events
For multi-type IoT devices, such as the TP-Link light bulb
with events ON-OFF-COLOR-INTENSITY, PINGPONG [28]
considers separate events as binary types, and trains and detects
them independently. Thus, if there are n possible types of events
for a device, PINGPONG runs the detection process at least

Algorithm 1: Generate Packet-Based Signatures.
Input
F
Pcap file
E
Event of the IoT device
IP
IP address of the device
TS Timestamp list of when the event occurred
Output
List of Signatures
packets ← all packets from F
E ← event name from file
T S ← list from the timestamps file
IP ← ip address from command line argument
n ← {}
for each pck ∈ packets do
if pck.src = IP or pck.dest = IP then
packets.remove(pck)
end if
end for
i←0
for each ts ∈ T S do
Initialize twindow
n[i + +] ← number of packets in [ts, ts + twindow ]
end for
nheu ← Heuristic(m = |T S|, n)
considered_packets ← []
for each ts ∈ T S do
considered_packets.add(packets(ts, nheu ))
end for
signatures ← []
clusters ← DBSCAN (considered_packets)
for each clstr ∈ clusters do
sig ← clstr.packet_pairs.concatenate()
signatures.add(sig)
end for
return signatures

n/2 times, rather than executing all the events of the device at a
time, which results in additional overhead. Consequently, if there
are total x devices each with n possible types of events, then the
computational overhead will be O(xn). On the other hand, we
improve the system to handle multi-type events simultaneously.
Specifically, in multi-type detection, we train and detect all
events of a specific device in a single run. As a result, if there
are total x devices each with n possible types of events, then
the computational overhead will be only O(x). Therefore, no
additional overhead is required, and the performance of the
system is improved.
Algorithm 2 shows the corresponding pseudocode for detecting multiple types of events. At first, we merge network traces of
all the events of a device into a single pcap file. Then, we take all
packets (packets) from the pcap file (F ), event type list (Evnt),
and the IP address (IP ) of the device as input. Next, we take a
list of occurred events (E) with their corresponding timestamp
(T S) which were stored in separate files. After that, we discard
the packets where neither the source nor destination address

AHSAN et al.: DETECTING SMART HOME DEVICE ACTIVITIES USING PACKET-LEVEL SIGNATURES FROM ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC

Algorithm 2: Handle Multi-type Events.
Input
F
Pcap file
Evnt Event type list of IoT device
IP
IP address of the device
(E, TS) Tuple list of type of occurred event with
corresponding timestamp
Output
List of Signatures
packets ← all packets from F
Evnt ← event types file
IP ← ip address from command line argument
(E, T S) ← events occurred and timestamps file
n ← {}
for each pck ∈ packets do
if pck.src = IP or pck.dest = IP then
packets.remove(pck)
end if
end for
i←0
for each t ∈ Evnt do
for each (e, ts) ∈ (E, T S) do
Initialize twindow
n[i + +] ← number of packets in [ts, ts + twindow ]
end for
end for
nheu ← Heuristic(m = |T S|, n)
signaturesList ← []
for each t ∈ Evnt do
considered_packets ← []
for each (e, ts) ∈ (E, T S) do
if e = t then
continue
end if
considered_packets.add(packets(ts, nheu ))
end for
tempList ← []
clusters ← DBSCAN (considered_packets)
for each clstr ∈ clusters do
signature ← clstr.packet_pairs.concatenate()
tempList.add(signature)
end for
signaturesList.add(tempList)
end for
return signaturesList

1075

events, we keep separate files. Using these signatures and nheu ,
we match signatures and detect activities in other independent
datasets, as described in Section IV.
IV. EVALUATION
This section provides a concise overview of our approach.
We begin by describing the datasets used for training, testing,
and negative, and positive experiments. Next, we present the
detailed results of our improved methodologies. We evaluate
our system using various performance metrics and compare it
with existing work. Additionally, we assess signature uniqueness
using network traffic from two large independent datasets and
test signature generalizability with another dataset.
A. Dataset
For evaluation, we used data from four public datasets:
r Training and Testing: PINGPONG dataset [28] contains
network traces of 19 different smart home devices with a
total size of around 40 GB. The dataset was collected in
2018 but it also contains updated traces for some of the
devices from 2019. We use this dataset in Section IV-C.
r Negative Control Experiment: A negative control experiment means testing our system on an independent dataset
to observe the uniqueness of our signatures for uncommon
devices.
– UNSW smart home traffic dataset [3] contains network
traces for 26 smart home devices. The dataset is a
collection of 59 pcap files, with a total size of 26.3 GB
and a total of 10,497,761 packets. We use this dataset in
Section IV-D-1.
– YourThings smart home traffic dataset [26], [27] contains 1,992 pcap files from 45 smart home devices, with
a total size of approximately 179.9 GB and 282,097,515
packets. We use this dataset in Section IV-D-2.
r Positive Control Experiment: A positive control experiment means testing the generalizability of our signatures using an independent dataset with common devices.
Mon(IoT)r [14] dataset contains network traces for 55 IoT
devices, with a total size of around 8.6 GB. We use this
dataset in Section IV-E to compare our signatures generated
in Section IV-C using the PINGPONG dataset with those
generated using this dataset (for only common devices
across the datasets).
B. Examples of Packet-Based Signatures

matches with IP and take the number of packets (ni ) within a
specific time-window (twindow ) of when an event (t) occurs and
calculate the heuristic, nheu , using III-B. Next, for each type
of event (t), we iterate over all the times that event occurred
(e, ts) and take nheu number of packets. Finally, we use the
DBSCAN clustering algorithm to make clusters (clusters) and
concatenate packet pairs in the clusters to reassemble the longest
packet sequences possible for creating signatures (signatures)
of that event. We output the signatures into a file. For individual

Fig. 2 illustrates the observed packet exchanges for three IoT
devices. For the Sengled bulb, the communication is from the
companion app to the cloud. In this case, for an ON event, the
controlling smartphone always sends a request packet of 215
bytes to an Internet host and receives a reply packet of 1275
bytes. For the OFF event, these packet lengths are 217 bytes and
1277 bytes, respectively, and for INTENSITY, 211 bytes, and
1063 bytes, respectively. For an Amazon plug, we observe an
exchange of TLS Application Data packets between the Amazon
plug and an Internet host where the packet lengths are 1099

1076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

Fig. 2. Packet-level signatures of Sengled bulb, Amazon plug, and TP-Link light bulb observable by a passive network adversary. We can see that unique traffic
patterns are exhibited during the execution of specific device events.
TABLE II
RESULTS OF PACKET-BASED SIGNATURE GENERATION & DETECTION METHODOLOGY, INCLUDING DETECTION RESULTS OF PINGPONG

bytes and 235 bytes, respectively, when the plug is ON. For
OFF events, we find consistently occurring packet pairs in the
plug’s communication with two different Internet hosts where
the lengths of the reply packets are the same; but for the requests
packets, the lengths are different. Similarly, for the TP-Link light
bulb, we observe that the smartphone sends a request packet to
the device with the same lengths of packets for both events, and
the reply packets from the device are of lengths 227 and 244
bytes, respectively. Thus, this request-reply pattern can occur in

any communication mode, such as Phone ↔ Device, Device ↔
Cloud, or Phone ↔ Cloud (as highlighted in Section II-B).
C. Results Using the PINGPONG Dataset
We have tested our methodology on 15 IoT devices on the
PINGPONG dataset [28]. Table II depicts the results. For devices
with multi-type events, we merge network traces of all the events
of a device into a single file and use Algorithm 2 as described in

AHSAN et al.: DETECTING SMART HOME DEVICE ACTIVITIES USING PACKET-LEVEL SIGNATURES FROM ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC

1077

TABLE III
DIFFERENCE IN GENERATED SIGNATURE BY US AND PINGPONG [28]

Section III-D. For most of the devices, we can detect signatures
for different events. The fourth column shows the number of
packets we have used for signature generation and detection.
The fifth column of the table contains the validation results
conducted on the training dataset, and the sixth column contains
the detection results after testing on traffic, independent of the
training and validation phases. Finally, the last two columns
contain corresponding validation and detection results for PINGPONG. The “TPT (Total Packets Taken)” depends on individual
network traffic, that is the total number of packets in the pcap
file, which varies from device to device. Though we discard
irrelevant packets, we can not strictly say the “majority” of the
packets are deemed irrelevant and subsequently discarded. In
several cases, we find most of the packets to be irrelevant. On
the contrary, in other cases, the network traffic contains comparatively fewer packets. Interestingly, we get identical signatures for
the individual events of the WeMo plug, Dlink plug, and WeMo
Insight Plug (possibly these devices share the same software
codebase from the same vendor). Also, for some device events
we obtain different signatures as highlighted using S1 and S2
labels in the table. In the “Matching” results of the last two
columns, we denote the number of detected events of each type
of device by summation. For example, our system detects 50
On, 50 Off, and 97 Intensity events of the Sengled bulb device
in the validation phase. However, the total number of actual
events for the Sengled bulb is 200. Therefore, we mention the
results as “50+50+97=197/200” in the table. For devices with
binary events, since the total number of actual events is 100 per
device in both validation and detection, we skip mentioning the
number of actual events in the table. Similar things go for the
detection column and other devices, except for the three devices
(WeMo plug, Dlink plug, and WeMo Insight Plug), for which we
get identical signatures, we state the number of detected events
together, rather than writing separately.
We next compare our signatures with the ones reported by
PINGPONG [28]. We discover some new signatures for five devices: Sengled bulb (ON-OFF-INTENSITY), Rachio sprinkler

(STOP), Roomba robot (BACK-TO-STATION), Amazon plug
(ON-OFF), and SmartThings plug (ON). These new signatures
are either smaller in size (i.e., vary in packet length, deduct
any part of the signature) or completely different from the
signatures stated in PINGPONG [28]. Table III illustrates a
comparison between our system and PINGPONG [28], only for
the devices where we obtain new signatures. For the Sengled
bulb, we get signatures <C-215 S-1275>, <C-217 S-1277>,
and <C-211 S-1063> for the ON, OFF, and INTENSITY
events, respectively, which are completely different from those
reported by PINGPONG [28]. These new signatures improve
the validation rate while keeping the detection rates almost
identical. For Rachio sprinkler’s event STOP, the signature
generated by PINGPONG [28] is <C-496 C-155 C-395>. In
our experiment, C − 395 is not present, and the new signature
becomes <C-496 C-155>. Importantly, this shortened signature
does not affect the validation and detection system, as evident
in Table III. The signature in PINGPONG [28] for the event
BACK-TO-STATION for the Roomba robot is <S-440 C-105
S-[1018-1024] C-105>. On the contrary, our system generates
a smaller signature excluding S − [1020 − 1022], and again
we observe improvement in both the validation and detection
phases. For the Amazon plug, parts of PINGPONG’s [28] signatures: S − [443 − 445] and S − [444 − 446], for events ON
and OFF, respectively, are not present in our new signatures (see
in Table III). Most importantly, these new signatures prove their
correctness by obtaining perfect matches in the validation and
detection phases (i.e., 100 versus 98, 100 versus 99). Finally, for
the SmartThings plug’s ON event, our system comes up with
a single signature, that is, <C-699 S-511>. On the other hand,
the corresponding existing signatures from PINGPONG [28]
are <C-699 S-511> and <S-777 C-136> (i.e., two signatures).
From Table III, we can see that this new signature can identify
more events compared to PINGPONG [28] (i.e., 100 versus 92
and 95 versus 92).
1) Comparisons With PINGPONG: We have compared our
system with the PINGPONG [28] system in terms of signature

1078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

TABLE IV
COMPARISON BETWEEN BOTH SYSTEMS ON SIGNATURE DURATION

TABLE V
COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR SYSTEM AND PINGPONG

duration and detection. The average signature duration for our
approach across all the devices is 1,141 milliseconds, which
is less than that of PINGPONG (1,499 milliseconds). From
Table IV, we can see that the longest signature in PINGPONG
is 9,132 milliseconds (for Sengled bulb), whereas in our case,
it is 8,060 milliseconds (for Dlink plug). Moreover, our system
improves the minimum and average signature duration time.
For the Sengled bulb, the minimum duration reduces to 3,324
milliseconds from 4,145.5 milliseconds, the average duration
reduces to 5,311 milliseconds from 5,964.5 milliseconds, and
the maximum duration reduces to 7,171 milliseconds from 9,132
milliseconds. For the Amazon plug, we observe a drastic change
in signature duration time as minimum, average, and maximum
duration reduced by 1,162 milliseconds (70 versus 1,232 ms),
1,179 milliseconds (686 versus 2,465 ms), and 3,071 milliseconds (1,466 versus 4,537 ms), respectively. For the Kwikset
doorlock, the minimum duration reduces to 136 milliseconds
from 173 milliseconds, the average duration reduces to 305
milliseconds from 395 milliseconds, and the maximum duration
reduces to 2,361 milliseconds from 2,874 milliseconds. Finally,
for the SmartThings plug, minimum and average signature duration improve (131 versus 335 ms, and 385 versus 537 ms),
and maximum duration remains similar to PINGPONG. For
four devices: Sengled bulb, Amazon plug, Kwikset doorlock,
and SmartThings plug, our performance is much better than
PINGPONG. For others, it remains almost the same.
Moreover, the last four columns of Table II illustrate that
our system always gives better validation results since it can,
most of the time, validate all 100 triggered events. In the case
of detection, it either improves or remains consistent with the
performance of PINGPONG. In our experiments, a true positive
is a case where our system can detect the event that is actually
triggered, a false positive is where there is no event happening
but our system detects as that event occurred, and a false negative
is a case where our system can not detect the actual triggered
event. However, a true negative is not possible here because there
will be nothing to detect if there is no ongoing event. In any
detection system, the target is to get high true positives and low
false negatives. From Table V, we can see that our system gives
more true positives and fewer false negatives than the existing

system since our main goal is to reduce false negatives and
increase true positives, which may result in a few false positive
events as a side effect. Besides, we get a higher recall score
which indicates that we can detect more events than others.
Additionally, the precision of both systems is almost similar.
Therefore, the results of Tables V and IV indicate that our
system outperforms PINGPONG in the signature generation,
and detection process.
Takeaway. PINGPONG [28] employs a time window-based
signature generation and detection strategy, considering all
packets within a specific time-window. However, this approach’s
drawback lies in its sensitivity to traffic rate fluctuations, leading
to variations in validation and detection phases. This is especially
problematic during network congestion, as fewer packets may
be available for signature detection in such periods. To address
these limitations, we have introduced a packet-count-based approach (Section III-B), which mitigates the impact of temporal
fluctuations and network congestion. Moreover, this approach
remains unaffected by higher-than-usual traffic rates, ensuring
accurate signature detection.
2) Experiment on Real World Settings: In the real world,
network traffic usually experiences random delays up to 500 ms,
even 700 ms [16], [33]. Therefore, to better justify our methodology and prove our claim, we create a dataset by injecting random
delays in the PINGPONG dataset [28] and test both systems on
the new dataset. Specifically, we inject delays of different ranges,
for example [0-100] ms, [100-200] ms, [200-300] ms, [300400] ms, and [400-500] ms varying the frequency of the delays,
such as after every 2, 5, 7, 10, 25, 50, 75, and 100 packets. For
every experiment, at first, we select a delay range, let [0-100] ms.
Then, we randomly choose a delay from that range every time,
keeping the frequency of the delays static for that experiment.
After that, we repeat the same experiment 10 times (rounds), and
finally, we take the average of the detection results. Similarly,
we conduct experiments changing the frequency for that delay
range. As a result, in total, there are 5*7*10=350 experiments
per device. Fig. 3 shows the comparison results on precision, recall, and f1-score metrics. We see that PINGPONG predicts few
true positive events, but misses many of them (resulting in too
many false negative events). Thus, in most cases, there are near
0 false positives. Consequently, recall and accuracy of PINGPONG drastically decrease to 14.7% and 25.6%, respectively,
as the more frequent delays increase. Additionally, precision
becomes almost 100 since there are a negligible number of false
positives. On the other hand, the precision, recall, and f1-score

AHSAN et al.: DETECTING SMART HOME DEVICE ACTIVITIES USING PACKET-LEVEL SIGNATURES FROM ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC

1079

Fig. 3. In real-world comparisons, our system maintains stable performance metrics. In contrast, PINGPONG experiences a notable decrease in recall and
F1-score, while precision remains unaffected. This suggests that while PINGPONG accurately detects true events, it misses a significant number of them.

of our system remain stable at 98.3%, 98.5%, and 98.4%, respectively, which means the system is not affected by the delays
at all.
D. Negative Control Experiments
1) Using UNSW Dataset: UNSW dataset [3] contains network traces of 26 IoT devices. We evaluate the uniqueness
of the signatures generated for 15 IoT devices by performing
signature detection on the UNSW dataset [3]. As there is no
common devices between UNSW and the 15 IoT devices for
which we have generated signatures, all the detected events will
be considered false positives. We get a total 90 false positive
events across a total of 10,497,761 packets.
2) Using YourThings Dataset: YourThings dataset [27] contains network traces of 45 IoT devices. We have tested our system
on the YourThings dataset, which includes 1,992 pcap files
over seven days. As there are three common devices (WeMo
plug, Roomba robot, and TP-Link light bulb) present in both
the YourThings dataset and our training-testing dataset, we only
performed signature detection for 12 of our devices that are not
present in the YourThings dataset to avoid the potential for true
positives. We get here only 258 false positives across a total of
282,097,515 packets.
Takeaway. In the two negative control experiments, we observe an average of 1 false positive per 0.117 million packets in
the UNSW dataset and an average of 1 false positive per 1.09
million packets in the YourThings dataset. These false positives
occur due to the range-based or relaxed matching strategy employed by our system. This strategy considers a match even if the
packet lengths in independent traffic are close to the exact lengths
observed during training. The detailed strategy is explained in
Section III-B.
E. Positive Control Experiment Using Mon(IoT)r Dataset
In this Section, we apply our methodology to the publicly
available Mon(IoT)r [14] dataset. We compare the signatures
extracted from the Mon(IoT)r dataset to those extracted from
the PINGPONG [28] dataset for the devices present in both

datasets. There are five common devices: WeMo Insight plug,
Blink camera, TP-Link plug, Sengled bulb, and TP-Link light
bulb. Since Mon(IoT)r dataset was collected in 2019, we use the
secondary dataset that PINGPONG collected for the common
devices in 2019. Thus, we repeat the signature extraction for the
dataset collected in 2019 for these devices to facilitate a better
comparison of signatures.
Table VI highlights the signatures for the common devices
across the two independent datasets. We can see that the signatures for the three devices changed. For the WeMo Insight
plug and Blink camera, the extracted signatures from the PINGPONG (2019) dataset and the Mon(IoT)r dataset are identical.
The signatures for the TP-Link plug and Sengled bulb remain
almost the same across these two datasets. The packet lengths
slightly differ in some positions by a few bytes. For example,
in the PINGPONG dataset, the TP-Link plug’s OFF signature
is <C-593 S-[1235-1236] S-100>, which changes to <C-606
S-[1214-1215] S-100> in Mon(IoT)r dataset. A similar thing
goes for the Sengled bulb. We could not obtain an updated
network trace from the PINGPONG dataset for the TP-Link light
bulb. Thus, we used the previous version. Overall, signatures
across these two datasets do not exactly match, but they are still
closer.
Another interesting insight is the temporal stability of signatures. Comparing Tables II with VI, we can see that the
signature changed for two of the devices across a 2-year time
span. For example, the WeMo Insight plug’s signature no longer
contains P H − 259, and S − 100 is added to the TP-Link plug’s
signature.
Takeaway. We observed in the positive control experiment
that some signatures change over time, probably due to the
configuration changes, communication protocol introduced in
firmware updates, or other credentials. This evolution can result
in introducing false negative events as the signatures will not
match the ones that were observed during training. To overcome
this situation, we need to update our signatures periodically.
The best thing is to repeat the training process to extract the
latest signatures of a device right before launching the detection
process.

1080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2025

TABLE VI
COMMON DEVICES IN THE MON(IOT)R AND PINGPONG DATASETS

V. DISCUSSION
Our system demonstrates high accuracy in revealing IoT
device activities from real smart home network traffic logs. The
experimental evaluations, covering a diverse range of IoT devices, show an average recall of 98-99% and an average precision
of 98-100%. We identify new packet-level signatures and validate their uniqueness by performing detection on independent
datasets, resulting in negligible false positives. Furthermore, the
generated signatures exhibit good generalizability within the
same time frame, although firmware updates can impact the final
signature.
Our system has a few limitations. First, the proposed methodology can only be applied to the TCP protocol, not to the UDP
protocol, which we plan to explore in the future. Besides, we
observe a few false positives as a side effect of reducing false
negatives while maximizing true positives.
Strategies to prevent general traffic analysis, like website
fingerprinting defenses [20], can mitigate our signature detection
system. These include using VPNs, traffic padding, and shaping
techniques, which aim to obscure traffic patterns and connection
details. However, they often introduce significant bandwidth
and latency overheads, challenging the real-time nature of IoT
devices. Other approaches involve injecting adversarial noise
into traffic [29] or splitting traffic across multiple networks [8],
albeit with practical limitations. A promising approach akin
to ‘k-anonymity’ could group traffic based on network usage
by IoT devices while preserving usability. Implementation and
evaluation of such methods for IoT devices remain avenues for
future research.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper introduces a packet-based signature generation
and detection system for effectively detecting user activities of diverse IoT devices, encompassing single, binary, and

multi-type events, using packet-level signatures extracted from
both encrypted and unencrypted network traffic. By overcoming
the time-window dependency limitations of existing systems, we
demonstrate the system’s superiority and correctness through
experimental results in real-world datasets. The uniqueness and
accuracy of our generated signatures are validated using publicly
available datasets, yielding satisfactory outcomes.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Acar et al., “Peek-a-boo: I see your smart home activities, even encrypted!,” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Secur. Privacy Wireless Mobile Netw.,
Linz, Austria, 2020, pp. 207–218.
[2] A. Sivanathan et al., “Characterizing and classifying IoT traffic in smart
cities and campuses,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops,
2017, pp. 559–564.
[3] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments using
network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 18,
no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019.
[4] D. Ahmed, A. Das, and F. Zaffar, “Analyzing the feasibility
and generalizability of fingerprinting Internet of Things devices,”
Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technol., vol. 2022, no. 2, pp. 578–600,
Mar. 2022.
[5] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc.
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016.
[6] B. Copos, K. N. Levitt, M. Bishop, and J. Rowe, “Is anybody home?
Inferring activity from smart home network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Secur.
Privacy Workshops, 2016, pp. 245–251.
[7] DataFlair Team, “How IoT works-4 main components of IoT system,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://data-flair.training/blogs/how-iotworks/
[8] W. De la Cadena et al., “TrafficSliver: Fighting website fingerprinting
attacks with traffic splitting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., 2020, pp. 1971–1985.
[9] G. Acar et al., “FPDetective: Dusting the web for fingerprinters,” in Proc.
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2013, pp. 1129–1140.
[10] I. Hafeez, A. Y. Ding, M. Antikainen, and S. Tarkoma, “Real-time IoT
device activity detection in edge networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Syst.
Secur., 2018, pp. 221–236.
[11] I. Hafeez, M. Antikainen, A. Y. Ding, and S. Tarkoma, “IoT-KEEPER:
Detecting malicious IoT network activity using online traffic analysis at
the edge,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 45–59,
Mar. 2020.

AHSAN et al.: DETECTING SMART HOME DEVICE ACTIVITIES USING PACKET-LEVEL SIGNATURES FROM ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC

[12] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2015,
pp. 1187–1203.
[13] Y. Jin, E. Sharafuddin, and Z.-L. Zhang, “Unveiling core network-wide
communication patterns through application traffic activity graph decomposition,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 37, no. 1,
pp. 49–60, 2009.
[14] J. Ren et al., “Information exposure for consumer IoT devices: A multidimensional, network-informed measurement approach,” in Proc. Internet
Meas. Conf., 2019, pp. 267–279.
[15] J. Ren et al., “Information exposure from consumer IoT devices: A multidimensional, network-informed measurement approach,” in Proc. Internet
Meas. Conf., 2019, pp. 267–279.
[16] J. Li, T. Zhang, J. Jin, Y. Yang, D. Yuan, and L. Gao, “Latency estimation
for fog-based Internet of Things,” in Proc. 27th Int. Telecommun. Netw.
Appl. Conf., 2017, pp. 1–6.
[17] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. J. Sánchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural networks for
Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050, 2017.
[18] M. Miettinen et al., “IoT sentinel: Automated device-type identification
for security enforcement in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Distrib.
Comput. Syst., 2016, pp. 2177–2184.
[19] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. 2nd
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[20] N. Mathews, J. K. Holland, S. E. Oh, M. S. Rahman, N. Hopper, and
M. Wright, “SoK: A critical evaluation of efficient website fingerprinting
defenses,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2023, pp. 344–361.
[21] T. T. T. Nguyen and G. J. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for internet
traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut.,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, Fourth Quarter 2008.
[22] N. J. Apthorpe, D. Y. Huang, D. Reisman, A. Narayanan, and N. Feamster,
“Keeping the smart home private with smart(ER) IoT traffic shaping,”
Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, pp. 128–148, 2018.
[23] N. J. Apthorpe, D. Reisman, and N. Feamster, “A smart home is no castle:
Privacy vulnerabilities of encrypted IoT traffic,” 2017, arXiv: 1705.06805.
[24] N. J. Apthorpe, D. Reisman, and N. Feamster, “Closing the blinds: Four
strategies for protecting smart home privacy from network observers,”
2017, arXiv: 1705.06809.
[25] N. J. Apthorpe, D. Reisman, S. Sundaresan, A. Narayanan, and N. Feamster, “Spying on the smart home: Privacy attacks and defenses on encrypted
IoT traffic,” 2017, arXiv: 1708.05044.
[26] O. Alrawi, C. Lever, M. Antonakakis, and F. Monrose, “Yourthings scorecard,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://yourthings.info/
[27] O. Alrawi, C. Lever, M. Antonakakis, and F. Monrose, “SoK: Security
evaluation of home-based IoT deployments,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2019, pp. 1362–1380.
[28] R. Trimananda, J. Varmarken, A. Markopoulou, and B. Demsky, “Packetlevel signatures for smart home devices,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, 2020.
[29] M. S. Rahman, M. Imani, N. Mathews, and M. Wright, “Mockingbird: Defending against deep-learning-based website fingerprinting attacks with adversarial traces,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16,
pp. 1594–1609, 2021.
[30] R. Perdisci, T. Papastergiou, O. Alrawi, and M. Antonakakis, “IoTFinder:
Efficient large-scale identification of IoT devices via passive DNS traffic
analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 474–489.
[31] R. Perdisci, W. Lee, and N. Feamster, “Behavioral clustering of HTTPbased malware and signature generation using malicious network traces,”
in Proc. Symp. Netw. Syst. Des. Implementation, 2010, pp. 391–404.
[32] R. Doshi, N. J. Apthorpe, and N. Feamster, “Machine learning DDoS
detection for consumer Internet of Things devices,” in Proc. IEEE Secur.
Privacy Workshops, 2018, pp. 29–35.
[33] A. S. S. M. D. Kumar, “Delay estimation of healthcare applications based
on MQTT protocol: A node-red implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Electron., Comput. Commun. Technol., 2022, pp. 1–6.
[34] S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, T.D. Nguyen, A.-R. Sadeghi, and N. Asokan,
“AuDI: Toward autonomous IoT device-type identification using periodic communication,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 1402–1412, Jun. 2019.
[35] S. Madakam, R. Ramaswamy, and S. Tripathi, “Internet of Things (IoT):
A literature review,” J. Comput. Commun., vol. 3, pp. 164–173, Dec. 2022.
[36] A. Subahi and G. Theodorakopoulos, “Detecting IoT user behavior and
sensitive information in encrypted IoT-app traffic,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 21,
2019, Art. no. 4777.

1081

[37] T. OConnor et al., “HomeSnitch: Behavior transparency and control for
smart home IoT devices,” in Proc. 12th Conf. Secur. Privacy Wireless
Mobile Netw., Miami, FL, USA, 2019, pp. 128–138.
[38] Z. Berkay Celik et al., “Sensitive information tracking in commodity IoT,”
in Proc. 27th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., Baltimore, MD, USA, 2018,
pp. 1687–1704.
Mohammad Shamim Ahsan received the BS degree in computer science and engineering from the
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), in 2023. Currently, he is a lecturer
with the Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
Department, United International University, Dhaka,
Bangladesh. He will start his PhD in Fall’24 with
the IST Department of Pennsylvania State University,
USA. His research interests are in Cybersecurity and
Privacy, focusing on IoT security, computer security,
web security, and social aspects of security. Apart
from this, he is continuously serving society as a peer-reviewer in several
well-known journals.
Md. Shariful Islam received the BSc degree in computer science and engineering from the Bangladesh
University of Engineering and Technology (BUET),
Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2023. Currently, he works as a
software engineer with Enosis Solutions, Bangladesh,
while seeking PhD opportunities starting Fall ’25.
He possesses experience in IoT security and has
participated in Computer Security competitions like
Capture the Flag. His research interests encompass
IoT security, cryptography, web security, and network
security.
Md. Shohrab Hossain (Member, IEEE) received the
BSc and MSc degrees in computer science and engineering from the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Dhaka, Bangladesh, in
2003 and 2007, respectively, and the PhD degree
from the School of Computer Science, University
of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA, in 2012. During
his PhD, he worked under NASA-funded projects
related to survivability, scalability, and security of
space networks. He is currently serving as a professor
with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Dhaka,
Bangladesh. His research interests include Cyber Security, Mobile malware
detections, Software-defined networking (SDN), security of mobile and ad hoc
networks, and the Internet of Things. He has published more than 90 technical
research papers in leading journals and conferences including the Journal of
Computers & Security, Ad Hoc Networks, IEEE Access, Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, IEEE Trans. of Mobile Computing, Wireless Personal
Communication, PLoS One, IEEE GLOBECOM, IEEE ICC, IEEE MILCOM,
IEEE WCNC, IEEE HPCC, etc.
Anupam Das (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
BS and MS degrees in computer science and engineering from the Bangladesh University of Engineering
and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2008 and
2010, respectively, and the PhD degree in computer
science from the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign (UIUC), Illinois, USA, in 2016. He was
a recipient of a Fulbright Science and Technology
fellowship during his PhD degree. He was also a
postdoctoral fellow with the School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) from
2016 to 2018. He is currently an assistant professor with the Computer Science Department at North Carolina State University (NCSU), Raleigh, North
Carolina, USA. His research interests lie in security and privacy, with a special
focus on designing secure and privacy-preserving technologies. He has published
more than 60 technical research papers in leading journals and conferences.
He has been awarded more than U.S. $2.5 million in research grants from the
U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF), NCSU, Meta, and Amazon. He has
also received two ACM Distinguished Paper Awards (ASIACCS 2014, MMSys
2017). His projects have been covered by media outlets such as Wired, Forbes,
ZDNet, MotherBoard, and FastCompany.