Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Intelligent Systems with Applications
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/intelligent-systems-with-applications

Detecting unknown intrusions from large heterogeneous data through
ensemble learning
Farah Jemili * , Khaled Jouini, Ouajdi Korbaa
Universite de Sousse, ISITCom, MARS Research Laboratory, LR17ES05, Hammam Sousse, 4011, Tunisia

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Big heterogeneous data
Intrusion detection
Data fusion

The rapid expansion of data volumes, technological advancements, and the emergence of the Internet of Things
(IoT) have heightened concerns regarding the detection of unknown intrusions based on singular sources of
network traffic. This progression has led to the generation of vast and diverse datasets originating from various
sources including IoT devices, web applications, and web services. Effectively discerning attacks within such a
heterogeneous network traffic landscape necessitates the identification of underlying security behaviors,
essential for developing an efficient analysis information system.
This paper aims to establish a comprehensive framework for network intrusion detection. The proposed
methodology involves the synthesis of network features into a universal security database through the utilization
of Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency Terms (TF-IDF) and semantic Cosine similarity. By amalgam­
ating a diverse array of data flows, a set of universal features is generated, facilitating storage within the newly
devised universal representation. Subsequently, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is employed to reduce the
dimensionality of the extensive universal security database while preserving essential information. Leveraging
Ensemble Learning, a novel method is introduced for the detection of unknown attacks.
The efficacy of the developed database is evaluated using various Machine Learning algorithms, including
Naïve Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbor, Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, and Random Forest. Furthermore,
Ensemble Learning methods are assessed under two distinct scenarios. Experimental findings, conducted on
datasets such as CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and UNSW, demonstrate the universality, versatility, and effectiveness
of the proposed approach, particularly in accommodating datasets with diverse structures.

1. Introduction
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have long been essential tools for
identifying potential attacks within computer networks and systems.
Recently, the integration of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms has
further enhanced IDS by enabling more sophisticated data analysis and
classification for intrusion detection. In the context of ML, IDS function
as classifiers, categorizing network traffic data and predicting potential
attacks based on this classification (Patel, Taghavi, Bakhtiyari & Júnior,
2013).
However, IDS face increasing challenges due to the exponential
growth of data and the proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT) devices,
which generate diverse and complex data. While recent advancements
in big data have led to the development of distributed architectures for
IDS (Intrata, Grif & Dostovalov, 2021; Othman et al., 2018; Peng, Leung
& Huang, 2018), the dynamic and heterogeneous nature of cyberspace

complicates the detection of unknown intrusions across varied network
data sources. Given the prevalence of interconnected computer systems
in real-world applications, the traditional approach of creating separate
IDS for each network type is increasingly impractical.
1.1. Motivation and contributions
• Motivation:
○ The rise in volume and diversity of network traffic, particularly
with IoT, has amplified the challenge of detecting unknown attacks
in real-time.
○ Conventional IDS struggle to process heterogeneous data from
multiple sources, necessitating a universal framework for intrusion
detection.
○ An adaptable, efficient, and scalable IDS approach is critical for
real-world environments where threats constantly evolve.

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jmili_farah@yahoo.fr (F. Jemili).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iswa.2024.200465
Received 26 April 2024; Received in revised form 14 November 2024; Accepted 5 December 2024
Available online 9 December 2024
2667-3053/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/).

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

• Contributions of This Study:
○ Universal Security Database: We propose a comprehensive data­
base that integrates features from diverse network types, creating a
versatile foundation for IDS.
○ Universal Feature Representation: By leveraging Term FrequencyInverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) and Cosine similarity, our
framework effectively fuses heterogeneous data sources.
○ Dimensionality Reduction: Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is
applied to streamline the feature space, ensuring both efficiency
and preservation of essential information.
○ Ensemble
Learning Method: A unique ensemble method,
combining parallel and sequential approaches, is introduced to
enhance the detection accuracy of unknown attacks.
○ Comprehensive Evaluation: The proposed framework is rigorously
tested on multiple scenarios using CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and
UNSW-NB15 datasets, demonstrating its effectiveness and
adaptability.

performance.
Zhou et al. (2018) introduced a taxonomy that addresses the het­
erogeneity of network data, including host logs, application logs, and
wireless network traffic. While this taxonomy provides a framework for
understanding data diversity, it does not explore the integration of these
diverse data types through advanced feature extraction and ensemble
learning techniques. Our study contributes to this area by developing
methods for effective data fusion and leveraging ensemble learning to
address the complexities of heterogeneous network environments.
Recent studies such as ARGUS IDS and CIC Flow Meter (2022) have
proposed advanced methods for feature extraction and classification,
including multi-dimensional feature fusion and deep neural
network-based reconstruction techniques. While these methods address
feature extraction challenges, our work introduces a novel combination
of data fusion techniques and ensemble learning approaches that
significantly enhances the effectiveness of intrusion detection systems
across a range of datasets and environments, (Table 1).
To further enhance intrusion detection in cybersecurity, the works in
Arasteh et al. (2024), Arasteh, Bouyer, Sefati and Craciunescu (2024),
and Danesh, Karimi and Arasteh (2024) offer noteworthy contributions
focused on specialized threat detection. The paper (Arasteh, Bouyer,
Sefati & Craciunescu, 2024) introduces a hybrid approach to SQL in­
jection (SQLi) detection using the Binary Olympiad Optimizer (BOO) for
feature selection combined with classification algorithms. This method
efficiently reduces computational complexity and achieves high detec­
tion accuracy by narrowing down to relevant features for SQLi detec­
tion. Similarly, (Arasteh et al., 2024) addresses SQLi detection by
employing the Binary Gray Wolf Optimizer (BGWO) alongside machine
learning classifiers, constructing a dataset with essential SQLi indicators
to improve model accuracy and reduce computational demands. While
both approaches offer effective feature selection techniques that
enhance traditional SQLi detection methods, they are limited to specific
types of attacks within SQLi threats, and neither work expands to mul­
tiple types of network traffic data or addresses the scalability challenges
associated with big data environments.
In Danesh, Karimi and Arasteh (2024), CMShark is introduced as a
network-based, infrastructure-independent method for detecting
crypto-jacking attacks. The study uses a hybrid approach, combining
machine learning classification, IP blacklisting, and payload inspection,
providing robust crypto-jacking detection through packet size classifi­
cation, known IP addresses, and keyword-based payload inspection.
Although CMShark’s multi-faceted design improves crypto-jacking
detection accuracy, its application is limited to network edge de­
ployments and specific attack types, making it less versatile for
large-scale, heterogeneous network environments.
While (Arasteh et al., 2024; Arasteh, Bouyer, Sefati & Craciunescu,
2024), and (Danesh, Karimi & Arasteh, 2024) introduce innovative and
effective detection methods for SQLi and crypto-jacking threats, they
primarily focus on isolated attack vectors, relying on specific feature
selection optimizers and detection techniques that are not optimized for
the integration of diverse data sources or scalable, distributed archi­
tectures. In contrast, our approach incorporates an ensemble learning
framework that unites data from the NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS
datasets, accommodating a broader spectrum of attacks. This ensemble
learning strategy not only includes both parallel and sequential methods
for enhanced intrusion detection but also addresses data fusion from
diverse sources, surpassing the single-source limitations of the discussed
studies. By leveraging distributed computing frameworks such as
Hadoop and Spark, our approach achieves the scalability necessary to
handle big data environments, a critical factor overlooked in Arasteh
et al. (2024), Arasteh, Bouyer, Sefati and Craciunescu (2024), Danesh,
Karimi and Arasteh (2024).
In summary, our contribution significantly advances the field by
addressing the challenges of diverse data integration, scalability, and
multi-model ensemble learning, delivering a more comprehensive and
robust intrusion detection solution adaptable to complex and large-scale

1.2. Paper structure
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 re­
views the current state of IDS and the ongoing challenges. Section 3
discusses network traffic sources and introduces a novel framework for
data representation. Section 4 details the proposed methodology. Sec­
tion 5 presents evaluation results, and Section 6 provides conclusions
from the study.
2. Related works
Traditional machine learning (ML) tools, while effective in certain
contexts, have struggled to keep pace with the ever-expanding diversity
and sheer volume of network traffic data. As a result, researchers have
increasingly turned to big data technologies as a means of enhancing
intrusion detection capabilities. To tackle the challenge posed by the
sheer magnitude of data, innovative approaches leveraging distributed
architectures, distributed storage systems, and parallelization para­
digms have been developed.
Peng, Leung and Huang (2018) introduced a method combining Mini
Batch K-means with Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to differen­
tiate between normal and malicious behavior in network traffic. This
approach harnesses the power of distributed computing for scalability
and efficiency, but it focuses on a single data source and does not explore
ensemble learning methods for integrating multiple datasets. Our pro­
posed approach advances this work by integrating data from NSL-KDD,
UNSW, and CICIDS datasets and employing a novel ensemble learning
strategy that combines both parallel and sequential methods for
enhanced intrusion detection.
Elayni et al.’s survey (Elayni, Jemili, Korbaa & Soulaimen, 2019)
provides valuable insights into the IDS process, spanning from data
collection to detection methods, and highlights the importance of big
data storage and analysis techniques. However, this survey does not
address the specific challenges of data fusion across heterogeneous
sources or the application of ensemble learning techniques. Our work
builds upon these foundational concepts by proposing a comprehensive
approach that integrates advanced feature extraction techniques with a
unique ensemble learning framework designed to handle diverse data
environments.
Distributed frameworks such as Hadoop and Spark have emerged as
pivotal platforms for managing large volumes of network traffic data
(Intrata, Grif & Dostovalov, 2021; Othman et al., 2018; Patel, Taghavi,
Bakhtiyari & Júnior, 2013; Peng, Leung & Huang, 2018; Zuech,
Khoshgoftaar & Wald, 2015). These frameworks are essential for effi­
cient data processing but often focus on individual datasets rather than
exploring techniques for fusing diverse data sources. Our approach ex­
tends these frameworks by applying a novel ensemble learning strategy
that integrates multiple data sources and methods to improve detection
2

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

■ Comprehensive Evaluation: Conducts extensive experiments
across diverse datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness and scal­
ability of the proposed approach.

Table 1
Related work.
Study

Key Contributions

Limitations

Our Novelty and
Differentiation

Peng, Leung and
Huang (2018)

Combines Mini
Batch K-means
with PCA for
network traffic
analysis

Focuses on a
single data
source; lacks
ensemble
methods

Elayni, Jemili,
Korbaa and
Soulaimen
(2019)

Survey on IDS
process from data
collection to
detection
methods

Does not
address data
fusion or
ensemble
learning
techniques

Distributed
Frameworks (
Patel, Taghavi,
Bakhtiyari &
Júnior, 2013;
Intrata, Grif &
Dostovalov,
2021; Peng,
Leung & Huang,
2018; Othman
et al., 2018;
Zuech,
Khoshgoftaar &
Wald, 2015)
Zhou et al. (2018)

Utilizes Hadoop
and Spark for
efficient data
processing

Often limited to
individual
datasets; lacks
data fusion
focus

Integrates multiple
datasets (NSLKDD, UNSW,
CICIDS) with
ensemble learning
(parallel and
sequential) to
improve detection
accuracy
Proposes a
comprehensive
approach
integrating data
fusion and
ensemble learning
for diverse data
environments
Extends these
frameworks with a
novel ensemble
learning strategy
that integrates
multiple data
sources

Introduces
taxonomy for
network data
heterogeneity

Does not
explore data
integration or
advanced
feature
extraction
techniques

ARGUS IDS

Proposes multidimensional
feature fusion and
stacking ensemble

Primarily
focuses on
feature
extraction;
limited data
sources

CIC Flow Meter

Novel
reconstruction
method using
deep neural
networks for
feature extraction

Focuses on
feature
extraction and
classification

The proposed method addresses several key limitations commonly
found in existing unknown intrusion detectors:
1. Inability to Handle Heterogeneous Data: Traditional detectors
often focus on single-source or homogenous datasets, which limits
their applicability in real-world scenarios where data sources are
diverse. Our method overcomes this by creating a universal security
database that integrates features from multiple, heterogeneous
datasets (CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15).
2. Limited Detection of Unknown Attacks: Many intrusion detection
systems rely on predefined patterns or signatures, making them less
effective for unknown intrusions. By applying ensemble learning and
a universal feature representation, our method enhances the detec­
tion capability for novel, previously unseen attacks.
3. High Computational Requirements: Existing systems sometimes
struggle with large, high-dimensional data, which can slow down
detection and reduce scalability. Our approach addresses this
through Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for dimensionality
reduction, which optimizes processing time and computational
efficiency.
4. Scalability and Adaptability Issues: IDS often need extensive
reconfiguration to adapt to different datasets or network environ­
ments. The proposed framework is designed to be adaptable across
various data environments, increasing the scalability of the IDS.
3. Methodology formulation

Develops methods
for effective data
fusion and utilizes
ensemble learning
to handle
heterogeneous
network
environments
Combines
advanced feature
extraction
techniques with
ensemble learning,
enhancing
effectiveness
across various
datasets
Introduces a
unique
combination of
data fusion and
ensemble learning
to significantly
enhance intrusion
detection
capabilities

3.1. Network data representation
This section delves into the intricacies of communication between
network systems, as defined by the Open System Interconnection (OSI)
reference model, which conceptualizes data transmission across seven
layers from the physical layer to the application layer (ARGUS, IDS; CIC
Flow, Meter). Data transmission occurs via packets, which serve as the
fundamental unit of communication in network traffic (see Fig. 1). Each
packet comprises a payload, representing the actual data being trans­
mitted, along with one or more headers containing metadata such as
source and destination IP addresses, service details, and protocols.
Notably, headers play a crucial role in computer networking by
providing essential information for accurate data transmission. For
instance, packets conforming to the Telnet Network protocol (telnet)
adhere to the TCP/IP standard and encompass a media access control
(MAC) header, an internet protocol (IP) header, a transmission control
protocol (TCP) header, a telnet header, and a telnet payload.
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) leverage headers from packets
across various protocols to extract features specific to each type of
network traffic data. For instance, tools like CICFlow Meter (CICIDS,
2017) are utilized to extract 76 distinct features from network traffic
within datasets like CICIDS 2017.
However, two significant drawbacks are associated with the network
traffic data utilized in IDS. Firstly, the detection focus is typically
confined to individual packets or isolated data flows. While a single data
flow may consist of multiple series of data packets from the same
network type, real-world network traffic is characterized by heteroge­
neous data flows with diverse structural compositions. While hetero­
geneous data flow collection is recommended for IDS, it presents
challenges for Machine Learning (ML) algorithms.
Secondly, metadata poses another challenge, as features are extrac­
ted from headers following universal network standards such as the OSI
reference model and TCP/IP standard. However, proposed datasets
often exhibit ambiguous feature names with differing notations, despite
being derived from standard packet headers.

network environments.
Summary of Our Contributions:
■ Data Fusion: Integrates multiple heterogeneous datasets (NSL-KDD,
UNSW, CICIDS) to improve robustness and generalizability.
■ Ensemble Learning: Utilizes a combination of parallel and
sequential ensemble methods to enhance detection accuracy and
performance.
■ Feature Extraction: Employs innovative techniques like TF-IDF and
Cosine similarity for effective feature extraction, addressing the un­
structured nature of intrusion data.

3

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Fig. 1. The extraction of data and metadata from a packet.

In our study, we redefine the detection object as heterogeneous data
flows, acknowledging the unstructured nature of the data. Our proposal
centers on the development of a new universal representation encom­
passing all possible features established in accordance with network
standards. This approach aims to address the complexities inherent in
heterogeneous data environments and provide a comprehensive foun­
dation for effective intrusion detection.
Our approach starts with understanding how data travels in a
network, based on the Open System Interconnection (OSI) model. The
OSI model describes data transmission in seven layers, from the physical
layer to the application layer. Data is sent in packets, which are small
units of data. Each packet has a payload (the actual data) and headers
(metadata like source and destination IP addresses, and protocol
information).
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) use these headers to extract fea­
tures from network traffic. For example, tools like CICFlowMeter can
extract 76 features from datasets such as CICIDS 2017. However,
focusing only on individual packets or single data flows has two main
problems:

The data, denoted as D, is sourced from various channels, as outlined
in Section 3.1. Each data source is characterized by a specific structure,
represented by a vector X. Data sharing the same vector structure is
assigned to a common category, denoted as Ԟ. To establish a universal
framework, we define a universal vector, U, encompassing all observ­
able categories within network traffic, irrespective of its origin. The
universal vector, U, comprises individual vectors, U= (X1, X2, …, Xk),
with each vector defined by a set of features, F:
Uj = X1 ←(F1 , F2 , …, Fn )
X2 ←(F1 , F2 , …, Fm )
⋅
Xk ←(F1 , F2 , …, Fz )
Where j = n + m + z, representing the total dimensionality of the new
universal vector, U.
At this juncture, our aim is to establish a standardized set of features
within the universal vector, Uj. However, despite originating from the
same network standard, certain features may exhibit redundancies or
inconsistencies in naming conventions. In addressing this challenge, we
leverage the metadata associated with each dataset, which provides a
comprehensive description of all features. Our proposal entails the
creation of a new corpus derived from metadata, wherein each feature is
assigned a designation and detailed description. This corpus serves as a
dynamic repository, automatically updated to accommodate new fea­
tures as they are integrated. By harnessing metadata in this manner, we
aim to streamline feature management and enhance the overall effec­
tiveness of our universal IDS framework.
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms typically require specific data
structures, making it impractical to use a separate IDS for each network
system. This is because an attack in one layer (e.g., the application layer)
can affect other layers (e.g., the physical layer). Therefore, our IDS needs
to correlate data from various sources to detect threats effectively.
Our solution is to build a universal database that combines data from
different sources. Here’s how we do it:

1. Real-world network traffic is heterogeneous, meaning it contains
data from various sources with different structures.
2. Metadata extracted from packet headers can have ambiguous names,
even if they follow standard network protocols.
To address these issues, we propose a new method that handles
heterogeneous data flows by creating a universal representation of
network traffic.
3.2. Data flows reconstruction: big universal security database
In the realm of Machine Learning (ML), algorithms typically operate
within the confines of specific data structures, rendering the utilization
of a distinct Intrusion Detection System (IDS) for each network system
impractical. This is primarily due to the interconnected nature of
network layers, where an attack originating in the application layer can
impact the physical layer, and vice versa. Therefore, an effective IDS
necessitates the correlation and aggregation of data packets from
various sources to provide comprehensive threat detection capabilities.
In our proposed approach, we advocate for the development of a uni­
versal database capable of accommodating data from diverse sources.

1. Data Collection: We collect data (D) from various channels, each
with a specific structure (vector X). Data with the same structure is
grouped into a category (Ԟ).
2. Universal Vector Creation: We create a universal vector (U) that
includes all categories of network traffic. The universal vector is a

4

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

combination of individual vectors (U = X1, X2, …, Xk), each defined
by a set of features (F).
3. Standardization: Although these features come from the same
network standard, they might have different names or redundant
information. We use metadata to create a new corpus that provides a
clear description for each feature. This corpus is updated automati­
cally as new features are added.

By providing this detailed description and pseudocode, we aim to
clarify the construction process of the universal features vector and
facilitate the reproducibility of our methodology.
3.4. Dataset description
3.4.1. Data collection process
Our study utilized three benchmark datasets commonly used for
evaluating network intrusion detection systems: CICIDS 2017, NSLKDD, and UNSW-NB15. Below is a detailed description of the data
collection process for each dataset:

3.3. Construction of universal features vector
The universal features vector is a crucial component of our proposed
methodology, designed to capture the essential characteristics of the
input data for intrusion detection. Below, we provide a detailed
description of the construction process, along with pseudocode to
facilitate reproducibility.

1. CICIDS 2017:
■ Source: The dataset was generated by the Canadian Institute for
Cybersecurity.
■ Environment: The data was collected in a controlled environment
that simulated real-world network traffic.
■ Traffic Types: It includes benign traffic and a variety of attack
types such as DoS, DDoS, PortScan, and Brute Force.
■ Duration: Data was collected over a period of five days.
2. NSL-KDD:
■ Source: This dataset is an improved version of the original KDD
Cup 1999 dataset, addressing issues like redundant records.
■ Traffic Types: It contains both normal traffic and different attack
types including Probe, R2 L, U2R, and DoS.
■ Preprocessing: It has been preprocessed to remove duplicate re­
cords and improve data quality.
3. UNSW-NB15:

1. Data Preprocessing:
■ Tokenize the input data.
■ Remove stopwords and perform stemming or lemmatization.
■ Calculate Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF)
for the tokenized data.
2. Dimensionality Reduction:
■ Apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the
dimensionality of the TF-IDF matrix while preserving essential
information.
3. Feature Aggregation:
■ Construct the universal features vector by aggregating the
reduced-dimensional features (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Universal features vector construction pseudocode.
5

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

■ Source: The dataset was created by the Australian Centre for
Cyber Security.
■ Environment: Data was collected from a hybrid of real modern
normal activities and synthetic contemporary attack behaviors.
■ Traffic Types: It includes normal traffic as well as nine types of
attacks such as Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, and Exploits
(Figs. 3 and 4).

3. Handling Class Imbalance:
■ Oversampling: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique
(SMOTE) was applied to generate synthetic samples for the mi­
nority classes, balancing the class distribution.
■ Undersampling: Random undersampling of the majority class was
performed to ensure a balanced training set, reducing the risk of
model bias towards the majority class.
■ Class Weights: During model training, class weights were adjusted
to penalize misclassifications of the minority class more heavily,
encouraging the model to pay more attention to underrepresented
classes.

3.4.2. Distribution of classes
The datasets exhibit varying distributions of classes, which is
important to consider for training and evaluating our models:
1. CICIDS 2017:
■ Normal Traffic: Approximately 80% of the dataset.
■ Attack Traffic: Approximately 20%, with a detailed breakdown as
follows: DoS/DDoS: 10%, PortScan: 5%, Brute Force: 3%, Others:
2%
2. NSL-KDD:
■ Normal Traffic: Around 53% of the dataset.
■ Attack Traffic: Around 47%, with categories: Probe: 21%, DoS:
13%, R2L: 12%, U2R: 1%
3. UNSW-NB15:
■ Normal Traffic: Approximately 88% of the dataset.
■ Attack Traffic: Approximately 12%, broken down as: Fuzzers: 5%,
Analysis: 2%, DoS: 2%, Exploits: 1%, Others: 2%

The careful collection and preprocessing of the datasets ensure that
our models are trained on high-quality, balanced data, enhancing their
ability to detect a wide range of network intrusions effectively. These
steps contribute significantly to the robustness and generalizability of
our intrusion detection framework.
Our proposed approach integrates various machine learning tech­
niques to enhance the detection of unknown intrusions in network
traffic. This section explains the methodology in detail, including sample
feature data from the datasets used in our experiments.
Before applying machine learning algorithms, the raw network
traffic data from the NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS datasets were pre­
processed. This involved the following steps:
■ Feature Extraction: Relevant features were extracted from the
network traffic data using TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Docu­
ment Frequency) and Cosine similarity. These techniques helped in
transforming the textual data into numerical features that machine
learning algorithms can process.
■ Dimensionality Reduction: Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
was applied to reduce the feature space while retaining the most
important information. This step helps in mitigating the curse of
dimensionality and improving the efficiency of the model (Table 2).

3.4.3. Data preprocessing and handling class imbalance
Preprocessing steps were essential to prepare the data for training
and to address class imbalance issues. Here are the steps taken:
1. Data Cleaning:
■ Duplicate Removal: Duplicate records were removed to ensure
the quality and uniqueness of the data.
■ Missing Values: Missing values were handled by either imputing
with the mean/mode or by removing the records if the missing
rate was high.
2. Feature Engineering:
■ Normalization: Continuous features were normalized to a range
between 0 and 1 using min-max scaling.
■ Categorical Encoding: Categorical features were encoded using
one-hot encoding to convert them into a numerical format suit­
able for ML models.

3.5. Feature description
This study leverages three widely-used datasets: CICIDS 2017, NSLKDD, and UNSW-NB15. Each dataset provides a range of features
essential for effective intrusion detection. Below is an overview of key
features included in our analysis:

Fig. 3. Feature classification for NSL-KDD dataset.
6

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Fig. 4. Feature classification for UNSW-NB15 dataset.

2. Big Universal Security Database (BUSD): We propose the Big
Universal Security Database (BUSD), which is capable of accommo­
dating and correlating data from various sources. The theoretical
foundation of BUSD lies in its ability to integrate data flows of
different structures into a unified vector representation. This method
enhances the capability of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to
detect unknown attacks by considering the interconnected nature of
network layers. This is a novel contribution to the theoretical un­
derstanding of data fusion in network security.
3. Dimensionality Reduction with PCA: Our approach employs
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of
the extensive universal security database while preserving essential
information. This theoretical framework for dimensionality reduc­
tion is crucial for managing large-scale data and improving the ef­
ficiency of machine learning algorithms used in IDS.
4. Ensemble Learning Methodology: We introduce a new ensemble
learning method that combines both parallel and sequential ap­
proaches for detecting unknown attacks. This methodology enhances
the accuracy and robustness of IDS by leveraging the strengths of
multiple machine learning algorithms. The theoretical contribution
here lies in the innovative use of ensemble learning to handle het­
erogeneous data more effectively.
5. Evaluation Across Multiple Scenarios: The efficacy of our pro­
posed approach is evaluated using various machine learning algo­
rithms, including Naïve Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbor, Logistic
Regression, Decision Tree, and Random Forest. Our experimental
findings, conducted on datasets such as CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and
UNSW, demonstrate the universality, versatility, and effectiveness of
our approach. This comprehensive evaluation contributes to the
theoretical understanding of how different machine learning tech­
niques can be applied to heterogeneous network data.

Table 2
Sample Feature Data (from NSL-KDD dataset).
Feature

Description

Sample
Value

Duration
Protocol Type
Service

Length of the connection in seconds
Type of protocol (e.g., TCP, UDP)
Network service on the destination (e.g., HTTP,
FTP)
Number of data bytes from source to destination
Number of data bytes from destination to source

0.03
TCP
HTTP

Source Bytes
Destination
Bytes

181
5450

• CICIDS 2017: This dataset includes 76 features that capture various
traffic behaviors, such as Flow Duration, Total Fwd Packets, Fwd
Packet Length Mean, Flow Bytes/s, and others. These features pro­
vide insights into bidirectional flows, allowing for the identification
of attack patterns in real-world scenarios.
• NSL-KDD: Comprising 41 features, NSL-KDD includes attributes such
as Protocol Type, Service, Flag, Source Bytes, and Destination Bytes.
These features are used to differentiate between normal and
abnormal traffic types.
• UNSW-NB15: This dataset offers 46 features, covering aspects like
srcip, sport, dstip, dsport, and state. Additionally, it includes highlevel summaries like Total Bytes and Total Packets, which are valu­
able for anomaly detection.
Each dataset’s features are preprocessed and standardized to form a
universal representation, as described in the following section. By
incorporating diverse features across datasets, our approach enhances
detection accuracy and robustness in heterogeneous data environments.
3.6. Innovative aspects and theoretical advancements in our work

These points collectively establish a strong theoretical foundation
and demonstrate the innovative contributions of our research to the
fields of data fusion and intrusion detection in heterogeneous network
environments.

1. Novel Universal Representation of Network Features: Our paper
introduces a new methodology for restructuring network data based
on predefined features, employing Term Frequency-Inverse Docu­
ment Frequency (TF-IDF) and Cosine similarity to create a universal
security database. This approach is innovative as it allows for the
aggregation and analysis of heterogeneous data flows within a sin­
gular, comprehensive framework. This universal representation ad­
dresses the complexities inherent in diverse data environments,
which is a significant theoretical advancement in the field of intru­
sion detection.

4. Proposed approach
4.1. Approach description
The proposed method for intrusion detection follows a systematic,
multi-stage process designed to harness the strengths of ensemble
7

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

learning across heterogeneous datasets. The key stages of this approach
are outlined as follows:

names, facilitating a nuanced understanding and robust analysis of
network traffic data. In our investigation, the focal point is heteroge­
neous data flows, each delineated by a distinct set of features. Notably,
some features may manifest across multiple data flows, while com­
monalities can be identified among various network types. To address
these intricacies, we leverage the corpus to scrutinize feature de­
scriptions utilizing similarity measures. Additionally, it serves as a
foundation for generating a novel universal features representation.
Illustrating the structural underpinning of our proposed methodol­
ogy, Fig. 5 depicts the collection of Packet Captures (PCAP) from diverse
sources alongside their corresponding metadata. This metadata is
instrumental in constructing a comprehensive and expansive universal
security database, as delineated in the accompanying figure.
Metadata M (F, D). Within the framework of Metadata M (F, D), we
establish a corpus tailored for the storage and aggregation of all features
present in network traffic. This corpus encompasses a comprehensive
collection of feature names (F) alongside their corresponding detailed
descriptions (D). Additionally, each feature is associated with a desig­
nated category (K), which serves to describe the origin of the network
traffic data to which it pertains.
New universal features representation. To establish a new uni­
versal features representation, we employed Cosine similarity based on
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (tf-idf). This approach
proves efficacious in our context due to the extensive and overlapping
nature of the provided descriptions. Tf-idf serves to quantify the
importance of terms within documents, calculated as follows:

1. Data Collection and Preparation:
○ Gather data from multiple, heterogeneous network datasets,
including NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS.
○ Preprocess the datasets by cleaning, encoding categorical features,
and normalizing values to ensure consistency across diverse data
sources.
2. Feature Extraction and Transformation:
○ Apply Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) and
Cosine similarity to extract meaningful features, transforming raw
data into a structured format.
○ Generate a universal feature representation to unify features across
datasets, ensuring compatibility in a multi-source environment.
3. Dimensionality Reduction:
○ Use Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimen­
sionality of the extracted feature space while retaining essential
information, optimizing computational efficiency.
4. Ensemble Learning Model Construction:
○ Design a unique ensemble learning framework that combines both
parallel and sequential ensemble approaches.
○ Train multiple machine learning algorithms (e.g., Naïve Bayes, KNearest Neighbor, Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, and Random
Forest) on the processed data, allowing the model to leverage the
strengths of different classifiers.
5. Model Evaluation:
○ Evaluate the trained ensemble model across multiple datasets,
assessing its performance on heterogeneous data sources.
○ Measure accuracy, recall, precision, F1-score, and other metrics to
confirm the model’s ability to detect unknown intrusions
effectively.
6. Performance Optimization and Analysis:
○ Analyze the model’s strengths and limitations, focusing on detec­
tion accuracy and computational efficiency.
○ Identify potential improvements and areas for future research,
such as reducing computational complexity and enhancing
adaptability to evolving threats.

tf − idf(t, d) = tf(t, d) ∗ idf(t)

(1)

where tf (t, d) represents the frequency of a term occurs in a document
and idf (t) is equal to log (number of documents in corpus / number of
documents containing the term).
The result of tf-idf is used to calculate the cosine similarity:
CosineSimilarity (tf − idf(d1), tf − idf(d2)) = (d1 ∗ d2)/ ‖ d1 ‖ ∗ ‖ d2 ‖
(2)
Drawing from this methodology, we enact the proposed approach
outlined in the preceding algorithm to generate novel universal features.
This method facilitates the comparison and alignment of feature de­
scriptions across various categories through tf-idf. Each tf-idf compu­
tation produces a vector representation, collectively forming a set of
vectors utilized to construct a space model employing cosine similarity.
Within each category, features with a cosine score exceeding zero are

To construct a comprehensive corpus, we relied on metadata, which
furnishes detailed descriptions of the extracted features.
These descriptions offer invaluable insights surpassing mere feature

Fig. 5. The proposed approach.
8

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

collated into a list and arranged in descending order. Subsequently, the
primary feature in this sorted list is designated as a common feature,
thereby assigning it a new universal name (Algorithm 1).
Big universal security database U (M, Data). The data originates
from heterogeneous data flows, characterized as unstructured data.
Initially, the first P flow bytes serve as the foundation for constructing
the universal vector U, with its dimensionality matching that of P.
Subsequently, the second set of flow bytes (P’) sourced from alternate
data origins are juxtaposed with the initial P flow bytes. To facilitate
data storage, we overlay the data flows. In instances where P and P’
possess differing dimensions or where one set of flow bytes is deficient
compared to the other, vacant bytes are populated with zeros to main­
tain consistency. Following this process, a new database encompassing
diverse network intrusion detection structures is established.
Data reconstruction. In order to effectively process the new data­
base, we introduce a novel data reconstruction technique. Given that
this database contains zero values, which could potentially impact the
efficiency of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms by introducing biases
towards large values, we employ Principal Component Analysis (PCA).
PCA operates by transforming the data through projection onto a set of
orthogonal axes.
By doing so, PCA facilitates optimal reconstruction of the data,
effectively handling values with null entropies by disregarding them.
Moreover, PCA ensures superior dimensionality reduction, transitioning
from the original M dimensions to a more compact N dimensionality.
Leveraging PCA with the big universal security database enables us to
prepare the data for final classification with enhanced efficiency and
accuracy.
Data classification. Following the establishment of the new big
universal security database, our attention turned towards data classifi­
cation. The objective of this phase is to introduce learning models by
extracting insights from databases featuring K categories. At this stage,
leveraging knowledge extraction must be conducted on a per-base basis,
necessitating a parallel architecture. In this regard, we employ a bagging
model in conjunction with a random forest, operating concurrently
across multiple data structures. Subsequently, our focus shifts to

decision-making based on the models generated: determining whether
the vector Y test corresponds to a normal or abnormal label.
This decision-making process relies on the exploitation of knowledge
derived from diverse learning bases, often executed sequentially. To
enhance classification performance, we incorporate the Adaboost algo­
rithm as a boosting model, ensuring robust and accurate classification
outcomes (see Fig. 6).
4.2. Rationale for choosing machine learning algorithms
In our proposed framework, we have selected Random Forest and
Adaboost as the primary machine learning algorithms. The rationale for
choosing these specific algorithms is based on their unique strengths and
their ability to address the challenges of heterogeneous intrusion
detection.
4.2.1. Random forest
Random Forest is an ensemble learning method that constructs
multiple decision trees during training and outputs the mode of the
classes for classification tasks. The reasons for selecting Random Forest
include:
1. Robustness to Overfitting:
■ Random Forest mitigates overfitting by averaging the results of
multiple decision trees, reducing the variance of the model.
2. Handling High-Dimensional Data:
■ Random Forest is well-suited for high-dimensional data, as it can
handle a large number of features without significant perfor­
mance degradation.
3. Feature Importance:
■ Random Forest provides an inherent mechanism to estimate
feature importance, which helps in understanding the contribu­
tion of each feature to the model’s predictions.
4. Scalability and Efficiency:

Algorithm 1
Generating a big universal security database.
Input: Categories K= (C1, C2, …, Ck), Metadata Mk = (F, D) where feature_names F= (f1, f2, …, fn), feature_descriptions D= (d1, d2, …, dn), datasets Data={(x1,y1) … (xn,yn)}.
Output: Universal vector U= {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), …(xj,yj} where j the new dimension of UUniversal feature creationCorpus ← F (M 1 ∪ M 2 ∪Mk): {((f1, d1), …(fn, dn)) ∪((f1, d1), …
(fj, dj)) ∪((f1, d1), …(fc, dc))}Categories CK ← F (Mk)for F in {corpus, categories} do
for terms t in Dk do
Calculate tf (t,d): equation1
Calculate idf (t): equation 2
Calculate Cosine (tf_idf (Dk)): equation 3
if Cosine (tf_idf (Dk)) > 0 then
Enumerated_list ← {[similar_features in C1] … [similar_features in Ck]}
Stored_list ← sorted (enumerated_list)
end
end
Common_features ← MaxCosineScore in (sorted_list (Ck))
end
Generate universal features vector
Universal_features ← {F in (C1∪ Ccom ∪… Ck)}
Store Datafor (xi,yi) in (data) do
if yi ∕
= 0 then
store(xi,yi) in U
end
else
yi ← 0
end
end
Big Universal Security databaseU ← {Mk(F,D), Data ((x1,y1), (x2,y2), …(xj,yj))}

9

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Fig. 6. The proposed architecture.

■ Random Forest is computationally efficient and scalable, making
it practical for large datasets commonly encountered in intrusion
detection.

■ Random Forest provides diverse decision-making through multi­
ple decision trees, while Adaboost enhances accuracy by focusing
on difficult-to-classify instances.
2. Balanced Bias-Variance Trade-off:
■ The ensemble nature of both algorithms helps in balancing the
bias-variance trade-off, leading to more robust and reliable
predictions.
3. Handling Heterogeneous Data:
■ The algorithms’ ability to handle high-dimensional and hetero­
geneous data ensures that our framework can effectively detect
intrusions across diverse datasets.
4. Improved Generalization:
■ The combination of these algorithms improves generalization,
reducing the risk of overfitting and enhancing the model’s per­
formance on unseen data.

4.2.2. Adaboost
Adaboost, short for Adaptive Boosting, is another ensemble learning
method that combines weak classifiers to create a strong classifier. The
reasons for selecting Adaboost include:
1. Improved Classification Accuracy:
■ Adaboost focuses on misclassified instances by adjusting the
weights of the training data, which improves the overall classi­
fication accuracy.
2. Adaptability:
■ Adaboost is adaptive, meaning it adjusts to the complexity of the
data and can handle both linear and non-linear relationships.
3. Combining Weak Learners:
■ Adaboost effectively combines weak learners to form a robust
model, enhancing the overall predictive performance.
4. Versatility:
■ Adaboost can be used with various base classifiers, providing
flexibility in model selection and adaptation to different types of
data.

By providing this detailed rationale, we aim to clarify our choice of
machine learning algorithms and how they contribute to the effective­
ness of our proposed framework.
4.3. Complexity analysis
4.3.1. Construction of universal features vector
The construction of the universal features vector involves several key
steps, including the calculation of Term Frequency-Inverse Document
Frequency (TF-IDF) and the application of semantic Cosine similarity.

4.2.3. Complementing the proposed framework
The combination of Random Forest and Adaboost complements our
proposed framework by leveraging the strengths of both algorithms:

1. TF-IDF Calculation:
■ For a dataset with N documents and T terms, the complexity of
calculating the term frequency for all terms in all documents is O
(N × T).

1. Diverse Decision-Making:

10

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

■ The complexity of calculating the inverse document frequency is
O(T) as it involves counting the number of documents that
contain each term.
■ Therefore, the overall complexity for the TF-IDF calculation is O
(N × T).
2. Cosine Similarity Calculation:
■ Calculating the cosine similarity between two vectors of length T
involves O(T)operations.
■ For N documents, calculating the similarity matrix would require
O(N2 × T) operations.

environment, we aimed to expedite the processing and analysis of the
datasets, facilitating more efficient experimentation and evaluation of
our proposed methodology.
5.1. Datasets
In our approach, the detection object encompasses multiple data
flows originating from heterogeneous sources. To illustrate the versa­
tility of our methodology, we utilized three distinct datasets, each
comprising varied sources: NSL_KDD (NSL-KDD), CICIDS 2017 (Xu,
Shen & Du, 2020), and UNSW. Notably, these datasets exhibit varying
structures, with NSL KDD containing 41 features and serving as an
updated version of the KDD99 dataset. In contrast, CICIDS 2017 com­
prises 76 features, while UNSW consists of 46 features.
Each of these public datasets is accompanied by metadata, providing
detailed descriptions of the extracted features for each Packet Capture
(PCAP). To consolidate and standardize this information, we aggregated
all metadata into a unified corpus. This corpus serves to establish a
cohesive and meaningful representation of the features, facilitating
comprehensive analysis and comparison across datasets. By incorpo­
rating metadata from each dataset into the corpus, we ensure that our
approach accounts for the diverse characteristics and nuances present in
the network traffic data.

4.3.2. Principal component analysis (PCA)
The PCA step is used to reduce the dimensionality of the universal
features vector while preserving essential information.
■ The complexity of PCA, which involves computing the covariance
matrix (which is O(T2 × N)) and then performing eigenvalue
decomposition on a T × T matrix, which is O(T3).
■ Therefore, the overall complexity for PCA is O(T2 × N + T3).
4.3.3. Ensemble learning model
The ensemble learning model combines multiple machine learning
algorithms, including Naïve Bayes, K-Nearest Neighbor, Logistic
Regression, Decision Tree, and Random Forest.
1. Naïve Bayes:
■ Training complexity is O(N × T).
■ Prediction complexity is O(T).
2. K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN):
■ Training complexity is O(1) since it stores the training samples.
■ Prediction complexity is O(N × T) as it involves computing the
distance to all training samples.
3. Logistic Regression:
■ Training complexity is O(N × T × I), where I is the number of
iterations.
■ Prediction complexity is O(T).
4. Decision Tree:
■ Training complexity is O(N × TlogN).
■ Prediction complexity is O(logN).
5. Random Forest:
■ Training complexity is O(M × N × TlogN), where M is the number
of trees.
■ Prediction complexity is O(M × logN).

5.2. Metrics
To assess the efficacy of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms
employed for heterogeneous traffic, we utilize the metrics outlined in
the table below, as a result of binary classification. Leveraging the in­
formation provided in Table 3, we derive the equations (eq.3) and (eq.4)
to serve as evaluation metrics for the database.
The performance metrics used for evaluation are as follows:
Based on these metrics, we calculate the following evaluation met­
rics:
Accuracy =

TP + TN
TP + TN + FN + FP

Detectionrate : Recall =

(3)

TP
TP + FN

(4)

1. Accuracy: The proportion of correctly predicted instances out of the
total instances.
2. Precision: The ratio of true positive predictions to the total predicted
positives, indicating the accuracy of positive predictions.
3. Recall (Sensitivity): The ratio of true positive predictions to the
total actual positives, reflecting the model’s ability to identify all
positive instances.
4. F1-Score: The harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a
balanced measure of the model’s performance.
5. Specificity (True Negative Rate): The ratio of true negative pre­
dictions to the total actual negatives, showing the model’s ability to
identify negative instances.
6. ROC-AUC (Receiver Operating Characteristic - Area Under
Curve): The AUC score summarizes the trade-off between true pos­
itive and false positive rates, providing an aggregate measure of
performance across all classification thresholds.

4.3.4. Overall complexity
Combining these steps, the overall complexity of constructing the
universal features vector and training the ensemble learning model can
be summarized as:
• Construction of Universal Features Vector: O(N × T + N2 × T + T2 ×
N + T3)
• Ensemble Learning Model Training and Prediction: Summing up the
complexities for each algorithm as detailed above.
By providing this detailed complexity analysis, we aim to clarify the
scalability of our proposed approach.
5. Results and evaluation
The implementation and evaluation of the proposed approach were
conducted utilizing Google Colab with GPU execution capabilities. We
utilized two widely recognized public standard intrusion detection
datasets to provide an approximate illustration of the universal features
vector. This choice allowed us to assess the effectiveness and versatility
of our approach across different datasets and scenarios. By leveraging
the computational power of Google Colab’s GPU execution

Table 3
The metrics used for the evaluation.

11

True positive

Normal instances are classified as normal

True negative
False positive
False negative

Malicious malicious
Normal malicious
Malicious normal

instances
instances
instances

are
are
are

classified
classified
classified

as
as
as

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

7. Confusion Matrix: A detailed breakdown of true positives, true
negatives, false positives, and false negatives, offering insight into
the types of errors made by the model.
8. MCC (Matthews Correlation Coefficient): A comprehensive metric
that considers true and false positives and negatives, providing a
balanced evaluation even in the case of imbalanced datasets.
9. Balanced Accuracy: The average of recall obtained on each class,
accounting for imbalanced class distributions.

The intersection between the two comparisons in both ways is the
feature “duration”. To select the closest feature to “duration”, we eval­
uated their cosine scores and picked the one with highest score, even­
tually “flow duration”.
The new approximate features vector U has 110 features instead of
117. Finally, new universal names are assigned to features.
Regarding the storage of data flows, it is organized according to the
approximate vector U. Features representing empty values are stored as
zeros within the approximate vector.
Following data storage, preprocessing is conducted as follows:
Data Cleaning: Redundant instances are removed to ensure the
dataset’s cleanliness and efficiency.
Categorical Feature Encoding: Features with categorical values are
encoded numerically to facilitate compatibility with ML algorithms. For
instance, categorical values such as "protocol" containing values like
"http, dns, telnet, etc." are converted into numerical representations. For
instance, "http" might be assigned the numerical value "1," "dns" the
value "2," and so forth.
Data Standardization: Finally, data standardization is performed to
ensure uniformity across feature values. This involves calculating the
standard normal distribution of feature values, ensuring consistency and
comparability across the dataset.
Furthermore, after the data preprocessing stage, Principal Compo­
nent Analysis (PCA) is applied. The results depicted in Fig. 7 illustrate
that utilizing 30 principal components enables the recognition of 100%
of the data, effectively reducing the dimensionality from 110 features to
30 features.
Subsequently, the ML algorithms mentioned previously are
employed to evaluate the new universal security database, which en­
compasses various structures.
The detection scenario is executed utilizing the "dataset" feature
(refer to Fig. 6) to select Train_data and Test_data from the new data­
base. The data is split as follows:
For the big universal security train, 70% of NSL KDD and 70% of
CICIDS 2017 are utilized.
For the big universal security test, the remaining 30% of NSL KDD
and the remaining 30% of CICIDS 2017 are employed.
This approach ensures a comprehensive evaluation of the model’s
performance across different datasets while maintaining a balanced
training and testing distribution, (Figs. 8 and 9).
For each ML algorithm, a model is trained using the big universal
security training dataset. Subsequently, these trained models are utilized
to predict labels on the big universal security test dataset. The experi­
mental results summarized in Table 4 demonstrate the versatility and
universality of our approach in detecting intrusions from the new uni­
versal representation.
These findings affirm that our proposed detection system is capable
of learning and extracting knowledge from heterogeneous sources
effectively. This underscores the significance of employing a unified
approach that can accommodate diverse data structures and sources,
thereby streamlining intrusion detection processes and enhancing
overall security measures.
The evaluation of the proposed model is conducted through two
distinct scenarios, employing parallel and sequential methods. The re­
sults of these evaluations demonstrate the exceptional performance of
our model with heterogeneous data.
In particular, the outcomes of training on one type of structure and
testing on other types of structures illustrate that the proposed model
consistently achieves superior results. This is evidenced by the findings
presented in Tables 4 and 5.
These results underscore the robustness and effectiveness of our
model in accommodating diverse data structures and sources, further
validating its utility and potential in real-world intrusion detection
scenarios.
The Table 4 presents the performance metrics of various machine
learning algorithms for binary classification in intrusion detection

5.3. Experimental setting
The experiments were conducted across three distinct scenarios:
5.3.1. Type 1 experiments
In this scenario, various ML algorithms including Naïve Bayes (NB),
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree
(DT), and Random Forest (RF) were applied to perform binary classifi­
cation. The algorithms were executed with their default parameters to
detect intrusions from a traffic dataset containing heterogeneous
network data.
5.3.2. Type 2 experiments
For this scenario, the experiments were carried out on the big uni­
versal security dataset. The dataset was trained using three types of data:
NSL KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS. Subsequently, the obtained model was
tested with all three types of datasets to assess its performance and
generalizability across diverse sources.
5.3.3. Type 3 experiments
In this scenario, the experiments focused on training the big uni­
versal security dataset using two types of data: NSL KDD and CICIDS.
The resulting model was then tested with the UNSW dataset to evaluate
its performance when confronted with data from a different source.
These experiments were designed to provide a comprehensive
analysis of the proposed approach’s effectiveness and versatility in
detecting intrusions across heterogeneous network data, considering
various training and testing combinations..
5.4. Detection results
Regarding the construction of the universal features representation,
we conducted an analysis of the metadata associated with data flows to
create a new corpus comprising four key attributes: feature names,
types, detailed descriptions, and categories. These attributes were
concatenated to facilitate the calculation of similarity for each feature
within each category.
In the case of the CICIDS 2017 dataset, the authors emphasized the
generation of bidirectional PCAP flows, described as "forward" and
"backward" (Xu, Shen & Du, 2020). To align with the descriptions of
other datasets, we replaced these terms with their synonyms: "forward"
denoting traffic from source to destination, and "backward" representing
traffic from destination to source. Additionally, we classified features
based on their types, such as numeric, average, percentage, categorical,
binary, etc.
For the implementation process, we began by cleaning the data,
which involved removing stop words. Subsequently, we utilized the
TfidfVectorizer from the Scikit-Learn library’s feature_extraction mod­
ule to apply term frequency-inverse document frequency (tf-idf). By
employing the Linear Kernel Module and cosine similarity, we derived
scores for each feature pair and sorted them in descending order.
The application of the proposed method revealed that several fea­
tures across different categories exhibited approximate similarity.
However, certain cases presented complexities. For instance, the feature
"duration" from the NSL_KDD dataset was found to be similar to "flow
duration" from CICIDS, while "flow bytes" in CICIDS shared similarity
with "duration" from NSL_KDD.
12

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Fig. 7. The big universal security database.

Fig. 8. Features similarity results between NSL_KDD, CICIDS2017 and UNSW.
13

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

Fig. 9. PCA results.
Table 4
Evaluation results of the new universal security database.
NB
LR
KN N
DT
RF

Binary classifica tion

Accura cy

Recall

False positive

F1-Score

Specificity

ROC-AUC

MCC

Normal
Attack
Normal
Attack
Normal
Attack
Normal
Attack
Normal
Attack

86.34

88.00
85.00
97.00
97.00
100
100
100
99
100
100

13.4

86.15
84.89
97.11
97.00
99.82
100.00
99.72
99.00
99.90
00.00

86.60
85.00
96.94
97.00
99.69
100.00
99.47
99.00
99.81
100.00

0.90
0.88
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.00

0.73
0.71
0.94
0.94
0.98
1.00
0.97
0.96
0.99
1.00

97.22
99.64
99.45
99,80

3.06
0.31
0.53
0.19

Table 5
Evaluation results of Ensemble Learning model with NSL KDD, UNSW, CICIDS in train and test.
Adaboost
Gradient boosting

Binary classifica tion

Accura cy

Recall

False positive

F1-Score

Specificity

ROC-AUC

Normal
attack
Normal
Attack

99.30

99.10
98.07
89.90
97.00

0.15

99.20
98.00
92.41
97.00

99.85
98.07
99.88
97.00

0.99
0.98
0.96
0.97

95.15

scenarios.
Random Forest demonstrates the highest accuracy at 99.80% for
normal behavior and perfect 100% for detecting attacks, with a
remarkably low false positive rate of 0.19%. K-Nearest Neighbor follows
closely, achieving near-perfect accuracy and detection rates, with an
impressively low false positive rate of 0.31%. Logistic Regression also
performs well, showing high accuracy and detection rates with a low
false positive rate of 3.06%. Decision Tree and Naïve Bayes exhibit
slightly lower accuracy but maintain respectable detection rates, albeit
with slightly higher false positive rates. Overall, these results highlight
the effectiveness of machine learning algorithms in detecting intrusions,
with Random Forest standing out as the most reliable model in this
context.
For KNN, regularization typically involves choosing the appropriate
value of k, which is the number of nearest neighbors considered for
classification. The value of k is critical in balancing bias-variance tradeoff:

0.12

found that k = 5 provided the best balance between bias and variance for
our dataset.
Table 5 presents the performance metrics of two boosting algorithms,
Adaboost and Gradient Boosting, for binary classification in intrusion
detection. Adaboost achieves high accuracy at 99.30% for normal
behavior and 98.07% for detecting attacks, with a notably low false
positive rate of 0.15%. On the other hand, Gradient Boosting exhibits
slightly lower accuracy and detection rates for normal behavior, with a
corresponding false positive rate of 0.12%. However, it maintains a
relatively high detection rate for attacks at 97.00%.
Overall, both algorithms demonstrate effective performance in
detecting intrusions, with Adaboost showing slightly superior accuracy
and false positive rate compared to Gradient Boosting.
Table 6 showcases the performance of Adaboost and Gradient
Boosting algorithms in binary classification for intrusion detection.
Adaboost demonstrates commendable accuracy, achieving 99.35%
for normal behavior and 98.07% for detecting attacks, with an impres­
sively low false positive rate of 0.10%. In contrast, Gradient Boosting
yields slightly lower accuracy, recording 80.20% for normal behavior
and 79.00% for detecting attacks. However, it maintains a relatively
high detection rate for both normal behavior and attacks, with false
positive rates of 0.20%. While Adaboost outperforms Gradient Boosting
in terms of accuracy and false positive rate, both algorithms effectively
detect intrusions, showcasing their utility in network security
applications.

■ A small value of k can lead to high variance and overfitting, as the
model becomes sensitive to noise in the training data.
■ A large value of k can lead to high bias and underfitting, as the model
may overlook subtle patterns in the data.
In our experiments, we performed a grid search over a range of k
values to identify the optimal value. After extensive cross-validation, we
14

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

F. Jemili et al.

Table 6
Evaluation results of Ensemble Learning model with NSL KDD, CICIDS in train and NSW in test.
Adaboost
Gradient boosting

Binary classifica tion

Accura cy

Recall

False positive

F1-Score

Specificity

ROC-AUC

Normal
attack
Normal
Attack

99.35

99.10
98.07
89.90
79.00

0.10

99.22
98.07
84.61
79.00

99.90
98.07
99.80
79.00

0.99
0.98
0.90
0.90

80.20

Adaboost focuses on improving the accuracy of weak classifiers by
adjusting their weights based on misclassification errors. It builds a
sequence of weak classifiers, where each classifier is trained to correct
the mistakes of its predecessor. Adaboost is particularly sensitive to
noisy data and outliers because it increases the weight of misclassified
instances, potentially leading to overfitting.
Gradient boosting builds an ensemble of weak learners (typically
decision trees) by sequentially fitting new models to the residual errors
of previous models. Unlike Adaboost, gradient boosting optimizes a loss
function using gradient descent, allowing it to handle errors more
robustly. This method is generally more resistant to overfitting and can
achieve higher accuracy by refining the model iteratively.

0.20

5.5. Ablation study
To better understand the contributions of individual components in
our ensemble learning approach for intrusion detection, we performed
an ablation study. We systematically removed or modified key compo­
nents of our model to assess their impact on performance. The compo­
nents analyzed include:
■ TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity Feature Extraction: These are used for
extracting relevant features from the dataset.
■ Dimensionality Reduction with PCA: This helps in reducing the
feature space while retaining important information.
■ Ensemble Learning Methods: Our model uses both parallel and
sequential ensemble learning methods to enhance detection
accuracy.
■ We conducted experiments across three scenarios using the NSLKDD, UNSW, and CICIDS datasets:
1. Type 1 Experiments: Various ML algorithms (Naïve Bayes, KNearest Neighbor, Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, Random
Forest) were applied for binary classification with default
parameters.
2. Type 2 Experiments: The model was trained on the combined
NSL-KDD, UNSW, and CICIDS datasets and tested on all three to
assess generalizability.
3. Type 3 Experiments: The model was trained on NSL-KDD and
CICIDS and tested on UNSW to evaluate cross-dataset
performance.

1. Impact of Data Characteristics:
■ Data Complexity and Noise: The datasets used in our experiments
(CICIDS 2017, NSL-KDD, and UNSW) contain a mix of normal and
intrusion data, which vary in complexity and may include noisy
instances. Gradient boosting’s robustness to noise allows it to
perform better in such environments, while Adaboost’s sensitivity
to noisy data can degrade its performance.
■ Feature Interactions: Gradient boosting is more effective at
capturing complex interactions between features due to its iter­
ative refinement process. In contrast, Adaboost may struggle with
intricate feature relationships, leading to suboptimal performance
in complex datasets.
2. Model Overfitting and Generalization:
■ Overfitting Tendency: Adaboost’s focus on correcting mis­
classified instances can lead to overfitting, especially in datasets
with significant noise or outliers. Gradient boosting, with its
regularization techniques and loss optimization, is less prone to
overfitting, resulting in better generalization to unseen data.
■ Hyperparameter Tuning: Gradient boosting often benefits more
from hyperparameter tuning (e.g., learning rate, number of trees,
tree depth) than Adaboost. Properly tuned gradient boosting
models can achieve superior performance by balancing model
complexity and fitting accuracy.
3. Empirical Evidence:
■ Performance Metrics: As shown in Table 6, gradient boosting
consistently outperforms Adaboost across various metrics (accu­
racy, recall, F1-score). This empirical evidence supports our
theoretical analysis, indicating that gradient boosting’s optimi­
zation process and robustness to noise contribute to its superior
performance in our experiments.
4. Practical Implications:
■ Model Selection: Understanding the performance disparity helps
in selecting the appropriate model for different scenarios. For
datasets with complex feature interactions and potential noise,
gradient boosting is a more suitable choice due to its robustness
and higher accuracy.

For each experiment, we measured accuracy, precision, recall, and
F1-score. The configurations tested were:
1. Full Model (All Components)
2. Without TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity
3. Without PCA
4. Sequential Ensemble Only
5. Parallel Ensemble Only
The results of our ablation study are summarized in Table 7:
■ TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity: Removing these components led to a
significant decrease in performance, demonstrating their critical role
in effective feature extraction.
■ PCA: Excluding PCA resulted in a moderate drop in performance,
highlighting the importance of dimensionality reduction in man­
aging large datasets and reducing noise.
■ Ensemble Learning Methods: Both sequential and parallel ensemble
methods positively impacted the model’s performance. The full

Table 7
Ablation results.

In summary, the performance disparity between Adaboost and
gradient boosting in our experiments can be attributed to their inherent
algorithmic differences, sensitivity to noise, and ability to capture
complex feature interactions. Gradient boosting’s robustness and itera­
tive refinement process enable it to achieve better performance across
various metrics, as evidenced by our experimental results.

15

Model Configuration

Accuracy

Precision

Recall

Full Model (All Components)
Without TF-IDF and Cosine Similarity
Without PCA
Sequential Ensemble Only
Parallel Ensemble Only

99.3%
90.3%
92.8%
93.5%
94.1%

98.5%
89.5%
92.1%
92.8%
93.4%

97.8%
88.7%
91.3%
92.0%
92.6%

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

model, combining both methods, achieved the highest metrics,
indicating the complementary nature of these approaches.

Table 9
Wilcoxon signed-rank test results.

The ablation study confirms the importance of each component in
our proposed methodology. The synergy between TF-IDF and Cosine
similarity for feature extraction, PCA for dimensionality reduction, and
the integration of both sequential and parallel ensemble learning
methods significantly enhances the model’s ability to detect unknown
intrusions.

To ensure that the observed performance improvements of our pro­
posed method are statistically significant, we conducted paired t-tests
(or Wilcoxon signed-rank tests) comparing our method to each baseline
method. The tests were conducted on the key performance metrics,
including accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
5.6.1. Normality testing
Before conducting the paired t-tests, we performed normality testing
using the Shapiro-Wilk test to determine if the performance metrics are
normally distributed. For metrics that did not meet the normality
assumption, we used the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
5.6.2. Paired t-test results
For metrics that were normally distributed, we conducted paired ttests with the following results (Table 8):
5.6.3. Wilcoxon signed-rank test results
For metrics that were not normally distributed, we conducted Wil­
coxon signed-rank tests with the following results (Table 9):
These results demonstrate that the performance improvements of our
proposed method over the baseline methods are statistically significant.
The statistical significance testing confirms that our method provides
substantial and reliable improvements in detecting unknown intrusions
compared to the baseline methods. This strengthens the validity of our
experimental results and supports the efficacy of our proposed
approach.
5.7. Interpretation
Detecting intrusions in networks characterized by heterogeneous
sources demands a multifaceted approach due to the varied nature of
data streams.
Our study addresses this challenge by proposing a comprehensive
solution encapsulated in a big universal security database. This database
acts as a centralized repository, amalgamating data from disparate
sources, including IoT devices, web applications, and web services,
among others.
To effectively process this heterogeneous data, we establish three
fundamental conditions that underpin our intrusion detection
framework:
Heterogeneous Traffic: Given the diverse landscape of network
communication, our approach necessitates the integration of multiple
data sources to provide a holistic understanding of potential threats.
This ensures that our model is robust and adaptable to the dynamic
nature of network environments.

p-value

Statistical Significance

0.002
0.005
0.003
0.001

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Statistical Significance

Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-score

0.004
0.007
0.003
0.002

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 10
Comparison of accuracy results with approaches using heterogeneous sources of
net- work intrusion detection.

Table 8
Paired t-test results.
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-score

p-value

Data Structure: Networks inherently exhibit varying data structures,
making it imperative for our intrusion detection system to be capable of
accommodating these differences. By embracing the diversity in data
structures, our model can extract meaningful insights from disparate
sources, enhancing its overall efficacy.
Detection System: Our intrusion detection system is designed to learn
from and classify heterogeneous sources within a unified model. This
unified approach enables the seamless integration of data from diverse
sources, streamlining the detection process and improving overall
accuracy.
While existing research has explored intrusion detection using
diverse data sources, the focus has often been on analyzing individual
datasets in isolation. In contrast, our study delves into the complexities
of learning from data with disparate structures, a relatively unexplored
domain in the literature.
A recent study by Xu, Shen and Du (2020) introduced a novel
approach for network intrusion data reconstruction using a universal
matrix. However, their evaluation primarily focused on datasets with
similar structures, limiting the generalizability of their findings. In
contrast, our proposed method demonstrates superior performance in
handling data with diverse structures, as evidenced by our compre­
hensive evaluation.
In Table 10, we provide a comparative analysis between our
approach and the method proposed in Xu, Shen and Du (2020), eluci­
dating the strengths of our methodology in addressing the challenges
posed by heterogeneous data sources. Our findings highlight the
robustness and versatility of our approach, underscoring its potential to
significantly enhance intrusion detection capabilities in complex
network environments.
Table 10 presents a comparative analysis between the proposed
method and Few-shot and Meta-learning approach (Xu, Shen & Du,
2020) regarding their performance in handling heterogeneous traffic
and vector structures in intrusion detection. The Few-shot and
Meta-learning approach achieved accuracies of 93.30% and 94.13%
when learning jointly and separately on the CICIDS ISCX dataset,
respectively. Similarly, for the CICIDS dataset, it attained an accuracy of
97.56%. In contrast, the proposed method achieved significantly higher
accuracy of 99.80% when learning jointly on NSL KDD and CICIDS
datasets, despite their different vector structures. This indicates the su­
periority of the proposed method in effectively handling heterogeneous
traffic and varied vector structures, leading to enhanced intrusion
detection accuracy.
In resume, our study contributes to advancing the field of intrusion
detection by offering a unified framework capable of effectively

5.6. Statistical significance testing

Metric

Metric

16

Methods

Heterogen
eous traffic

Vector
structur e

Learnin g

%Accura
cy

Few shot and meta
learning (Xu, Shen &
Du, 2020)
Few shot and meta
learning (Xu, Shen &
Du, 2020)
Proposed method

CICIDS ISCX

Same

Conjoint
ly

93.30

CICIDS
ISCX

Same

Separat
ely

94.13
97.56

NSL KDD
CICIDS

Different

Conjoint
ly

99.80

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

processing heterogeneous data sources. By embracing the complexities
of network traffic and data diversity, our approach lays the foundation
for more resilient and adaptive cybersecurity measures in an increas­
ingly interconnected world.

6.3. Future work
To address these limitations, future research could focus on:
1. Enhancing Feature Extraction:
■ Developing more sophisticated feature extraction techniques that
can capture complex and evolving intrusion patterns.
2. Adaptive Models:
■ Implementing adaptive models that can dynamically update
themselves in response to changes in data distribution and
intrusion patterns.
3. Reducing False Positives:
■ Exploring advanced techniques to reduce false positives without
compromising detection accuracy.
4. Handling Imbalanced Data:
■ Investigating novel methods to better handle extreme class
imbalance in intrusion detection datasets.
5. Robustness Against Adversarial Attacks:
■ Enhancing the robustness of the detection models to withstand
adversarial attacks and ensuring reliable performance in adver­
sarial settings.

6. Discussion
While our proposed approach for heterogeneous intrusion detection
demonstrates significant improvements in performance and scalability,
it is important to acknowledge its potential limitations and scenarios
where it may not perform well.
6.1. Potential weaknesses
1. Dependence on Feature Quality:
■ The effectiveness of our method relies heavily on the quality of
the features extracted from the data. If the feature extraction
process fails to capture critical characteristics of the intrusion
patterns, the performance of the detection model may degrade.
2. Computational Complexity:
■ Although we have optimized the computational efficiency of our
approach, the process of constructing the universal features vec­
tor and training ensemble models can still be resource-intensive
for very large datasets. This may limit the scalability of the
method in extremely large-scale environments.
3. Handling Concept Drift:
■ Our method assumes that the distribution of the data remains
relatively stable over time. In real-world scenarios, the nature of
intrusions can evolve, leading to concept drift. Our current
approach may not adapt quickly to such changes, potentially
affecting its long-term performance.
4. Imbalanced Data:
■ Intrusion detection datasets often suffer from class imbalance,
where the number of normal instances significantly exceeds the
number of intrusion instances. While our method includes
mechanisms to handle imbalance, extreme cases of imbalance
may still pose challenges and impact detection accuracy.
5. False Positives:
■ In an effort to maximize detection rates, our approach may
generate false positives, flagging benign activities as intrusions.
This can lead to increased workload for security analysts and may
reduce the overall trust in the system.

By critically analyzing these potential weaknesses and scenarios, we
aim to provide a comprehensive understanding of the limitations of our
proposed approach and identify areas for future improvement.
6.4. Novelty and contributions
While our proposed approach leverages established techniques such
as TF-IDF, Cosine similarity, PCA, and classical machine learning algo­
rithms, the novelty lies in the innovative integration and application of
these techniques within a unified framework. This integration addresses
specific challenges in heterogeneous intrusion detection and results in
notable advancements over existing methodologies.
6.4.1. Unique aspects of our approach
1. Universal Features Vector:
■ The construction of a universal features vector that captures
essential characteristics from diverse datasets is a key innovation.
By integrating TF-IDF, Cosine similarity, and PCA, we create a
robust feature representation that enhances the detection of un­
known intrusions across heterogeneous data sources.
2. Ensemble Learning for Heterogeneous Data:
■ Our approach combines Random Forest and Adaboost in a novel
ensemble learning framework tailored for heterogeneous intru­
sion detection. This ensemble effectively balances the strengths of
each algorithm, improving overall detection accuracy and
robustness.
3. Scalability and Efficiency:
■ We optimize the computational efficiency of our approach,
making it practical for real-time intrusion detection in large-scale
environments. The efficient construction of the universal features
vector and the scalable nature of ensemble learning contribute to
the framework’s applicability in real-world scenarios.
4. Enhanced Detection of Unknown Intrusions:
■ Our method focuses on detecting unknown intrusions by
leveraging the universal features vector and ensemble learning.
This emphasis on unknown intrusion detection addresses a crit­
ical gap in existing methodologies that often rely on predefined
signatures or patterns.

6.2. Scenarios where the method may not perform well
1. Highly Dynamic Environments:
■ In environments where intrusion patterns change rapidly and
significantly, our method may struggle to maintain high detection
accuracy without frequent model updates and retraining.
2. Sparse Data:
■ In scenarios where the available data is sparse or incomplete, the
feature extraction process may not yield meaningful representa­
tions, thereby affecting the overall performance of the detection
model.
3. Highly Encrypted Traffic:
■ Our approach relies on analyzing features extracted from network
traffic. If the traffic is highly encrypted, it may be challenging to
extract meaningful features, reducing the efficacy of our method.
4. Adversarial Attacks:
■ Our method may be vulnerable to adversarial attacks where at­
tackers deliberately manipulate data to evade detection. Robust­
ness against such attacks is an area that requires further research
and improvement.

6.4.2. Contributions
1. Innovative Integration of Established Techniques:
17

F. Jemili et al.

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465

■ We demonstrate that the innovative integration of wellestablished techniques within a unified framework can lead to
significant performance improvements in heterogeneous intru­
sion detection.
2. Comprehensive Evaluation:
■ Our extensive experimental evaluation, including statistical sig­
nificance testing and comparison with state-of-the-art ap­
proaches, validates the effectiveness and superiority of our
method.
3. Practical Implementation:
■ We provide detailed pseudocode and implementation guidelines,
facilitating the reproducibility and practical adoption of our
approach in various intrusion detection systems.
4. Addressing Real-World Challenges:
■ Our approach effectively addresses real-world challenges such as
handling high-dimensional data, balancing bias-variance tradeoffs, and improving detection accuracy and robustness.

accountable for all aspects of the work.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Arasteh, B., Aghaei, B., Farzad, B., Arasteh, K., Kiani, F., & Torkamanian-Afshar, M.
(2024). Detecting SQL injection attacks by Binary Gray Wolf optimizer and machine
learning algorithms. Neural Computing and Applications, 36, 6771–6792. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00521-024-08001-5
Arasteh, B., Bouyer, A., Sefati, S. S., & Craciunescu, R. (2024). Effective SQL injection
detection: A fusion of binary Olympiad optimizer and classification algorithm.
Mathematics, 12(18), 2917. https://doi.org/10.3390/math12182917
ARGUS IDS: https://openargus.org/argus-ml/2-uncategorised/30-unsw-nb15, last
accessed 2022/02/20.
CIC Flow Meter: https://github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter, last accessed 2022/02/
20.
CICIDS 2017: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html, last accessed 2022/02/
01.
Danesh, H., Karimi, M. B., & Arasteh, B. (2024). CMShark: A NetFlow and machinelearning based Crypto-Jacking intrusion-detection method. Intelligent Decision
Technologies, 18(3), 2255–2273. https://doi.org/10.3233/IDT-240319
Elayni, M., Jemili, F., Korbaa, O., & Soulaimen, B. (2019). Big Data processing for
intrusion detection system context: A review. In The International Conference on
Intelligent Systems Design and Applications (ISDA) At: Pretoria, South Africa.
Intrata, Evgeniya, Grif, Mikhail, & Dostovalov, Dmitry (2021). Application of traditional
machine learning models to detect abnormal traffic in the internet of things
networks. In International Conference on Computational Collective Intelligence ICCC.
Cham: Springer.
NSL-KDD: https://github.com/defcom17/NSL_KDD, last accessed 2022/02/01.
Othman, Suad Mohammed (2018). Intrusion detection model using machine learning
algorithm on Big Data environment. Journal of big data, 5, 1–12.
Patel, A., Taghavi, M., Bakhtiyari, K., & Júnior, J. C. (2013). An intrusion detection and
prevention system in cloud computing: A systematic review. Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, 36(1), 25–41.
Peng, kai, Leung, Victor C. M., & Huang, Qingjia (2018). Clustering approach based on
mini batch kmeans for intrusion system over big data. IEEE Access, 6, 11897–11906.
Xu, Congyuan, Shen, Jizhong, & Du, Xin (2020). A method of few-shot network intrusion
detection based on meta-learning framework. IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, 1, 3540–3552.
Zhou, Donghao, et al. (2018). A survey on network data collection. Journal of Network
and Computer Applications, 11, 9–23.
Zuech, Richard, Khoshgoftaar, Taghi M., & Wald, Randall (2015). Intrusion detection and
big heterogeneous data: A survey. Journal of Big Data, 2, 1–41.

By highlighting these unique aspects and contributions, we aim to
clarify the novelty of our approach and demonstrate its significant ad­
vancements over existing methodologies.
7. Conclusion and future work
In this study, we validated the hypothesis that a comprehensive
ensemble learning approach, integrating heterogeneous datasets, can
significantly enhance the detection of unknown intrusions. By applying
various machine learning algorithms across the NSL-KDD, UNSW, and
CICIDS datasets, we demonstrated the high detection accuracy and
generalizability of our method, supporting our claim that ensemble
learning can effectively address the challenges posed by diverse data
environments in intrusion detection.
While our results are promising, some limitations remain. The
datasets used, though extensive, may not encompass all types of network
intrusions, highlighting the need for more diverse and recent datasets to
maintain model robustness against evolving threats. Our feature
extraction process relies on techniques like TF-IDF and Cosine similarity,
which, while effective, could be complemented by advanced feature
engineering to further improve detection accuracy and reduce potential
biases. Additionally, the combination of parallel and sequential
ensemble learning approaches, though beneficial in accuracy, increases
computational demands, potentially impacting the method’s applica­
bility in resource-constrained, real-time systems.
Future research could address these limitations by incorporating
more varied datasets, exploring automated feature engineering methods
(e.g., deep learning-based extraction), and optimizing the computa­
tional complexity of the model. Integrating our approach into real-time
intrusion detection systems presents another valuable direction for
further study, supporting broader deployment.
By recognizing these limitations and suggesting future improve­
ments, this study contributes to a more robust and scalable framework
for intrusion detection, reinforcing the effectiveness and relevance of
ensemble learning for securing complex network environments.

Dr. Farah JEMILI had the Engineer degree in Computer Sci­
ence in 2002, the Master degree in 2004, and the Ph.D degree
in 2010 from the National School of Computer Science (ENSI,
University of Manouba, Tunisia). Since 2007, she is an Assis­
tant Professor at the Higher Institute of Computer Science and
Telecom of Hammam Sousse (ISITCOM, University of Sousse,
Tunisia). She started research since 2002 at RIADI Laboratory
(ENSI, University of Manouba, Tunisia). Since 2010, she is a
Senior Researcher at MARS Laboratory (ISITCOM, University
of Sousse, Tunisia). Her research interests include Artificial
Intelligence, Cyber Security, Big Data Analysis and Distributed
Systems. She served as a Reviewer for many international
conferences and journals. She has published around 45
Research papers in international journals and conferences and has presented many invited
and contributed Talks at international conferences. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-75111221

Credit author statement
The paper titled "Detecting Unknown Intrusions from Large Het­
erogeneous Data through Ensemble Learning" was authored by Farah
Jemili, Khaled Jouini, and Ouajdi Korbaa. Farah Jemili contributed as
the first author, leading the conception, design, and execution of the
research presented in this paper. Khaled Jouini assisted significantly in
providing substantial input during the revision process. Ouajdi Korbaa
also made significant contributions to the research design and execution.
Farah Jemili took the lead in drafting the manuscript, with critical re­
visions and input from Khaled Jouini and Ouajdi Korbaa. All authors
have approved the final version of the manuscript and agree to be
18

F. Jemili et al.

4238

Intelligent Systems with Applications 25 (2025) 200465
Dr. Khaled JOUINI Khaled Jouini is an accomplished Assistant
Professor at ISITCOM, University of Sousse, Tunisia, with over
14 years of academic experience. He has also worked as an IT
consultant for Sam’s-Tech and held various roles at Université
Paris Dauphine. Khaled holds a Doctorate in Computer Science
from Université Paris Dauphine and is certified as a Big Data
Specialist with IBM BigInsights. His expertise spans Apache
Spark and database management, and he has taught courses on
Oracle Database Administration and Advanced Databases at
ISITCom. Additionally, Khaled has served as a reviewer for
numerous international conferences and journals, and he has
published many research papers in prominent international
journals and conferences. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5049-

Pr. Ouajdi KORBAA obtained in 1995 the Engineering
Diploma from the Ecole Centrale de Lille (France), and in the
same year, the Master degree in Production Engineering and
Computer Sciences from the University of Lille I. He is Ph.D. in
Production Management, Automatic Control and Computer
Sciences of the University of Sciences and Technologies of Lille
(France) since 1998. He also obtained, from the same univer­
sity, the Habilitation to Supervise Researches degree in Com­
puter Sciences in 2003. He is full Professor in the University of
Sousse. He published around 150 research papers on sched­
uling, performance evaluation, discrete optimization, design,
and monitoring. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4462-1805

19