10528

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Disentangled Dynamic Intrusion Detection
Chenyang Qiu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Guoshun Nan , Member, IEEE, Hongrui Xia , Zheng Weng,
Xueting Wang, Meng Shen , Member, IEEE, Xiaofeng Tao , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Jun Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Network-based intrusion detection system (NIDS)
monitors network traffic for malicious activities, formingthe frontline defense against increasing attacks over information infrastructures. Although promising, our quantitative analysis shows that
existing methods perform inconsistently in attacks (e.g., 18% F1
for the MITM and 93% F1 for DDoS by a GCN-based state-ofthe-art method), and perform poorly in few-shot intrusion detections (e.g., dramatically drops from 91% to 36% in 3D-IDS,
and drops from 89% to 20% in E-GraphSAGE). We reveal that
the underlying cause is entangled distributions of flow features.
This motivates us to propose DIDS-MFL, a disentangled intrusion
detection approach for various scenarios. DIDS-MFL involves two
key components: a double Disentanglement-based Intrusion Detection System (DIDS) and a plug-and-play Multi-scale Few-shot
Learning-based (MFL) intrusion detection module. Specifically,
the proposed DIDS first disentangles traffic features by a nonparameterized optimization, automatically differentiating tens and
hundreds of complex features. Such differentiated features will be
further disentangled to highlight the attack-specific features. Our
DIDS additionally uses a novel graph diffusion method that dynamically fuses the network topology for spatial-temporal aggregation
in evolving data streams. Furthermore, the proposed MFL involves
an alternating optimization framework to address the entangled
representations in few-shot traffic threats with rigorous derivation. MFL first captures multi-scale information in latent space
to distinguish attack-specific information and then optimizes the
disentanglement term to highlight the attack-specific information.
Finally, MFL fuses and alternately solves them in an end-to-end
way. To the best of our knowledge, DIDS-MFL takes the first step
toward disentangled dynamic intrusion detection under various
attack scenarios. Equipped with DIDS-MFL, administrators can
effectively identify various attacks in encrypted traffic, including
known, unknown, and few-shot threats that are not easily detected.
Comprehensive experiments show the superiority of our proposed
Received 11 December 2024; revised 5 June 2025; accepted 25 July 2025.
Date of publication 4 August 2025; date of current version 3 October 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2902200, and in part by the
General Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62471064. Recommended for acceptance by M. L. Zhang. (Corresponding
author: Guoshun Nan.)
Chenyang Qiu, Guoshun Nan, Hongrui Xia, Zheng Weng, Xueting
Wang, and Xiaofeng Tao are with the National Engineering Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China, and also with Beiyou Shenzhen Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: cyqiu@bupt.edu.cn; nanguo2021@bupt.edu.cn; kphchrls@bupt.edu.cn; wengzheng@bupt.edu.cn; wxtyuki@bupt.edu.cn; taoxf@bupt.edu.cn).
Meng Shen is with the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
(e-mail: shenmeng@bit.edu.cn).
Jun Liu is with the School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster
University, LA14YW Lancaster, U.K. (e-mail: j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk).
Our code is available at https://github.com/qcydm/DIDS-MFL.
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3595671, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3595671

DIDS-MFL. For few-shot NIDS, our DIDS-MFL achieves a 71.91%
–125.19% improvement in average F1-score over 14 baselines and
shows versatility in multiple baselines and multiple tasks.
Index Terms—Intrusion detection, network security.

I. INTRODUCTION
NAUTHORIZED attempts like password cracking [1],
man-in-the-middle attacks (MITM) [2], and denial-ofservice (DoS) [3] are known as the network attacks [4], targeting an organization’s digital assets with the intention of
data leakage or the execution of harmful deeds. These attacks
are frequently perceived as network anomalies [5] due to their
distinct characteristics that differ from standard traffic patterns.
An alarming statistic [6] notes that 31% companies across the
globe experience a daily average of at least one cyber attack, a
frequency amplified by the proliferation of mobile online business endeavors. The situations necessitate an intelligent system
deployment to assist network administrators in the automated
segregation of these anomalies from the vast sea of internet
traffic. A network-based intrusion detection system (NIDS) [7],
which monitors network traffic and identifies malicious activities, facilitates administrators to form the frontline defense
against increasing attacks over information infrastructures (e.g.,
sensors and servers). Hence, NIDS is widely applied in many
information systems of governments and e-commercial business
sectors [8]. Fig. 1 demonstrates how NIDS builds a frontline
defense against two network attacks, protecting systems from
potential cyber threats.
Existing NIDS can be categorized into two types, i.e.,
signature-based ones [9], [10], [11] and anomaly-based
ones [12], [13], [14]. The former detects network attacks based
on pre-defined patterns or known malicious sequences stored
in a database, such as the number of bytes in traffic. These
patterns in the NIDS are referred to as signatures. The latter anomaly-based NIDS learns to track attacks with machine
learning techniques. Early statistical approaches [2], [3], such
as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Regression (LR),
and Decision Tree (DT), rely on carefully designed handcrafted
features to learn classification boundaries. Recent deep learningbased methods [15], [16] use millions of neural parameters
to mine the knowledge underlying the training samples, and
have achieved great success in automatically modeling complex
correlations for tens and thousands of features. The state-of-theart E-GraphSAGE [17] employs graph convolution networks
(GCNs) to learn the feature representations for better prediction.

U

0162-8828 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

Fig. 1. Illustration of two network attacks DoS and MITM. DoS floods the
target with massive traffic to overwhelm an online service, and MITM eavesdrops
on the communication between two targets and steals private information. An
NIDS can be easily deployed in a single location to collect statistical features
and alert administrators for potential threats.

Although promising, existing NIDS approaches face two
challenges in detecting traffic threats accurately:
r Challenge 1. The existing NIDS methods yield extremely
inconsistent results in identifying distinct attacks: For statistical methods, Fig. 2(a) demonstrates that the detection
performance of an SVM-based method [18] for an unknown attack1 can be as low as 9% in terms of F1 on
the CIC-ToN-IOT [19] dataset. While the model achieves
40% F1 in declaring another unknown threat (DDoS) on the
same benchmark. Regarding the deep learning-based methods, Fig. 2(d) demonstrates that E-GraphSAGE achieves a
lower than 20% F1 score for MITM attacks and a higher
than 90% F1 score for DDoS on the CTC-ToN-IOT dataset.
r Challenge 2. The existing NIDS approaches struggle to
detect few-shot traffic threats accurately: In practical scenarios, the strengthening of defensive measures and the
consequent escalating trend of cyber threats have inevitably
caused the rise of new-type attacks with a limited instance
number, referred to as few-shot traffic threats. However, our
empirical observations reveal that the NIDS methods have
dramatic performance deterioration in few-shot scenarios,
as shown in Fig. 3(a), e.g., our previous work DIDS [20]
dramatically drops from 91.57% under supervised learning
setting to 36.12% under the few-shot learning setting over
the CIC-ToN-IoT dataset, and similarly, EURLER and
E-GraphSAGE have an average F1-scores lower to 36.26%
under the few-shot learning setting.
For the first challenge, we depict feature distributions and visualize the representations to investigate the underlying cause of
why existing methods perform inconsistently for various attacks,
including unknown ones and known ones. Fig. 2(b) and (c) depict
statistical distributions of the two unknown attacks for the SVMbased model during testing. We observe that feature distributions
of MITM attacks are entangled, while the ones of DDoS are more
separated. It can be inferred that statistical distributions of traffic
features are one of the main underlying causes of performance
variations. Separated distributions benefit the unknown attack
identification, while entangled ones are indistinguishable and
unable to help the NIDS to make accurate decisions. We refer to
1 The unknown attacks referred to in this paper are never appeared new type
of attacks in training set

10529

such a phenomenon as the entangled distribution of statistical
features. To analyze the reason for performance variations of
acknowledged attacks during testing, we use Pearson correlation
heat map [21] to visualize the representations of MITM and
DDoS respectively, where the representations are generated by
the encoder of E-GraphSAGE. Fig. 2(e) and 2(f) demonstrate
the two correlation maps. Interestingly, we observe that the
coefficients of MITM representations are much larger than those
of DDoS. We further compare MITM with other attacks, including Backdoor and Dos, and find those high coefficients in the
representation will lead to lower intrusion detection scores. We
refer to such a phenomenon as the entangled distribution of
representational features, which can be considered as another
main cause for the degradation of attack classification.
For the second challenge, we observe that the NIDS approaches still perform poorly when combining the state-ofthe-art few-shot learning methods, as shown in Fig. 3(b). For
the meta-learning-based MBase [22], we attribute the poor
performance to the limited anomaly types in network traffic.
Effective meta-learning approaches typically necessitate vast
types of few-shot anomalies, which are more aligned with the
field of computer vision and natural language processing [23],
[24], [25], [26]. Therefore, we focus on the similarity-based
method BSNet [27] and uncover why BSNet outperforms DIDS.
We depict the t-SNE visualizations of their respective learned
representations. As shown in Fig. 4(a) and (b), we observe
that the representations of BSNet in different attack types are
more separated in the latent space. It can be inferred as one
of the main causes of higher F1 scores in BSNet. Following
this thread, we further depict their representation correlations
via correlation heatmaps. We have found that the representations of BSNet are more entangled than DIDS as shown in
Fig. 4(c) and (d). Aligning with the disentanglement studies in
Challenge 1, we attribute the main obstacle to the performance
improvement of BSNet to the entangled representations. More
discussions on the above empirical studies are available in
Appendix 18.3.
In light of the discussions, we raise two critical questions:
r Q1: How can an intrusion detection model automatically
address the first challenges, i.e., two entangled distributions, to benefit the detection of both unknown and known
attacks?
r Q2: Can a few-shot intrusion detection method automatically learn the representations as separated in latent space,
simultaneously as disentangled among representation
elements?
Achieving Q1 is challenging. To mitigate the issue of the first
entangled distribution, we need to differentiate tens and thousands of features involved in real-time network traffic, without
prior knowledge of the statistical distributions. Such a problem
is largely under-explored in the field of NIDS. For the second
entangled distribution, there are some remotely related methods [28], [29], [30] in other fields, including computer vision
and natural language processing. However, these approaches
mainly focus on object-level representation learning, and hence
they are hardly directly applied to intrusion detection to tackle
this challenge.

10530

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 2. Quantitative analysis on CIC-TON-IOT. (a) Comparisons of detecting various attacks, which are regarded as an unknown type in evaluation. Specifically,
we train an SVM model without using the data points of these attacks, and evaluate the instances of these attacks on the test set. (b) and (c) show the feature
distributions of two attacks, MITM and DDoS, respectively. (d) Comparisons of detecting various known attacks on the previous state-of-the-art deep learning
model E-GraphSAGE, (e) and (f) are correlation maps of representations of the two attacks, where the representations are generated by E-GraphSAGE.

Fig. 3. (a) Performance comparisons among different intrusion detection
methods with normal-size traffic and few-shot traffic. (b) F1-score comparisons
between DIDS few-shot learning and two SOTA few-shot learning baselines.
We repeat the above comparisons 10 times.

Fig. 4. The correlation map and the t-SNE visualization of representations
generated by DIDS and BSNet on CIC-ToN-IoT dataset.

Second, the difficulties of Q2 lie in two aspects: 1. tackling Q2 involves two optimization terms, a disentanglement
term, and a latent space term. How to optimize them into an
end-to-end framework is under-explored in NIDS and few-shot
learning. 2. As for latent space optimization, existing similaritybased methods [27], [31], [32] mainly focused on utilizing the

original-scale information of representations, while ignoring
their multi-scale information to help few-shot traffic separated in
latent space. We also provide formal definitions and illustrative
figures for each case of entanglement and disentanglement in
Appendix 11.
To address the above two questions, we propose a novel
model called Disentangled dynamic Intrusion Detection System
with Multi-scale Few-shot Learning (DIDS-MFL). Specifically,
DIDS-MFL has two critical components: DIDS and MFL. The
former DIDS disentangles the statistical flow features with a
non-parametric optimization, aiming to automatically separate
entangled distributions for representation learning. We refer to
this step as statistical disentanglement. Then DIDS further learns
to differentiate the representations by a regularization function,
aiming to highlight the salient features for specific attacks with
smaller coefficients. We refer to this step as representational disentanglement. DIDS finally introduces a novel graph diffusion
module that dynamically fuses the graph topology in evolving
traffic. The latter MFL is a flexible plug-and-play module for
few-shot detection matching multiple NIDS baselines. We first
optimize the multi-scale traffic representations in latent space
to distinguish attack-specific information. Then we propose
an element-wise disentanglement term to highlight the attackspecific information. Finally, we alternately solve them in an
end-to-end framework.
Extensive experiments on five benchmarks show the superiority of our DIDS-MFL. The main contributions are:
r We propose DIDS-MFL, aiming to mitigate the entangled
distributions of flow features for NIDS in various practical
scenarios, e.g., known, few-shot, and unknown attacks2 . To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to quantitatively
analyze such an interesting problem and empirically reveal
the underlying cause in the intrusion detection field.
r As for DIDS, we present a double disentanglement scheme
for differentiating the general features of various attacks
and highlighting the attack-specific features, respectively.
2 More details on unknown attack detection are available in Appendix 17.1.

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

We additionally introduce a novel graph diffusion method
for dynamic feature aggregation.
r As for MFL, we propose a fusion-based framework by
capturing multi-scale information and disentangling representations. We alternately solve them with rigorous derivation for few-shot intrusion detection. As a plug-and-play
module, MFL also shows versatility in multiple baselines
and downstream tasks.
r Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on various benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of DIDSMFL and provide some helpful insights for effective NIDS
in various practical scenarios.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Network Intrusion Detection System
Existing NIDS can be classified into two groups, i.e.,
signature-based ones [9], [10], [11] and anomaly-based
ones [12], [13], [14], [33]. Signature-based intrusion detection
systems (IDS) rely on identifying known attack patterns or
signatures. These systems are adept at recognizing established
threats, where the attack signatures are predefined, employing
rule sets to match against network traffic for indicative malicious
activities. However, their dependency on signature databases
poses a limitation, as they are typically ineffective against novel
or zero-day attacks that do not yet have a defined signature. In
contrast, the anomaly-based ones do not rely on prior knowledge of attack signatures. They leverage machine learning or
statistical techniques to model normal network behavior and
flag deviations as potential threats. Anomaly detection holds the
advantage of identifying unknown attacks and adapting to new
threat patterns. The anomaly-based ones involve statistical methods [2], [3] and deep learning-based ones [15], [16]. Early deep
learning studies model the traffic as independent sequences [34],
[35], [36], [37]. Recent popular studies rely on GCN to aggregate
traffic information [38], [39], [40]. Most related to our work
is Euler [41], which builds a series of static graphs based on
traffic flow and then performs information aggregation. Our
DIDS differs from the above methods in two aspects: 1) We
build dynamic graphs rather than static ones, and such a dynamic
aggregation can capture fine-grained traffic features for attack
detection. Furthermore, we fuse the network layer information
into our graph aggregation. 2) We introduce a double disentanglement scheme, including statistical disentanglement and
representational one, to benefit the detection of both known and
unknown attacks.
B. Disentangled Representation Learning
Disentanglement aims to learn representations that separate
the underlying explanatory factors responsible for variation
in the data. Previous studies [42], [43], [44], [45] focus on
the generative models by employing constraints on the loss
functions, such as β-VAE [46] modifying the VAE framework
to emphasize the independence of latent variables. Beta-VAE
achieves disentanglement by introducing a trade-off term between reconstruction and KL divergence, while FactorVAE [47]

10531

introduces a total correlation penalty. CausalVAE [48] takes a
significant step by integrating causal reasoning, allowing for
interventions in the generative process. Disentangled Graph
Neural Networks are another active area, where methods aim
to learn independent node representations decoupled from the
graph structure, e.g., GD-GAN employs a GAN framework to
disentangle the latent factors of variation in graph data, allowing
for controllable generation of new graph structures and node
features. Some recent approaches [49], [50], [51], [52] capture
the intrinsic factors in graph-structured data. Most related to our
work is DisenLink [52], which disentangled the original features
into a fixed number of factors, with selective factor-wise message
passing for better node representations. While our DIDS uses a
double disentanglement method, which first disentangles the statistical features via non-parametric optimization, and then learns
to highlight the attack-specific features with a regularization.
C. Dynamic Graph Convolution Networks
Dynamic graph convolution networks (GCNs) focus on evolving graph streams. There is a line of early studies in GCNs
on dynamic graphs, which incorporate temporal information
into graphs. These methods can be categorized into the spatiotemporal decoupled ones [38], [39], [53] and the spatio-temporal
coupled ones [40], [54], [55], [56]. The former employs two
separate modules to capture temporal and spatial information,
e.g., DynGCN [57] performs spatial and temporal convolutions
interleaved, updating model parameters to adapt to new graph
snapshots, DIDA [58] Handles spatio-temporal distribution
shifts by discovering invariant patterns and using intervention
mechanisms to eliminate spurious impacts. The latter incorporates spatial-temporal dependencies by proposing a synchronous
modeling mechanism, e.g., AST-GCN [59] adapts the graph
structure and convolutional filters based on the temporal context
to capture the evolving relationships in dynamic graphs, TDGCN [60] uses temporal difference learning to update spatialtemporal graph convolutional filters, capturing the changes in
graph structure and node states over time. Our DIDS is mainly
inspired by the GIND [55], which adaptively aggregates information via a non-linear diffusion method. The key difference
between our GCN approach and GIND is: we introduce the
non-linear graph diffusion method into a multi-layer graph that
considers the network topology for dynamic intrusion detection.
D. Few-Shot Learning
Few-shot learning is a machine learning paradigm designed
to enable a model to learn from a small number of training
instances and generalize effectively to unseen data. The existing few-shot learning methods can be divided into two categories: meta-learning-based ones [61], [62], [63], including
meta-learning-based NIDS approaches [64], [65], [66], [67],
and similarity-based ones. Meta-learning-based methods focus
on learning a model that can adapt to new tasks with limited
data. These methods often involve a meta-training phase where
the model learns to learn from a variety of tasks, followed by
a meta-testing phase where the model rapidly tunes to a new
task. In contrast, the similarity-based ones rely on measuring

10532

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

the similarity or distance between the query instances and the
support set to make predictions without necessitating vast types
of few-shot samples. The similarity-based ones can also be
grouped into augmentation-based ones [68], [69], [70], [71],
[72], metric learning-based ones [31], [32], [73], [74], [75],
and other similarity-based few-shot learning methods [76], [77],
[78], [79]. Recent popular few-shot learning methods mainly
focused on utilizing multiple learning metrics, or prototype
completion. The most related to us is BSNet [27]. Ours differs
from it in two aspects: first, we emphasize the importance
of preserving multi-scale intrinsic representation information,
rather than optimizing the original-scale information; second,
we propose a joint optimization scheme to generate separated
and disentangled representations to make few-shot threats distinguishable.
Finally, this work is an extension version form [20]. In [20],
we address the performance inconsistency issue caused by
entangled features on sufficient training data. More practical
scenarios is collecting attack traffic with limited instances. It is
more challenging compared to [20] with involving double optimization goals. To this end, this paper proposes an alternating
optimization framework MFL to address the entangled representations in few-shot traffic threats with rigorous derivation.
The proposed MFL is also a plug-and-play few-shot intrusion
detection module that is compatible with other NIDS methods.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Multi-Layer Graphs
To model the sophisticated traffic network topology, we
formally define the multi-layer graphs. First, we consider a
single-layer network modeled by a graph G = (V, E, ω), where
V is the set of nodes and E ⊂ V × V is the set of edges. Here
ω : V × V → R is an edge weight function such that each edge
euv ∈ E has a weight ωuv . Then the multi-layer graph can be
defined as follows:
⎞
⎛
A(1,1) · · · A(1,k) · · · A(1,m)
⎜ .
..
.. ⎟
..
..
⎜ ..
.
.
.
. ⎟
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎜
(1)
A = ⎜ A(l,1) · · · A(k,k) · · · A(l,m) ⎟ .
⎟
⎜
..
.. ⎟
⎜ ..
..
..
.
.
⎝ .
.
. ⎠
A(m,1) · · · A(m,k) · · · A(m,m)
where Ai,i refers to the intra-layer adjacency matrix and
Ai,j (i = j) refers to cross-layer adjacency matrix.
B. Edge Construction
We have constructed a multi-layer dynamic graph by defining
the devices as nodes and the communications between two
devices as edges. To construct the edge relationships in the
multi-layer graph, we first transform the Netflow data to edges
by the following definition:
Eij (t) = (vi , li , vj , lj , t, Δt, Fij (t)).

(2)

First, we concatenate the source IP and source port in the original
traffic flows as the source identity for the device i. Similarly,

we can obtain the destination identity for the device j. We
denote vi and vj as the source and destination nodes respectively.
Secondly, li denotes the layer of device i, and li = 0 indicates
that i is a terminal device such as a PC, a server, or an IoT
device. Here li = 1 indicates that i is an intermediate device
such as a router in the communication link. Specifically, we
assign devices with the router address 192.168.0.1 or with many
stable connections in layer 1. Then t refers to the timestamp of
traffic and Δt indicates the traffic duration time. Finally, Fij (t)
is the traffic features.
C. Problem Formulation
1) Dynamic Traffic Intrusion Detection: We first define the
devices as nodes and the communications with timestamps
between any pair of devices as edges. We use T to represent
the maximum timestamp. An Edge sequence E is denoted by
{E t }Tt=1 , where each E t represents a network traffic. Also,
after each edge, there is a corresponding multi-layer graph,
then the corresponding multi-layer graph stream G takes the
form of {G t }Tt=1 , where each G t = (V t , E t ) represents the
multi-layer graph at timestamp t. A multi-layer adjacency matrix At ∈ Rm×n represents the edges in E t , where ∀(i, j, w) ∈
E t , At [i][j] = wij and wij is the weight of the matrix. The goal
of intrusion detection is to learn to predict the edge E t as a benign
traffic or an attack in binary classification, and a specific type
under the multi-classification.
2) Few-Shot Intrusion Detection: Given a few-shot intrusion
detection task T = {Ctr , Cte }, where Ctr is a training set with
few-shot traffic, and Cte is a test set. Our goal is to design a fewshot module to accurately classify the samples in Cte by few-shot
learning on Ctr . Ctr includes two key components, support set and
query set. The former provides the few-shot traffic information
to the model, and the latter contains new instances for model
evaluation and optimization. The query set can be sampled from
the support set for the traffic-limited scenarios. Specifically, we
conduct N -way K-shot intrusion detection, N -class traffic with
K samples, i.e., 5, in the support set. The few-shot intrusion
detection model aims to conduct accurate detection in the query
set, while the only available reference is the few-shot traffic in
the support set.
IV. MODEL
In this section, we present the DIDS-MFL, which consists of
five main modules. Fig. 5 shows the architecture of our proposed
model. Next, we dive into the details of these modules.
A. Statistical Disentanglement
As we discussed in Section I, statistical distributions of traffic
features are one of the main underlying causes of performance
variations. i.e., separated distributions benefit the unknown attack identification, while entangled ones are indistinguishable
and thus unable to help the NIDS to make accurate decisions.
Therefore, our aim is there to disentangle the traffic features and
make them distinguishable.

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

10533

Fig. 5. Overview of the proposed DIDS-MFL, which consists of five modules. 1) Edge construction module builds edges based on traffic flow. 2) Statistical
disentanglement module differentiates values in vectors to facilitate the identification of various attacks. 3) Representational disentanglement module learns to
highlight attack-specific features. 4) Multi-Layer graph diffusion module fuses the network topology for better aggregation over evolving dynamic traffic. 5)
Multi-scale few-shot learning module aims to few-shot traffic threats detection. Finally, traffic classifier takes the traffic representation as an input to yield the
detection results. DIDS takes the first four steps and flows through the orange arrows to the classifier, while DIDS-MFL takes the five steps by flowing through the
blue arrows to the classifier.

To separate the features of traffic without any prior knowledge,
we formulate the differentiation as a constrained non-parametric
optimization problem and approximate the optimal results by
solving the Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) [80]. We perform a min-max normalization on the edge feature Fij (t). For
convenience, we denote the normalized edge feature as F, and
Fi is the i-th normalized element.
We need a weight matrix w to generate the disentangled representation of F. Our key optimization objectives are to minimize
the mutual information between the elements of traffic features
and also bound the range of w when we perform aggregation.
We start by constraining the weight matrix w with the range of
the superposition function as follows:
Wmin ≤ wi ≤ Wmax (1 ≤ i ≤ N ),

N


wi Fi ≤ B, (3)

i=1

where Wmin , Wmax and B are constants, N is the edge feature
dimension. We then constrain the order-preserving properties of
generated representations:
wi Fi ≤ wi+1 Fi+1 (1 ≤ i ≤ N − 1).

(4)

Finally, we maximize the distance between components in
the vector w, consequently minimizing the mutual information
between each two feature elements. In this way, we can disentangle the distribution of element-wised features. The optimization
objective can be expressed as follows:
w = arg max(wN FN − w1 F1
−

N
−1


|2wi Fi − wi+1 Fi+1 − wi−1 Fi−1 |).

problem into an SMT problem with an optimization objective
(6) and a subjection (7) to approximate the optimal results.
w = arg max wN FN − w1 F1
+

N
−1


2wi Fi − wi−1 Fi−1 − wi+1 Fi+1 ,

(6)

i=2

subjects to:
⎧
wi
⎪
⎪
⎨ N

∈
w
n
i=1 i i ≤
F
≤
w
⎪
⎪
⎩ i i
2wi Fi
≤

[Wmin , Wmax ]
B
wi+1 F(i+1)
wi−1 Fi−1 + wi+1 Fi+1 .

(7)

The subjection in (7) ensures variants’ ranges and the orderpreserving property of generated representation. It also ensures
symbols when removing the absolute value sign. The detailed
explanation of why (6) can generate the disentangled representation is available in Appendix 7.
Specifically, we employ (6) as an optimization objective, i.e.,
loss function, and utilize Adam optimizer to solve it. Then we can
generate the disentangled edge representation hi,j , which can be
expressed as hi,j = w F, where the symbol represents the
Hadamard product.
Equipped with the above non-parametric optimization, we
can differentiate tens and hundreds of complex features of various attacks, mitigating the entangled distribution of statistical
features. Such statistically disentangled features facilitate our
model to be more sensitive to various attacks.

(5)

i=2

We are unable to determine the convexity of the optimization
object due to its closed form. Therefore, we transform the above

B. Representational Disentanglement
So far we have constructed edges and statistically differentiated the features of traffic flows hi,j = w F. This module

10534

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

generates contextualized node representations X from edge
representations hi,j by using the temporal information. This
involves three steps:
1) Generating updating messages: For an incoming traffic
flow, we will build an edge or update the corresponding edge,
which may lead to a dramatic change in the node representations
involved in this interaction. We can update the node representations by utilizing this change. Therefore, we name the abrupt
change an updating message and denote it as c(t). Specifically,
we generate c(t) by incorporating historical memory and disentangled edge representation hi,j . The messages of node i and j
are as follows:
 

  
(8)
ci (t) = Msg mi t− , mj t− , t, Δt, li , lj , hi,j ,
 −
 −


cj (t) = Msg mj t , mi t , t, Δt, li , lj , hi,j ,
(9)
where hi,j is the disentangled edge representation. Δt is the
edge duration time, li , lj is the layer marks of edge, mi (t− ) is
the historical memory of the two interacting nodes, where t− is a
historical time point, compared to the existing time point t, Msg
is a learnable function, and we use RNN. The initial memory
mi (0) is 0, ∀i ∈ V . Specifically, RNN aims to generate the
new memory message c(t) combining the historical memory
m(t− ) and disentangled representation hij by learnable weight
matrices and gating mechanism.
2) Updating node memory: We update the node memory by
merging the latest message with the historical memory and then
encode the merging information, which can be expressed as
follows:
 

(10)
mi (t) = Mem ci (t), mi t− ,
where Mem is an encoder, and here we use GRU. We similarly
update the memory of node j via (10). Specifically, GRU introduces Reset Gate and Update Gate to better generate the updated
node memory mi (t) by fusing historical memory mi (t− ) and
new memory message ci (t). GRU considers both long-term and
short-term dependencies, thus mitigating the vanishing gradient
issue in temporal models.
3) Generating second disentangled node representations: We
can generate the node representation by utilizing the updated
memory in (10), and the representation of node i in time t can
be expressed as xi (t) = xi (t− ) + mi (t), where xi (t− ) is the
historical representation of node i. In this way, we obtain the
dynamic node representations of traffic in an evolving time flow.
The representation of node j can also be generated in a similar
way. The initial value of node representations X(0) is 0.
We aim to preserve the disentangled property in node representations. However, the update operations above may entangle
them at the element level again. Therefore, we propose the second representational disentanglement, which aims to highlight
the attack-specific features in node representations in the following end-to-end manner. It also ensures that the element-wised
representations are close to orthogonal.
2
1


LDis = X(t)X(t− ) − I .
F
2

(11)

The above regularization encourages the model to learn
smaller coefficients between every two elements of node representations. Such representations can be more differentiated.
As the module is supervised by the signal of a specific attack,
it can learn to highlight the attack-specific features, so as to
improve the detection accuracy, as discussed in Section I. By
doing so, we are able to mitigate the entangled distribution of
representational features as mentioned at the beginning.
C. Multi-Layer Graph Diffusion
So far, we have generated the dynamic disentangled node
representations with temporal information. For further fusing
the multi-layer topological structure information, we propose
a multi-layer graph diffusion module. Please note that we still
preserve the disentangled property by the following customized
designs.
We utilize the following graph diffusion method to fuse the
topological information in evolving graph streams, which can
capture the fine-grained spatial-temporal coupled information.
The previous dynamic intrusion detection methods may lose
this information in separated time gaps, due to the employed
time-window or snapshots-based methods. More discussions on
the ‘dynamic’ and superiority of the proposed graph diffusion
approach compared to the previous methods, are available in
Appendix 17.2.

∂t X = F (X, Θ)
(12)
X(0) = 0,
where F is a matrix–valued nonlinear function conditioned on
graph G, and Θ is the tensor of trainable parameters. The above
(12) establishes the foundation for spatial-temporal coupled
information modeling.
Specifically, we aim to amplify the important dimensions of
disentangled representations and depress the influence of trivial
feature elements in the diffusion process. To formulate this
process, we consider PM (PeronaMalik) diffusion [81], a type
of nonlinear filtering. It can be expressed as:
 ∂x(u,t)
= div[g(|∇x(u, t)|)∇x(u, t)]
∂t
(13)
x(u, 0) = 0,
where div is the divergence operator, ∇ is the gradient operator,
and g is a function inversely proportional to the absolute value
of the gradient.
Before formally formulating the multi-layer graph diffusion,
we propose the following spatial-temporal influence coefficient
sij ∈ S between nodes i,j in tij time. The coefficient matrix
considers the information changes over spatial-temporal coupled traffic data. Specifically, different layers and topology
structures over traffic networks and the traffic feature interactions at different times will influence the node representations
dynamically:
sij = f (li ||lj ||φ(t − tij )),


f (x) = W(2) · ReLU W(1) x ,

(14)
(15)

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

where || is a concatenate operator, φ(·) is a generic time encoder [82] to generate temporal representations, W(1) and W(2)
are the parameters of the first and second layer MLP.
Now we formally propose the multi-layer graph diffusion
module. We first define a differential operator on the multi-layer
graph, aiming to transfer the above continuous PM diffusion
in (13) to multi-layer graphs. As known from previous literature [83], the gradient operator corresponds to the instance
matrix M, while the divergence operator corresponds to the
matrix M , and we can compute the matrix M by the equation
MT M = D − A, where D is the diagonal matrix. Then our
novel multi-layer diffusion can be expressed as:


(16)
∂Xt = −M σ(MXK )S MXK K,
where K is a transformation matrix, S is the structure-temporal
influence coefficients calculated in (14) and σ(·) represents the
function exp(−| · |). The solution to (16) can be expressed as:
 t+Δt
Xt+Δt = Xt +
∂t Xt dτ,
(17)

10535

where δ, and ζ are trade-off parameters.
E. Multi-Scale Few-Shot Learning
So far we have proposed DIDS for supervised intrusion detection. Furthermore, we propose the following MFL to detect
few-shot threats accurately, e.g., 5 samples of each attack type.
We first denote the learned representations Xt+Δt in (17) as
Z ∈ RL∗N , where L is the length of representations, and N is the
few-shot sample number. The few-shot learner aims to generate a
coefficient matrix S as a learned similarity matrix between each
sample pair, thus benefiting the distinction of few-shot traffic
threats.
Specifically, we propose a Multi-scale Few-shot learning
(MFL) module. MFL first focuses on the original representations
Z to generate a coefficient matrix as:
min = Z − ZH 2F + λ1 H 2F , s.t. diag(H) = 0,
H

(21)

where | · |2F is the Frobenius matrix norm (F-norm) and diag(H)
denotes the diagonal entries of H. H can be directly derived
where t is the last edge occurrence time and Δt is the edge by solving (21). Specifically, we directly employ (21) as a loss
duration and we use the Runge-Kutta method to solve this function and utilize backpropagation and optimizer, e.g., Adam,
to solve it.
equation.
The above optimization term in MFL only preserves the
original-scale
information of Z. The multi-scale information
D. Classifier and Loss Function
of Z can also provide necessary information to make few-shot
For DIDS, we make the two-step predictions for intrusion
traffic samples distinguishable. To this end, we proposed a
detection. We utilize the first MLP to classify whether the
transform-based algorithm to generate coefficient matrix Q by
traffic is benign or anomalous and utilize the second MLP to
using Z’s multi-scale information. This process can be considdetect the specific type of attack. When an unknown attack
ered as an ‘augmentation’ of the original representations Z in
invades, the direct multi-classifications will be easy to fail to
the latent space, aiming to capture the invariant attack-specific
assign the anomalous label thus leading to poor performance. In
features across different scales. Finally, we fuse the obtained
contrast, through the first-step binary classification, DIDS will
coefficient matrices H and Q. Equipped with the fusion of
focus more on inconsistencies with normal behavior to improve
generated matrices, MFL can effectively utilize few-shot repthe performance of detecting unknown attacks. The following
resentations across different scales, i.e., under the original and
second multi-classification will further alert the administrators
transformed scale, thus benefiting the distinction of few-shot
that what kind of attack it is more similar to so that similar
traffic threats. We have the following principles to achieve MFL
mitigation measures can be taken. Specifically, the intrusion loss
and clarify the motivations behind these designs:
can be expressed as:
r 1. MFL should encourage the representations under differ⎛
⎞
ent scales to be close in latent space, thus capturing the
m
K


⎝
⎠
attack-specific features and benefiting the distinction of
log(1 − pnor,i ) + log(patt,i ) +
yi,k log(pi,k )
LInt = −
traffic samples in different types, which is motivated by
i=1
j=1
the empirical studies in Fig. 4(a) and (b).
(18)
r 2. MFL should ensure the disentanglement among the
where m is the batch size, K is the number of attack classes, pnor,i
elements of the learned representation, thus highlighting
is the probability of normal, patt,i is the probability of attack.
the attack-specific information, which is motivated by the
Additionally, the adjacent time intervals may cause adjacent
empirical studies in Fig. 4(c) and (d).
times embedding to be farther apart in embedded space, due
To achieve the above goals, we first propose a transformationto the learning process independency. To address this problem, based learning scheme by projecting the representations Z to
we constrained the variation between adjacent timestamps em- a latent space, aiming to discover the attack-specific invariant
bedding by minimizing the Euclidean Distance:
features across different scales. Then we introduce a regularizaT
tion term to disentangle the few-shot representations. Finally,

Xt+Δt − Xt 2 .
(19) we propose an alternating optimization algorithm to derive Q in
LSmooth =
t=0
an end-to-end way. The implementation involves the following
three steps:
Finally, the overall loss of DIDS can be expressed as follows:
1) Generating Representation Transformation: We denote
(20) Z = Z as the original representations, and Z = G(Z) as the
L = LInt + δLSmooth + ζLDis ,
o
t
t

10536

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

transformed representations, where G is a transformation operator. Specifically, we introduce a scaling operator S as follows:
⎡
⎤
s1 · · · 0
⎢. .
.. ⎥
⎥
.
..
(22)
S = diag(s1 , s2 , . . ., sL ) = ⎢
. ⎦,
⎣.
0 · · · sL
where s1 , s2 , . . ., sD is the scale factor, and different values
determine different scalars. Then the scaling transformation
can be written as Zt = G(Z) = SZ. Especially, when s1 =
s2 = . . . = sL = γ, S is an equal-rate scaling operator with
the rate of γ. Hence, the transformation can be rewritten as
Zt = G(Z) = SZ = γIZ = γZ. By the equal-rate transformation, we generate transformed representations while preserving
their content, e.g., scaling up an image by the rate of 2, will not
change the content we see.
2) Generating Multi-scale Coefficient Matrix: So far, we have
generated the transformations of Z. In step 2, we propose a constraint term to encourage the representation to be close between
the original and transformed scale. Furthermore, we introduce
a learnable projection operator P to uncover the attack-specific
invariant information, thus benefiting the distinction of few-shot
traffic threats.

2
(23)
f1 (P) = PT Zo − PT Zt F ,
The projection operator P can be considered as a metric
matrix across different-scale representation, also benefiting the
connectivity of same-attack traffic samples under the transformation. Then we formally propose an optimization problem as
follows:
min f1 (P) + η Q F ,
s.t. PZ = PG(Z)Q,

(24)

The above formulation (24) corresponds to design principle 1
and is motivated by the empirical studies in Fig. 4(a) and (b),
aiming to distinguish the attack-specific information in the latent
space.
3) Disentangling the Learned Representations: Finally, we
introduce a disentangle regularization term to highlight the
attack-specific information, thus mitigating the representation
entangled problem in few-shot traffic samples.
2

 T +j
−j 
(25)
f2 (P) = −
P Zo − PT Zt  ,
j

F

(L−1)×N
repeats the j-th row of Zo and Z−j
where Z+j
t ∈
o ∈R
R(L−1)×N denotes the transformation matrix by removing the
j-th row. The above disentanglement regularization term (25)
corresponds to design principle 2 and is motivated by the
empirical studies in Fig. 4(c) and (d), aiming to highlight the
attack-specific information.
Combining the above key formulations (24) and (25), we can
rewrite the optimization problem as:

min f (P) + η Q̃ F ,
s.t. PZ = γPZQ, Q̃ = Q,

(26)

where f (P) = α2 (f1 (P) + f2 (P)), α and η are trade-off hyperparameters, Q̃ is a auxiliary variable, and γ is scaling rate
hyperparameter.
Since the optimization problem in (26) is not convex with
the unknowns {P, Q}, we solve Q by iteratively updating variables while fixing another. We propose the following alternating
solution to derive the coefficient matrix Q.
Alternating Solution for MFL: We solve (26) by converting
the original problem to the augmented Lagrange minimizing
problem, as (26) involving a multi-objective optimization:
L=

α
PZ − γPZQ 2F
2

α 
PZ+j − γPZ−j 2 + η Q̃ F
−
F
2 j
+ < Φ1 , PZ − γPZQ+ < Φ2 , Q − Q̃ >

μ
PZ − γPZQ 2F + Q − Q̃ 2F ,
+
2

(27)

where Φ1 and Φ2 are the Lagrange multipliers and the penalty
parameter μ > 0.
The alternating solution for (27) involves four steps, and the
details are available in Appendix 13.
So far, we have obtained coefficient matrices H and Q by
parallel computing of (21) and (27) using the alternating solving
algorithm. We can fuse two coefficient matrices by introducing
a trade-off hyperparameter :
Q∗ = H + ∗ Q

(28)

where Q∗ contains fine-grained multi-scale information to help
few-shot traffic threats distinguishable.
Finally, we can generate the coefficient matrix of MFL by
S∗ = (|Q∗ | + |Q∗ |T )/2. Given the noise information and outliers in the obtained S∗ , in practical implementations, we further
conduct SVD decomposition of S∗ to filter noisy information and
generate a normalized matrix S. The detailed implementation
pseudo-code of generating S is available in the Appendix 14.
DIDS-MFL Loss: The DIDS-MFL loss consists of two components, a multi-scale few-shot learning term and a regularization term. The former uses a cross-entropy loss, aiming to match
the prediction to the query set via the generated multi-scale
coefficient matrix S. In the few-shot intrusion detection task,
S is derived from the representations of support and query
samples. The latter enforces the representations Z to be close
to the original-scale representations in latent space. Finally, we
introduce a trade-off hyperparameter β to control the regularization intensity. The specific DIDS-MFL loss is as follows:
L=

N 
Q


Yi,j log(Pi,j ) + β ZH − Z

(29)

i=1 j=1

where N is the category number of attacks, Q is sample number
of query set in each category, Yi,j and Pi,j are ground-truth and
prediction, respectively, Pij is query sample’s mean similarity
score derived from the coefficient matrix S, β is a trade-off
hyperparameter. In (29), the first term discovers the multi-scale

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

information of Z, while the second term preserves the information under the original scale via the coefficient matrix H. We
can fine-tune β to control these two terms.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Settings
Datasets: We conduct experiments on five popular datasets
that involve massive network traffic over the Internet of Things
(IoT). We give detailed descriptions as follows:
r CIC-ToN-IoT: This dataset is generated from the existing
ToN-IoT dataset by a network traffic tool CICFlowMeter,
where TON-IoT is a well-known database for intrusion detection collected from Telemetry datasets of IoT services.
This dataset consists of 5,351,760 flows, with 53.00%
attack samples and 47.00% benign samples.
r CIC-BoT-IoT: It is generated from the existing BoTIoT dataset by CICFlowMeter. This dataset consists of
6,714,300 traffic flows, with 98.82% attack samples and
1.18% benign samples.
r EdgeIIoT: It is collected from an IoT/IIoT system that
contains mobile devices and sensors. This dataset includes
1,692,555 flows, with 21.15% attack samples and 78.85%
benign samples.
r NF-UNSW-NB15-v2: It is NetFlow-based and generated
from the UNSW-NB15 dataset, which has been expanded
with additional NetFlow features and labeled with attack
categories. This dataset includes 2,390,275 flows, with
3.98% attack samples and 96.02% benign samples.
r NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2: It is a NetFlow-based dataset
generated from the original pcap files of CSE-CICIDS2018 dataset. This dataset includes 18,893,708 flows,
with 11.95% attack samples and 88.05% benign samples.
Configurations: All experiments and timings are conducted
on a machine with Intel Xeon Gold 6330@ 2.00 GHz, RTX3090
GPU, and 24 G memory. We use the Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 0.01, the learning rate scheduler reducing rate
as 0.9, with weight decay being 1e−5 . We train all the models
with 500 epochs.
Baselines: To evaluate the performance of the proposed DIDS,
we select 10 deep learning based-models as baselines, including
3 sequence models (i.e., MLP [84], MStream [16], LUCID [37]),
4 static GCN models (i.e., GAT [85] and E-GraphSAGE [86],
SSDCM [87], DMGI [88]), where SSDCM and DMGI are
designed for static multi-layer graphs, 4 dynamic GCN models
(i.e., TGN [89], EULER [41], AnomRank [90], DynAnom [90]).
Additionally, we choose 3 rule-based baselines to compare with
the proposed DIDS, (i.e., ML [91], AdaBoost [92], and Logistic
Regression).
Metrics: We follow the previous works [93] to evaluate the
performances by two commonly used metrics in intrusion detection including F1-score (F1) and ROC-AUC score (AUC).
B. Main Results
1) Comparisons of Binary Classification: Under this setting,
we classify a traffic flow as an attack or a benign one. We

10537

categorize the baselines into three groups, including dynamic
GCNs at the top of Table I, static GCNs at the middle of the
table, and another three baselines at the bottom. It should be
noted that AnomRank and DynAnom are two popular baselines
for anomaly detection. We run our experiment 5 times and report
the mean and variance values. The comparison results in Table I
show that our DIDS consistently performs the best among all
baselines over the five benchmarks, which shows the superiority
of our method for intrusion detection. Specifically, compared
to the E-GraphSAGE, the previous state-of-art GCN-based approach, our method achieves a 4.80% higher F1-score over the
CIC-BoT-IoT dataset. Our DIDS outperforms AnomRank, the
previous state-of-the-art method for anomaly detection on F1,
by 15.27 points over the EdgeIIoT dataset. We attribute the
above results to the gains of our statistical disentanglement,
representational disentanglement and dynamic graph diffusion.
2) Comparisons of Multi-Classification: We compare the
performance of our method to four baselines in declaring the specific attack type. These baselines include E-GraphSAGE [17],
TGN [89], ML [96], and AdaBoost [97], as they are representative of different types of intrusion detection models and have
been widely used in previous studies. Fig. 6 demonstrates that
the proposed DIDS consistently performs well among all five
datasets, especially under some complex attacks. The classification results in Fig. 6 correspond to the second issue we
claimed in Challenge 1. The existing graph-based methods,
including E-GraphSAGE, ML, and AdaBoost, perform inconsistently in the identification of complex attacks (e.g., MITM
and Backdoor). We also observe that some attacks that are not
easily detected by the baseline approaches, can be identified
by the proposed DIDS with higher F1 scores. For example,
E-GraphSAGE only achieves 18.34% and 30.7% F1 scores on
CIC-ToN-IoT for MITM and Backdoor attacks, respectively,
while our DIDS is able to obtain higher than 40% F1 score
gains for each attack. These results further show the superiority
of the proposed DIDS. We also find that the average F1 scores
of our method on CIC-BoT-loT and NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2
are lower than those on other datasets. The underlying reason is
the unbalanced attack distributions in the training set, where the
dominant type may mislead the classifications. Such a finding
aligns with previous work in the field of computer vision [98].
Nevertheless, the proposed DIDS is still the best under such
distributions. We leave this interesting observation as our future
work.
3) Comparisons of Unknown Attacks: To further investigate
the performance of detecting unknown attacks, we conduct
experiments on the four attack types by discarding the corresponding instances in the train set and detecting them in the test
set. From this perspective, the unknown attacks are the new-type
attacks that do not belong to the existing types of attacks in the
training set. The unknown attack detection results in Table III
correspond to the first issue we claimed in Challenge 1. We run
our experiments 5 times and report the mean and variance values
with different random seeds. Table III reports the classification
results on the CIC-ToN-IOT dataset. It shows that the statistical
rule-based method Logistic Regression can only achieve as low
as a 1.68 F1 score for DDoS attacks, this confirms our analysis

10538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

TABLE I
COMPARISONS OF BINARY CLASSIFICATION ON FIVE DATASETS

Fig. 6.

Comparisons of multi-classification. Here † indicates that the results are directly copied from the previous works.

at the very beginning that rule-based methods can hardly detect
unknown attacks. The score of graph-based E-GraphSAGE is
much smaller than DIDS, e.g., 6.05% for MITM, indicating
the limitations of the static graph in detecting unknown attacks.
We also observe that TGN performs better than E-GraphSAGE,
although both of them are graph-based methods. We attribute the
improvement to the dynamic module for TGN. Nevertheless, our
DIDS outperforms all these methods by a large margin, with
an average score of 33.65% on the four attacks. The results
also suggest that our method is more consistent in detecting
various unknown attacks, showing the effectiveness of the two
disentanglements. More details about unknown detection are
available in Appendix 17.1.
4) Comparisons Under Few-Shot Settings. Task Setting: We
first conduct the DIDS pretraining over the known benign and

attack traffic. Then we conduct a N -way-K-shot learning for the
few-shot attack traffic. Specifically, N is the category number of
few-shot traffic, and K is the training number of each category,
referred to support set. In our few-shot experiments, we set K as
5. We also construct a query set for our few-shot task, with 15
sample numbers for each category. The query set can be sampled
from the category samples, or augmented from the support
set. We split a 5-fold cross-validation set from the training
set, with 20% of support and query set. Taking CIC-TON-IoT
as an example, we conduct a five-way-five-shot learning and
five-classification test with 100 training samples. We repeat the
above training, validate, test ten times, and report the average
performance. Each time’s training and validation samples are
randomly selected from our existing traffic data, thus simulating
the few-shot learning setting in real-world scenarios.

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

10539

TABLE II
COMPARISONS OF FEW-SHOT LEARNING CLASSIFICATION ON FIVE DATASETS

TABLE III
UNKNOWN CLASSIFICATION ON THE CIC-TON-IOT DATASET WITH METRIC
F1-SCORE (%)

Baselines: We select 14 few-shot learning models to incorporate into DIDS as baselines, including 3 meta-learning
based models (i.e., MBase [22], MTL [61], TEG [99]), where
TEG is designed for graph-structure-based few-shot learning,
4 augmentation-based models (i.e., CLSA [70], ESPT [71],
ICI [69], KSCL [72], where CLAS and ESPT are based on
contrastive augmentation, ICI and KSCL are based on instance
augmentation), 4 metric learning-based models (i.e., BSNet
[27], CMFSL [31], TAD [32], PCWPK [100]), 3 selective and
strong baselines in current few-shot intrusion detection area (i.e.,
FeCoGraph [101], FC-Net [64], and BSF-NID [102].
Performance metrics: We follow the previous work [103]
using F1 scores and NMI [104] metrics for multi-classification
comparison.
As shown in Table II, our MFL consistently achieves the
best performances among 14 baselines under the five benchmarks. Specifically, our MFL achieves reproducible average
results of 93.25% and 90.17% in F1 score and NMI value
over five public datasets. The results gain 71.91% - 125.19%
and 71.95% - 144.07% improvements in average F1-score and
NMI value of 14 baselines over five public datasets, respectively. Furthermore, compared to the previous state-of-the-art
approaches, the proposed DIDS-MFL still achieves a 12.42%51.32% and 15.16%-58.62% improvement in F1 score and NMI,
respectively. Specifically, the selective baselines in few-shot
intrusion detection achieve better performance compared to the
previous approaches, such as FC-Net, achieving the second-best
F1 score of 78.55% in CIC-ToN-IoT, and BSF-NID, achieving
the second-best NMI value of 69.44% in CIC-BOT-IoT. However, these strong baselines are still significantly lower than the
proposed DIDS-MFL, lying in two aspects: 1) The benchmarks

TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY OF DIDS

cover more comprehensive real-world traffic data, including
malicious traffic data with complex patterns. It poses a critical
challenge to the existing baselines in detecting some complex
attacks, especially under few-shot intrusion detection settings. 2)
The existing few-shot intrusion detection approaches can hardly
separate the few-shot representations in the latent space and
highlight the few-shot attack-specific information, thus misleading the few-shot threat detection. It manifested that the proposed
MFL performs well in both F1 score and NMI value, while
existing approaches, e.g., FC-Net, perform worse in NMI value,
a stricter metric to evaluate multi-classification performance.
We attribute the superior and impressive reproducible results
of MFL to our multi-scale latent information learning and disentanglement designs among traffic representation dimensions.
The RQ5 and RQ6 in the discussion section further verified our
attributions.
C. Ablation Study
1) DIDS: In this section, we conduct an ablation study on the
CIC-ToN-IoT dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of each component. We remove our statistical disentanglement and denote it
as “w/o SD”. We use “w/o RD” and “w/o MLGRAND” to refer
to the model that removes representational disentanglement and
the multi-layer graph diffusion module, respectively. Table IV
reports the comparison results in binary classification. It shows
that removing the multi-layer graph diffusion module leads to the
most significant performance degradation, e.g., an 18.33 points
decrease in AUC, indicating that it is the key component for

10540

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY OF MFL

Fig. 8. The comparison of node representation of the Injection attack after
graph aggregation of our DIDS and E-GraphSAGE. The grey line presents
benign data.

Fig. 7.

Statistical disentanglement of traffic features.

the accuracy of the proposed DIDS. Our second disentangled
memory is also non-trivial to the overall detection accuracy, as
removing this component can decrease the performance by 12.47
points in AUC. We observe that the SD module also benefits the
model performance. The above ablation study further confirms
the effectiveness of the three key components.
2) MFL: Furthermore, we conduct an ablation study on the
CIC-TON-IOT dataset to evaluate the effectiveness of our designed multi-scale few-shot learning (MFL) module. We denote
our model without multi-scale latent optimization space as “w/o
LOS” and “w/o DR” as our model without the disentanglement
regularization term. For the model without both of the above
components, we denote it as “SE”, which degenerated into a
naive self-expressiveness model. Table V shows that removing
both LOS and DR leads to dramatic performance degradation,
i.e., 9.92% and 9.75% drop in F1-score and NMI, respectively,
indicating the effectiveness of our designed MFL. Furthermore,
we observed that each component of MFL, e,g. LOS or DR is
necessary for performance improvement, cause removing one of
them will lead to performance degradation, i.e., 22.21%-23.16%
and 8.63%-9.24% drop in F1-score and NMI, respectively.
Without any one of these two components, the performance
will be poorer than the base model SE. Results showcase the
complementary relationships of the proposed two modules. The
LOS provides a latent optimization space across multi-scale
representations, which is the foundation of the DR term. Then
the DR term generates effective disentangled representations
across multiple scales based on LOS.
D. Discussion
1) DIDS
RQ1: How does the statistical disentanglement help the detection of various attacks? To answer this question, we visualize the
distributions of features before and after the statistical disentanglement. Fig. 7 shows the visualizations of the two distributions
respectively. We can observe that there is less overlap between
distributions of features after the disentanglement compared

Fig. 9.

Spatial-temporal coupling in intrusion detection.

with the original data, which demonstrates this module could
decrease the mutual reference between features and enable them
to be distinguishable. We also observe that the distributions
gradually shift to the right side, representing the order-preserved
constraints within our disentangling method.
RQ2: How does the representational disentanglement benefit
“highlighting the attack-specific features”? To answer this question, we track several Injection attack data in the CIC-ToN-IoT
dataset and obtain the representation of these data in DIDS
and E-GraphSAGE. Meanwhile, we calculate the above two
methods’ average values of embeddings for the benign traffic.
As shown in Fig. 8, the representation values of E-GraphSAGE
are much closer to the normal. It illustrates that as nodes aggregate, the discrepancies in features become blurred, leading
to inaccurate classification. While benefiting from the representational disentanglement, each dimension of features in DIDS
can effectively preserve its own properties, deviating from the
averages. Especially for the attack-specific features Fwd Pkt Len
Max and Fwd Pkt Std, etc., these attack-specific features are significantly highlighted in Fig. 1(a), thus improving the accuracy
of detection. The result proves the effectiveness of the proposed
DIDS in maintaining a disentangled representation during the
aggregation process, ensuring the presence of discrepancies,
thus highlighting the attack-specific features and leading to more
accurate classification for attacks.
RQ3: How does the multi-layer diffusion module perform
effectively for intrusion detection? We have illustrated the principle of multi-layer diffusion in Section IV-C. In this part, we take
the MITM attack as an example to illustrate the effectiveness of
spatial-temporal in intrusion detection.

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

10541

TABLE VI
TIMESTAMP AND IP

Fig. 9(a) shows a deep learning-based NIDS. When a MITM
attack occurs, it is difficult to detect the intrusion since the spatial
and temporal information of those packets is not considered.
There are also some methods that only consider a single aspect
of spatial and temporal information, such as E-GraphSAGE
and MStream. In this case, for example, E-GraphSAGE mainly
focuses on the spatial relationship of the set nodes and extracts features from them. However, we observe that different
streams have their own timestamps from Table VI, so the lack
of temporal information makes it impossible to analyze the
dynamic structural changes of the edge. Similarly, taking the
temporal information as the only effect factor will also get
incomplete characteristics that do not contain spatial information (IP address). Moreover, some methods that take both the
spatial and temporal information into account, such as Euler,
take the snapshot method to capture the feature of the flow
which does not achieve the synchronous update for spatial and
temporal information. As shown in Fig. 9(b), intuitively, we
can quickly detect that UE6 is an intrusion device of layer 1
when the flow changes from SW 2 − SW 3 to SW 2 − U E6 and
U E6 − SW 3 considering SW 2, SW 3 are layer 2 devices. Also,
we have noticed the changes in dynamic graph structure with a
multi-Layer graph diffusion module to realize spatio-temporal
coupling and synchronous updating. Overall, DIDS performs
best among these baselines in detecting various attacks.
RQ4: How does the disentanglement facilitate the explainability of DIDS? For this question, we rely on Fig. 8(a) as an
example to recover the possible traffic features of a password
attack. Since the original features are retained after disentanglement, we can find some feature values that deviate significantly
from the normal values in node embeddings. In the password
attack, we observe that the deviated features after disentanglement are “Fwd Pkt Std” and “Fwd Pkt Len Max”. It aligns with
our common sense for the main causes of password attacks and
further benefits the explainability of DIDS.
2) MFL
RQ5: How does multi-scale transform-based MFL benefit
the distinction of few-shot traffic threats? To answer this question, we visualize the learned representations of DIDS and the
few-shot learning module MFL on the CIC-TON-IoT dataset
via t-SNE technology. As shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b), the
MFL’s representations are highly separated and distinguishable
for different few-shot attacks, i.e., the red square box, compared
to the representation generated by DIDS, i.e., the red round box.
It verifies the effectiveness of our proposed multi-scale few-shot
learning framework, i.e., multiple coefficient matrices fusion and
multi-scale transformation. They discover the attack-specific

Fig. 10. The t-SNE visualization of representations on the CIC-TON-IoT
dataset generated by DIDS and MFL.

Fig. 11. The correlation map and the t-SNE visualization of representations
generated by DIDS and DIDS-MFL with MFL.
TABLE VII
THE MULTI-CLASSIFICATION F1-SCORE (%) COMPARISON BETWEEN
DIFFERENT DATASETS ON DIDS WITH MFL MODULE

invariant features among few-shot traffic in latent space, thus
improving the distinction of attack representations.
RQ6: Can MFL disentangle the representations of few-shot
samples? To answer this question, we visualize the learned
representations of DIDS and MFL on the CIC-TON-IoT dataset
via correlation heatmaps. As shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b), the
visualization results significantly reveal that MFL can generate
highly disentangled representations via our designed regularization term. Specifically, MFL generates a block diagonal heatmap
with high correlations and non-diagonal areas with very low
correlations. It verifies that MFL disentangles the few-shot traffic
representations and highlights the attack-specific ones, making
them more distinguishable.
RQ8: Can MFL improve the performance of DIDS? So far,
we have verified the effectiveness of MFL in few-shot traffic
intrusion detection, including serving as a plug-and-play module
for other methods. To further study the applicability of MFL in
supervised task, we conduct DIDS training with MFL and report
the multi-classification results, as shown in Table VII. DIDS
with MFL achieves a 2.31% to 15.82% F1-score improvements
among three datasets. The results reveal the effectiveness of
MFL when serving as a multi-classification module for normalsize traffic training. Our designed multi-scale transform-based
framework also sheds light on the future intrusion detection
model design. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of the

10542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

TABLE VIII
THE F1-SCORE (%) AND TIME COST (S) COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE LLM
AND DIDS-MFL ON 100 TRAFFIC SAMPLES FROM THE CIC-TON-IOT
DATASET

proposed MFL module under multiple baselines in few-shot
intrusion detection tasks and their visualization analyses in
Appendix 20 and 21, respectively.
RQ9: Network intrusion detection and Large language
model (LLM): Recently, there has been a significant surge in
the development and application of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [105] cross various domains, including Natural Language Processing (NLP) [106], Computer Vision (CV) [107],
and multimodal tasks. However, the existing LLMs, e.g. GPT3.5, GPT-4 struggle to detect traffic threats accurately and efficiently. As shown in Table VIII, the F1-score of the existing LLM
is significantly lower than our SOTA method DIDS. It may lie in
the hallucinations [108] of existing neural language-based LLM,
which struggle to comprehend the intrinsic attack features in
traffic data. Second, the LLM necessitates more time to process
the input traffic data and may fail as the size of the input traffic increases. It may be attributed to the numerical values of the traffic
data involved. To sum up, the future directions to empower NIDS
via LLM can be: 1. Aligning encrypted traffic data with the input
requirements of LLMs, thus speeding the intrusion detection via
LLM; 2. Determining the necessary volume of traffic data and
corresponding traffic mining technology to unlock the powerful
inference capabilities of LLM.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper quantitatively discovers the inconsistent performances of existing NIDS and reveals that the underlying cause
is entangled feature distributions. Furthermore, we delve into
the deeper reasons for the poor few-shot intrusion detection
performance of existing NIDS. These interesting observations
motivate us to propose DIDS-MFL. The former is a novel
method that aims to benefit known and unknown attacks with
a double disentanglement scheme and graph diffusion mechanism, and the latter is a transform-based multi-scale few-shot
learner to highlight few-shot traffic threats. The proposed DIDS
first employs statistical disentanglement on the traffic features
to automatically differentiate tens and hundreds of complex
features and then employs representational disentanglement
on the embeddings to highlight attack-specific features. DIDS
also fuses the network topology via multi-layer graph diffusion
methods for dynamic intrusion detection. Finally, the proposed
MFL uses an alternating optimization framework to separate and
disentangle the few-shot traffic representations. Extensive experiments on five benchmarks show the effectiveness and the practical employment potential of our DIDS-MFL, including binary
classifications, multi-classifications, unknown attack detection,
and few-shot intrusion detection. Future work could focus on
the deployment of DIDS-MFL on future wireless networks.

REFERENCES
[1] P. G. Kelley et al., “Guess again (and again and again): Measuring
password strength by simulating password-cracking algorithms,” in Proc.
2012 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2012, pp. 523–537.
[2] Z. Cekerevac, Z. Dvorak, L. Prigoda, and P. Cekerevac, “Internet of
Things and the man-in-the-middle attacks–security and economic risks,”
MEST J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 15–25, 2017.
[3] K. M. Prasad, “DoS and DDoS attacks: Defense, detection and traceback
mechanisms-a survey,” Glob. J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 14, no. E7,
pp. 15–32, 2014.
[4] B. Bhushan and G. Sahoo, “Recent advances in attacks, technical challenges, vulnerabilities and their countermeasures in wireless sensor networks,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 98, pp. 2037–2077, 2018.
[5] X. Li et al., “Detection and identification of network anomalies using
sketch subspaces,” in Proc. 6th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas.,
2006, pp. 147–152.
[6] C. Wueest, Targeted Attacks Against the Energy Sector, Mountain View,
CA, USA: Symantec Security Response, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[7] S. Kumar, A. Viinikainen, and T. Hamalainen, “Machine learning classification model for network based intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Internet Technol. Secur. Trans., 2016,
pp. 242–249.
[8] H. Zhao, N. Zheng, J. Li, J. Yao, and Q. Hou, “Unknown malware
detection based on the full virtualization and SVM,” in Proc. 2009 Int.
Conf. Manage. e-Commerce e-Government, 2009, pp. 473–476.
[9] P. Ioulianou, V. Vasilakis, I. Moscholios, and M. Logothetis, “A signaturebased intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things,” in Proc. Inf.
Commun. Technol. Form, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[10] F. Erlacher and F. Dressler, “FIXIDS: A high-speed signature-based flow
intrusion detection system,” in Proc. NOMS 2018-2018 IEEE/IFIP Netw.
Operations Manage. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–8.
[11] M. Masdari and H. Khezri, “A survey and taxonomy of the fuzzy
signature-based intrusion detection systems,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol.
92, 2020, Art. no. 106301.
[12] N. T. Van et al., “An anomaly-based network intrusion detection system
using deep learning,” in Proc. 2017 Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. Eng., 2017, pp.
210–214.
[13] S. Aljawarneh, M. Aldwairi, and M. B. Yassein, “Anomaly-based intrusion detection system through feature selection analysis and building
hybrid efficient model,” J. Comput. Sci., vol. 25, pp. 152–160, 2018.
[14] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban
IDS: An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for iot
edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897,
Aug. 2020.
[15] Z. Ahmad, A. S. Khan, C. W. Shiang, J. Abdullah, and F. Ahmad,
“Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
learning and deep learning approaches,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. e4150.
[16] S. Bhatia, A. Jain, P. Li, R. Kumar, and B. Hooi, “MStream: Fast anomaly
detection in multi-aspect streams,” in Proc. Web Conf. 2021, Apr. 2021,
pp. 3371–3382, doi: 10.1145%2F3442381.3450023.
[17] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “EGraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
for iot,” in Proc. NOMS 2022-2022 IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage.
Symp., 2022, pp. 1–9.
[18] C. Ioannou and V. Vassiliou, “Network attack classification in IoT using
support vector machines,” J. Sensor Actuator Netw., vol. 10, no. 3, 2021,
Art. no. 58.
[19] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
security systems at the edge: Network ton_iot datasets,” Sustain. Cities
Soc., vol. 72, 2021, Art. no. 102994.
[20] C. Qiu et al., “3D-IDS: Doubly disentangled dynamic intrusion detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2023, pp. 1965–1977.
[21] I. Cohen et al., “Pearson correlation coefficient,” Noise Reduction Speech
Process., 2009, pp. 1–4.
[22] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, H. Xu, T. Darrell, and X. Wang, “Meta-baseline: Exploring simple meta-learning for few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 9062–9071.
[23] X. Li et al., “PromptAD: Learning prompts with only normal samples
for few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 16838–16848.
[24] N. Belton, M. T. Hagos, A. Lawlor, and K. M. Curran, “FewSOME:
One-class few shot anomaly detection with siamese networks,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, Jun. 2023,
pp. 2978–2987.

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

[25] J. Liao, X. Xu, M. C. Nguyen, A. Goodge, and C. S. Foo, “COFT-AD:
Contrastive fine-tuning for few-shot anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 2090–2103, 2024.
[26] Y. Ma, Z. Wang, Y. Cao, and A. Sun, “Few-shot event detection: An
empirical study and a unified view,” in Proc. 61st Annu. Meet. Assoc.
Comput. Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 2023, vol. 1, pp. 11211–11236.
[27] X. Li, J. Wu, Z. Sun, Z. Ma, J. Cao, and J.-H. Xue, “BSNet:
Bi-similarity network for few-shot fine-grained image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 1318–1331, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TIP.2020.3043128.
[28] G. Liu and J. Guo, “Bidirectional LSTM with attention mechanism and
convolutional layer for text classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 337, pp.
325–338, 2019.
[29] C. Brodbeck and J. Z. Simon, “Continuous speech processing,” Curr.
Opin. Physiol., vol. 18, pp. 25–31, 2020.
[30] V. Sharma and R. N. Mir, “A comprehensive and systematic look up into
deep learning based object detection techniques: A review,” Comput. Sci.
Rev., vol. 38, 2020, Art. no. 100301.
[31] B. Xi, J. Li, Y. Li, R. Song, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “Few-shot learning
with class-covariance metric for hyperspectral image classification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 5079–5092, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID251068999
[32] M. Hu, H. Chang, Z. Guo, B. Ma, S. Shan, and X. CHEN, “Understanding few-shot learning: Measuring task relatedness and adaptation
difficulty via attributes,” in Proc. 37 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
pp. 19397–19409. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
Pvgxecj5aS
[33] R. Samrin and D. Vasumathi, “Review on anomaly based network
intrusion detection system,” in Proc. 2017 Int. Conf. Elect., Electron.,
Commun., Comput., Optim. Techn., 2017, pp. 141–147.
[34] L. Ma, Y. Chai, L. Cui, D. Ma, Y. Fu, and A. Xiao, “A deep learningbased ddos detection framework for Internet of Things,” in Proc. ICC
2020-2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[35] N. Hu, Z. Tian, H. Lu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “A multiple-kernel
clustering based intrusion detection scheme for 5G and IoT networks,”
Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 3129–3144, 2021.
[36] Y. Li et al., “GraphDDoS: Effective DDoS attack detection using graph
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported
Cooperative Work Des., 2022, pp. 1275–1280.
[37] R. Doriguzzi-Corin, S. Millar, S. Scott-Hayward, J. M. Rincon, and D.
Siracusa, “Lucid: A practical, lightweight deep learning solution for ddos
attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp.
876–889, Jun. 2020.
[38] M. Kalander, M. Zhou, C. Zhang, H. Yi, and L. Pan, “Spatio-temporal
hybrid graph convolutional network for traffic forecasting in telecommunication networks,” 2020, arXiv:2009.09849.
[39] Y. Cong, B. Yang, J. Ma, and X. Jiang, “Dynamic graph representation
learning via graph transformer networks,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations, 2022, pp. 1–12.
[40] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial-temporal synchronous
graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial-temporal
network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol.
34, pp. 914–921.
[41] I. J. King and H. H. Huang, “EULER: Detecting network lateral movement
via scalable temporal link prediction,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.
Symp., 2022, pp. 1–16.
[42] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int.
Conf. Knowl. Dis. Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.
[43] M. W. Gondal et al., “On the transfer of inductive bias from simulation
to the real world: A new disentanglement dataset,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, vol. 32, pp. 15661–15672.
[44] F. Locatello, B. Poole, G. Rätsch, B. Schölkopf, O. Bachem, and
M. Tschannen, “Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compromises,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 6348–6359.
[45] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning,
the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery,” Queue, vol.
16, no. 3, pp. 31–57, 2018.
[46] I. Higgins et al., “Beta-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a
constrained variational framework,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017, pp. 1–15.
[47] H. Kim and A. Mnih, “Disentangling by factorising,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 2649–2658.
[48] M. Yang, F. Liu, Z. Chen, X. Shen, J. Hao, and J. Wang, “CausalVAE:
Structured causal disentanglement in variational autoencoder,” 2023,
arXiv:2004.08697.

10543

[49] R. Suter, D. Miladinovic, B. Schölkopf, and S. Bauer, “Robustly disentangled causal mechanisms: Validating deep representations for interventional robustness,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 6056–6065.
[50] K. Ridgeway and M. C. Mozer, “Learning deep disentangled embeddings
with the F-statistic loss,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
vol. 31, pp. 185–194.
[51] F. Träuble et al., “On disentangled representations learned from correlated
data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 10401–10412.
[52] S. Zhou, Z. Guo, C. Aggarwal, X. Zhang, and S. Wang, “Link prediction
on heterophilic graphs via disentangled representation learning,” 2022,
arXiv:2208.01820.
[53] A. Pareja et al., “EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks
for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, pp.
5363–5370.
[54] F. Gu, H. Chang, W. Zhu, S. Sojoudi, and L. E. Ghaoui, “Implicit graph
neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33,
pp. 11984–11995.
[55] Q. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Yang, and Z. Lin, “Optimization-induced
graph implicit nonlinear diffusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2022, pp. 3648–3661.
[56] B. Chamberlain, J. Rowbottom, M. I. Gorinova, M. Bronstein, S. Webb,
and E. Rossi, “GRAND: Graph neural diffusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 1407–1418.
[57] J. Li, Y. Liu, and L. Zou, “DynGCN: A dynamic graph convolutional network based on spatial-temporal modeling,” in Proc.
Web Inf. Syst. Eng.–WISE 2020: 21st Int. Conf., Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, Berlin, Heidelberg:Springer-Verlag, 2020, pp. 83–95, doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-62005-9_7.
[58] Z. Yue, H. Zhang, Q. Sun, and X.-S. Hua, “Interventional few-shot
learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33,
pp. 2734–2746.
[59] D. Wang, Y. Deng, Z. Yin, H.-Y. Shum, and B. Wang, “Progressive disentangled representation learning for fine-grained controllable talking head
synthesis,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2023, pp. 17979–17989.
[60] L. Zhao et al., “T-GCN: A temporal graph convolutional network for
traffic prediction,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 9, pp.
3848–3858, Sep. 2020.
[61] Q. Sun, Y. Liu, T.-S. Chua, and B. Schiele, “Meta-transfer learning
for few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2019, pp. 403–412.
[62] K. Singh and D. Malhotra, “Meta-learning based efficient framework for
diagnosing rare disorders: A comprehensive survey,” AIP Conf. Proc.,
vol. 3072, no. 1, Mar. 2024, Art. no. 040003, doi: 10.1063/5.0199881.
[63] A. Li, T. Luo, T. Xiang, W. Huang, and L. Wang, “Few-shot learning
with global class representations,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 9714–9723.
[64] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur., vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
[65] Y. Ouyang, B. Li, Q. Kong, H. Song, and T. Li, “FS-IDS: A novel few-shot
learning based intrusion detection system for SCADA networks,” in Proc.
ICC 2021 - IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[66] Z. Shi, M. Xing, J. Zhang, and B. H. Wu, “Few-shot network intrusion
detection based on model-agnostic meta-learning with l2f method,” in
Proc. 2023 IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., 2023, pp. 1–6.
[67] Y. Yan, Y. Yang, F. Shen, M. Gao, and Y. Gu, “Meta learning-based
few-shot intrusion detection for 5G-enabled industrial internet,” Complex
Intell. Syst., vol. 10, 2024, Art. no. 268699862. [Online]. Available: https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID
[68] W. Cho and E. Kim, “Improving augmentation efficiency for few-shot
learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 17697–17706, 2022.
[69] Y. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Yao, and Y. Fu, “How to trust unlabeled data?
instance credibility inference for few-shot learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 6240–6253, Oct. 2022.
[70] X. Wang and G.-J. Qi, “Contrastive learning with stronger augmentations,” Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5549–5560, May 2023.
[71] Y. Rong, X. Lu, Z. Sun, Y. Chen, and S. Xiong, “ESPT: A self-supervised
episodic spatial pretext task for improving few-shot learning,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 9596–9605.
[72] H. Xu, H. Xiong, and G.-J. Qi, “K-shot contrastive learning of visual
features with multiple instance augmentations,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 8694–8700, Nov. 2022.
[73] M. N. Rizve, S. Khan, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah, “Exploring complementary strengths of invariant and equivariant representations for few-shot
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2021, pp. 10836–10846.

10544

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

[74] Y. Zhou, J. Hao, S. Huo, B. Wang, L. Ge, and S.-Y. Kung, “Automatic
metric search for few-shot learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 10098–10109, Jul. 2024.
[75] X. Chen, G. Zhu, and J. Wei, “MMML: Multimanifold metric learning
for few-shot remote-sensing image scene classification,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5618714.
[76] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for fewshot learning,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., NY,
USA:Curran Associates Inc., 2017, pp. 4080–4090.
[77] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. S. Torr, and T. M.
Hospedales, “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2018, pp. 1199–1208. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID4412459
[78] O. Vinyals, C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra,
“Matching networks for one shot learning,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA:Curran Associates Inc., 2016,
pp. 3637–3645.
[79] J. Oh, S. Kim, N. Ho, J.-H. Kim, H. Song, and S.-Y. Yun, “Understanding
cross-domain few-shot learning based on domain similarity and few-shot
difficulty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., A. H. Oh, A. Agarwal,
D. Belgrave, and K. Cho, Eds., 2022, pp. 2622–2636. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rH-X09cB50f
[80] L. D. Moura and N. Bjørner, “Z3: An efficient SMT solver,” in Proc.
Tools Algorithms Construction Anal. Syst.: 14th Int. Conf., TACAS 2008,
Held Part Joint Eur. Conf. Theory Pract. Softw., 2008, pp. 337–340.
[81] P. Perona and J. Malik, “Scale-space and edge detection using anisotropic
diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 12, no. 7, pp.
629–639, Jul. 1990.
[82] D. Xu, C. Ruan, E. Korpeoglu, S. Kumar, and K. Achan, “Inductive
representation learning on temporal graphs,” 2020, arXiv:2002.07962.
[83] F. R. Chung, Spectral Graph Theory, vol. 92. Providence, RI, USA:
American Mathematical Soc., 1997.
[84] M. Roopak, G. Y. Tian, and J. Chambers, “Deep learning models for cyber
security in iot networks,” in Proc. IEEE 9th annu. Comput. Commun.
Workshop Conf., 2019, pp. 452–457.
[85] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., 2017, vol. 30, pp. 5998–6008.
[86] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Representation learning on
graphs: Methods and applications,” arXiv:1709.05584, 2017.
[87] A. Mitra, P. Vijayan, R. Sanasam, D. Goswami, S. Parthasarathy, and B.
Ravindran, “Semi-supervised deep learning for multiplex networks,” in
Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp.
1234–1244.
[88] C. Park, D. Kim, J. Han, and H. Yu, “Unsupervised attributed multiplex
network embedding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, pp.
5371–5378.
[89] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, and M. Bronstein, “Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs,”
2020, arXiv:2006.10637.
[90] M. Yoon, B. Hooi, K. Shin, and C. Faloutsos, “Fast and accurate anomaly
detection in dynamic graphs with a two-pronged approach,” in Proc.
25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019,
pp. 647–657.
[91] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Netflow datasets
for machine learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” in
Proc. Big Data Technol. Appl.: 10th EAI Int. Conf., BDTA 2020, 13th
EAI Int. Conf. Wireless Internet, WiCON 2020, Virtual Event, 2021, pp.
117–135.
[92] W. Lalouani and M. Younis, “Robust distributed intrusion detection
system for edge of things,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf.,
2021, pp. 1–6.
[93] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Evaluating standard feature sets towards increased generalisability and explainability of MLbased network intrusion detection,” Big Data Res., vol. 30, 2022,
Art. no. 100359.
[94] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E:
A self-supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph
neural networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, 2022, Art. no. 110030.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0950705122011236
[95] X. Guo, B. Zhou, and S. Skiena, “Subset node anomaly tracking over large
dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2022, pp. 475–485, doi: 10.1145/3534678.3539389.

[96] H. Wang, Z. Lei, X. Zhang, B. Zhou, and J. Peng, “Machine learning
basics,” Deep Learn., vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[97] R. E. Schapire, “Explaining adaboost,” in Empirical Inference: Festschrift
in Honor of Vladimir N. Vapnik. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2013, pp.
37–52.
[98] R. S. Fisher et al., “Operational classification of seizure types by the international league against epilepsy: Position paper of the ilae commission
for classification and terminology,” Epilepsia, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 522–530,
2017.
[99] S. Kim, J. Lee, N. Lee, W. Kim, S. Choi, and C. Park, “Task-equivariant
graph few-shot learning,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1120–1131.
[100] B. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Ye, and S. Feng, “Prototype completion for few-shot
learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 10, pp.
12250–12268, Oct. 2023.
[101] Q. Mao et al., “FeCoGraph: Label-aware federated graph contrastive
learning for few-shot network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 2266–2280, 2025.
[102] X. Dong, Y. Lai, X. Zhang, and X. Xu, “Counteracting new attacks in cps:
A few-shot class-incremental adaptation strategy for intrusion detection
system,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2473–2488,
Jun. 2025.
[103] S. Bandyopadhyay and V. Peter, “Unsupervised constrained community
detection via self-expressive graph neural network,” in Proc. Uncertainty
Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1078–1088.
[104] M. Grandini, E. Bagli, and G. Visani, “Metrics for multi-class classification: An overview,” 2020, arXiv:2008.05756.
[105] A. Bahrini et al., “ChatGPT: Applications, opportunities, and threats,” in
Proc. 2023 Syst. Inf. Eng. Des. Symp., 2023, pp. 274–279.
[106] I. Lauriola, A. Lavelli, and F. Aiolli, “An introduction to deep learning
in natural language processing: Models, techniques, and tools,” Neurocomputing, vol. 470, pp. 443–456, 2022.
[107] F. Liu, D. Chen, F. Wang, Z. Li, and F. Xu, “Deep learning based single
sample face recognition: A survey,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, no. 3, pp.
2723–2748, Aug. 2022. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10462-022-10240-2
[108] L. Huang et al., “A survey on hallucination in large language models:
Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions,” ACM Trans. Inf.
Syst., vol. 43, pp. 1–55, 2023.

Chenyang Qiu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the BSc degree in science from Beijing
Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 2020. He is
currently working toward the PhD degree with the
National Engineering Research Center for Mobile
Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing. He has authored
or coauthored papers in top-tier conferences and
journals, including KDD, AAAI, IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, and IEEE Transactions on
Cybernetics. His research interests include wireless
network intrusion detection, semantic communication, graph neural networks,
and ai robustness.

Guoshun Nan (Member, IEEE) is currently a professor with the Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications. He is a member of the National
Engineering Research Center for Mobile Network
Technologies. He has authored or coauthored papers in top-tier conferences and journals including
ACL, CVPR, EMNLP, SIGIR, SIGCOMM, IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE
Network, Computer Networks, Journal of Network,
and Computer Applications. His research interests include natural language processing, computer vision,
machine learning, and wireless communications, such as information extraction,
model robustness, multimodal retrieval, and next-generation wireless networks.
He was a reviewer for ACL, EMNLP, AAAI, Neurocomputing, and IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing.

QIU et al.: DISENTANGLED DYNAMIC INTRUSION DETECTION

Hongrui Xia is currently working toward the undergraduation degree with the National Engineering
Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
He specializes in network security and intrusion
detection, aiming to advance his expertise in safeguarding digital systems and detecting cyber threats.
Dedicated to contributing to the field through research
and innovation.

Zheng Weng is currently working toward the undergraduation degree with the National Engineering
Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
He focuses on graph neural networks and machine
learning, exploring innovative methods to enhance
data security and network integrity through advanced
computational models.

Xueting Wang is currently working toward the undergraduation degree with the National Engineering
Research Center for Mobile Network Technologies,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
Her current research interests include artificial intelligence security, the analysis and detection of network
traffic attacks, and the use of AI automation to detect
and analyze viruses such as Trojans.

10545

Meng Shen (Member, IEEE) received the BEng degree in computer science from Shandong University,
Jinan, China in 2009, and the PhD degree in computer
science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
in 2014. He is currently with the Beijing Institute
of Technology, Beijing, as a professor. His research
interests include privacy protection for cloud and
IoT, blockchain applications, and encrypted traffic
classification. He was the recipient of the Best Paper
Runner-Up Award at IEEE IPCCC 2014.

Xiaofeng Tao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1993, and the
master’s and PhD degrees in telecommunication
engineering from the Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in
1999 and 2002, respectively. He is currently a professor with the National Engineering Research Center
for Mobile Network Technologies, BUPT, a fellow
of the Institution of Engineering and Technology, and
the chair of the IEEE ComSoc Beijing Chapter. He
has authored or coauthored more than 200 articles and three books in wireless
communication areas. His research focuses on B5G/6G.

Jun Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BEng
degree from Central South University in 2011, the
MSc degree from Fudan University in 2014, and the
PhD degree from Nanyang Technological University
in 2019. He was with the Singapore University of
Technology and Design from 2019 to 2024 and Tencent from 2014 to 2015. He is currently a professor
and the chair of Digital Health with the School of
Computing and Communications, Lancaster University. His research interests include computer vision,
machine learning, and digital health. He is in the list
of Stanford/Elsevier’s Global Top 2% Scientists. He was the recipient of the
Best Thesis Award from EEE at NTU and Best Paper Award, from PREMIA.
He was the area chair of CVPR, ECCV, ICML, NeurIPS, ICLR and MM.