IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

13085

DRCAD: Dual-View Experts Routing and
Counterfactual Generation for Explainable
Time Series Anomaly Detection
Dawei Zhao , Member, IEEE, Haoran Li , Lijuan Xu , Zhen Wang , Fellow, IEEE, and Haipeng Peng

Abstract—Time series anomaly detection is critical in domains
such as cybersecurity monitoring, network operations, and industrial control systems. Lately, unsupervised anomaly detection
methods that utilize contrastive learning have shown promise.
However, existing approaches often struggle to model highdimensional temporal dependencies efficiently and rely on rigid
feature-fusion schemes that can inadvertently amplify noise.
These factors increase computational overhead and sensitivity
to irrelevant signals, hindering the capture of salient patterns.
Additionally, the explainability of anomalies detected by these
mechanisms is often limited, restricting their application in
traceable detection processes and an explicit decision-making
basis. In this paper, we propose dual-view experts routing and
counterfactual generation for explainable time series anomaly
detection (DRCAD), a novel framework that detects anomalies
within time series data while providing intuitive and actionable explanations for model predictions. DRCAD uses in-patch
and patch-wise perspectives as input views for the contrastive
learning model, employing a flattened attention mechanism
with lightweight spatial projections and a Patch Mixture of
Experts (MoE) layer for adaptive routing and information fusion.
It identifies anomalies by expanding the discrepancy between
normal and anomalous points in the representation space, subseReceived 15 August 2024; revised 22 March 2025 and 24 September 2025;
accepted 28 November 2025. Date of publication 3 December 2025; date
of current version 16 December 2025. This work was supported in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2023YFB3107300, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62172244, in part by Taishan Scholars Program under
Grant tsqn202211210, in part by the “20 New Universities” Project of Jinan
City under Grant 202333023 and Grant 202333045, in part by the Key
Research and Development Program of Shandong under Grant 2025CXPT082,
in part by Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant
ZR2024MF250, and in part by the Pairing Plan Project of the School
of Computer Science and Technology of Qilu University of Technology
(Shandong Academy of Sciences) under Grant 2024JDJH12. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was Dr. Andrew Clark. (Corresponding authors: Dawei Zhao; Lijuan Xu.)
Dawei Zhao, Haoran Li, and Lijuan Xu are with the Key Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry of
Education, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer
Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
Sciences), Jinan 250316, China, and also with Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Industrial Network and Information System Security, Shandong
Fundamental Research Center for Computer Science, Jinan 250014, China (email: zhaodw@sdas.org; haoranli0605@163.com; xulj@sdas.org).
Zhen Wang is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and
Electronics (iOPEN), and the School of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710072, China (e-mail:
zhenwang0@gmail.com).
Haipeng Peng is with the Information Security Center, State Key Laboratory
of Networking and Switching Technology, and the National Engineering
Laboratory for Disaster Backup and Recovery, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: penghaipeng@
bupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3639899

quently outputting anomaly scores. These anomaly scores guide
the generation of counterfactual samples, integrating feature
change tendencies with normalized feature impacts to derive
a feature importance ranking as the explanation. We evaluate
DRCAD on six widely used datasets, observe state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance. Moreover, in the explainability evaluation
on SWaT dataset, DRCAD achieves superior realism and sparsity
in counterfactual generation compared to existing methods, with
top-ranked features closely matching officially documented attack
characteristics.
Index Terms—Time series, contrastive learning, anomaly detection, explainable, XAI, counterfactual explanation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

NOMALY detection is a critical task in many highsecurity domains. For example, in industrial control
systems, experts aim to identify which sensor is malfunctioning or which device is under attack [1], [2]. In
network security, anomaly detection is essential for identifying and mitigating threats such as intrusions, insider
attacks, and performance issues [3], [4]. Insufficient detection of anomalous data can lead to severe consequences
[5].
Detecting anomalies in real-world scenarios is challenging. In practice, anomalies constitute only a small fraction
of the data and are generally weakly correlated with one
another [6]. Current anomaly detection techniques primarily
use statistical methods, traditional machine learning, and deep
learning, with deep learning achieving significant success
[7], [8]. Deep learning based anomaly detection methods
are typically divided into prediction-based and reconstructionbased approaches [9]. In recent years, reconstruction-based
methods have gained significant notice. These methods operate
on the idea that a model, when trained exclusively on normal
data patterns, will fail to accurately reconstruct anomalous
data, thus identifying anomalies through reconstruction errors.
However, these methods often face challenges such as large
reconstruction errors, which can adversely affect model training and lead to false positives. To overcome these limitations,
contrastive learning-based anomaly detection methods have
emerged, offering a compelling alternative approach [6], [10],
[11], [12], [13]. Contrastive learning focuses on learning
representations by contrasting different views. Nevertheless,
designing stable architectures for contrastive learning on time
series is still challenging, and the effectiveness of such representations for anomaly detection warrants further investigation.

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

13086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

In addition, the opacity of internal representations in deep
learning models is an urgent issue. For example, if a banking
system labels someone as a defaulter, the individual may
demand the basis for this judgment. Legal systems may only
trust the model if it aligns with objective facts. Unfortunately,
most time series anomaly detection models lack explainability,
leaving users unaware of how decisions are made.
Several methods have been proposed to address the explainability problem. Feature importance techniques, such as SHAP
[14] and LIME [15], provide insights into which features are
most influential in a model’s decision. However, these methods
often fail to offer a clear understanding of how changes in
the input would affect the output. In contrast, counterfactual
explanations [16], [17], [18] seek the closest but different
data point in a non-real space that would yield a different
prediction under the model. These methods are commonly
used in computer vision [19], where counterfactual images
are generated and compared with the original images for
explanation. However, applying counterfactual explanations to
time series anomaly detection is challenging due to the unique
temporal dependencies and intrinsic coupling of features in
time series data, as well as the mixture of normal and
anomalous samples, making it difficult for experts to discern
the properties of generated samples [20], [21]. To handle the
challenges above, after the model makes a prediction, we use
an anomaly score-guided conditional variational autoencoder
(CVAE) [22] to generate counterfactual samples. Unlike traditional VAEs, conditioning on the anomaly score mitigates the
challenge of distinguishing normal from anomalous samples
by guiding the CVAE to generate counterfactuals that are
coherent and plausible within the learned distribution, thereby
indicating which current conditions should change to yield the
opposite prediction. For instance, if a counterfactual sample
in an anomaly detection model shows significant changes in
debt, the user can repay the debt to alter the model’s decision.
We adopt variational autoencoder driven by its ability to learn
complex data distributions and generate realistic samples by
mapping data to a latent space and then reconstructing it.
This characteristic is particularly beneficial for time series
data, where maintaining temporal dependencies and feature
relationships is crucial.
To simultaneously address the tasks of anomaly detection and anomaly explanation, we propose Dual-view experts
Routing and Counterfactual generation for explainable time
series Anomaly Detection (DRCAD), an innovative anomaly
detection framework with counterfactual explanations. It leverages dual-perspective learning of data representations and
identifies anomalies by comparing the discrepancy between the
two representations and a set threshold, effectively avoiding
potential biases from relying on reconstruction errors. DRCAD
can (1) detect anomalies in input time series data and (2)
generate counterfactual samples and assign importance scores
to each feature to explain anomalies. The contributions of this
paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose DRCAD, a contrastive learning framework
where in-patch and patch-wise relationships serve as dual
input perspectives for the model. A Flattened Attention mechanism encodes the original data and dual

perspectives, and a Patch Mixture of Experts (MoE)
mechanism dynamically adjusts feature importance based
on input data. The model detects anomalies by increasing
the distance between normal and anomalous points in the
representation space.
• We use anomaly scores to constrain the generation of
counterfactual samples and combine counterfactual discrepancies with prediction-based contributions to derive
feature importance scores, thereby explaining anomalies.
• We evaluate our detection approach with the state-ofthe-art anomaly detection algorithms on six real-world
datasets, demonstrating better anomaly detection performance. On the SWaT dataset, we compare four
representative explanation methods and obtain comparable results. Additionally, we generate importance scores
for each feature and provide visual results, showing a
high correlation between the most important features
and the attack characteristics described in official documents, additional feature-weight experiments corroborate
the fidelity of our explanations.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Explainability in Deep Learning
In recent years, the explainability of deep learning networks
has garnered significant attention. Traditional machine learning
explanation methods, such as decision trees and naive Bayes,
have been applied to deep learning models to enhance their
explainability. Notable methods like LIME [15], which designs
a local surrogate model to fit the model’s prediction results,
and SHAP [14], which uses Shapley values to calculate each
feature’s contribution to the model’s prediction, are prominent
examples. However, these methods face challenges in explaining time series data due to the unique operational patterns
that only emerge over observed periods and long-term trends,
coupled with the higher information content compared to other
data types.
Several methods have been specifically developed to explain
time series predictions. TimeX [23] designs a time prediction
surrogate model that approximates the original model’s output
by minimizing the embedding distance in the latent space
between the original and surrogate models. FIT [24] estimates
feature importance by fixing certain variables and altering
others to observe changes in the predicted distribution over
time. WinIT [25] extends FIT by using a retrospective window
to explain changes in the predicted distribution, illustrating
the temporal dependencies between different observations of
the same feature for more persistent explanation patterns.
Other post-hoc explanation methods generate explanations for
model predictions. For instance, counterfactual explanations
[16], [17] focus on identifying how features need to change
to produce an opposite prediction with minimal perturbation.
CounTS [26] designs a self-interpretable time series prediction
model that uses causal inference to identify causal relationships between inputs and the predictions, providing feasible
counterfactual explanations for time series prediction models.
The aforementioned methods are all aimed at explaining the
results of time series prediction models. However, merely

ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

13087

Fig. 1. Overview of DRCAD. E performs basic embedding of the multivariate time series. The detector D x encodes the in-patch view and the patch-wise view
with Flattened Attention and fuses them using a Patch Mixture of Experts, producing two representations whose discrepancy defines the anomaly score S .
The detection decision is obtained by comparing S with a threshold δ. The generator Gc f is a score-conditioned CVAE that uses the input and S to generate
counterfactual sequences and to compute feature importance for explanation. The workflow is: the embedded series is first partitioned into patches of length p.
Next, The detector processes the two views and outputs the score S , which is compared with δ for detection. For explanations, the raw series is concatenated
with S to train the score-conditioned CVAE, which then generates counterfactual series under the condition. Feature importance is finally obtained by T-test
between the original and the counterfactual series.

providing explanations for the results of time series prediction
models is often not directly applicable to time series anomaly
detection. This is because the task of anomaly detection
requires the ability to accurately identify and interpret anomalous samples, rather than just explaining the overall prediction
results.
Currently, only a few works focus on explaining time series
anomalies. InterFusion [27] explains anomalies in multivariate
time series by using the original reconstruction probability of each detected entity anomaly and applying Markov
Chain Monte Carlo imputation to obtain more plausible latent
embeddings and reconstructions.However, due to the potential
deviation of the reconstruction from the original input data,
this may result in explanations that are unrelated to the input
data, thereby affecting the accuracy of the interpretation. Some
works use attention matrices to explain anomalies. VTT [28]
explains anomalies through a comparative analysis of attention
patterns derived from the original anomaly-containing data
and those obtained from reconstructed data. By analyzing
attention maps, key variables and changes in correlations
can be identified. However, it lacks fine-grained explanations
and fails to provide more specific reasons for anomalies and
detailed relationships between variables. Most methods either
analyze feature impacts solely based on prediction results or
are only suitable for specific models.
B. Time Series Anomaly Detection
Time series anomaly detection aims to identify points or
segments in sequence data that deviate from expected patterns. In the statistical domain, techniques include but are
not limited to moving averages, exponential smoothing, and
autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) models
[29]. These traditional methods detect potential anomalies by
analyzing historical patterns and trend changes in the data. In
the machine learning domain, researchers have explored using
clustering algorithms like k-means [30], density-based methods, and classification algorithms such as decision trees [31]

and support vector machines (SVM) for anomaly detection.
These methods identify anomalies by learning the similarities
and differences between data points.
Deep learning techniques have further expanded the capabilities of anomaly detection due to their powerful feature
extraction and high-dimensional data processing abilities [7].
Time series anomaly detection algorithms in deep learning mainly include prediction-based and reconstruction-based
methods. In detail, prediction-based algorithms construct a
prediction model to estimate future normal data points based
on historical data. When a specific data point is observed,
the method compares it with the model’s predicted value. If
there is a significant difference between the observed data
point and the predicted value, the point may be considered
anomalous. Reconstruction-based algorithms are more widely
used in anomaly detection. These methods rely on building
a model to encode the normal behavior of a given time
series into a low-dimensional latent space and then attempt
to reconstruct the original sequence. Since the model is
trained only on normal data, it will not effectively reconstruct
anomalous subsequences. However, labeling anomalous points
in real life is challenging, making it difficult to ensure that the
training data is free from anomalies [32]. For prediction-based
methods, if the training data contains anomalous samples,
the model may incorrectly interpret these anomalous data
points as part of normal fluctuations, reducing future prediction
accuracy. Reconstruction-based methods typically work by
training models to recognize only normal data patterns. If
the training set contains anomalous data, the model may
learn to reconstruct these anomalous patterns, failing to
distinguish between normal and anomalous data. Lately, selfsupervised methods like contrastive learning have achieved
significant success [33], [34], [35], [36]. Contrastive learning
assumes that normal data should exhibit certain similarities,
while anomalous data will significantly deviate from the
normal data distribution, thereby isolating anomalous samples
[6], [10], [13].

13088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE I
N OTATION

III. M ETHOD
A. Overview
As illustrated in Figure 1, our goal for multivariate time
series is to design a framework that can simultaneously handle
anomaly detection and provide explanations for the anomalies.
In Table I, we list the notations used in this paper. Overall, we
develop an anomaly detection classifier based on contrastive
learning, which avoids the issue of large reconstruction losses
affecting training, a common problem in reconstruction-based
anomaly detection methods. After the model completes its
predictions, output the importance of each feature to determine
which features are more likely to cause anomalies when
altered, we achieve this by calculating an anomaly score
for each time window, which serves as a conditional input
for the counterfactual generator. This guides the generation
of counterfactual samples and adjusts the randomness of
counterfactual generation by incorporating the normalized
contribution of each feature to the prediction. Sections B and C
detail the implementation methods for the anomaly detection
model and counterfactual explanations, respectively.
B. Time Series Anomaly Detection
We propose a novel contrastive learning method for time
series anomaly detection, leveraging improved representation
network techniques without the need for negative examples.
The input multivariate time series is defined as X ∈ RT ×D ,
with each sample containing time steps T and a number
of sensors D. The task of the anomaly detector D x is to
output detection results yipred ∈ RT . We divide the time series
into several patches, splitting the original data into in-patch
and patch-wise perspectives. These perspectives model the
representations within and between patches, respectively. We
use these two perspectives as positive samples for contrastive
learning.

To better understand our proposed time series anomaly
detection method, we compare it with six popular methods.
Figure 2 shows the architecture comparison of six approaches.
Rather than relying on conventional multi-head attention and
frequency domain analysis mechanisms, DRCAD (Figure 2(f))
uses MLP to“Flatten Attention” in order to enhance feature space resolution and reduce computational complexity.
Additionally, during information integration, we introduce a
elaborately designed Patch Mixture of Experts (MoE) layer
to selectively filter and merge information from the two
perspectives.
Here, we introduce the overall structure of the anomaly
detection module, including the implementation of the flattened attention mechanism and Patch MoE, and explain how
representation differences are used for anomaly detection.
1) Anomaly Detection Model Structure: In the Embedding processing stage, we apply instance normalization and
channel independence [39] to standardize the multivariate time series input and reduce the model’s parameter
count.
Patch was first popularized as a fixed-size, typically nonoverlapping image block that is linearly projected into a token
[40]. In sequence modeling (NLP), related segmentation ideas
appear as chunking units used as tokenization granularity. For
time series, a patch is defined as a contiguous, non-overlapping
segment along the time axis. It has been shown effective for
time series representation learning [39]. To this end, after the
embedding operation, the input multivariate time series X ∈
RT ×D is partitioned into Tp non-overlapping patch blocks, an
operation we denote as Patching(·). Consequently, the original
data is transformed from dimensions T × D to Tp × p × D:
 
T

X = Patching(E(X)) ∈ R p

×p×D

,

(1)

where E(·) refers to the embedding process. Our approach
utilizes a feature projection mechanisms, represented as FP(·),
to extract and transform features from two complementary
views within our framework. The projection function is realized through a distinct linear transformation:
T

Xin−patch = FP(X) ∈ Rd× p ,
X patch−wise = FP(X) ∈ R

d×p

.

(2)
(3)

These two views are then used as inputs for the subsequent module, flattened attention, to obtain their respective
representations.
The flattened attention module is crucial in our architectural
design. This pivotal component facilitates the learning of
multi-view representations from input data, enabling a comprehensive analysis of latent patterns. Normal data points tend
to exhibit consistent underlying patterns across these varied
views. In contrast, anomalies, being rare and lacking definitive
patterns, struggle to align with the latent structures of normal
data or even with other anomalies. This results in weak correlations between anomalous points and the rest. Consequently,
the representational disparities for standard data points across
different views remain minimal, whereas anomalies display
significant variations. By leveraging crafted criteria to assess

ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

13089

Fig. 2. The distinctions between DRCAD and the other five methods. Anomaly Transformer [6] (a) employs Gaussian kernels to learn prior differences and
amplifies these correlation differences using a minimax strategy to quantify each time point. DCdetector [10] (b) employs a“Dual attention” mechanism to
differentiate anomalous patterns from regular data points within time series. ModernTCN [37] (c) employs enhanced TCN blocks optimized for time series
modeling. TFMAE [13] (d) employs dual Transformer-based autoencoders with temporal and frequency masking strategies to learn unbiased patterns and
anomalies. CATCH [38] (e) proposes frequency patchification and a Channel Fusion Module for optimized signal analysis and channel correlation. DRCAD
(f) employs a novel approach, utilizing MLP and a specially designed MoE layer to obtain representations of two input views, in contrast to the conventional
multi-head attention mechanism.

Fig. 3. Structure of the anomaly detector D x . The detector consists of an Embedding module, a Flattened Attention module, a Patch Mixture of Experts
(MoE) module, and an Upsampling operation. The detailed structures of the flattened attention module and the patch MoE module are provided, as they
contribute the most to anomaly detection. The structures used for the in-patch and patch-wise views are identical.

these representational differences, we can effectively differentiate between normal and anomalous data points.Finally,
we derive anomaly scores by assessing the discrepancies
between the two representations and employ a predetermined

threshold for identifying anomalies. Figure 3 shows the specific structure of detector, with the main components being
embedding module, flattened attention module, patch MoE
module, and the anomaly detection module. Furthermore, the

13090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

detailed structures of the flattened attention module and the
Patch MoE module are also provided in Figure 3, as they
contribute the most to anomaly detection.
2) Flattened Attention and Patch MoE Structure: The attention mechanism is effective in capturing patterns in time series
data, but its high complexity limits the training efficiency
of the model.Unlike previous works that solely rely on the
traditional attention mechanism for sequence modeling [6],
[10], we employ a MLP to flatten the attention mechanism.
Specifically, we replace the traditional dot-product attention
with linear layers and non-linear activation functions. Instead
of forming all pairwise query-key scores, we flatten tokens
and use MLP to compute mixing weights for interactions. This
avoids constructing O(L2 ) attention maps, reduces memory and
compute, and is less sensitive to noisy or irrelevant channels.
Together with the Patch Mixture of Experts that adaptively
fuses the in-patch and patch-wise views per window, it
strengthens the cross-view discrepancy used for scoring and
improves both the accuracy and latency trade-off.Specifically,
we first initialize and merge the query Q and key K from the
two perspectives:
QS , KS = WQ Xin−patch , WK Xin−patch ,
QN , KN = WQ X patch−wise , WK X patch−wise ,
CS = Concat(QS , KS ), C N = Concat(QN , KN ),

(4)
(5)

T

where QS , KS ∈ R p ×h×dmodel , QN , KN ∈ R p×h×dmodel , and h refer
to dnmodel
.
head
Next, the concatenated tensor is flattened into two dimensions and passed to a predefined MLP to compute the attention
weights. We define the flattening operation C f lat as follows,
including in-patch view flatten C f latS and patch-wise view
C f latN :
 
T

C f latS = reshape(CS ) ∈ R p

×h×(2×dmodel )

C f latN = reshape(C N ) ∈ R

(p)×h×(2×dmodel )

,

,

(6)

where h represent the head number. Our designed MLP
consists of two linear layers and a ReLU activation layer. The
computation process of the MLP is as follows:
M1 = ReLU(C f lat W1 + b1 ),
M2 = M1 W2 + b2 .

(7)
(8)

The two-dimensional tensor is then restored to a fourdimensional tensor and transposed, which is:
O = (reshape(M2 ))T .

(9)

Finally, we obtain the preliminary representation results for
the two dimensions, in-patch and patch-wise:
FlattenedS = S o f tmax(MLP(C f latS (CS ))),
FlattenedN = S o f tmax(MLP(C f latN (C N ))).

(10)
(11)

Mixture of Experts (MoE) is usually employed in the
domain of large language models to enhance the accuracy
and capabilities of artificial intelligence systems. We design
a Patch MoE layer here to adjust the self-attention weighted
results based on the importance of different features in

the input data. Specifically, we generate importance weights
related to the input data using the flattened attention module to
control the weighted results in the self-attention mechanism,
which are defined as follows:
FlatAttenS = (1 − (σ(MLP(VS )))) · AS
+ σ(MLP(VS )) · FlattenedS ,
FlatAttenN = (1 − (σ(MLP(VN )))) · AN
+ σ(MLP(VN )) · FlattenedN ,

(12)
(13)

where V represents the value and A retains the original
attention score obtained by multiplying Q and K. This yields
the final representation results for the two inputs.
Since the patch-wise view ignores the correlation between
points within a patch, and the in-patch view ignores the correlation between different patches, upsampling is required when
comparing the results of the two representation networks.
For the patch branch, the upsampling operation is performed
within the patch (i.e., from patch to point), ultimately obtaining
the patch representation. For the in-patch branch, the upsampling operation extends from one patch to the full number
of patches, ultimately obtaining the in-patch representation,
which is:
N = Upsampling(FlatAttenN ),
S = Upsampling(FlatAttenS ).

(14)

3) Contrastive Difference and Anomaly Detection: Considering the rarity of anomalies and the common latent patterns
shared by normal points, the representations of the same input
should be similar. For normal samples, the representations
learned from two different perspectives should be highly
consistent, but the representations of anomalous samples are
difficult to learn, resulting in significant differences in the
representations learned from different perspectives. Therefore,
in the representation discretization module, we utilize the
KL divergence to measure the dissimilarity among the two
branches. The loss functions for the two branches are symbolized as follows:
X
LS =
KL(S k S topgrad(N)) + KL(S topgrad(N) k S ),
(15)
X
LN =
KL(N k S topgrad(S )) + KL(S topgrad(S ) k N),
(16)
where S topgrad(·) represents the stop-gradient operation, S
and N represent the embedding results within and between
patches, respectively. The final loss function is:
L=

LN − LS
.
len(N)

(17)

Similar to most anomaly detection methods, we determine
whether a point is an anomaly by comparing the anomaly
score with a threshold. The anomaly score is the degree of
difference between the two perspectives:
X
Score(Xi ) =
KL(S k S topgrad(N))
+ KL(N k S topgrad(S )),

(18)

ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

Fig. 4. Visualization results of different detection model on 105 window size.
(a) Higher attention weights are assigned to temporally proximate time series
data points, while correlations between features further apart in the sequence
are disregarded. (b) The attention weights are overly smoothed, resulting in
the neglect of crucial areas within the time series. Consequently, neither yields
the desired level of explanatory granularity.

where KL(· k ·) is the KL divergence. The anomaly score is
compared with a prior threshold δ, and points exceeding the
threshold are considered anomalies. That is:
(
1: anomaly S core(Xi ) ≥ δ
(19)
yi =
0: normal
S core(Xi ) < δ.
C. Counterfactual Feature Importance Explanation
In this section, we introduce the method for explaining
anomalies by comparing the differences between counterfactual and original samples to obtain feature importance
scores. A higher score indicates a greater contribution of that
feature to the occurrence of the anomaly.Notably, although our
anomaly detection model incorporates an attention mechanism,
we chose not to use the attention matrix for explanations.
We observe that, under a sliding-window setting, the attention
weights mainly concentrate on outputs from the adjacent
window, yielding only local explanatory effects, as Figure 4
shows. In contrast, counterfactual explanations aim to provide
insights into what changes to the input might lead to a
desired prediction. Such altered inputs shift the prediction to
a specific target, for example, from normal (prediction value
0) to anomalous (prediction value 1), thus offering actionable
explanations for the anomaly.
Considering that existing counterfactual generators mostly
satisfy the requirement of proximity without providing
answers on which features to change, we acknowledge that
constraining features is challenging. In the real world, it is
challenging to pre-determine the importance and range of
feature changes. This makes generating feature importance
scores by simply comparing the differences between generated
samples and original samples more random. Therefore, we
enhance the model by predicting feature importance, making
the explanation results more meaningful by overlaying the
normalized feature mask on the prediction results.
We introduce the process of generating counterfactual samples in paragraph a). In paragraph b), we describe the process
of calculating feature importance after obtaining the generated
samples. In paragraph c), we present the final method used to
explain anomalies.
1) Generating Counterfactual Samples: We use a Conditional Variational Autoencoder (Conditional VAE) [41] to
generate counterfactual samples. For input multidimensional

13091

time series, the trained anomaly detection model scores the
sample points as S core ∈ RT ×D , and outputs the detection
results yipred ∈ RT . The objective is to generate a set of samples
xic f ∈ RD×T that make minimal changes to the features but
can flip the model’s prediction results, for example, changing
yipred = 0 to yci f = 1.
Unlike previous methods for generating counterfactual samples, we use the anomaly score S as a condition to supervise
the learning process of the autoencoder. We first embed the
input score, encoding it as S core0 ∈ RT ×2 . In the encoder part,
we input S core0 as a conditional parameter along with the time
series sample to obtain the mean µ and variance σ. Similarly,
in the decoder part, the condition is also input along with µ
and σ to generate the counterfactual sample. During training,
the CVAE attempts to generate samples from the latent space
distribution that satisfy the conditional constraints. To meet the
proximity requirement, we add an L1 norm as a regularization
constraint. Therefore, the final loss L is:


Eqφ (z | xi ,Score0 ) − log pθ xi | z, Score0 + λ1 kX c f − Xk1

+ KL qφ (z | xi , Score0 ) p(z | Score0 ) ,
(20)
where S core0 is the conditional input to the variational autoencoder, and X c f is the generated counterfactual sample. After
training the model, we can generate counterfactual samples
needed for the desired prediction of anomalies by elevating
the given condition, that is:
S core0 = δ + η,

(21)

where δ is prior threshold and η is the bias of elevating.
2) Feature Discrepancy: After obtaining the counterfactual
samples, we can compare the data changes between the original data and the generated counterfactual samples to obtain
the feature discrepancies. To ensure the entire process is interpretable, we use an independent sample T-test to compare each
feature of the original and generated samples, calculating their
significant differences. The T-test is a statistical method used
to compare whether the means of two independent samples
are significantly different. By calculating the T-statistic and
the corresponding P-value, the statistical relevance of feature
discrepancies between the paired samples can be ascertained.
For the independent sample T-test, we establish two competing hypotheses: Null hypothesis (H0): Both sample groups
share identical mean values; Alternative hypothesis (H1):
The mean values of the two samples differ. The decision to
accept or reject H0 hinges on the calculated T-statistic and its
corresponding P-value. When the P-value falls below the predetermined significance threshold (typically 0.05), we dismiss
H0, suggesting a noteworthy distinction between the sample
means. The magnitude of this difference is inversely related to
the P-value, smaller P-values indicate more pronounced feature
disparities.
Our goal is to obtain the importance score for each feature based on the discrepancy between the two samples.
Specifically, for each feature, we extract the values of that
feature from the original and generated samples, forming two
independent samples with a sample size of nT . First, we
calculate the pooled standard deviation, then compute the

13092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 Explaining DRCAD’s Detection Result
Input: Multivariate time series X ∈ RT ×D , detection results
S core, the CVAE model, elevating bias η.
Output: Feature importance values valc f ∈ R1×D , the
well-trained CVAE, encoding network parameters θ, decoding
network parameters φ, counterfactual examples X c f ∈ RT ×D .
1: # Incorporate anomaly S core condition into the model.
2: S core0 ← ReLU(Linear(S core)).
3: Concate X with S core0 in Encoder.
4: Concate z with S core0 in Decoder.
5: # Initialization parameters.
6: CVAE, θ, φ ← Randomly initialize the parameters.
7: # Training Process of CVAE.
8: for i = 1,2,...,e p do
9:
z ← S ample(µ, logσ).
10:
Calculate L via Eq.(20).
11:
CVAE, θ, φ ← Update parameters using Adam.
12: end for
13: Generating X c f by elevating S core0 to δ + η.
14: # Calculate the feature importance.
15: for i = 1,2,...,D do
16:
Calculate the feature discrepancy by Eq.(23).
17:
Calculate the contribution of each feature by Eq.(24).
18:
Output i-th feature importance by Eq.(25).
19: end for
T-statistic for the two samples. The formula for calculating
the T-statistic is:
r
nT E(X1 ) − E(X2 )
T (X1 , X2 ) =
,
(22)
2
S
and we define the counterfactual discrepancy for each feature
as:
valc f (i) = T (xi , xic f ).
(23)
Using the T-statistic distribution table, we can find the
corresponding P-value. The smaller the P-value, the more
significant the discrepancy in that feature between the generated datasets and the origin. This allows us to evaluate
the importance of each feature by comparing the differences
between the original and generated samples.
3) Explanation by Feature Importance: Algorithm 1 illustrates the computational process of feature importance. The
counterfactual generator captures the relationships between
time series features, but it does not impose constraints when
changing feature values. This can lead to an excessive number of undesirable explanations (e.g., the model may prefer
to change only a few features, or some features may lose
discreteness during the change process). Our solution is to
add an additional feature importance prediction. We calculate
the impact of each feature on the prediction result. Specifically, after the model training is completed, we sequentially
transform each feature into random noise, erasing its effect
on the prediction. After obtaining the true prediction value
and the actual prediction value, we normalize the impact of
each feature on the prediction. The formula about feature
contribution is defined as follows:
val pre (i) = Norm(D(XI/{i} )),

(24)

where I represents the collection of all feature sequences.
Finally, we perform a weighted summation to determine the
final feature importance value:
val(i) = val pre (i) − λ2 · valc f (i),

(25)

where λ2 aligns the numerical values. Feature importance
highlights the suspicious features causing anomalies and provides feasible actions on how altering features could lead to
anomalies.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
We adopt six widely used datasets to evaluate the anomaly
detection model and provide explanation results on the SWaT
dataset. Details of datasets used are summarized in TABLE II,
including:
• PSM [42]: This dataset is collected internally from multiple application server nodes at eBay and contains 25
dimensions.
• MSL [43]: NASA’s collection encompasses data on the
Mars rover’s sensor health and actuator operations, offering valuable insights into the vehicle’s performance.
• SMAP [43]: This dataset, also gathered by NASA,
includes soil samples and telemetry data utilized by the
Mars rover.
• SWaT [44]: This dataset is obtained from 51 sensors
of the critical infrastructure system under continuous
operations.
• SMD [45]: This dataset is a five-week-long collected
from an internet company compute cluster, which stacks
accessed traces of resource utilization of 28 machines.
• GECCO [46]: This dataset focuses on drinking water
quality in the context of the Internet of Things.
B. Baselines
We compare our model with seventeen compelling anomaly
detection models, including:
• Reconstruction-based models: LSTM-VAE [47],
OmniAnomaly [45], BeatGAN [48], InterFusion [27],
CATCH [38].
• Autoregression-based models: VAR [49], LSTM [43],
CL-MPPCA [50],GPT4TS [51], ModernTCN [37].
• Density-estimation models: LOF [52], MPPCACD [53],
DAGMM [54].
• Clustering-based methods: DeepSVDD [55], THOC
[56], ITAD [57].
• Classic methods: OCSVM [50], IForest [58].
• Change point detection and time series segmentation
methods: BOCPD [59], U-Time [60], TS-CP2 [61].
• Contrastive learning based methods: Anomaly Transformer [6], DCdetector [10], TFMAE [13].
We compare our approach with four prevalent counterfactual
generation methods on SWaT dataset, that is:
• Regularized Gradient Descent (RGD): [17] A approach
that minimize the sum of squared differences between
expected outcomes and counterfactuals, employing gradient descent for counterfactual search.

ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

13093

TABLE II
S PECIFIC I NFORMATION A BOUT THE DATASETS . AR (A NOMALY R ATIO ) I S THE P ROPORTION OF A NOMALIES . T HE F IRST
F OUR DATASETS H AVE R ELATIVELY H IGHER AR, W HEREAS SMD AND GECCO H AVE L OWER AR

• Generative Adversarial Network (GAN): [62] This
approach integrates the standard GAN with a target
classifier.
• Counterfactual Search Guided by Prototypes (CSGP):
[63] This method extends RGD by pushing counterfactuals towards more realistic data points of the desired class
using class prototypes.
• Generating Counterfactuals using Residual GANs
(CounteRGAN): [16] The CounteRGAN method leverages a residual generative adversarial network to generate
counterfactuals for a target classifier.

rate is set to 1e-4. The CVAE model training data is stored as
time series sampled from anomalous samples according to the
time window, with duplicates present. We set epoch = 5, the
training-to-validation ratio to 8:2, λ1 = 0.1, λ2 = 1e-3, learning
rate to 1e-4, η is set to 5e-4 and batch size is set to 128.
The encoder and decoder each have 3 layers. During testing,
we use normal samples. Both the anomaly detection module
and the CVAE module are implemented in PyTorch [64] and
optimized using the Adam [65] optimizer. The hardware used
is an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 24G.
E. Main Results

C. Evaluation Metrics
1) Metrics on Time Series Anomaly Detection: We employ
accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score which are the most commonly used evaluation metrics for anomaly detection tasks.
2) Metrics on Counterfactual Examples Generation: We
utilize four widely adopted metrics from related work to
evaluate the relative performance of our method for generating
counterfactual time series samples. These metrics include
realism, sparsity, prediction gain (pred-gain), and latency.
Realism reflects the extent to which the content or results
generated by counterfactuals are consistent or believable. We
employ the L2 norm to calculate reconstruction error as a
measure of realism. A lower value indicates higher realism of
the method.
Sparsity refers to the degree of difference between counterfactuals and the actual observed data. Lower sparsity implies
that counterfactuals are closer to actual data points. We use
the L1 norm to quantify this difference.
Prediction gain shows the contrast between the classifier’s
predictions on the counterfactual examples and the original
input data point. A higher value indicates a higher proportion
of normal samples successfully reversed into anomalies.
Latency represents the computational cost of generating
counterfactual samples. In many scenarios of time series
anomaly detection, generating explanatory samples is required
to be as real-time as possible.
D. Implementation Details
We document the hyperparameters used, as well as the runtime environment and hardware configuration. In the anomaly
detection module, the default epoch is set to 1, and the learning

1) Anomaly Detection Results: We compare our model
with 17 representative methods on four higher anomaly ratio
(AR) datasets using precision (P), recall (R), and F1-score
(F1) as the evaluation metrics. Table III reports the results.
The evaluation results of CATCH on the SMAP dataset are
omitted from this study due to the lack of preprocessed
data and a standardized data processing methodology. The
comparison shows that our detector achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance on multiple benchmarks. In addition, on
the two lower AR datasets GECCO and SMD, our method
maintains high precision and competitive F1, as shown in
Table IV.
Although the DRCAD model performs exceptionally across
multiple evaluation metrics, its recall rate is slightly lower
than other methods. One possible explanation is that the
designed Patch MoE is overly stringent, causing some borderline anomalous data to be filtered out and thus not recognized
as anomalies by the model. While this stringent filtering
standard enhances the overall reliability of the model, it may
also impact the recall rate to some extent.
2) Counterfactual Generation: In this subsection, we evaluate the generation capability of the CVAE and the quality
of counterfactual samples on the SWaT dataset. The CVAE
is trained using anomalous data to avoid the absence of highscoring anomalies during training, allowing the model to learn
the input condition score.
We compare our interpretation method with four popular
methods in terms of proximity, sparsity [66], prediction gain,
and time efficiency. TABLE V shows our comparison results
on SWaT dataset. DRCAD’s prediction gain is slightly lower
than RGD because the VAE model has higher randomness
when generating counterfactual samples.

13094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE III
C OMPREHENSIVE D ETECTION O UTCOMES ON F OUR R EAL -W ORLD T IME S ERIES DATASETS W HICH H AVE R ELATIVELY H IGHER AR, R ANKED IN
A SCENDING O RDER OF P ERFORMANCE . T HE M ETRICS P, R, AND F1 D ENOTE P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1-S CORE , R ESPECTIVELY. A LL VALUES
A RE P RESENTED AS P ERCENTAGES , W ITH THE T OP R ESULTS IN B OLD AND THE S ECOND -B EST U NDERLINED

TABLE IV

TABLE V

D ETECTION R ESULTS ON GECCO AND SMD DATASETS . T HESE T WO
DATASETS H AVE A L OWER AR T HAN THE OTHER F OUR DATASETS

C OUNTERFACTUAL T IME S ERIES E VALUATION R ESULTS ON THE SWAT
DATASET. T HE A RROWS D ENOTE W HETHER L ARGER ↑ OR
L OWER ↓ VALUES A RE B ETTER

3) Feature Importance and Explanation: We aim to explain
which features are more likely to cause decision reversals
by outputting feature importance. Therefore, we use T-test to
measure importance, as Figure 5 shows. The lower the p-value,
the more important the feature. Then obtain the normalized
results of each feature’s impact on the final prediction on the
SWaT dataset. According to the formula 25, we calculate the
final feature importance values, as shown in Figure 6. Note that
the proposed method is model-agnostic and data-agnostic. We

chose to provide explanations on the SWaT dataset because it
has more authoritative official documentation.
We select the top four features with the highest scores
from the obtained feature importance results to illustrate
the rationality of the explanation: P302, MV303, DPIT301,
and AIT504. Higher feature importance scores indicate that
modifying these features are more likely to cause anomalous
events. The feature with the highest importance score is P302,
indicating that if we modify the value of P302 beyond a certain
range, the model is highly likely to predict the time series
result as anomalous. According to the description provided
by the SWaT dataset [44], P302 was deliberately closed from
31/12/2015 01:45:19 to 11:15:27. This actuator pumps water

ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

13095

Fig. 7. Recall comparison under different anomaly ratios. (a) AR × 0.5:
anomaly prevalence reduced to 50% of the original; (b) AR × 0.1: reduced
to 10%. Results for 5 datasets comparing DCdetector and DRCAD. As AR
decreases, recall drops for both methods, with a clearer advantage for DRCAD
at AR × 0.1.

F. Model Analysis
Fig. 5. Feature p-values ranking. A lower p-value indicates that the feature
undergoes larger changes when generating counterfactuals.

Fig. 6. Feature importance ranking on the SWaT dataset.

from the UF feed tank to the RO feed tank through UF
filtration. The negative impact of attacking actuator P302
on the water flow of the RO unit is that tank T401 stops
inflowing, affecting the feature values after P4, as shown in
Figure 9. From 29/12/2015 14:38:12 to 14:50:08, MV303 is
prevented from opening, causing changes in the backwash
process and leading to the cessation of stage 3, resulting in
anomalies.
By attributing features to decisions, we effectively avoid
the randomness in the counterfactual generation process. Relatively, MV303 have a high proportion in the normalized feature
impact on prediction results, which is one of the key reasons
we can identify it as a cause of anomalies. Similarly, DPIT301
causes the water level of T401 to drop and the water level
of T301 to rise by setting the value > 40kpa. AIT504 is
modified twice within twelve minutes, causing water to not
enter the drainage pipe, which fully aligns with the attack
methods described in the documentation. This indicates that
our results are highly credible.

1) Anomaly Ratio Sensitivity: Anomaly ratio (AR) is considered a key factor that controls how hard detection becomes.
When anomalies are fewer, recall usually drops and it is
harder to balance recall and precision. To study this effect,
we create two test settings named AR × 0.5 and AR × 0.1
while keeping the raw signals unchanged. For each setting we
choose the decision threshold on a validation set using the
precision recall curve so that the operating point is fair for
every method. We evaluate on MSL, SMAP, SWaT, PSM, and
SMD and report per dataset results with recall trends shown
in Figure 7.
The results show a clear two step drop as the anomaly
ratio goes from the original level to AR × 0.5 and then to
AR × 0.1. Both DCdetector and DRCAD lose recall, yet
DRCAD stays higher on all datasets and the gap is larger at
AR × 0.1. The advantage is strongest on harder datasets such
as SMD where rare events are easy to miss. This result may
be due to the design of DRCAD, where flattened token mixing
reduces sensitivity to channel noise and the Patch MoE adaptively fuses in-patch and patch-wise views to retain weak but
useful cues.
2) Ablation Studies on Detector Structure: Table VI shows
the ablation studies on the Flattened Attention and Patch MoE
modules. “No Flatten” indicates that the representations of
the two views are obtained through the traditional multi-head
attention mechanism, while “No MoE” means replacing with
multi-scale patch sizes, specifically patch size is set to 3 and
5. Experimental results indicate that both designed modules
can enhance performance. Patch MoE is more prominent
because it integrates useful information during representation
extraction.
3) Ablation Studies on Dual-View Structure Design:
We conduct an investigation into the rationality of homogeneous branch structures, as shown in Table VII, while
“Original” refers to no modification; “Freeze” denotes fixing the parameters of the branch; “Random init” represents
random initialization of the branch; “Switch” indicates interchanging inputs between two branches. To facilitate a more
comprehensive analysis of feature disparities across varying viewpoints between the dual branches, we introduced
C-S and R-A-R metrics [67], where C-S stands for Cosine
Similarity, while R-A-R represents Range-AUC-ROC based

13096

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 8. Comparative results of employing four attention mechanisms in the detector across four datasets, respectively.

Fig. 9. Visualization results of latent distribution under distinct feature weights by T-SNE.
TABLE VI
A BLATION S TUDIES ON F LATTENED ATTENTION AND PATCH M O E M ODULE

on label transformation under ROC curve. It can be seen
that freezing either the in-patch or patch-wise branch leads
to a slight decrease in model performance and similarity metrics, with values approaching those observed in the
unfrozen state. This phenomenon can demonstrate that both
branches capture equally important yet distinct features. The
observed increase in the R-A-R metric may be due to the

model’s enhanced focus on optimizing the unfrozen branch
when one branch remains static. Similarly, the R-A-R metric
potentially benefits from this stability, as it considers performance across various thresholds, resulting in a marginal
performance improvement. When initialization operations are
performed, a significant decrease in metrics is observed.
This substantial reduction can be explained by the disruption

ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

13097

TABLE VII
A BLATION S TUDIES ON H OMOGENEOUS B RANCH S TRUCTURES

Fig. 10. Visualization results of the different window size comparison.

of pre-trained weights and the consequent amplification of
disparities between the two branches. Specifically, there are
no notable changes when switching the inputs from the two
views, confirming that identical branch structures are capable of capturing features from different views, as disscussed
above.
4) Ablation Studies on Attention Mechanism: Moreover, we
perform ablation studies on Attention Mechanism to evaluate the efficiency and necessity of our proposed design as
the Flattened Attention is developed to optimize parameter
efficiency while retaining the capability to extract temporal patterns from sequential data. Figure 8 illustrates the
results of modeling time series using three different attention mechanisms in the detector: Multi-head Attention [68],
Flash Attention [69], and Sparse Attention [70]. It can be
seen that Flattened Attention exhibits superior performance
enhancement, more efficient runtime, and smaller memory
consumption. Flash Attention and Sparse Attention have
the same level of complexity; however, Sparse Attention
demonstrates superior stability. Furthermore, it is noteworthy
that the multi-head attention mechanism did not demonstrate
superior performance in comparative analyses. This underperformance may be attributed to overfitting, as the datasets
like SMAP and PSM provided relatively limited training data.
This phenomenon underscores the critical balance between
model complexity and data availability required for optimal
performance.
5) Feature Importance Analysis: We validate the efficacy
of the feature importance output. Figure 9 illustrates the
visualization of feature distributions in the SWaT dataset under
three conditions. Figure 8(a) visualizes the distribution of

Fig. 11. Visualization results of different elevating bias η for counterfactual
generation.

normal and anomalous points under baseline conditions, where
red points denotes anomalous and blue represents normal
instances. Figure 8(b) demonstrates the result after artificially
reducing the weights of the top five features ranked by
importance, revealing that anomalous points become significantly less distinguishable. Figure 8(c) shows the outcome
of randomly downweighting five features across all dimensions, where the distribution overlap between normal and
anomalous points in the low-dimensional embedding space
exhibits minimal variation. This comparative analysis validates
the effectiveness of feature importance ranking methodologies
in maintaining class separability for time series anomaly
detection tasks.
6) Parameter Selection: We investigate the parameter sensitivity of the DRCAD model. Figure 10 demonstrates detect
performance across different window sizes, indicating robust
stability of our model across four datasets. Within the window

13098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

R EFERENCES
[1]

Fig. 12. (a) Time cost comparison on different datasets. (b) Accuracy
performance on different datasets.

size range [60,105], fluctuations in DRCAD performance
do not exceed 8.03%. Figure 11 illustrates the performance
of counterfactual generation under varying elevating bias η
values. Lower Realism and Pred-gain metrics indicate reduced
perturbation in the generated counterfactual samples. Note that
excessively high bias values may compromise the integrity of
the counterfactual generation rules.
7) Time Cost and Accuracy (ACC) Comparison: In
Figure 12 we compare the Time efficiency and Accuracy
(ACC) of our method with two highly correlated methods,
Anomaly Transformer and DCdetector. Across four datasets,
our method yield the lowest average time overhead, and ACC
results close to DCdetector, higher with Anomaly Transformer.
This can be attributed to our designed flattened attention mechanism, which successfully ties the algorithm’s complexity to
the hidden layer dimensions of the MLP, thereby avoiding
excessive computations.

V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we propose DRCAD, a novel approach that
addresses both the challenges of multivariate time series
anomaly detection with the need for result interpretation.
We present an innovative high-confidence explanation technique applicable to time series anomaly detection model.
Specifically, our method employs a contrastive representation
learning framework to capture time series dependencies and
identify anomalies by analyzing representational discrepancies
from multiple angles. Furthermore, we develop counterfactual instances based on detected anomalies and quantify
feature importance through the extent of feature alterations.
Experimental evaluations demonstrate that DRCAD achieves
state-of-the-art outcomes across various metrics in anomaly
detection tasks and superior realism and sparsity in counterfactual generation compared to existing methods, as validated on
four real-world datasets, the explanations on the SWaT dataset
align closely with the official documentation.
However, there are still many aspects in our work that
require improvement. One observed limitation is that our
explanation process does not account for the differences
between different types of features. In practice, as seen
with the SWaT dataset, discrete features should be given
greater weight because they influence the data of subsequent
features.

T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes,
“Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1–37, Sep. 2022.
[2] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT
time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
pp. 6481–6494, Jul. 2020.
[3] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A
robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on
heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[4] P.-F. Marteau, “Random partitioning forest for point-wise and collective
anomaly detection—Application to network intrusion detection,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2157–2172, 2021.
[5] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A
survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.
[6] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–20.
[7] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
series: A comprehensive evaluation,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, May 2022.
[8] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
[9] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and
M. Salehi, “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,”
2022, arXiv:2211.05244.
[10] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[11] A. Liu et al., “Contrastive context-aware learning for 3D high-fidelity
mask face presentation attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 17, pp. 2497–2507, 2022.
[12] X. Luo, X. Han, W. Zuo, X. Wu, and W. Liu, “MLaD2 : A semisupervised money laundering detection framework based on decoupling
training,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 4518–4533,
2024.
[13] Y. Fang, J. Xie, Y. Zhao, L. Chen, Y. Gao, and K. Zheng, “Temporalfrequency masked autoencoders for time series anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), May 2024,
pp. 1228–1241.
[14] S. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
model predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
pp. 4765–4774.
[15] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should I trust
you?’ Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd
ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2016,
pp. 1135–1144.
[16] D. Nemirovsky, N. Thiebaut, Y. Xu, and A. Gupta, “Countergan: Generating counterfactuals for real-time recourse and interpretability using
residual gans,” in Proc. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 1488–1497.
[17] S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, and C. Russell, “Counterfactual explanations
without opening the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr,”
Harv. JL Tech., vol. 31, p. 841, Apr. 2018.
[18] S. Nagesh, N. Mishra, Y. Naamad, J. M. Rehg, M. Shah, and
A. Wagner, “Explaining a machine learning decision to physicians via
counterfactuals,” in Proc. Conf. Health, 2023, pp. 556–577.
[19] Y. Goyal, Z. Wu, J. Ernst, D. Batra, D. Parikh, and S. Lee,
“Counterfactual visual explanations,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2019, pp. 2376–2384.
[20] E. Ates, B. Aksar, V. J. Leung, and A. K. Coskun, “Counterfactual
explanations for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Artif.
Intell. (ICAPAI), May 2021, pp. 1–8.
[21] E. Delaney, D. Greene, and M. T. Keane, “Instance-based counterfactual
explanations for time series classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. CaseBased Reasoning, 2021, pp. 32–47.
[22] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013,
arXiv:1312.6114.
[23] O. Queen, T. Hartvigsen, T. Koker, H. He, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Zitnik, “Encoding time-series explanations through self-supervised model
behavior consistency,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36,
2024, pp. 1–31.
[24] S. Tonekaboni, S. Joshi, K. R. Campbell, D. Duvenaud, and A. Goldenberg, “What went wrong and when? instance-wise feature importance
for time-series black-box models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 799–809.

ZHAO et al.: DRCAD: DUAL-VIEW EXPERTS ROUTING AND COUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

[25] K. K. Leung, C. Rooke, J. Smith, S. Zuberi, and M. Volkovs, “Temporal
dependencies in feature importance for time series prediction,” in Proc.
11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[26] J. Yan and H. Wang, “Self-interpretable time series prediction with
counterfactual explanations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023,
pp. 39110–39125.
[27] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc.
27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
pp. 3220–3230.
[28] H. Kang and P. Kang, “Transformer-based multivariate time series
anomaly detection using inter-variable attention mechanism,” Knowl.Based Syst., vol. 290, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 111507.
[29] G. E. P. Box and D. A. Pierce, “Distribution of residual autocorrelations in autoregressive-integrated moving average time series models,”
J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., vol. 65, no. 332, pp. 1509–1526, Dec. 1970.
[30] N. Kant and M. Mahajan, “Time-series outlier detection using enhanced
k-means in combination with PSO algorithm,” in Engineering Vibration,
Communication and Information Processing: ICoEVCI 2018, India.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 363–373.
[31] P. Karczmarek, A. Kiersztyn, W. Pedrycz, and E. Al, “K-means-based
isolation forest,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 195, May 2020, Art. no.
105659.
[32] Y. Yang, H. Zhang, and Y. Li, “Long-distance pipeline safety early
warning: A distributed optical fiber sensing semi-supervised learning
method,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 17, pp. 19453–19461, Sep. 2021.
[33] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[34] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758.
[35] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to selfsupervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
2020, pp. 21271–21284.
[36] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[37] D. Luo and X. Wang, “Moderntcn: A modern pure convolution structure
for general time series analysis,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2024, pp. 1–43.
[38] X. Wu et al., “CATCH: Channel-aware multivariate time series anomaly
detection via frequency patching,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2025, pp. 1–15.
[39] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series
is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc.
11th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–24.
[40] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers
for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
2020, pp. 1–21.
[41] K. Sohn, X. Yan, and H. Lee, “Learning structured output representation
using deep conditional generative models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015, pp. 3483–3491.
[42] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
Aug. 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
[43] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
[44] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop CyberPhys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016, pp. 31–36.
[45] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data
Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[46] K.-H. Lai, D. Zha, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, and X. Hu, “Revisiting time
series outlier detection: Definitions and benchmarks,” in Proc. 35th Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, 2021, pp. 1–13.
[47] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[48] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous
rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc.
28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 4433–4439.

13099

[49] O. D. Anderson, Time-Series, 2nd ed. London, U.K.: Charles Griffin,
1976.
[50] S. Tariq et al., “Detecting anomalies in space using multivariate convolutional LSTM with mixtures of probabilistic PCA,” in Proc. 25th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., Jul. 2019, pp. 2123–2133.
[51] T. Zhou et al., “One fits all: Power general time series analysis by
pretrained lm,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2023,
pp. 43322–43355.
[52] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[53] T. Yairi, N. Takeishi, T. Oda, Y. Nakajima, N. Nishimura, and N. Takata,
“A data-driven health monitoring method for satellite housekeeping data
based on probabilistic clustering and dimensionality reduction,” IEEE
Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1384–1401, Jun. 2017.
[54] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
pp. 1–19.
[55] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[56] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using
temporal hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020, pp. 13016–13026.
[57] Y. Shin et al., “ITAD: Integrative tensor-based anomaly detection system
for reducing false positives of satellite systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int.
Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2020, pp. 2733–2740.
[58] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422.
[59] R. Prescott Adams and D. J. C. MacKay, “Bayesian online changepoint
detection,” 2007, arXiv:0710.3742.
[60] M. Perslev, M. H. Jensen, S. Darkner, P. Jennum, and C. Igel, “U-time:
A fully convolutional network for time series segmentation applied to
sleep staging,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
pp. 4415–4426.
[61] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change
point detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in
Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
[62] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27, 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[63] A. V. Looveren and J. Klaise, “Interpretable counterfactual explanations
guided by prototypes,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl.
Discovery Databases, 2021, pp. 650–665.
[64] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
pp. 8026–8037.
[65] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[66] R. K. Mothilal, A. Sharma, and C. Tan, “Explaining machine learning
classifiers through diverse counterfactual explanations,” in Proc. Conf.
Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, Jan. 2020, pp. 607–617.
[67] J. Paparrizos, P. Boniol, T. Palpanas, R. S. Tsay, A. Elmore, and
M. J. Franklin, “Volume under the surface: A new accuracy evaluation
measure for time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment,
vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2774–2787, Jul. 2022.
[68] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2025, pp. 5998–6008.
[69] T. Dao, D. Y. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. Ré, “FlashAttention: Fast
and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 16344–16359.
[70] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever, “Generating long
sequences with sparse transformers,” 2019, arXiv:1904.10509.

Dawei Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in cryptology from Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in
2014. He is currently a Professor with Shandong
Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer
Center in Jinan), China. His main research interests
include network security, complex networks, and
epidemic spreading dynamics.

13100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Haoran Li is currently pursuing the master’s degree
in computer science and technology with Shandong
Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer
Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology
(Shandong Academy of Sciences), China. His current research interests include anomaly detection and
interpretable machine learning.

Lijuan Xu received the master’s degree in computer
science and technology from Shandong University,
Jinan, China, in 2007. She is currently an Associate
Professor with Shandong Computer Science Center
(National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), China.
Her main research interests include network security,
industrial internet security, and computer forensics.

Zhen Wang (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong
Kong, in 2014. He is a Distinguished Professor and
the Dean of the School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China. He
has published more than 100 articles in PNAS, Science Advances, Nature Communications, Physical
Review Letters, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE ,
IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F OREN SICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND
L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING, NeurIPS,
ICLR, ICML, WWW, IJCAI, and AAAI with more than 30 000 citations.
His research focuses on artificial intelligence, networks, multiagent systems,
and games. He is an Elected Member of Academia Europaea/the Academy
of Europe, European Academy of Sciences and Arts, and a fellow of AAIA
and IOP.

Haipeng Peng received the M.S. degree in system
engineering from Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang, China, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree
in signal and information processing from Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2010. He is currently a Professor
with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications. He
has co-authored 200 scientific articles. His research
interests include information security, network security, and complex networks.