6398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Efficient Intrusion Detection for In-Vehicle
Networks Using Knowledge Distillation From
BERT to CNN-BiLSTM
Sifan Li , Yue Cao , Senior Member, IEEE, Guojun Peng , Meng Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Wei Sun,
and Luan Chen , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Under the development of intelligent transportation
systems, In-Vehicle Networks (IVNs) serve as a critical channel
for both internal and external communications. However, the
inherent complexity and diversity of data traffic present significant challenges for the detection of IVN anomalous flows.
Meanwhile, the introduction of various novel technologies has
introduced new security vulnerabilities to IVNs. These vulnerabilities significantly impact the security of IVNs and the
accuracy of in-vehicle Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). To
address these issues, this paper proposes a lightweight and
efficient anomaly detection method based on knowledge distillation technology, termed Knowledge Distillation from BERT
to CNN-BiLSTM (KDBC). Specifically, the KDBC distills the
deep semantic knowledge from the BERT model into a more
lightweight CNN-BiLSTM architecture, significantly reducing
computational overhead and storage requirements without substantially compromising detection performance. Experimental
results demonstrate that the KDBC model enhances both security and versatility, achieving superior detection accuracy in
identifying abnormal attacks across diverse IVN data, including
automotive Ethernet and CAN networks. Moreover, the KDBC
model has been validated for its effectiveness and robustness in
actual in-vehicle gateway environments, achieving an accuracy
of over 0.98 and an F1 score greater than 0.98.
Index Terms—Ethernet, CAN, knowledge distillation, BERT,
CNN-BiLSTM.
Received 2 December 2024; revised 4 May 2025 and 9 June 2025;
accepted 10 June 2025. Date of publication 18 June 2025; date of
current version 27 June 2025. This work was supported in part by
Hubei Province Major Science and Technology Innovation Program under
Grant 2024BAA011, in part by Horizon Europe (EU) HORIZON-TMAMarie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA)-Staff Exchange (SE) Project
TRACE-V2X under Grant 101131204, in part by Wuhan Industrial Base
Innovation Program under Grant 2023010402010783, in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62372149 and
Grant U23A20303, in part by China Scholarship Council (CSC), and in part
by the Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data (the Ministry
of Education of China) under Grant BigKEOpen2025-04. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Prof. Guan Gui. (Corresponding author: Yue Cao.)
Sifan Li, Yue Cao, and Guojun Peng are with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430000, China (e-mail:
sifan.li@whu.edu.cn; yue.cao@whu.edu.cn; guojpeng@whu.edu.cn).
Meng Li is with the Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big
Data, Ministry of Education, the School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, and the Intelligent Interconnected Systems Laboratory
of Anhui Province, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230002, China,
and also with HIT Center, University of Padua, 35121 Padua, Italy (e-mail:
mengli@hfut.edu.cn).
Wei Sun is with the Research and Development Institute, Dongfeng Motor
Corporation Ltd., Wuhan 430000, China (e-mail: sunw@dfmc.com.cn).
Luan Chen is with ETIS UMR 8051, ENSEA, CNRS, CY Cergy Paris
University, 95000 Cergy, France (e-mail: luan.chen@ensea.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3581117

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

ITH the rapid development of intelligent transportation
systems, In-Vehicle Networks (IVNs) are becoming
increasingly crucial in smart vehicles, enabling communication between Electronic Control Units (ECUs) and with
external infrastructure like traffic lights and roadside units
[1]. IVNs primarily consist of automotive Ethernet, Controller
Area Network (CAN), and Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN).
Automotive Ethernet, with high bandwidth and low latency,
is used in systems like Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems
(ADAS) and infotainment. Conversely, CAN networks remain
the mainstream choice for in-vehicle control communication
due to their reliability and low cost [2]. TSN meets the
real-time demands of applications by providing deterministic
transmission capabilities, such as autonomous driving and
vehicle control systems.
Despite significant advancements in functionality and performance, IVNs face new security challenges due to their
complexity and diversity [3]. The high interconnectivity of
these networks makes them more susceptible to attacks. For
instance, frame injection attacks in autonomous driving systems can lead to vehicles executing erroneous commands,
endangering passenger safety. The broadcast nature of CAN
networks makes them vulnerable to Denial-of-Service (DoS)
and replay attacks, which can incapacitate critical vehicle
functions [4], [5]. Additionally, time synchronization attacks
in TSN can disrupt network time synchronization mechanism,
leading to system failures. As new technologies continue
to emerge, these security threats become more pronounced,
raising the demands for robust protection of IVNs [6].
In response to the growing security threats in IVNs,
various detection methods have been proposed to address
these challenges. For instance, several studies have employed
ensemble learning methods, such as decision trees and Support Vector Machines (SVM), to detect anomalous traffic
in CAN bus networks [7]. Other research has utilized deep
learning techniques, including Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN), Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN),
for intrusion detection within CAN bus networks [8], [9],
[10]. Furthermore, a number of studies have explored hybrid
models, combining CNNs with Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) networks to enhance detection accuracy [11], [12].

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION FOR IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS USING KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

However, the architecture of modern IVNs has evolved
significantly, incorporating a heterogeneous mix of CAN
bus, automotive Ethernet, and TSN technologies to meet the
growing demands for high bandwidth and low-latency communication. This multi-protocol integration introduces new
and complex security challenges. Each protocol comes with
distinct data formats, transmission patterns, and potential
attack surfaces [13]. Consequently, IDSs that are designed to
operate within a single-protocol context, such as CAN-only
or Ethernet-only solutions, are no longer sufficient. They are
incapable of handling the cross-domain traffic that modern
centralized gateways must monitor and protect. Therefore,
research efforts limited to single or dual network types fall
short in addressing the comprehensive security demands of
today’s in-vehicle communication systems.
Although many existing IDSs perform well in isolated
environments, they lack generalizability and robustness when
applied to real-world scenarios involving mixed-protocol traffic. For example, a model trained exclusively on CAN traffic
is unable to detect threats embedded in automotive Ethernet or
TSN data streams. Meanwhile, most current approaches rely
on complex model architectures, such as deep learning models
like Transformer or BERT. These models inherently have
high computational overhead and storage requirements, which
significantly hinder their deployment in resource-constrained
in-vehicle environments. In addition, many existing studies
lack real-world testing, remaining theoretical or using nonrepresentative environments. Those that test in real-world
conditions often have limited IVN realization, hindering
comprehensive evaluation. To fill these gaps, this paper
conducts tests in a real in-vehicle gateway environment,
crucial for the practical deployment of the proposed KDBC
model.
Even if the BERT model demonstrates exceptional understanding and versatility capabilities for complex IVN traffic
data, capturing deep semantic features, its large model size
limits its direct application in resource-constrained in-vehicle
environments. On the other hand, while the CNN-BiLSTM
model offers a smaller model size and faster runtime, its
versatility ability is weaker when handling diverse IVN attack
data. Therefore, by combining BERT with CNN-BiLSTM
through knowledge distillation, the superior performance of
BERT can be effectively transferred to the CNN-BiLSTM
model. This paper addresses the challenges of transferring
the rich contextual embeddings from BERT while preserving
both spatial and sequential information, and optimizes the
distillation process to align BERT’s complex representations
with the simpler feature extraction process of CNN-BiLSTM.
By carefully tuning the distillation loss function, the approach
ensures minimal information loss during the transfer. As a
result, the detection accuracy of CNN-BiLSTM is significantly enhanced, while maintaining its lightweight advantages,
making it suitable for the real-time and resource-constrained
requirements of in-vehicle systems. The main contributions of
this paper are summarized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, the KDBC model is the first
to integrate the detection of abnormal traffic across CAN
networks, automotive Ethernet, and TSN into a single
framework.

6399

• Through knowledge distillation, the KDBC achieves a
lightweight design while preserving the deep semantic
analysis capabilities of BERT model, thereby ensuring
both efficiency and detection performance.
• This study employs the TOW-IDS [6] and can-train-andtest [14] datasets for training and testing, and deploys
the model on an in-vehicle gateway for practical evaluation. In both scenarios, KDBC demonstrates outstanding
performance, striking a balance between lightweight
design and efficiency, making it well-suited for resourceconstrained in-vehicle environments.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section II outlines the current research in the field of intrusion
detection for IVNs. Section III provides relevant background
information on IVNs and threat models. Section IV presents
a detailed description of the proposed KDBC framework
and its components. Section V demonstrates the experimental
evaluation of KDBC. Finally, section VI summarizes and
concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This section reviews related work, categorized into three
parts based on the intrusion detection scenarios: intrusion
detection research for CAN bus networks, automotive Ethernet
and TSN.
A. Intrusion Detection Research for Can Bus Networks
Intrusion detection research for in-vehicle CAN bus networks is currently one of the most prominent areas in IVN
studies, attracting increasing attention from industry professionals in recent years. Machine learning-based models for
intrusion detection have become a mainstream approach, with
a number of studies combining CNN and LSTM models for
detection [11], [12]. Other research has leveraged the advantages of the BERT model from Natural Language Processing
(NLP) for extracting deep semantic features in intrusion
detection [15], [16]. Additionally, Du et al. [17] introduced
CLUSTER, a novel approach for CAN bus intrusion detection.
It utilizes the distance from known class inputs to cluster
centroids as the training loss, aligning with the threshold
for open set recognition. Beyond the aforementioned open
set recognition techniques, transforming CAN bus data into
directed graphs is also a viable option. Islam et al. [18]
proposed a novel graph-based Gaussian Naive Bayes (GGNB)
intrusion detection algorithm, which utilizes graph properties
and PageRank-related features to achieve high detection accuracy. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [1] developed a CAN bus
anomaly detection system based on Graph Neural Networks
(GNN). It can detect various attacks, including message injection, suspension, and falsification, in just 3 milliseconds.
B. Intrusion Detection Research for Automotive Ethernet
Compared to intrusion detection research for in-vehicle
CAN bus networks, the study of intrusion detection in automotive Ethernet has garnered relatively less attention. However,
in recent years, the importance of automotive Ethernet have
increasingly become evident due to the introduction of

6400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORK

Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems (ADAS). Han et al. [6]
proposed a method for detecting abnormalities in automotive
Ethernet using wavelet transform and deep CNNs, effectively
addressing inherent attack vectors and vulnerabilities. Based
on the dataset introduced in [6], two studies [19], [20] were
conducted. First, da Luz et al. [19] proposed a novel multistage deep learning-based Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
for automotive Ethernet networks, which combines a Random
Forest (RF) with a pruned CNN for classifying attack types.
Second, Jeong et al. [20] introduced the Automotive Ethernet
Real-time Observer (AERO), an unsupervised network IDS
designed to protect IVNs by analyzing automotive Ethernet
traffic and detecting anomalies.
C. Intrusion Detection Research for TSN
Given that in-vehicle TSN primarily employs the IEEE
802.1 series of standards, this section highlights relevant intrusion detection research. Ergenç et al. [21] presented TSNZeek,
the first open-source security monitoring and intrusion detection mechanism for IEEE 802.1 TSN protocols, addressing
the lack of inherent security measures within these standards.
Meyer et al. [22] introduced a framework for detecting anomalous traffic through ingress control in TSN, utilizing stringent
TSN traffic descriptors to reduce false positives. They implemented Software-Defined Networking (SDN) technologies to
gather and assess ingress anomaly reports, thereby identifying
and blocking generating flows from the network.
D. Motivation
Table I summarizes and compares related studies. Most
focus on either the CAN bus or TSN, with a few addressing both automotive Ethernet and TSN. However, the IVN
architecture in modern vehicles varies, integrating CAN bus,
automotive Ethernet, and TSN to achieve higher data rates and
lower latency. Thus, research limited to single or dual IVN
scenarios fails to address the full security needs of modern
IVNs.
Additionally, many existing studies lack real-world testing, remaining theoretical or using non-representative

Fig. 1. The scenario of IVN.

environments. Those that test in real-world conditions often
have limited IVN realization, hindering comprehensive evaluation. To fill these gaps, this paper conducts tests in a
real in-vehicle gateway environment, crucial for the practical
deployment of the proposed KDBC model.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL
A. Background
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the in-vehicle central gateway, where
the IDS model is deployed, primarily connects the CAN bus,
automotive Ethernet, TSN, and Telematics BOX (T-BOX). The
T-BOX is mainly used for collecting vehicle data, which is
then transmitted to the cloud via networks such as Wi-Fi or
5G [23]. Next, this section primarily introduces three typical
IVNs: automotive Ethernet, CAN bus networks, and TSN.
TSN is considered an extension of automotive Ethernet, and
it is discussed separately due to its susceptibility to attacks,
such as time synchronization attacks.
1) Automotive Ethernet: Automotive Ethernet is a highbandwidth, low-latency network technology developed to meet
the communication needs of modern vehicles, making it ideal

LI et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION FOR IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS USING KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

for ADAS, infotainment, and large-scale data transmission
[24]. Using single-pair UTP cabling, it reduces space, weight,
and costs, while supporting real-time data transfer from highresolution cameras and sensors for autonomous driving. Its
adoption simplifies IVN architecture, reduces system complexity and wiring costs, and is becoming the standard for efficient
in-vehicle communication in future intelligent vehicles [25].
2) Controller Area Network (CAN): CAN, developed by
Bosch in the late 1980s, is a widely used protocol in IVNs,
valued for its reliability, real-time performance, and low cost
[26]. It uses a multi-master, message-oriented protocol to
facilitate communication between ECUs, with a simple frame
structure and robust error detection to ensure data accuracy
and stability [27]. Despite bandwidth limitations as vehicle
systems grow more complex, enhanced protocols like CANFD maintain CAN’s vital role in modern vehicles, ensuring
safety and reliability [28].
3) Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN): TSN is a set of
Ethernet-based standards developed under IEEE 802.1 to provide deterministic data transmission and time synchronization,
ideal for applications requiring low latency and jitter [29]. It
uses sub-standards like Time-Aware Shaping, Frame Preemption, and Precision Time Protocol to manage network traffic,
ensuring reliable communication for critical applications in
IVNs, such as autonomous driving and ADAS. By reducing
latency and packet loss, TSN enhances vehicle safety and
performance, supporting the development of intelligent, connected vehicles in complex environments.
B. Threat Model
As shown in Fig. 1, attacks on automotive Ethernet are
primarily categorized into frame injection attacks, switch MAC
flooding attacks, and DoS attacks. In contrast, attacks on
the CAN bus are mainly classified as DoS attacks, replay
attacks, fuzzy attacks, gear spoof attacks, and RPM spoof
attacks. Attacks targeting TSN predominantly involve time
synchronization attacks.
1) Frame Injection Attack: An adversary sends forged
data frames to disrupt communication, potentially altering
or losing critical control information and causing incorrect
vehicle system responses. This attack targets the integrity
of data in transit, possibly causing discrepancies in-vehicle
control functions, which may lead to unpredictable behavior
or system failures. It is particularly dangerous in real-time
systems, where timing and accuracy of communication are
paramount for safety.
2) Switch MAC Flooding Attack: An adversary overwhelms
a switch’s forwarding table with forged MAC addresses,
preventing it from properly forwarding legitimate packets. The
goal of this attack is to disrupt the network’s ability to forward
data correctly, leading to network congestion, delayed packet
delivery, or a complete failure to transmit data. This attack can
degrade network performance, causing disruptions in vehicle
communications, such as sensor or control message delays,
which can compromise vehicle operation.
3) DoS Attack: DoS attacks can target either automotive
Ethernet or the CAN bus, with Ethernet attacks involving
the transmission of invalid data frames that consume bandwidth and disrupt legitimate communication, affecting vehicle

6401

safety. In CAN bus attacks, sending numerous high-priority
messages blocks the bus, delaying critical control commands
and jeopardizing driving safety [30]. This attack can lead
to system failures or performance degradation, resulting in
critical control commands being delayed and jeopardizing
driving safety.
4) Replay Attack: Attackers resend intercepted valid data
packets to deceive the system into repeating operations, causing state confusion or unpredictable behavior. The attack can
confuse the state machine of vehicle, leading to erroneous
actions, such as repeating an earlier maneuver or applying an
outdated control input.
5) Fuzzy Attack: A fuzzy attack exploits uncertainties
in sensor or control system data by injecting random or
ambiguous inputs, causing confusion in decision-making and
potentially compromising vehicle security. This could degrade
vehicle safety by misinterpreting sensor data, leading to incorrect navigation decisions or unsafe vehicle operations.
6) Gear Spoof Attack: Attackers manipulate sensor or ECU
data to falsely report the vehicle’s gear position, misleading the
driver or vehicle system into misinterpreting the current gear
status. This attack can cause incorrect gear shifting, leading
to unsafe vehicle operation, such as unintended acceleration,
stalling, or even vehicle collisions due to inaccurate speed or
power delivery information. It can severely compromise driver
safety, particularly in automated or semi-automated systems
where gear shifts are handled autonomously.
7) RPM Spoof Attack: Attackers can manipulate sensor
or ECU data to transmit false tachometer readings, misleading engine speed information. This attack can distort the
driver’s perception of engine performance, potentially leading
to unsafe driving decisions, such as over-revving the engine
or failing to recognize an engine failure. By manipulating
engine speed readings, the attacker can disrupt the operational efficiency of vehicle, increasing the risk of accidents
or mechanical damage.
8) Time Synchronization Attack: The attacker disrupts time
synchronization mechanisms, such as the Precision Time Protocol (PTP), causing discrepancies in time-stamped data used
by autonomous or driver-assist systems. Time synchronization
is critical for systems that rely on time-sensitive data, such
as collision avoidance, navigation, or autonomous driving.
Disrupting time synchronization can lead to misalignment
of sensor data, causing delays in decision-making or faulty
system responses, which can directly endanger vehicle safety
by impairing the accuracy and timing of control actions.
To identify threat models across multiple IVNs, the KDBC
model needs to have strong versatility, capable of recognizing
different attacks in various IVN environments. To achieve this,
the KDBC model adopts a binary classification design, where
the output is classified as either normal or abnormal based on
traffic analysis. Additionally, during the initial training phase,
the KDBC model is trained using various publicly available
IVN datasets. Once the model achieves stable performance, it
is then deployed in a real-world in-vehicle gateway environment for practical testing.

6402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 2. The framework of KDBC.

IV. P ROPOSED KDBC F RAMEWORK
A. Overview
The proposed KDBC primarily aims to address the intrusion
detection challenges associated with diverse network data
in IVNs. Therefore, its optimal deployment location is at
the in-vehicle central gateway. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the
KDBC framework consists of three main components: data
processing, the teacher model (BERT-based binary classifier),
and the student model (CNN-BiLSTM-based binary classifier),
along with the knowledge distillation process.
Initially, the KDBC reads traffic files (.pcap) collected from
the in-vehicle gateway and converts them into decimal text
data. Subsequently, data preprocessing is conducted, which
includes feature selection, padding, and masking. The processed data is then simultaneously fed into both the teacher
and student models for training and testing. Finally, the KDBC
computes the distillation loss based on the logits from the
teacher and student models, and outputs the results once the
distillation loss meets the desired threshold.
In the proposed KDBC architecture, each component plays
a distinct yet collaborative role to enable efficient and accurate
intrusion detection in IVNs. The BERT-based teacher model
serves as a powerful semantic feature extractor, leveraging
its deep bidirectional transformer layers to capture complex
contextual relationships in the input data. Meanwhile, the
student model, composed of a CNN for local feature extraction
and a BiLSTM for capturing temporal dependencies, provides
a lightweight and deployable solution suitable for resourceconstrained environments like in-vehicle gateways. During
training, both models receive the same preprocessed input data.
The knowledge distillation mechanism bridges these models
by transferring the knowledge from the teacher to the student:
it computes the distillation loss between the soft output logits
of the teacher and student models, allowing the student to
learn not only from the ground truth but also from the richer
representations learned by the teacher. This architecture

ensures that the student model maintains high detection performance while significantly reducing computational and memory
costs, making it ideal for real-world IVN deployment.
B. Data Preprocessing
Data preprocessing is a critical step to ensure model performance and detection accuracy. Given the complex and variable
nature of IVN environments, the collected data often suffer
from issues such as missing values, varying lengths, and
feature redundancy. Consequently, a series of preprocessing
techniques are necessary to optimize data quality. This section
will provide a detailed overview of four core preprocessing strategies: feature selection, Z-Score Normalization, zero
padding, and masked language data augmentation.
1) Feature Selection: Feature selection is an indispensable
component of data preprocessing, aiming to identify the most
representative subset of features from the raw data. It can
also mitigate the impact of redundant information on model
performance. In IVN data, the number of features is often large
and complex, encompassing many that are irrelevant or weakly
related to intrusion detection. In addition, feature selection can
effectively reduce the complexity of subsequent tasks such as
padding and masking, making it easier to unify data length
through padding.
The KDBC framework utilizes mutual information-based
feature selection. Specifically, mutual information quantifies
the degree to which knowing one variable reduces the uncertainty of another variable [31]. By calculating the mutual
information between features and the target variable (traffic
labels), the KDBC can assess the contribution of each feature
to the target variable, thereby selecting the most relevant
features. For each variable A and the target variable B, the
mutual information I(A; B) is defined as:


XX
d(a, b)
I(A; B) =
d(a, b) log
(1)
d(a)d(b)
a∈A
b∈B

LI et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION FOR IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS USING KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

Fig. 3. Feature distribution by label.

6403

padding operation fills these gaps with zero values, effectively
restoring data integrity while ensuring that all samples have the
same length for subsequent processing, which facilitates batch
processing and model training. Additionally, zero padding can
mitigate noise interference arising from length discrepancies,
thereby enhancing the versatility capability of model.
After the feature selection process, the data length from
both automotive Ethernet and TSN networks was unified to
42 bytes. Therefore, the data length from the CAN bus needs
to be extended to 42 bytes using zero padding, while retaining
the original 16-byte content. Zero padding is instrumental
in enabling intrusion detection models to process data from
multiple IVN protocols by standardizing input length, thereby
ensuring compatibility across heterogeneous data formats such
as CAN, Ethernet, and TSN. This alignment facilitates the
ability of model to recognize cross-protocol anomalies without
structural inconsistencies, enhancing the versatility and robustness of the KDBC across diverse network traffic.
3) Z-Score Normalization: Z-score normalization, also
known as standard deviation normalization, is a method that
transforms data into a standard normal distribution through
mathematical conversion [33]. Its primary purpose is to convert
data of varying magnitudes into a unified scale of Z-score values, enhancing data comparability and reducing interpretability
bias. In this study, to mitigate the impact of varying data
ranges across different protocols, this study applies Z-score
normalization to the data, as defined by the following formula:
S −µ
(2)
SD
where S core represents the standardized Z-score, a dimensionless value. S represents an individual observation, i.e., a data
point in the original dataset. µ denotes the mean of the entire
dataset. S D represents the standard deviation of the dataset.
4) Masked Language Data Augmentation: The masking
data augmentation technique is an innovative method inspired
by NLP, aimed at enhancing the robustness and versatility
capability of model by randomly masking certain data features.
In the context of IVN data, the KDBC can consider continuous
or discrete features (such as network traffic) as “vocabulary”,
and simulate real-world noise/anomalies by randomly selecting
and masking these “vocabularies”. This approach compels the
model to learn and make predictions with partial information,
thereby stimulating its ability to explore additional latent
features and correlations.
Masking data augmentation not only improves the capacity
of model to recognize unknown attacks but also mitigates
overfitting to extent, enhancing the versatility performance of
model. As shown in Algorithm 1, in the KDBC framework, the
mask probability is set to 10%. An empty list, masked data,
is initialized, and 10% of the traffic is randomly sampled from
the overall data (lines 1-5). Among the selected traffic, 70%
will randomly replace one token with [mask] (lines 7-9), 20%
will randomly replace one token with another random token
(lines 10-11), and 10% will remain unchanged (lines 12-13).
S core =

Fig. 4. Feature correlation heatmap.

Here, d(a, b) represents the joint probability distribution of A
and B, while d(a) and d(b) denote the marginal probability
distributions of A and B, respectively. The mutual information
between each feature and the target variable in the dataset
is computed using Equation 1. The features are ranked in
descending order according to their mutual information values
with the target variable to assess their relative importance.
Finally, 42 features with mutual information values greater
than 0.1 are selected for inclusion based on this ranking.
After feature selection, Fig. 3 illustrates the distribution of
different label data values for the top 9 selected features. For
instance, regarding the first feature, it is observed that a portion
of the malicious traffic falls within the range of 0. This is
attributed to the presence of certain DoS attacks on the CAN
bus within the malicious traffic. Fig. 4 displays the heatmap
of the 42 selected features, with values ranging from [−1, 1].
Values closer to −1 or 1 indicate a strong negative or positive
correlation between two features, while values near 0 suggest
a weak correlation.
2) Zero Padding: Zero padding is primarily employed to
address missing values and achieve uniformity in data length
[32]. In IVN data, issues such as device failures, communication interruptions, or inconsistent sampling frequencies
often result in missing data (value is NULL). The zero-

C. Teacher Model
The choice of BERT model as the teacher model among
numerous deep learning models is based on several key

6404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 1 Masked Language Data Augmentation Algorithm
Input: text corpus (a collection of text documents)
Output: modi f ied corpus (text documents with tokens
masked or replaced)
1: Initialize modi f ied corpus as an empty list
2: for each text in text corpus do
3:
Generate a random number r between 0 and 1
4:
if r < 0.1 then
5:
Append text to modi f ied corpus
6:
Generate another random number p between 0 and
1
7:
if p < 0.7 then
8:
Randomly select a token from the text
9:
Replace the selected token with [mask]
10:
else if p < 0.9 then
11:
Randomly select a token from the text
12:
Replace the selected token with another random
token from the vocabulary
13:
else
14:
Keep the text unchanged
15:
end if
16:
else
17:
Append the unchanged text to modi f ied corpus
18:
end if
19: end for
20: return: modi f ied corpus

reasons. First, unlike traditional feature engineering-based
intrusion detection methods, BERT can automatically extract
useful features from network traffic data without the need
for complex feature extraction rules [34]. It can significantly
enhance the efficiency and accuracy of intrusion detection.
Second, the pre-training of BERT on a large corpus endows
it with strong cross-domain adaptability. In the context of
IVN traffic intrusion detection, BERT can quickly adapt to
and handle various types of network traffic data, including
encrypted traffic [35]. Finally, the BERT model supports finetuning, allowing for further training and optimization tailored
to specific tasks. In the realm of IVN traffic intrusion detection,
fine-tuning the BERT model can improve detection accuracy
and efficiency by adapting to different network environments.
The BERT model is a pre-trained deep neural network that
centers around the bidirectional encoder of the Transformer
architecture. This model generates high-quality language representations through unsupervised pre-training on large-scale
corpora, followed by fine-tuning for specific tasks.
1) Input Embedding: The input embedding of BERT model
for IVN traffic consists of three processes: token embedding,
segment embedding, and position embedding. The input traffic
is initially segmented into tokens using a tokenizer, with
each token mapped to a high-dimensional space to create
token embedding. Segment embedding adds an additional
embedding for each token to indicate its association with a
specific traffic stream. Position embedding provides a unique
embedding vector for each position, which are learned during
the training process.

Fig. 5. The structure of BERT model.

2) Transformer Encoders: As shown in Fig. 5, the core of
BERT model is the encoder part of the Transformer, which
consists of multiple Transformer layers. Each Transformer
layer primarily comprises a multi-head self-attention mechanism and a Feedforward Neural Network (FFNN).
Multi-Head Self-Attention Mechanism: The self-attention
mechanism allows the model to consider all other features in
the input sequence while processing each individual feature.
The multi-head self-attention mechanism operates by running
multiple self-attention heads in parallel and concatenating
their outputs, headi , to capture information from different
subspaces. The computation formula is as follows:


QK T
V
(3)
Attention(Q, K, V) = σ √
dk
MultiHead(Q, K, V)
= Concat(head1 , head2 , . . . , headh ) · W O
headi = Attention(QWiQ , KWiK , VWiV )

(4)
(5)

where σ represents the softmax function, and Q, K, and V
denote the query, key, and value matrices, respectively. dk is
the dimension of the key vectors. Additionally, T denotes the
transposed matrix. The variable h represents the number of
heads, while WiQ , WiK , WiV , and W O are learnable parameter
matrices.
FFNN: The FFNN is employed to perform further transformations on the vectors at each position. It consists of two
linear transformations followed by a ReLU activation function,
which can be expressed mathematically as:
FFNN(z) = max(0, z · W1 + b1 ) · W2 + b2

(6)

where z represents the input of FFNN layer. W1 and b1 are
the weight matrix and bias vector of the first Fully Connected
(FC) layer, while W2 and b2 are the weight matrix and bias
vector of the second FC layer.
3) Output Layer: The output layer of BERT model varies
depending on the specific task. In the BERT pre-training phase
of KDBC, the output layer is utilized to compute the loss for
the Masked Language Model (MLM).
X

L MLM = −
log P xt | X\M
(7)
t∈M

where M is the set of masked positions, and X\M is the input
with masked tokens. xt represents the true value of the masked
word at index t.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION FOR IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS USING KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

Fig. 6. The structure of CNN-BiLSTM.

Following the pre-training phase is the fine-tuning stage,
where the BERT fine-tuning process adjusts the pre-trained
model for specific tasks, enabling it to better adapt to and
address particular challenges. The fine-tuning process primarily involves the following steps:
• Adding Task-Specific Layers: For the binary classification
task aimed at IVNs outlined in this paper, the finetuning of KDBC model involves modifying the activation
function of FC layer in the final output stage to sigmoid.
• Parameter Setting: After adding the task-specific layers, fine-tuning typically does not require training from
scratch. Instead, it initializes using the parameters of the
pre-trained model, which accelerates the training process
and enhances model performance.
• Fine-Tuning Training: Supervised learning is conducted
using labeled training data, during which the model
parameters are fine-tuned. Subsequently, the loss between
the true labels and the predicted labels is calculated using
the cross-entropy loss function, as follows:
1 X
Li
L=
N i

1 X 
=
− yi · log (pi ) + (1 − yi ) · log (1 − pi )
(8)
N i
where yi represents the label for sample i, with positive
class denoted as 1 and negative class as 0. pi indicates
the probability that sample i is predicted as the positive
class. The model parameters are subsequently updated
through back-propagation and an optimization algorithm
to minimize the loss. The teacher model adjusts its
parameters based on the loss to achieve better training
outcomes. Finally, the logits corresponding to the optimal
results are transferred to the student model.
D. Student Model
Considering the limited resource environment of automotive
systems, the KDBC framework demands the student model
to maintain high performance while achieving low computational complexity and a smaller model size. Therefore, for
IVN traffic characterized by temporal and spatial features,
the KDBC ultimately selects the CNN-BiLSTM model. By
combining the strengths of CNN and BiLSTM, this model can
extract local features from network traffic and capture longterm dependencies within the data, thereby enabling accurate
representation of complex IVN traffic and enhancing intrusion
detection accuracy [36].

6405

As illustrated in Fig. 6, the processed IVN data is first
fed into a series of meticulously designed CNN layers, which
extract local features from the raw data through convolution
operations. Each CNN layer is immediately followed by a
Batch Normalization (BN) layer, which normalizes the output
to accelerate the training process and improve model stability.
Subsequently, a ReLU activation function is applied to the
normalized data, introducing non-linearity that allows the
model to learn more complex feature representations. After
two rounds of processing with CNN, BN, and ReLU, the data
is passed to the Dropout layer to mitigate the risk of overfitting.
Next, the processed data is sent to the Bi-LSTM layer.
Bi-LSTM effectively captures long-term dependencies in
sequence data by considering both forward and backward
sequential information. This layer transforms the spatial features extracted by the convolutional layers into high-level
representations over time.
Finally, the output from the Bi-LSTM layer is passed to a
FC layer, which maps the features to the final output space
through a weight matrix transformation. The output of the
FC layer is then processed by a sigmoid activation function,
compressing the values into the (0, 1) range, representing the
predicted probabilities for the binary classification task. This
entire process leverages the advantages of CNN in feature
extraction, BN+ReLU in enhancing non-linearity and stability,
and Bi-LSTM’s capability in handling sequential data, collectively forming a robust model architecture.
E. Knowledge Distillation
In our work, the knowledge distillation process transfers BERT’s deep semantic understanding and contextual
dependencies into a lightweight CNN-BiLSTM model. This
is crucial for capturing subtle temporal and structural patterns in IVN traffic. The most critical transferred knowledge
includes high-efficiency learning capability in few-shot scenarios, context-aware feature representations and sequential
semantic understanding, which enhance the student model’s
ability to detect anomalies beyond static field analysis.
In knowledge distillation, response-based knowledge distillation is one of the significant methods. On one hand, it is
relatively straightforward to implement, as it focuses solely
on the differences in responses between the teacher model
and the student model at the output layer [37]. On the other
hand, it possesses strong versatility capabilities. By imitating
the predictions of the teacher model, the student model can
effectively learn and adopt the teacher model’s versatility
capabilities. Consequently, the distillation process in KDBC
employs response-based knowledge to compute the final loss.
The core idea of response-based knowledge distillation is to
enable the student model to directly imitate the final prediction
results of the teacher model. By minimizing the difference in
responses between the student model and the teacher model at
the output layer, the student model can absorb the versatility
capabilities and knowledge of the teacher model.
Algorithm 2 illustrates how to utilize knowledge distillation techniques to transfer knowledge from the teacher
model to the student model, thereby enhancing the performance of the student model. Initially, the inputs include the
training data loader (train dataloader), the teacher model

6406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Algorithm 2 The Process of Knowledge Distillation
Input: train dataloader, teacher model, student model
Output: epoch loss
1: epoch loss ← 0
2: α ← 0.5
3: for epoch in epochs do
4:
total loss ← 0
5:
for
step,
x train,
y train
in
enumerate(train dataloader) do
6:
teacher logits = teacher model(x train, y train)
student logits
=
7:
student output,
student model(x
train, y train)

logits
8:
pt = sigmoid teacher
temp


logits
9:
qt = sigmoid student
temp
10:
so f t loss = temp2 × KLDivLoss(pt , qt )
11:
hard loss = BinaryCrossEntropy(student output,
y train)
12:
KDBC loss = α × hard loss + (1 − α) × so f t loss
13:
KDBC loss.backward()
14:
Adam(student model.parameters(), lr=2 × 10−4 ,
weight decay = 10−5 ).step()
15:
total loss = total loss + KDBC loss
16:
end for
total loss
17:
epoch loss ← len(train
dataloader)
18: end for
19: return: epoch loss

(teacher model), and the student model (student model),
while the output is the average loss for each epoch
(epoch loss). The epoch loss is initialized to 0, and the
weight (α) for the distillation loss is set to 0.5 (lines 1-2).
Upon entering the training loop, each epoch is traversed,
and the total loss for that epoch (total loss) is initialized to 0
(lines 3-4). For each batch of training data (x train, y train),
the current step is obtained (line 5). Predictions in the form of
logits are generated using the teacher model (teacher logits)
(line 6), and predictions and logits are produced using the
student model (student output and student logits) (line 7).
Subsequently, the soft label probabilities (pt and qt ) are
computed using the logits from both models through the
sigmoid function (lines 8-9). The soft label loss (so f t loss)
is calculated using the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence loss
function (KLDivLoss), incorporating a temperature coefficient
(temp) (line 10), while the hard label loss (hard loss) is
computed using BinaryCrossEntropy function (line 11). The
calculation formula for the BinaryCrossEntropy function can
be referred to as Equation 8.
The aforementioned KLDivLoss function is an asymmetric
measure used to quantify the difference between two probability distributions. It is commonly employed in the fields
of information theory and machine learning to compare the
predicted distribution with the true distribution. The definition
of the KLDivLoss function is as follows:
DKL (PkQ) =

X
o

P(o) log

P(o)
Q(o)

(9)

where DKL (PkQ) represents the KL divergence from distribution P to distribution Q. It is a non-negative value used
to measure the extent to which distribution Q deviates from
distribution P. P(o) denotes the probability of the o th event in
the target or true distribution under discrete conditions. Q(o)
denotes the probability of the o th event in the approximate
or predicted distribution under discrete conditions.
Next, the total knowledge distillation loss (KDBC loss)
is computed by combining the soft label loss and the hard
label loss, adjusting the weights of the two losses using α
(line 12). The total loss undergoes backpropagation (line 13),
and the parameters of the student model are updated using the
Adam optimizer, with the learning rate and weight decay set
to prevent overfitting (line 14). The current batch loss is added
to the total loss (line 15), and the total loss is normalized by
the number of batches to yield the average loss for each epoch
(epoch loss) (lines 16-17). Finally, the average loss for each
epoch (epoch loss) is returned (lines 18-19).
V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In this study, the KDBC model is evaluated within specific
hardware and software environments. Considering the resource
limitations of actual in-vehicle environments, the knowledge
distillation process of KDBC model is conducted offline on a
server, after which the trained student model is loaded onto
the in-vehicle gateway for real-time online testing.
This study utilized the Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU for its exceptional computational power and memory capacity, supporting
the training and inference of the teacher model. The CPU,
an AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 5995WX with 64 cores
and 128 threads, ensured efficient multitasking for data loading, preprocessing, and model training. The KDBC model
was developed using JupyterLab 3.4.4, which facilitates code
writing, debugging, documentation, and data visualization. The
implementation was done in Python 3.10.6, with libraries such
as PyTorch for neural network training, NumPy for numerical
computations, Pandas for data processing, and Matplotlib and
Seaborn for visualization.
A. Datasets
By transferring the deep semantic knowledge from a large
pre-trained BERT model (teacher) to a lightweight CNNBiLSTM model (student), the KDBC are able to retain high
detection performance while significantly reducing model
complexity and training data requirements. This approach
effectively leverages the representation power learned from
large-scale pre-training, thereby enhancing generalization on
limited-domain data. While the model still has a certain level
of dependency on data, we mitigate this by employing two
diverse and complementary datasets and real vehicle test for
training and evaluation.
This study evaluates the datasets used for the IDS model,
which include the CAN bus representative dataset, can-trainand-test [14], and the automotive Ethernet representative
dataset, TOW-IDS [6]. Since the TOW-IDS dataset [6] contains normal/attack data for the gPTP protocol, and there is
currently no publicly available data on in-vehicle TSN attacks,
this study utilizes TOW-IDS [6] to represent both automotive
Ethernet and TSN datasets.

LI et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION FOR IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS USING KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

The can-train-and-test dataset [14] was collected from real
road data involving four different vehicles and six drivers,
aiming to create a diverse CAN dataset for machine learning
purposes. The dataset accesses CAN traffic data through
the OBD-II port of each vehicle, connecting via a Korlan
USB2CAN cable to convert the raw OBD-II data into USB
data, thereby enabling communication through the SocketCAN
subsystem and can-utils tools in Linux. For this study, subdataset 3 has been selected as the representative dataset for
the CAN bus.
The TOW-IDS dataset [6] was released by the HCRL1 and
is specifically designed for the development and evaluation
of IDSs in automotive Ethernet environments. This dataset
includes both normal and abnormal data from various real
driving scenarios, covering AVTP, gPTP, and UDP protocols.
The abnormal dataset consists of five types of attack: frame
injection, PTP synchronization, switch MAC flooding, CAN
DoS, and CAN replay attacks. The data was extracted through
port mirroring on a 100BASE-T1 switch and is accompanied
by detailed annotations, thereby facilitating researchers in
developing and validating IDSs for IVNs.
B. Evaluation Metrics
In evaluating the performance of KDBC model, this study
employs a set of key metrics, as indicated by the following
formulas:
T RP + T RN
(10)
Accuracy =
T RP + T RN + FAP + FAN
T RP
Precision =
(11)
T RP + FAP
T RP
Recall =
(12)
T RP + FAN
2 · Precision · Recall
F1 − S core =
(13)
Precision + Recall
where TRP indicates the number of normal traffic samples
that are correctly classified as normal traffic. FAN indicates
the number of normal traffic samples that are misclassified as
intrusion traffic. FAP indicates the number of intrusion traffic
samples that are misclassified as normal traffic. TRN indicates
the number of intrusion traffic samples that are correctly
classified as intrusion traffic.
Accuracy measures the proportion of correct predictions,
serving as a key performance metric. The F1-Score, the harmonic mean of precision and recall, is useful for imbalanced
datasets, offering a comprehensive evaluation. The confusion
matrix shows the distribution of true versus predicted labels,
providing an intuitive performance overview across classes.
C. Experimental Results
This study evaluates the performance of KDBC model using
two datasets: the TOW-IDS [6] for automotive Ethernet and the
can-train-and-test [14] for in-vehicle CAN. The experimental
design aims to validate the advantages of KDBC model in
enhancing the efficiency and accuracy of IDSs. It accomplishes
this by comparing the performance of different models across
1 Hacking
and Countermeasure
ocslab.hksecurity.net/welcome

Research

Lab

(HCRL):

https://

6407

these two datasets. Specifically, this study first compares the
original BERT model, the baseline CNN-BiLSTM model,
the KDBC model, and other models under two scenarios.
These two scenarios include using the TOW-IDS dataset [6]
alone and using a combination of the TOW-IDS [6] and cantrain-and-test [14] datasets, with a training-testing split of
70%:30%. Meanwhile, the study focuses on analyzing the
accuracy, F1-Score, and other key performance indicators of
each model across different datasets. This section also includes
a comparative analysis with the optimal solutions from existing
research focused on the TOW-IDS dataset [6]. Moreover,
relevant approaches were replicated using both two datasets
to facilitate comparison with the KDBC model.
1) Experimental Results Under TOW-IDS Dataset: This
study conducted comprehensive testing on the TOW-IDS
dataset [6], with detailed results presented in Fig. 7 and 8.
Specifically, Fig. 7 visually depicts the confusion matrices
of three different models on this dataset, clearly illustrating
the classification performance of each model. Fig. 8 further
compares the key performance indicators of the three models,
with the teacher model (BERT) showing exceptional results,
achieving an accuracy of 0.9980 and an impressive F1-Score
of 0.9971.
In contrast, the proposed KDBC model follows closely,
demonstrating strong performance with an accuracy of 0.9966,
slightly below that of the BERT model, while achieving a
high F1-Score of 0.9935. Notably, the original CNN-BiLSTM
model, which was not optimized through knowledge distillation, exhibited relatively weaker detection performance among
the three models, with an accuracy of 0.9600 and an F1-Score
of 0.9401.
The comparative analysis reveals that the KDBC model,
enhanced by knowledge distillation, not only exhibits performance that is nearly indistinguishable from the teacher
model BERT, but also shows significant improvement over
the original CNN-BiLSTM model. Specifically, its accuracy
increased by 3.66 percentage points, and its F1-Score rose by
0.0534, effectively validating the efficacy and superiority of
KDBC model.
2) Experimental Results Under TOW-IDS + Can-Train-andTest Dataset: To further validate the performance of model,
this study integrated the TOW-IDS [6] and can-train-and-test
[14] datasets, conducting tests on this combined dataset. The
results are illustrated in Fig. 9 and 10. Fig. 9 comprehensively
presents the confusion matrices for the three models on the
mixed dataset, providing a clear reflection of classification
accuracy. Fig. 10 systematically compares the key performance
indicators of the three models, with the teacher model (BERT)
maintaining its leading position, achieving an accuracy of
0.9999 and an exceptionally high F1-Score of 0.9999.
Following the BERT model is the proposed KDBC model,
which is an optimized CNN-BiLSTM model enhanced through
knowledge distillation. The KDBC model demonstrates outstanding performance on the mixed dataset, achieving an
accuracy of 0.9996 and an F1-Score of 0.9997, showing only
a slight gap from the teacher model. In contrast, the original
CNN-BiLSTM model, which was not subjected to knowledge
distillation, exhibited relatively weaker performance among

6408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 7. The confusion matrix of three models on TOW-IDS.

TABLE II
T HE C OST OF T HREE M ODELS ON TOW-IDS + CAN-T RAIN - AND -T EST

TABLE III
T HE C OMPARISON OF KDBC AND OTHER L ITERATURE
U NDER TOW-IDS DATASET

Fig. 8. The comparison of three models on TOW-IDS.

the three models, with an accuracy of 0.9658 and an F1-Score
of 0.9696.
Through comparative analysis, it is evident that the KDBC
model not only approaches the performance of the teacher
model BERT, but also achieves a significant improvement
compared to the original CNN-BiLSTM model. Specifically,
the accuracy of the KDBC model increased by 3.38 percentage
points, and the F1-Score also rose by 0.0301.
In comparison to the tests conducted solely on the
TOW-IDS dataset [6], the results from the combined dataset
show a general slight improvement across all performance
metrics. This is primarily attributed to the higher discernibility of CAN bus data features compared to Ethernet data
features, providing the model with richer and more learnable
information. Further observation of the two result figures
clearly demonstrates that the KDBC model exhibits excellent
performance on both datasets, evidenced by high accuracy and
F1-Scores among other key metrics. Meanwhile, the KDBC
achieved 0.9700 detection accuracy with only 30% of the
original training data, demonstrating that augmentation and
knowledge distillation synergistically address data scarcity
while ensuring efficiency. This remarkable performance is
largely due to the response-based knowledge distillation strategy employed by the KDBC model. Through this strategy, the
KDBC model effectively mimics the final prediction results of
the BERT model, thereby learning the strong versatility capability and deep knowledge of BERT. This not only enhances
the performance of the KDBC model, but also ensures stable
predictive accuracy when confronted with complex datasets.

3) The Cost of KDBC: Given the limited computational
resources available in vehicles, there is a stringent requirement
for lightweight detection models. Therefore, this study not
only focuses on the performance of the models, but also
analyzes the sizes and parameter counts of the three models.
It is evident from Table II that while the BERT teacher model
excels across all performance metrics, it is significantly large,
with a size of 417.64 MB and a staggering parameter count
of 100 million. In contrast, both the CNN-BiLSTM and the
KDBC models are notably more streamlined, with sizes of
only 2.35 MB and 1.01 MB, respectively, and parameter counts
limited to 614,913 and 264,833.
In the context of pursuing lightweight models, the KDBC
model demonstrates significant advantages. It not only maintains high levels of detection accuracy and F1-Score among
key metrics, but also successfully minimizes computational
overhead through structural optimization.
4) The Comparison With Existing Research Methods: To
demonstrate the advancements of KDBC model, this study
compares it with models proposed in other literature. The
performance metrics (accuracy, F1-score and model size) of
the KDBC model are obtained by training and testing our
model directly on the original, unmodified TOW-IDS and
can-train-and-test datasets. For the baseline schemes listed

LI et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION FOR IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS USING KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

6409

Fig. 9. The confusion matrix of three models on TOW-IDS + can-train-and-test.

TABLE V
T HE C OMPARISON OF KDBC AND OTHER L ITERATURE U NDER
TOW-IDS + CAN-T RAIN - AND -T EST DATASET

Fig. 10. The comparison of three models on TOW-IDS + can-train-and-test.
TABLE IV
T HE C OMPARISON OF KDBC AND OTHER L ITERATURE
U NDER CAN-T RAIN - AND -T EST DATASET

in Tables III and IV, the reported results are primarily
extracted from their respective original papers, in which the
same datasets are used under comparable conditions. We
carefully select the results that used the original dataset
splits without alterations to ensure fairness and consistency.
Regarding the selection of comparison methods, we focused
on well-established and widely cited schemes in the field
of IVN intrusion detection. These include models that either
(1) utilized the TOW-IDS [6] or can-train-and-test datasets
in their original form, or (2) adopted deep learning-based
architectures, such as CNN-LSTM and BERT variants, which
are directly comparable to our proposed approach.
For the TOW-IDS dataset [6], the comparison includes
TOW-IDS (with Wavelet Transform) [6], ResNet50 [6], EfficientNetB0 [6], Multi-stage IDS [19], and a semi-supervised
model [38], alongside the KDBC model. As shwn in Table III,
it is evident that the KDBC model achieves the highest accuracy, with its F1-Score also remaining at a high
level, slightly lower than that of TOW-IDS (with Wavelet

Transform) [6] and Multi-stage IDS [19]. However, the size
of KDBC model is only one-tenth that of TOW-IDS (with
Wavelet Transform) [6], clearly showcasing its advantages in
terms of lightweight design.
For the can-train-and-test dataset [14], we compared several
baseline methods, including Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB)
[14], Logistic Regression (LR) [14], Support Vector Machine
(SVM) [14], and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) [14]. As
shown in the Table IV, although LR has the smallest model
size at only 0.044 KB, its detection performance is relatively
poor. The SVM achieved a high accuracy of 0.9976, but
its F1-score was extremely low at just 0.0018. The best
overall performance was achieved by the proposed KDBC
model, which significantly outperformed the other methods
in both detection accuracy and F1-score, while maintaining a
reasonable model size of 17.7 KB.
For the hybrid dataset of TOW-IDS [6] and can-train-andtest [14], this study reproduced the ECF-IDS [15], CC-IDPS
[39], CNN-LSTM [11] and CNN-LSTM (with attention) [11]
models to compare with the KDBC model. The comparison
results are presented in Table V. It is clear that CC-IDPS [39]
achieved the best performance, with an accuracy of 0.9998
and an F1-Score of 0.9999. Meanwhile, the ECF-IDS [15],
CC-IDPS [39], and KDBC models all maintained high
detection accuracy and F1-scores, outperforming both the
CNN-LSTM [11] and CNN-LSTM (with attention) [11] models. Notably, the model size of KDBC is less than 1% of that
of ECF-IDS [15] and CC-IDPS [39], making it significantly
more lightweight while still delivering superior performance.
D. Real Scenarios Test
The practical applicability of the KDBC model was evaluated in two phases. In the initial stage, the model was

6410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE VI
T HE C OMPOSITION OF I N -V EHICLE G ATEWAY T EST DATASET

Fig. 11. Test of real scenarios and data.

trained and tested in a laboratory environment by connecting
it to an InchTek A1000Plus in-vehicle security gateway.2 The
A1000Plus is an in-vehicle security gateway product that supports automotive-grade Ethernet and CAN hybrid networks. It
integrates a high-performance automotive-grade gateway chip
and a security system foundation chip. Its software is based on
the AUTOSAR architecture, offering high reliability and meeting functional safety requirements. Once the model achieved
stable performance, we proceeded to the second stage, where
it was deployed and validated in a real vehicle environment3
(DongFeng Mengshi 817). Normal traffic was collected from
the real vehicle under various operating conditions, such as
ignition, driving, braking, and idling.
As shown in Fig. 11, the deployed system monitored multiple in-vehicle communication channels, including Ethernet,
TSN, and CAN bus data, to verify the effectiveness of the
model in real-world conditions. At the same time, we injected
relevant attack data and collected data from the in-vehicle
CAN bus and automotive Ethernet using a laptop.
For the CAN bus tests, we used a laptop connected to the
vehicle’s OBD-II interface via CANalyst-II. We then injected
DoS, spoof, replay, and fuzzy attack data into the in-vehicle
CAN bus. The specific details of each attack were as follows:
• DoS attack: Inject 60274 blank messages with both CAN
ID and DATA set to 0 every 0.1 milliseconds.
• Gear/RPM Spoof attack: Intercept CAN messages containing engine RPM or gear information, modify the
engine RPM or gear data fields in the message, and resend
it to the CAN bus.
• Replay attack: Replay the data packets captured in the
previous 10 seconds every 20 seconds.
• Fuzzy attack: Inject messages of totally random CAN
ID and DATA values every 0.1 milliseconds.
For the automotive Ethernet tests, we used a laptop connected to the in-vehicle gateway through an automotive
Ethernet media converter. Using tools like hping3, Macof,
LinuxPTP, and nmap on Kali Linux, we injected DoS, frame
injection, switch MAC flooding, PTP synchronization, sniffing,
and scanning attacks into the automotive Ethernet.
Specifically, active sniffing attacks are conducted using
Ettercap and Scapy, involving techniques such as ARP spoofing, MAC flooding, and DNS poisoning to intercept and
2 The in-vehicle gateway and related technologies used in this experiment
were provided by Beijing Inchtek Technology Co., Ltd.
3 The real test vehicle and related technologies used in this experiment were
provided by DongFeng Motor Group Co., Ltd.

TABLE VII
T HE C OMPARISON OF KDBC AND OTHER L ITERATURE
U NDER R EAL S CENARIOS

manipulate network traffic, thereby disrupting normal communication patterns. Scanning attacks are carried out with
Nmap, Wireshark, and Burp Suite, including port scanning,
protocol/service fingerprinting, CAN ID probing, and TSN
QoS analysis to identify active nodes, services, and timesensitive communication paths within the IVN.
Unlike the TOW-IDS [6] and can-train-test [14] datasets,
the actual test data (as shown in Table VI) included novel
network attacks that were not present in the training dataset
(e.g., sniffing and scanning attacks). As a result, the testing
difficulty increased due to the need to identify these new attack
types. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 12, the performance metrics
of the KDBC model in real scenarios are lower compared to
those in the TOW-IDS dataset [6]. Nevertheless, the KDBC
model still maintains a high level of detection performance,
achieving an accuracy of 0.9842, precision of 0.9715, recall
of 0.9874, and an F1 score of 0.9816.
The comparative test results of the ECF-IDS [15], CC-IDPS
[39], CNN-LSTM [11], CNN-LSTM (with attention) [11] and
KDBC models in real scenarios are shown in Table VII.
Compared to the results in Table V, the performance of all five
models declined in real testing scenarios, with the CNN-LSTM
[11] model showing the most significant drop in accuracy by
0.0440. The accuracy of both the ECF-IDS [15], CC-IDPS
[39] and KDBC models decreased by 0.0148, 0.0146 and
0.0154 respectively. Although the performance of the KDBC
model slightly lags behind the ECF-IDS [15] model, the size
of the KDBC model is significantly smaller than that of the
ECF-IDS [15].
During the real scenarios testing process, the KDBC model
displayed a certain level of versatility in detecting anomalies
associated with novel attacks, which can be attributed to
the high-quality text representations provided by the BERT

LI et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION FOR IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS USING KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION

6411

Fig. 12. The confusion matrix of three models on real vehicle test.

teacher model. These representations helped the student model
(CNN-BiLSTM) enhance its understanding and processing of
input data, enabling it to learn more comprehensive features
and patterns for accurate anomaly detection.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper addresses security challenges in IVNs within
intelligent transportation systems, particularly regarding new
technologies and complex network scenarios. It introduces
a lightweight and efficient anomaly traffic detection method
named KDBC. The KDBC leverages knowledge distillation
to transfer the deep semantic knowledge of BERT into a
more efficient CNN-BiLSTM model, reducing computational
and storage costs without compromising performance. Experimental results show KDBC’s strong versatility and superior
performance in detecting anomalies across Ethernet and CAN
network data, validated in a real in-vehicle gateway environment, offering a practical solution for IVNs security. Future
work will refine KDBC by exploring advanced distillation
techniques to enhance its real-time detection accuracy and
efficiency.
R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for
fast anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023.
E. Levy, A. Shabtai, B. Groza, P.-S. Murvay, and Y. Elovici, “CAN-LOC:
Spoofing detection and physical intrusion localization on an in-vehicle
CAN bus based on deep features of voltage signals,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 4800–4814, 2023.
W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020.
Z. Niu, J. Xue, Y. Wang, T. Lei, W. Han, and X. Gao, “QARF: A
novel malicious traffic detection approach via online active learning for
evolving traffic streams,” Chin. J. Electron., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 645–656,
May 2024.
Z. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Xun, and J. Qin, “IdentifierIDS: A practical voltagebased intrusion detection system for real in-vehicle networks,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 661–676, 2024.
M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “TOW-IDS: Intrusion detection
system based on three overlapped wavelets for automotive Ethernet,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 411–422, 2023.
M. H. Khan, A. R. Javed, Z. Iqbal, M. Asim, and A. I. Awad, “DivaCAN:
Detecting in-vehicle intrusion attacks on a controller area network
using ensemble learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 139, Apr. 2024, Art. no.
103712.
M. D. Hossain, H. Inoue, H. Ochiai, D. Fall, and Y. Kadobayashi,
“An effective in-vehicle CAN bus intrusion detection system using
CNN deep learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf.
(GLOBECOM), Dec. 2020, pp. 1–6.

[9]

H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
[10] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[11] H. Sun, M. Chen, J. Weng, Z. Liu, and G. Geng, “Anomaly detection for
in-vehicle network using CNN-LSTM with attention mechanism,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 10880–10893, Oct. 2021.
[12] W. Lo, H. Alqahtani, K. Thakur, A. Almadhor, S. Chander, and
G. Kumar, “A hybrid deep learning based intrusion detection system
using spatial–temporal representation of in-vehicle network traffic,” in
Proc. Veh. Commun. (VEH COMMUN), vol. 35, Mar. 2022, p. 100076.
[13] X. Zhang, L. Hao, G. Gui, Y. Wang, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari,
“An automatic and efficient malware traffic classification method for
secure Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5,
pp. 8448–8458, Mar. 2024.
[14] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Can-train-and-test: A curated CAN dataset for
automotive intrusion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024,
Art. no. 103777.
[15] S. Li, Y. Cao, H. J. Hadi, F. Hao, F. B. Hussain, and L. Chen, “ECFIDS: An enhanced cuckoo filter-based intrusion detection system for
in-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 3846–3860, Aug. 2024.
[16] E. Nwafor and H. Olufowobi, “CANBERT: A language-based intrusion
detection model for in-vehicle networks,” in Proc. 21st IEEE Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), Dec. 2022, pp. 294–299.
[17] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, and C. Gao, “Open world intrusion detection:
An open set recognition method for CAN bus in intelligent connected
vehicles,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 76–82, May 2024.
[18] R. Islam, M. K. Devnath, M. D. Samad, and S. M. J. Al Kadry, “GGNB:
Graph-based Gaussian naive Bayes intrusion detection system for CAN
bus,” Veh. Commun., vol. 33, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 100442.
[19] L. F. M. da Luz, P. F. D. Araujo-Filho, and D. R. Campelo, “Multi-stage
deep learning-based intrusion detection system for automotive Ethernet
networks,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 162, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 103548.
[20] S. Jeong, H. K. Kim, M. L. Han, and B. I. Kwak, “AERO: Automotive Ethernet real-time observer for anomaly detection in in-vehicle
networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 4651–4662,
Mar. 2024.
[21] D. Ergenç, R. Schenderlein, and M. Fischer, “TSNZeek: An open-source
intrusion detection system for IEEE 802.1 time-sensitive networking,”
in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf. (IFIP Netw.), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–6.
[22] P. Meyer, T. Häckel, F. Korf, and T. C. Schmidt, “Network anomaly
detection in cars based on time-sensitive ingress control,” in Proc. IEEE
92nd Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Nov. 2020, pp. 1–5.
[23] Z. Chen et al., “Digital forensics for automotive intelligent networked terminal devices,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 4,
pp. 5128–5138, Apr. 2024.
[24] M. De Vincenzi et al., “A systematic review on security attacks
and countermeasures in automotive Ethernet,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1–38, Jun. 2024.
[25] H. Kim, W. Yoo, S. Ha, and J.-M. Chung, “In-vehicle network average
response time analysis for CAN-FD and automotive Ethernet,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 6916–6932, Jun. 2023.

6412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[26] Z. King, “Investigating and securing communications in the controller
area network (CAN),” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun.
(ICNC), Jan. 2017, pp. 814–818.
[27] S. Gao, L. Zhang, L. He, X. Deng, H. Yin, and H. Zhang,
“Attack detection for intelligent vehicles via CAN-bus: A lightweight
image network approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 12,
pp. 16624–16636, Dec. 2023.
[28] M. H. Shahriar, Y. Xiao, P. M. Salazar, W. Lou, and T. Y. Hou,
“CANShield: Deep learning-based intrusion detection framework for
controller area networks at the signal-level,” IEEE Internet Things
J. (IoTJ), vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4528–4539, Jan. 2022.
[29] A. Morato, E. Ferrari, S. Vitturi, F. Tramarin, C. Zunino, and
M. Cheminod, “A TSN-based approach to combine real-time CAN
network with in-vehicle Ethernet,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Metrol.
Automot. (MetroAutomotive), Jun. 2024, pp. 12–17.
[30] J. Zhou, S. Li, Y. Cao, H. J. Hadi, and H. Lin, “Robust intrusion detection
system in CAN bus through multi-scale feature fusion,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2024, pp. 1316–1321.
[31] W. Su et al., “Towards All-in-one pre-training via maximizing multimodal mutual information,” Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), vol. 2023, pp. 15888–15899, Jan. 2022.
[32] M. A. Islam, M. Kowal, S. Jia, K. G. Derpanis, and N. D. B. Bruce,
“Position, padding and predictions: A deeper look at position information in CNNs,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 132, no. 9, pp. 1–22, Sep. 2024.
[33] N. Fei, Y. Gao, Z. Lu, and T. Xiang, “Z-score normalization, hubness,
and few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 142–151.
[34] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
naacL-HLT, Jan. 2018, p. 2.
[35] Z. Zhang et al., “Semantics-aware BERT for language understanding,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, no. 5, 2020, pp. 9628–9635.
[36] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for
network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern
Recognit. (AIPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 223–231.
[37] J. H. Cho and B. Hariharan, “On the efficacy of knowledge distillation,”
in Proc. ICCV, Oct. 2019, pp. 4794–4802.
[38] K. H. Shibly, M. D. Hossain, H. Inoue, Y. Taenaka, and Y. Kadobayashi,
“A feature-aware semi-supervised learning approach for automotive
Ethernet,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Resilience (CSR), Jul.
2023, pp. 426–431.
[39] S. Li, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, T. Liao, F. Yan, and H. Lin, “A cloud
collaborative-based intrusion detection and prevention system for IVN,”
IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 4, p. 1, Nov. 2025.

Sifan Li received the B.S. degree from Nanchang
University in 2021 and the M.S. degree from Wuhan
University in 2024. He is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber Science
and Engineering, Wuhan University. His research
interests include in-vehicle network security, the
IoT intrusion detection, and aerospace-sky-earth
cybersecurity.

Yue Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the Institute for Communication
Systems (ICS) formerly known as the Centre for
Communication Systems Research, University of
Surrey, Guildford, U.K., in 2013. Further to his
Ph.D. study, he had conducted a Research Fellow
with the University of Surrey and academic faculty with Northumbria University, U.K., Lancaster
University, U.K., and Beihang University, Beijing,
China. He is currently a Professor with the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China. His research interests include intelligent transport systems,
including e-mobility, V2X, and edge computing.

Guojun Peng received the Ph.D. degree from
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2008. He is
currently a Professor with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Wuhan University. His
research interests inlcude system security and trust
computing. He is a member of CCF and CSAC.

Meng Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science and technology from the
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), China, in 2019.
He is currently an Associate Professor and the Dean
Assistant of the School of Computer Science and
Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology (HFUT), China. He is also a Post-Doctoral
Researcher with the Department of Mathematics and
the HIT Center, University of Padua, Italy, where
he is with the Security and PRIvacy Through Zeal
(SPRITZ) Research Group led by Prof. Mauro Conti (IEEE Fellow). He was
sponsored by the ERCIM “Alain Bensoussan” Fellowship Program to conduct
post-doctoral research supervised by Prof. Fabio Martinelli at CNR, Italy,
from October 2020 to March 2021. He was sponsored by China Scholarship
Council (CSC) for the joint Ph.D. study supervised by Prof. Xiaodong
Lin (IEEE Fellow) with the Broadband Communications Research (BBCR)
Laboratory, University of Waterloo, and Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada,
from November 2017 to August 2018. His research interests include security,
privacy, applied cryptography, blockchain, TEE, and the Internet of Vehicles.
In this area, he has published 80 papers in international peer-reviewed
journals and conferences, including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION
F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON D EPENDABLE AND
S ECURE C OMPUTING, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING , TODS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON S ERVICES C OMPUTING , COMST, ISSTA, MobiCom, ACISP, ICICS,
SecureComm, TrustCom, ICC, and IPCCC. He is a Senior Member of
CIE, CIC, and CCF. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, and IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS
J OURNAL.

Wei Sun received the degree from the Department
of Systems Engineering and Applied Mathematics,
Chongqing University. He is currently working at
the Research and Development Institute, Dongfeng
Motor Group Corporation Ltd., as the Chief Digital Engineer. For many years, he has been in
charge of informatization and digital planning in the
research and development field, the implementation
of research and development information system
projects, and connected vehicle cybersecurity work.
He has rich experience in informatization and digitalization in the research and development field as well as in the cybersecurity
of connected vehicles.

Luan Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Conservatoire National des Arts
et Métiers (CNAM-Paris) in 2020. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Information,
Communications, and Imaging (ICI) Group, ETIS
Laboratory (UMR 8051), a joint research laboratory of CY Cergy Paris University, ENSEA, and
CNRS, France. His research interests include wireless indoor localization/sensing, statistical signal
processing (RF/biomedical), mobile computing for
IoT, and machine learning technologies.