IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

3565

Efficient Intrusion Detection in AMI Systems Based
on Federated Semi-Supervised Learning
Zhuoqun Xia , Haidong Tang , Zhenzhen Hu , Member, IEEE, and Hongmei Zhou, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) network is the most critical part of a smart grid, and it faces serious
security challenges from network attacks. Federated learning (FL)
is a common method for addressing network security problems;
however, it has several shortcomings, such as difficulty in obtaining
labeled data and high communication costs. Therefore, in this
paper, an efficient intrusion detection method based on federated
semi-supervised learning is proposed to improve the efficiency
of AMI network intrusion detection and reduce communication
overhead. First, an intrusion detection framework based on federated distillation (FD) is established to address intense assumption
dependency problems and reduce communication overhead. Then,
an efficient intrusion detection algorithm is used to improve the
classification performance. Finally, the designed deep convolutional
generative adversarial network (DCGAN) model is used to obtain
high-quality sample data. The experimental results show that the
scheme achieves an accuracy of 99.58%, a communication overhead of 75 MB, and a reduction in the false-positive rate of 6%.
Index Terms—Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI),
intrusion detection, federated distillation (FD), semi-supervised
learning, deep convolutional generative adversarial network
(DCGAN).

I. INTRODUCTION
N RECENT years, the vigorous evolution of smart grids
(SGs) has yielded numerous application services, such as demand response (DR), advanced metering infrastructure (AMI),
and real-time price (RTP), which has been very beneficial
for customers and grid companies [1]. An AMI is a typical application service for smart grids. The AMI consists of
group smart meters, concentrators, and data centers. In addition, AMI enables bidirectional communication between customers and utilities [2]. However, massive data transmission
imposes a considerable burden on the communication of AMI
networks. Fortunately, fifth-generation (5G) communication
technology can meet wide coverage, large connectivity, and
low latency requirements. Therefore, using 5G communication

I

Received 15 February 2024; revised 9 April 2025; accepted 14 April 2025.
Date of publication 21 April 2025; date of current version 25 August 2025.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 52177067 and Grant 62402209 and in part by the
Hunan Natural Science Foundation under Grant 2023JJ30052. Recommended
for acceptance by Prof. Xiaowen Chu. (Corresponding author: Zhenzhen Hu.)
Zhuoqun Xia, Haidong Tang, and Hongmei Zhou are with the College
of Computer, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha
410114, China (e-mail: xiazhuoqun@csust.edu.cn; 1031564607@qq.com;
zhouhongmei@stu.csust.edu.cn).
Zhenzhen Hu is with the College of Computer Science, University of South
China, Hengyang 421001, China (e-mail: hzz88@hnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3562751

technology in the AMI network is an efficient solution [3]. Smart
grids (SGs) and wireless technology enable AMI to integrate
more flexibly with smart meters and more services/applications.
However, AMI systems are widely distributed and vulnerable to
various security attacks, such as denial of service (DoS), false
data injection (FDI), and user-to-root (U2R) attacks [4]. In 2015,
a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack on Ukrainian AMI
systems affected 225000 consumers [5]. In 2020, the Energias
de Portugal (EDP) electricity company suffered from Ragnar
Locker Ransomware attacks, which resulted in economic losses
of $10.9 million [6]. Therefore, network security attacks have
a history of leading to severe financial losses and hindering
people’s daily lives.
Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) can intercept network
traffic and trigger real-time alerts to improve the performance
of AMI networks in monitoring and detecting failures. Recent
studies have focused on deep learning (DL)-based intrusion
detection systems to improve the accuracy of AMI intrusion
detection. Some authors have proposed AMI network intrusion detection schemes that combine feature downscaling and
modified long short-term memory (LSTM) networks to increase
classification accuracy. However, this approach has flaws, such
as low data privacy, low efficiency, and high latency [7], [8], due
to the possibility of exploiting privacy-sensitive network traffic
data. To improve communication security, several authors have
investigated federated learning (FL)-based intrusion detection
methods for AMI networks [9], [10], [14]. However, these methods have two drawbacks. First, large numbers of AMI devices
upload model parameters to cloud servers, resulting in heavy
communication burdens. Second, existing FL-based intrusion
detection methods rely on strong assumptions (adequate available traffic samples, labeled samples, and having all samples
available for model training). In these methods, the client uploads the overall model to the cloud server rather than using
the Federated Distillation (FD) model parameters. Therefore,
the FDs are widely used to reduce communication costs [11],
[12], [13]. In the real world, these unlabeled data are rarely used
in supervised learning procedures due to the high cost of data
labeling, lack of most of the data being labeled, limited stored
data, missing and unbalanced data, etc. [15]. Semi-supervised
learning has gained widespread attention in recent years because
it can efficiently address insufficiently labeled data.
Although the above literature has addressed the relevant issues
to some extent, there are still two significant shortcomings:
(1) Several studies have been performed on intrusion detection FL-based methods in AMI networks, however, not many

2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

of the studies have considered the attack detection accuracies
and communication overheads, which significantly reduces the
practical application potential of the proposed model. (2) Several
existing works on intrusion detection modeling have focused on
using or modifying the structure of a neural network to achieve
a high detection rate but have ignored the complexities of data
collection and use. However, the processing of datasets may
sometimes be more time-consuming than the study of detection
models. Therefore, datasets must be automatically processed for
AMI-IDS research.
This paper proposes an effective intrusion detection method
for AMI networks based on federated semi-supervised learning,
known as FSSL-IDS, to address these challenges. The main
research contributions of this paper are as follows:
r We propose a distributed intrusion detection framework
based on FD to provide efficient communication methods
for AMI networks. The framework allows AMI devices to
participate in creating global detection models by exchanging model outputs. The switched model output reduces the
communication overhead for intrusion detection in AMI
networks and enables high detection performance.
r We create an intrusion detection model based on the DCGAN. The limited labeled data from the cloud server can
be supplemented by the synthetic data produced by the
DCGAN, which has the advantages of efficient feature
extraction capabilities, fast training speeds, and high detection accuracies in implementing intrusion detection in the
AMI network. Moreover, the DCGAN addresses the issues
of missing categories, imbalances, and limited labeled data
on the cloud server side.
r The PyTorch framework is used to conduct simulation
experiments on the proposed model. These experiments
verify that our proposed FSSL-IDS model not only has high
accuracy but also reduces the FL communication overhead.
The introduction of the DCGAN model fully utilizes the
AMI dataset, which endows the model with high practical
value.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Section II, related work is discussed. In Section III, the preparatory knowledge is presented. In Section IV, the FSSL-IDS
detection framework, the DCGAN intrusion detection model,
and the federated semi-supervised learning intrusion detection
technique are introduced. In Section V, the performance of the
FSSL-IDS is experimentally evaluated. The conclusions of this
paper are presented in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
A. DL-Based IDSs for AMI Networks
In response to insufficient machine learning (ML), some
researchers have investigated deep learning-based intrusion detection for AMI networks. Several works have demonstrated
that DL outperforms ML in terms of AMI network intrusion
detection. For example, Zheng et al. [17] proposed a depth-andbreadth convolutional neural network (CNN) model to identify
power theft in a smart grid. To detect intrusions into smart
grids, Taghavinejad et al. [18] proposed a hybrid deep neural
network to improve detection performance by incorporating

multiple calssification and regression tree (CART) decision tree
classifiers. Vijayanand et al. [19] used a multilayer deep learning
algorithm to analyze smart meter traffic for accurate attack
detection. He et al. [20] proposed an AMI network intrusion
detection method using the conditional deep belief network
(CDBN), which can identify a false data injection via several
external conditions. Xiao et al. [21] combined self-encoders with
convolutional neural networks and reduced the dimensionality
of the data to reduce redundant feature interference. Xu et al.
[22] analyzed abnormal data in AMI networks via a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (BiGRU). Compared with LSTM, the
BiGRU is more effective and accurate and has a lower false
alarm rate. Alshede et al. [36] proposed an integrated voting
algorithm based on random forest and convolutional neural
networks to classify multiclass attack categories. Alsirhani et al.
[37] proposed a smart grid intrusion detection strategy that
combines deep learning and signature techniques. After the
dataset is preprocessed, the feature values are extracted, and
the African culture optimization algorithm is used to organize
the feature selection. Then, deep belief network (DBN)-LSTM
is used to identify attacks. Alabassi et al. [38] proposed a deep
learning-based system for critical infrastructure cyber-attack
detection and location recognition by building new representations and modeling the system’s behavior via multiple layers
of autoencoders.
In AMI intrusion detection, deep learning improves accuracy
and multiclassification while reducing overfitting. However,
there is a reliance on centralized data, which poses privacy issues
and network strain.
B. FL-Based IDS for AMI Networks
Federated learning is a distributed learning system in which
clients work together to train models under the supervision of a
cloud server. Training data can be stored locally on the client,
and the cloud server must be informed only of local distributed
model training parameters [23], [24]. This method lowers the
costs and privacy hazards associated with centralized ML methods. Federated learning is a viable method for detecting AMI
intrusions because it can help address data privacy concerns.
Recently, Sun et al. [8] suggested an intrusion detection
solution for AMI networks that employs Transformer models for hierarchical federated learning training. The system
achieves collaborative training of shared intrusion detection
models for smart meters while protecting privacy and reducing communication costs. In addition, Mirzaee et al. [9] presented a federated intrusion detection solution for AMI networks based on deep neural networks (DNNs), which achieves
secure and private AMI systems by monitoring AMI network
traffic with federated deep neural network detection techniques
and constructing a distributed IDS architecture. Xia et al. [10]
suggested a client-based paradigm for effective AMI network
intrusion detection. The framework comprehensively considers the client’s security performance and computing power to
achieve efficient intrusion detection. It uses a DBN based on
an attention mechanism, thereby reducing the communication
overhead. Liang et al. [25] proposed a federated learning approach for AMI intrusion detection, with local DNN model

XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING

TABLE I
NOMENCLATURE

training on concentrators and a data center aggregating and
distributing a global model. Wen et al. [26] developed a federated
learning framework for collaborative privacy-preserving power
theft detection in smart grids by employing a secure communication protocol and temporal convolutional network (TCN)
model. Wang et al. [39] proposed an intrusion detection method
based on an AMI network federated learning client security. In
addition, adaptive weights have been used to resist poisoning
attacks. Naeem et al. [40] proposed a novel FL-empowered
semi-supervised active learning (FL-SSAL) security orchestration framework for a label-at-client scenario that used labeled and unlabeled samples to detect attacks in the network
infrastructure.
However, supervised approaches in AMI intrusion detection
cannot utilize large amounts of unlabeled data. This paper proposes a method using a DCGAN within FL to improve detection
performance by leveraging both labeled and unlabeled data, and
achieves high-precision classification. Additionally, federated
distillation is employed to optimize the communication overhead, resulting in a highly accurate and efficient model.
III. PRELIMINARY KNOWLEDGE
A. Federated Distillation
The parameters andexplanations used in this paper are as
shown in Table I. Federated learning was proposed by Google in
2016 [7], and its emergence addressed the capability of attackers
to steal or tamper with raw data during the upload process.
The mainstream federated averaging (FedAVG) algorithm ensures that the client shares only the model parameters but not
the local raw data, thus ensuring the privacy of the client’s
local data. Moreover, FD can shrink the model. The client
participating in FD does not need to upload model parameters;
only the average predicted values of the labels, namely, the
local model output (local logits), need to be uploaded. After
the Softmax function operation, the local model output is a
normalized vector value, which is much smaller than the size of
the local model parameters, largely reducing the communication

3567

overhead of the entire training process [27], [28]. Suppose that
the local dataset of client k is Dk = (xki , yik )|i = 1, 2, . . ., n,
where n denotes the number of samples in dataset Dk . Then,
Dk can be divided into l subsets according to the labels, that is,
Dk (Dk = Dk,0 ∪ Dk,l ∪ . . . ∪ Dk,L−1 ). For any subset Dk,l ,
k,l
Dk,l = {(xk,l
i , yi ), i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n}. The label of each sample is a one-hot vector; for example, the one-hot vector of label
k,l k,l
k,l
, yi,1 , . . . , y i , lk , l, yi,L−1
},
L can be expressed as y ik , l = {yi,0
k,l
where yi,l = 1 and the other values are equal to 0. The FD
algorithm consists of the following six main steps [11], [12],
[13]:
1) Training phase: The client k performs the same procedures as in federated learning local training to train its
local model ω k with the dataset Dk .
2) Prediction Phase: The local average logit vector, which is
calculated for client k and displayed below, represents the
average value of each label:


k
(1)
ŷik,l = F xk,l
i |ω
N
1  k,l
= k,l
ŷi
N
i=1
k,l

ȳ

k,l

(2)

If client k has no samples with label l, namely, Dk,l = ∅,
then the label l’s local average logit vector is 0, that is,
ȳ k,l = 0.
3) Upload phase: Each client uploads {ȳ k,0 , ȳ k,l , . . . ,
ȳ k,L−1 } to the cloud server.
4) Aggregation phase: The client receives the global average
logit vector via broadcast from the cloud server after
performing global aggregation.
K

ȳ s,l =

1  k,l
ȳ
K

(3)

k=1

5) Update Phase: Each client calculates a new local average
logit vector based on the global average logit as follows:
 l

1
ȳ k,l = l
N × ȳ s,l − ȳ k,l
(4)
N −1
where each sample xi with true label l has a local average
logit vector ȳik,l equal to ȳ k,l .
6) Iteration phase: Client k trains its model using the true
labels and the new local average logit vector.
B. Generating an Adversarial Network
The deep learning network called the generative adversarial
network (GAN) uses an inverse model [29]. Fig. 1 depicts
the network structure. Generators train themselves to generate
artificial data, whereas discriminators are trained to distinguish
between raw and generated data. The performances of the two
networks can be incrementally improved as they operate in
parallel. After n iterations, the discriminator learns to identify
the data source, whereas the generator learns to produce data
similar to the original data. The GAN function is as follows:
minG maxD = Ex Pdata (logDi (x))
+ Ez Pz (log (1 − Di (Gi (z))))

(5)

3568

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Generating an adversarial network.
Fig. 2.

where Gi (z) represents the synthetic data generated by the
generator, and the discriminator output is Di [0, 1], which expresses the likelihood that the data are authentic or a copy. The
generator aims to reduce the possibility that the discriminator
classifies the data source as 1 − Di (Gi (z)). The discriminator’s
goal is to maximize the probability of data source recognition,
that is, 1 − Di (Gi (z)) and Di (x). The generator’s input is the
noise signal, which is a random vector of size k that follows
the normal distribution and provides data that are similar to
the training data. The generator and the training samples serve
as the discriminator’s input so that the discriminator can distinguish between them.
IV. THE PROPOSED FSSL-IDS SCHEME
Joint training by exchanging equipment local FL model parameters is a common practice in the AMI intrusion detection
field and provides benefits for data privacy protection [29],
[30], [31], [32], [33]. However, in traditional FL-based intrusion
detection methods for AMI networks, AMI devices require
communication overhead proportional to the model size when
training is performed. In addition, in actual AMI networks, the
data obtained from the AMI device are usually partially labeled
or may be completely unlabeled. To address the problems mentioned above, we propose a method based on the federal AMI
network intrusion detection method.
A. FSSL-IDS Detection Framework
In this section, our detection framework and main ideas are
described, as shown in Fig. 2. The AMI detection framework
proposed in this paper consists mainly of a data center (i.e.,
cloud server), a concentrator, and a 5G base station, which are
described in detail below.
1) Data Center: The data center is a cloud server deployed
by an electric utility that is in charge of gathering, analyzing, and
processing the data, serving as the federated learning counterpart
of the central server. Before training begins, considering that the
standard samples are the majority, and that attack samples are

FSSL-IDS detection framework.

the minority, the generator using the DCGAN model generates
synthetic data based on the original labeled data, feeds it to the
discriminator for supervised learning along with the original
labeled data, and finally broadcasts the initialized DCGAN
model to the centralizer. In addition, after each round of communication, the DCGAN supervised model is adjusted using the
global model output, which is created by incorporating the local
model output from the cloud server. Finally, the cloud server
broadcasts the global model output and the DCGAN supervisory
model back to the concentrator.
2) Concentrator: The concentrator is the local client for FL
training. This device collects smart meter power data from
residential customers and requires privacy and security protection. Smart meters communicate with home appliances through
the home LAN to collect data. The power data are regularly
delivered to a nearby concentrator for storage and co-training.
In each round of training, the concentrator uses local unlabeled
data for local updates, obtains local model outputs, and performs
category prediction on the unlabeled data. The output of the local
model is then transferred to the cloud server.
3) 5G Base Stations: 5G base stations are deployed near
the concentrator to improve the spectral efficiency of communication between the concentrator and the cloud server via
5G network slicing technology and to provide low-latency
end–to-end connectivity. The concentrator generates the local
model output through federated distillation learning and transmits it to the cloud server for aggregation over the 5G core
network.
B. Federated Semi-Supervised Intrusion Detection Algorithm
In this section, we detail the design of the federated semisupervised learning algorithm, as shown in Fig. 3. Specifically,
a small publicly available labeled dataset is first introduced, and
the cloud server uses this labeled dataset for initial training.
Before training, a generator network using the DCGAN model
generates synthetic data based on the original labeled data; it

XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING

3569

Algorithm 1: FSSL-IDS Algorithm.

Fig. 3.

Communication process for federated semi-supervised learning.

This model is trained on a small publicly available labeled
dataset. The proposed algorithm is described in detail below.
1) Supervised Training and Label Balancing Phase: First,
the cloud server trains the supervised classification model θ0
with a small number of publicly available labeled datasets.
Considering a class imbalance problem in labeled datasets,
synthetic data are produced from the original labeled data before
training via the generator network of the DCGAN model. The
discriminator for supervised learning is then given both synthetic
data and original labeled data. The detailed formula is as follows:
Zi = GaussianN oise(b)

(6)

XG = G (ω, z) |zZi

(7)



p

D = XG + D


θ0 = Adam θ
then feeds these synthetic data together with the original labeled
data into the discriminator for supervised learning. The local
concentrator is trained locally via a large amount of unlabeled
data via the FD algorithm after receiving the supervised model
from the cloud server to determine the class to which each sample
in the unlabeled data belongs, thereby assisting the cloud server
in performing iterative training for supervised learning.
We assume that there are M concentrators, and that each
concentrator m{1, 2, 3, . . . , M } has a local unlabeled dataset
|i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n}. The cloud server has a
Dm,c = {xm,c
i
small number of publicly available labeled datasets Dp =
{(xpj , yjp )|j = 1, 2, 3, . . . , N p }. Intrusion detection is similar to
a classification task. In this section, there are assumed to be L
categories, and yjp is assumed to be a one-hot vector. In addition,
each concentrator receives a supervised classification model θ0
broadcast by the cloud server before local unsupervised training.

m

1 
(−D (Gθ (z)) , θ, α)
m i=1



(8)
(9)

where b denotes a random number, where Adam denotes the
optimization function, where D denotes the discriminator, and
where G denotes the generator.
2) Distribute Model Parameter Phase: The cloud server distributes the supervised classification model θ0 to the local concentrator through the 5G core network.
3) Local Update Phase: Based on the stochastic gradient
descent algorithm, each concentrator is trained unsupervised
with a substantial amount of local unlabeled data, and the local
update model θt is calculated as shown below:
θt = θ0 − η∇ψ (Dm,c |θ0 )

(10)

In the intrusion detection problem, the cross-entropy loss function is generally used, and ψ(Dm,c |θ0 ) is calculated as follows:

3570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

ψ (D

m,c

|θ0 ) = −

n


logF (xm,c
|θ0 )
i

(11)

i=1

4) Prediction Phase: Concentrator m uses federal distillation to calculate the local model output (local logits), which
represents the inferred probability of each data sample being
classified into each category. To achieve category prediction of
unlabeled data, a local unsupervised model based on what was
learned in the previous stage must be used. The local logits values predicted by each concentrator m are calculated as follows:
|θt )
p̂i,m = F (xm,c
i

(12)

where the matrix P̂m is used to denote the set p̂i,m |i =
1, 2, 3, . . . , n.
5) Uploading Phase: The concentrator uploads the local
model output P̂m to the cloud server, unlike in traditional FL,
which uploads the model parameters θt .
6) Aggregation Phase: The cloud server performs entropy
reduction, which primarily accelerates and stabilizes the FD
process, to combine the uploaded local model output with the
global model output p̂i,s , which is calculated as follows:
M

1 
p̂i,s =
p̂i,m
M m=1

(13)

p̂i,s = S (p̂i,s |T )

(14)

where S is the Softmax function at temperature T .
7) Supervised Learning Phase: The cloud server takes the
global model output p̂i,s as the input of the DCGAN model and
helps the DCGAN model be supervised and trained again.
θt+1 = θt+1 − η∇ψ (Dp , p̂i,s |θt+1 )

(15)

8) Broadcast Global Model Output Phase: Over the 5G core
network, the cloud server broadcasts the global model output p̂i,s
to every concentrator client.
9) FD Phase: The concentrator updates the local model
based on the broadcasted global model output p̂i,s and the local
unlabeled data Dm,c . Specifically, the local model parameters
are calculated as follows:
θt = θt − η∇ψ (Dm,c , p̂i,s |θt )

(16)

The above communication process is iterated several times until
the model converges, and the detailed process is shown in
Algorithm 1.
C. DCGAN Intrusion Detection Model
Often, the data are unlabeled or unbalanced, and it is not
practical to directly use the data in the model to make judgments.
We use the DCGAN to construct intrusion detection models;
this approach can solve the problem of data labeling, and can
better extract dataset characteristics. The DCGAN is used for
supervised learning in cloud servers and for local training, and
updates the concentrators and cloud server concentrators. FD
trains the DCGAN intrusion detection model collaboratively

Fig. 4.

Deep convolutional generative adversarial network.

Algorithm 2: DCGAN Algorithm.

XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING

over a 5G core network. A CNN discriminator and a CNN
generator compose the DCGAN optimization model, which is
gamed to produce the best outcomes. The goal of the discriminator is to identify anomalous data, whereas the generator’s
goal is to generate additional data to improve the classification.
The DCGAN may also extract deep features from AMI network
traffic via CNNs to increase the model’s stability and training
duration. The architecture of the DCGAN is shown in Fig. 4.
The DCGAN is represented as follows:
min max VGAN (G, D)
G

D

= Ex∈X [Log (D(x))] + Ez∈Xz [Log (1−D (G(x)))]

(17)

In the suggested intrusion detection model based on the DCGAN, data z are selected from the dataset Xz with random noise
as the input to the DCGAN generator. xz and z are matrices of


, respectively, where km and km
sizes jm × km and jm × km
are the sample sizes of Xz and z, respectively, and where jm
is the feature size of the noisy data. The random noisy data
are subsequently converted into fake data Xz = G(Xz ) by the
generator G, where Xz is a matrix of size km C × C. This
process of generating false data from random, noisy data can
be expressed as follows:
 l C
vXzl = g l ωG
× Xzl−1 + blG , l = 1, 2, 3, . . . , nm (18)

function, and is defined as follows:
φ (QL , QL )
e

=

1
− [QLl log (QLl ) + (1 − QLl ) log (1 − QLl )] (21)
e
l

where the lth actual value in a batch of input data is indicated by
the symbol QLl ; in a batch of input data, e represents the number
of samples, and QLl represents the lth neural network predictor.
The cross-entropy loss function can be used to improve the CNN
performance effectively.
Additionally, the loss function of the model can be improved
via the adaptive moment estimation (ADAM) optimization function with the following formula:
e

gt =

ξM SE (QL , QL ) =

2
e

l=1 (QLl − QLl )

e

(19)

To train the discriminator network, the generator-generated
dataset Xz is combined with the input dataset XR =
(X1 , X2 , . . . , Xmx ) to generate the combined data Xc . where
mx is the number of samples of genuine data, Xi (i =
1, 2, 3, . . . , mx ) is the data matrix, and Xc is a matrix of size
km + mx . The discriminator network is trained using the combined data Xc . Discriminator D is a CNN network used to
generate discriminative data Yc = D(Xc ), and Yc is a matrix
of size 2 × (km + mx ). The training process of discriminator D
is shown in Formula (22).


l
ψ∗l kcnn
∗ X (l−1) + blcnn = X l , l = 1, 2, . . . , nC
(20)
where X 0 denotes the input data X, X nC denotes the output
data Y , and where X l denotes the output of the lth layer. The
maximum pooling operation is used by all pooling levels. Adl
l
= (kcnn
, blcnn ) is used to denote the parameters
ditionally, θcnn
of the lth convolutional layer. The activation function ψ∗l can be
a hyperbolic tangent function, a ReLU function, or a Softmax
function. The cross-entropy loss function φ is used as the loss


1
∇θ
φ (QL , QL )
e

(22)

k=1

mt = ρ1mt−1 +(1−ρ1 )gt

(23)

nt = ρ2nt−1 +(1−ρ2 )gt2

(24)

mt
1 − ρt1
nt
n̂t =
1 − ρt2

m̂t =

n

where Xz0 denotes the input data z, Xz m denotes the output
Xz of the generator G, Xzl denotes the output of the lth layer,
l
l
= (ωG
, blG ) denotes the parameters of the lth transposed
and θG
convolutional layer. In addition, g l is the activation function,
which is typically set as the hyperbolic tangent function. The
suggested strategy optimizes generator G via the mean square
error (MSE) function to obtain the best result for the generator
network. The MSE loss function can be expressed as follows:

3571

Δθ = −η √

m̂t
n̂t + ε

(25)
(26)
(27)

where φ denotes the loss function of the CNN, and where ∇θ
denotes the gradient of the parameter θ. gt denotes the gradient
of the tth time step, and t denotes the number of optimization
time steps. ρ1 and ρ2 denote the exponential decay rates of
the moment estimate, and the values of ρ1 and ρ2 lie between
[0, 1], respectively, indicating the decay degree of the moment
estimate. In addition, mt and nt denote the biased first-order
moment estimates and second-order moment estimates, respectively. Correspondingly, m̂t and n̂t denote the bias-corrected
first-order moments and bias-corrected second-order moments,
respectively. ε denotes the constant used for numerical stabilization. Δθ denotes the magnitude of the updated parameter θ.
Y (Yc ) =

y1ι=0 ,y2ι=1 if y1ι <y2ι
y1ι=1 ,y2ι=0 if y1ι ≥y2ι , [4pt]ι = 1, . . ., km + mχ

(28)
where y1l and y2l denote the discriminant results of the lth data
point of the discriminator. Yz and YR compose the discriminator’s output data Yc . The discriminant result of the produced data
Xz is Yz , and the discriminant result of the original data XR is
YR . The function ϕ is subsequently used to determine Yz and
YR . The function ϕ can be used to determine the discriminative
ability of the original data and the created data, and the following
technique is used to implement the function ϕ:
ϕ=

TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN

(29)

3572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

where the letters TP, FP, FN, and TN represent true-positive,
false-positive, false-negative, and true-positive samples, respectively. The matrices corr(A, B) and their similarity are defined
as follows:
corr(A, B)
=

ms


ms

ns (ams ,ns−ā )

ns (ams ,ns −ā)

2





bms ,ns−b̄

2 
ms
ns bms ,ns − b̄
(30)

where ā and b̄ represent the average values of A and B, respectively, and both matrices A and B are of size ms × ns .
Consequently, the following formula can be used to determine
how similar Xz and XXz are on average:


kc


 

l corr Xzl , XXzl
Cr Xz , XXz =
(31)
kc
where the generated data Xz are the generated data, and where
XXz is the comparison data. The model is updated by determining the sizes of ϕ(Y (Yz ), YYz ) and ϕ(Y (YR ), YYR ) and
determining whether the The Cr(Xz , XXz ) value reaches the
threshold υ. The labels for the produced data Xz and the original
data XR are YYz and YYR , respectively. If ϕ(Y (Yz ), YYz ) is
smaller than ϕ(Y (YR ), YYR ) and Cr(Xz , XXz ) ≤ ν, then the
generator is updated; otherwise, the discriminator is updated.
Implementing the Nash equilibrium yields the ideal discriminator. The precise method is expressed as follows:
max DEX∈XR [log (ϕ (D(X)))] + Ez∈Xz
[log (1 − ϕ (D (G(z))))]

(32)

Finding the best discriminator is the objective function. The
value function is therefore expressed as follows:
VGAN (G, D) = EX∈XR [log (ϕ (D(X)))]
+ Ez∈Xz [log (1 − ϕ (D (G(z))))]

(33)

∗
= arg max DVGAN (G, D) can be
If G is constant, then DG
considered the best discriminator. Accordingly, if D is a con∗
)
stant, the optimal generator G∗G = arg min GVGAN (G, DG
can be obtained. After a series of training steps, the opti∗
= arg max DVGAN (G∗G , D) can be obmal discriminator DG
tained. The details of the DCGAN algorithm are shown in
Algorithm 2.

V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS
A. Experimental Setup
1) Environment Setting: We formulate the federated semisupervised learning intrusion detection model via the PyTorch
framework in Python 3.8 version 1.9.0. The experiments were
executed on a Linux operating system with an Intel Core i56200U CPU and an AMD Radeon (TM) R5 M430 GPU. In the
experiments, 100 concentrator clients are considered, and the
training set is divided equally and randomly into 100 copies,
with one copy assigned to each client. The rounds are set as
the number of test rounds and kept constant for each set of

TABLE II
NUMERICAL PROCESSING OF LABEL DATA

experiments for accurate comparisons. For each global round,
the local model output of the concentrator is transmitted to
the cloud server via the 5G core network for aggregation and
updating. We perform different parameter selection and training
steps, thus presetting the learning rate, batch size, and local
training epochs for each communication round to 0.0001, 50,
and 10, respectively.
2) NSL-KDD Dataset: This dataset has been widely used
in AMI intrusion detection [8], [9], [10]. It contains all types
of attacks that AMI networks can be subjected to, including
the 4 attack categories DoS, Probe, U2R, and R2L, and the 39
attack subcategories, making it an ideal dataset for evaluating
the performance of IDS models.
The data distribution of the NSL-KDD dataset has a periodic
character, which is critical for detecting and defending against
cyberattacks. Each piece of data contains 42 features, of which
38 are numeric, 3 are symbolic, and 1 is a label [27]. The training
and testing intrusion detection models can use these features
to help detect and respond to various cyberattacks promptly.
Table II details the 4 attack categories.
3) Data Preprocessing: The NSL-KDD dataset includes
samples of multiple data types, including symbolic data, and
neural networks cannot directly process such samples. Therefore, to better train the model, preprocessing operations such
as numerical processing, one-hot coding, normalization, and
balancing sample categories must first be performed on the data
to improve the accuracy.
(1) Numerical Processing and One-Hot Coding: The goal
is to convert symbolic features to numerical features for numerical processing and institute one-hot encoding during data
preprocessing. The main features that need to be processed by
numerical and one-hot encoding are protocol_type, service, and
flag. The protocol type consists of three attributes, namely, TCP,
UDP, and ICMP, which are represented by 1x3-dimensional
vectors (0,0,1), (0,1,0), and (1,0,0), respectively, after numerical
encoding and one-hot encoding. The service and sign features
contain 70 and 11 attributes, respectively, and can be represented
by 1x70 and 1x11 dimensional vectors, respectively. After numerical and one-hot encoding of these three symbolic features,
we obtain a 1x84-dimensional numerical feature vector. This
vector is combined with the original 1x38-dimensional numerical feature vector to obtain a 1x122-dimensional numerical
feature vector. In addition, the symbolic label data must be
numerically processed. This dataset has five label types, namely,
labels representing normal behavior (Normal) and attack behavior (U2R, R2L, Probe, DoS). Table IV presents the numerical
processing results of the labels.
(2) Normalization Processing: After the numerical processing
and one-hot coding process, certain numerical features may

XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF THE DETECTION PERFORMANCE WITH THE CENTRALIZED
METHODS

TABLE IV
ACCURACY, FPR, AND PRIVACY PROTECTION COMPARED TO THE EXISTING
METHODS

3573

the final data sample exhibits a balanced state. The sample size
of the normal attack type is the greatest, and that of the R2L
attack type is the lowest.
4) Evaluation Metrics: In this work, the accuracy, precision, recall, F1, false-positive rate (FPR), and loss were used
as evaluation metrics. These metrics are calculated from the
true positive (TP), false-negative (FN), false-positive (FP), and
true negative (TN) values, where TP denotes the number of
positive class samples correctly predicted as positive, FN denotes the number of positive class samples incorrectly predicted
as attack samples, FP denotes the number of attack samples
incorrectly predicted as positive, and TN denotes the number of
attack samples correctly predicted as attack samples.
B. Performance Comparison with the Centralized Detection
Scheme

Fig. 5. Balancing treatment of small-sample attack classes in the NSL-KDD
training set.

mislead the learning model if used directly due to their large
values. The purpose of normalization is to improve the learning models’ performance. Normalization refers to mapping the
datasets’ numerical features into a uniform interval [0,1] range.
The specific normalization formula is as follows:
x=

xi − xmin
xmax − xmin

(34)

where xi denotes the feature’s starting value; xmax and xmin
denote the feature’s highest and lowest values, respectively; and
x denotes the normalization outcome.
(3) Sparse Class Balancing: Fig. 5 shows the sample sizes for
different attack types. Owing to the uneven distribution of attack
categories and unbalanced labels in the NSL-KDD dataset, it
is necessary to balance the data. Through preprocessing, the
sample data generated are the same as the original sample, and

We compare the effectiveness of the proposed FSSL-IDS
approach with that of the centralized intrusion detection strategy.
In this set of experiments, 100 concentrator clients are assumed
to be distributed in the AMI system, and each concentrator
represents an IDS that monitors the network traffic of the AMI
network. According to the experimental results in Fig. 6(a), the
loss of the FSSL-IDS approach is 0.06 under 100 communication
rounds, which is significantly lower than that of the centralized
scheme, with a loss value reduction of approximately 50%. In
addition, according to the experimental results in Fig. 6(b), the
FSSL-IDS method achieves a 99.58% detection accuracy over
100 communication rounds, which is an improvement of approximately 2% over that of the traditional centralized method;
this is because our method uses a DCGAN model, which makes
it easier for neural networks to converge during training by
processing datasets with complete and balanced dataset labels.
Specifically, the FSSL-IDS method achieves a better performance in monitoring AMI network traffic. With distributed monitoring, each concentrator client can effectively detect intrusions,
thus reducing the risk of system attacks. The significant loss
reduction in the FSSL-IDS method indicates that the method can
better control the complexity of the model without sacrificing
detection accuracy. Additionally, the detection accuracy of the
FSSL-IDS method is 2% greater than that of the traditional
centralized method, which indicates that the method can detect
intrusions more accurately, and thus, better secure the AMI
systems.
Table III compares the precision, recall, and F1 score of
the FSSL-IDS method with those of the centralized method.
Table III shows that the proposed FSSL-IDS outperforms the
centralized method on all three evaluation metrics. Specifically,
the FSSL-IDS method achieves 99.54%, 99.50%, and 99.52%
values under the precision, recall, and F1 metrics, respectively,
which represents improvements of 0.49%-6.32% in precision,
1.83%-8.71% in recall, and 2.01%-5.54% in F1 over the centralized method. This indicates that the FSSL-IDS approach
performs better at distinguishing natural traffic from attack
traffic, thus achieving more accurate detection of intrusions and
protecting the AMI systems. In addition, the superiority of the
FSSL-IDS method is shown in Fig. 7. The figure shows that the

3574

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

Comparison with centralized detection methods (a) loss (b) accuracy.

DoS, and probe attacks, and higher detection accuracies for R2L
and U2R attacks; this is because the proposed FSSL-IDS model
uses an innovative method of data feature extraction. Excellent
dataset preprocessing and multilayer convolution make the extracted features more representative and more convenient for
neural network fitting. Therefore, we can draw two conclusions:
(1) the FSSL-IDS approach has been studied and is verified
to achieve better detection performance and privacy protection
than the centralized approach, and (2) we can achieve multicategory detection performance, which meets the high detection
performance requirements for the AMI networks.
C. Performance Comparison With Existing Detection Schemes
Fig. 7.
ods.

Precision, recall, and F1 comparisons with centralized detection meth-

Fig. 8.

Multiclassification results of the FSSL-IDS method.

FSSL-IDS approach can better distinguish between normal and
attack traffic conditions, resulting in higher detection accuracy
and a lower false-positive rate.
In addition, we analyze the detection performance of the proposed method for each attack category. As shown in Fig. 8, the
FSSL-IDS approach achieves better performances for normal,

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method’s detection, we compared the proposed method’s performance with
that of the existing detection methods, namely, the NBTree
[32], DBN-ELM [33], A-DQN [34], 5-layer AE-based [35],
AE-CNN-based [17], HFL-Transformer [8], FLDNN [9], and
Fed_ADBN [10] methods, via the same evaluation metrics.
According to the comparison results in Table IV, the proposed
FSSL-IDS method yields better accuracy and a lower false alarm
rate than the other methods. The accuracy of the FSSL-IDS
method is 99.58%, which is 0.1%-9% better than that of the
existing methods. The false alarm rate of the FSSL-IDS method
is 1.02, which is 0.07%-6% lower than that of the existing
methods. The lower the FPR is, the better the classification
performance. In addition, the FSSL-IDS method has a significant
of privacy protection advantage over the existing centralized
intrusion detection methods; this is because only our method
is trained using unlabeled data, and a comprehensive dataset is
more likely to reveal the most realistic AMI attack patterns. In
the table, “–” indicates that no results are available.
D. Performance Comparison With AMI Federated Detection
Methods
In addition to the above experiments, we perform a comprehensive comparison using different evaluation metrics. Table V
shows the performance comparison of the proposed FSSL-IDS

XIA et al.: EFFICIENT INTRUSION DETECTION IN AMI SYSTEMS BASED ON FEDERATED SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING

TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING AMI NETWORK FEDERATED
DETECTION METHODS

TABLE VI
MULTI-CLASSIFICATION PRECISION COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING AMI
NETWORK FEDERATED DETECTION METHODS

TABLE VII
MULTI-CLASSIFICATION RECALL COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING AMI
NETWORK FEDERATED DETECTION METHODS

3575

TABLE VIII
COMPARISON OF COMMUNICATION OVERHEAD PER ROUND FOR DIFFERENT
MODEL SIZES OF FEDERATED LEARNING METHODS

of model size. As the model size increases, the FL overhead
increases due to the need to upload model parameters, and
the parameters are proportional to the model size. In contrast,
the FSSL-IDS uploads model outputs that do not depend on
the model size, thereby reducing communication overhead and
enhancing data security. This method avoids potential leakage
of sensitive information by not requiring uploading local model
parameters, ensuring efficient distributed learning with strong
privacy protections.
VI. CONCLUSION

method with other methods in terms of precision, recall, and F1
score. According to the data in Table V, the proposed FSSL-IDS
method performs well on all the evaluation metrics, with a
detection precision of 99.5%, a recall rate of 99.50%, and an
F1 score of 99.52%. These data indicate that the proposed
method outperforms the existing AMI network-federated detection methods in terms of detection performance.
Additionally, Tables VI and VII present the classification
performances of the proposed FSSL-IDS approach and current
AMI network federated detection methods on several threat
categories. These data further show that the classification performance of the proposed method is significantly better than that
of the existing AMI network federated detection methods.
According to the experimental results in Tables VI and VII, the
proposed FSSL-IDS method has almost the same accuracy and
recall rate as other models in the face of DoS attacks and probe
attacks. It significantly improves the detection performance of
R2L attacks and U2R attacks.
The proposed method exhibits excellent performance in identifying various network attacks, particularly R2L and U2R attacks, by fully leveraging unlabeled data from the local concentrator. This significantly enhances the precision of detecting
small-sample attacks; this is because, compared with other
models, our model processes the dataset in a way that makes
it difficult for noise to affect the detected data.
E. Communications Overhead Evaluation
In this section, we compare the performance of the federal
learning approach and the proposed approach for different model
sizes in respect to the communication overhead per round.
Table VIII shows that the proposed FSSL-IDS approach outperforms FL in terms of communication overhead, regardless

This paper investigates efficient intrusion detection based on
federated semi-supervised learning in AMI systems. First, we
design an FD-based intrusion detection framework to reduce
the communication overhead. Next, we use an effective intrusion
detection algorithm to improve the classification performance.
Finally, we design a DCGAN model to improve the sample data
quality. The use of a federated semi-supervised algorithm allows
for improvements of more than 99.58% and 6% in accuracy and
the false-positive rate, respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Natalizio, H. Ishii, R. Lu, and S. Pack, “Introduction to the special
section on security and privacy of smart network systems,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1975–1977, Jul.–Sep. 2021.
[2] Y. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Hong, and C. Kang, “Review of smart meter
data analytics: Applications, methodologies, and challenges,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 3125–3148, May 2019.
[3] B. Goswami, R. Jurdak, and G. Nourbakhsh, “Node allocation strategy
for low latency neighborhood area networks in smart grid,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 5087–5098, Sep./Oct. 2024.
[4] J. Bi, F. Luo, G. Liang, X. Yang, S. He, and Z. Y. Dong, “Impact assessment
and defense for smart grids with FDIA against AMI,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 578–591, Mar./Apr. 2023.
[5] D. E. Whitehead, K. Owens, D. Gammel, and J. Smith, “Ukraine cyberinduced power outage: Analysis and practical mitigation strategies,” in
Proc. 70th Annu. Conf. Protective Relay Engineers, Apr. 2017, pp. 1–8.
[6] V. Kayalvizhy and A. Banumathi, “A survey on cyber security attacks and
countermeasures in smart grid metering network,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
Comput. Methodol. Commun., Apr. 2021, pp. 160–165.
[7] G. Lu and X. Tian, “An efficient communication intrusion detection
scheme in AMI combining feature dimensionality reduction and improved
LSTM,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 6631075.
[8] X. Sun et al., “A hierarchical federated learning-based intrusion detection
system for 5G smart grids,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 16, 2022, Art. no. 2627.
[9] P. H. Mirzaee, M. Shojafar, Z. Pooranian, P. Asefy, H. Cruickshank,
and R. Tafazolli, “Fids: A federated intrusion detection system for 5G
smart metering network,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Mobility, Sens. Netw.,
Dec. 2021, pp. 215–222.
[10] Z. Xia et al., “Fed_ADBN: An efficient intrusion detection framework
based on client selection in AMI network,” Expert Syst., vol. 40, no. 4,
2023, Art. no. e12983.
[11] F. Sattler, A. Marban, R. Rischke, and W. Samek, “CFD: Communicationefficient federated distillation via soft-label quantization and delta coding,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2025–2038, Jul./Aug. 2022.

3576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 12, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2025

[12] S. Itahara, T. Nishio, Y. Koda, M. Morikura, and K. Yamamoto,
“Distillation-based semi-supervised federated learning for communication-efficient collaborative training with non-IID private data,” IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 191–205, Jan. 2023.
[13] D. Sui, Y. Chen, J. Zhao, Y. Jia, Y. Xie, and W. Sun, “Feded: Federated learning via ensemble distillation for medical relation extraction,”
in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., Nov. 2020,
pp. 2118–2128.
[14] S. Bhattacharjee, A. Thakur, and S. K. Das, “Towards fast and semisupervised identification of smart meters launching data falsification
attacks,” in Proc. Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., May 2018,
pp. 173–185.
[15] R. Sharma, A. M. Joshi, C. Sahu, G. Sharma, K. T. Akindeji, and
S. Sharma, “Semi supervised cyber attack detection system for smart grid,”
in Proc. 30th Southern Afr. Universities Power Eng. Conf., Jan. 2022,
pp. 1–5.
[16] K. Zhang, Z. Hu, Y. Zhan, X. Wang, and K. Guo, “A smart grid AMI
intrusion detection strategy based on extreme learning machine,” Energies,
vol. 13, no. 18, 2020, Art. no. 4907.
[17] Z. Zheng, Y. Yang, X. Niu, H. -N. Dai, and Y. Zhou, “Wide and deep
convolutional neural networks for electricity-theft detection to secure
smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1606–1615,
Apr. 2018.
[18] S. M. Taghavinejad, M. Taghavinejad, L. Shahmiri, M. Zavvar, and
M. H. Zavvar, “Intrusion detection in IoT-based smart grid using hybrid
decision tree,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Web Res., Apr. 2020, pp. 152–156.
[19] R. Vijayanand, D. Devaraj, and B. Kannapiran, “A novel deep learning
based intrusion detection system for smart meter communication network,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Techn. Control, Optim. Signal Process.,
Apr. 2019, pp. 1–3.
[20] Y. He, G. J. Mendis, and J. Wei, “Real-time detection of false data injection
attacks in smart grid: A deep learning-based intelligent mechanism,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2505–2516, Sep. 2017.
[21] Y. Xiao, C. Xing, T. Zhang, and Z. Zhao, “An intrusion detection model
based on feature reduction and convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 42210–42219, 2019.
[22] C. Xu, J. Shen, X. Du, and F. Zhang, “An intrusion detection system using
a deep neural network with gated recurrent units,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 48697–48707, 2018.
[23] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., Apr. 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[24] S. A. Rahman, H. Tout, C. Talhi, and A. Mourad, “Internet of things
intrusion detection: Centralized, on-device, or federated learning?,” IEEE
Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 310–317, Nov./Dec. 2020.
[25] H. Liang, D. Liu, X. Zeng, and C. Ye, “An intrusion detection method for
advanced metering infrastructure based on federated learning,” J. Modern
Power Syst. Clean Energy, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 927–937, May 2023.
[26] M. Wen, R. Xie, K. Lu, L. Wang, and K. Zhang, “FedDetect: A novel
privacy-preserving federated learning framework for energy theft detection
in smart grid,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 6069–6080,
Apr. 2022.
[27] S. Revathi and A. Malathi, “A detailed analysis on NSL-KDD dataset
using various machine learning techniques for intrusion detection,” Int. J.
Eng. Res. Technol., vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 1848–1853, 2013.
[28] R. Vinayakumar, K. P. Soman, and P. Poornachandran, “Applying convolutional neural network for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Adv. Comput., Commun. Inform., Sep. 2017, pp. 1222–1228.
[29] N. Gao, L. Gao, Q. Gao, and H. Wang, “An intrusion detection model
based on deep belief networks,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Cloud Big
Data, Nov. 2014, pp. 247–252.
[30] G. Xie, L. T. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Luo, R. Li, and M. Alazab, “Threat analysis
for automotive CAN networks: A GAN model-based intrusion detection
technique,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4467–4477,
Jul. 2021.
[31] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for
network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 223–231.
[32] D. H. Deshmukh, T. Ghorpade, and P. Padiya, “Improving classification using preprocessing and machine learning algorithms on NSL-KDD dataset,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Inf., Comput. Technol., Jan. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[33] D. Liang and P. Pan, “Research on intrusion detection based on improved
DBN-ELM,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Inf. Syst., Comput. Eng.,
Jul. 2019, pp. 495–499.

[34] Z. Liu, L. Hou, K. Zheng, Q. Zhou, and S. Mao, “A DQN-based consensus
mechanism for blockchain in IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 9, no. 14, pp. 11962–11973, Jul. 2022.
[35] R. Yao, N. Wang, Z. Liu, P. Chen, D. Ma, and X. Sheng, “Intrusion
detection system in the smart distribution network: A feature engineering
based AE-LightGBM approach,” Energy Reports, vol. 7, pp. 353–361,
2021.
[36] H. Alshede, L. Nassef, N. Alowidi, and E. Fadel, “Ensemble voting-based
anomaly detection for a smart grid communication infrastructure,” Intell.
Automat. Soft Comput., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 3257–3278, 2023.
[37] A. Amjad, M. A. Mohammed, M. H. Ahmed, I. T. Ahmed, M. A. E.
Rasha, and H. S. Ahmed, “Implementation of african vulture optimization
algorithm based on deep learning for cybersecurity intrusion detection,”
Alexandria Eng. J., vol. 79, no. 105–115, pp. 1110–0168, 2023.
[38] A. Al-Abassi, A. N. Jahromi, H. Karimipour, A. Dehghantanha, P. Siano,
and H. Leung, “A self-tuning cyber-attacks’ location identification approach for critical infrastructures,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
no. 7, pp. 5018–5027, Jul. 2022.
[39] J. Wang, Z. Q. Xia, Y. L. Chen, C. Hu, and F. Yu, “Intrusion detection
framework based on homomorphic encryption in AMI network,” Front.
Phys., vol. 10, 2022, Art. no. 1102892.
[40] F. Naeem, M. Ali, and G. Kaddoum, “Federated-learning-empowered
semi-supervised active learning framework for intrusion detection in
ZSM,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 88–94, Feb. 2023.

Zhuoqun Xia received the Ph.D. degree from the
School of Information Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China, in 2012. In
2000, he joined the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha, where he is currently a Full Professor. He has authored or coauthored
more than 50 research papers in journals or conferences. His research interests include cryptography,
network and information security.

Haidong Tang received the B.Sc. degree in network
engineering from Dalian Minzu University, Dalian,
China, in 2022. He is currently working toward the
master’s degree in computer science from the Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha,
China. His research interests include cryptography,
network and information security, especially the security of the smart grid.

Zhenzhen Hu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from Hunan University,
Changsha, China, in 2022. She is currently a Teacher
of computer science with the University of South
China, Hengyang, China. Her research interests include mobile and wireless networks, especially UAV
wireless communication in wireless network.

Hongmei Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the
master’s degree in computer science from the Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha, China, in 2023. Her research interests include
cryptography, network and information security, especially the security of the AMI system.