5564

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Empirical Study of Hierarchical Intrusion Detection
Systems for Unknown Attacks
Menaka Pushpa Arthur, Ganesan Ramachandran, Keshav Sood , Senior Member, IEEE,
Pavan Kaarthik, Srivarshinee Sridhar, and Morshed Chowdhury

Abstract—The attack detection models of the traditional
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) are trained on closed-set
problems which reduces the classifiers’ performance on detecting
unknown attacks in the open-set problem space. Mostly adapted,
one-short learning in the classifier does not allow the traditional
IDS to be an open-set recognizer. The alternate continuous
learning-based IDS in unknown attack detection claims ongoing
suggestions from experts to retrain the model with newly
identified samples. Hence, using the multi-layer hierarchical IDS
(HIDS) with optimized classifier models, the unknown attacks
can be classified by comparing their patterns with benign and
known attacks. However, we have identified many challenges in
the existing HIDS system on various datasets though it provides
a solid foundation in this design category for unknown attack
identification. As a result, in this paper, we designed an enhanced
multi-tier IDS for zero-day attack detection with optimized
heterogeneous classifiers in its major two phases like basic
framework demands. We have examined the enhanced proposed
hierarchical IDS on various benchmark Intrusion Detection
Systems datasets such as WUSTL, CIC_IDS_2017, 5G and
UNR to analyze the efficiency in unknown attacks classification.
When compare to existing multi-tier IDS, the proposed IDS
achieved highest detection 96.2%, 87%, 96.8% and 100% in
5G, WUSTL, UNR and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets for unknown
attacks. The optimized model in the proposed IDS reduces the
time complexity into 50% than the existing. Implementation
results show the proposed enhanced IDS performs better than
the existing hierarchical IDS with a high true positive rate for
benign, known and unknown attack labels on various datasets.
Index Terms—Intrusion detection system, zero-day attack,
open set problems, machine learning.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE SCOPE of zero-day attacks in the latest networks
such as Internet of Things (IoT), Industrial-IoT (IIoT) and

Received 6 June 2025; accepted 7 August 2025. Date of publication
19 August 2025; date of current version 5 December 2025. This research is
supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India, under
the Fund for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure in Universities and Higher
Educational Institutions (FIST) Program [Grant No. SR/FST/ET-I/2022/1079],
and a matching grant from VIT University, Chennai. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
D. G. Berbecaru. (Corresponding author: Menaka Pushpa Arthur.)
Menaka Pushpa Arthur, Ganesan Ramachandran, Pavan Kaarthik, and
Srivarshinee Sridhar are with the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai 600127, India (e-mail:
menakapushpa.a@vit.ac.in).
Keshav Sood is with the School of Information Technology, Deakin
University, Geelong, VIC 3220, Australia.
Morshed Chowdhury is with the School of Engineering and Information
Technology, Melbourne Institute of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3000,
Australia.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3600378

5G is very high due to their diversified connected devices, vast
coverage, large network scalability, and restricted computation
resources in the connected devices. Due to advanced intelligent
technology [1], openly accessible high-end resources, and the
motivations from terrorists, attackers trigger more attacking
strategies than before. The zero-day attacks can be predicted
only after a while from the attack initiation to create an explicit
impact on the network performances. Meanwhile, its impact
on the network is substantial. In this situation, the conventional signature-based IDSs make them unable to protect the
networks from unknown attacks with zero knowledge about
the new coming attacking strategy. The traditional IDSs have
been built by learning the patterns of benign and known attack
instances. With limited data sets, fewer minority samples
and traffic do not contain modern networks’ footprints, the
conventional IDSs struggle to identify new attacks and new
benign traffic [2]. Also, the unknown attack classification gets
complicated and produces high false positive rates in such
IDSs because of real-world open-set problems [3].
Traditional Artificial Intelligence-enabled IDSs are mostly
designed as a closed-set recognition approach where all class
samples are used in the training phase and those class labels
alone are expected to occur during testing for prediction [3],
[4], [5]. The Open Set Recognition (OSR) approach facilitates
the classifier to detect zero-day attack instances in an adaptive
and proactive manner [3]. To address the open-set problem,
IDS should be designed to classify the newly arrived class test
samples that are not seen or used to train the classification
model [4]. Further, one-shot training is not sufficient for
an intrusion detection model to learn the pattern of the
zero-day attacks. The IDS framework with OSR [6], [7]
continuously evolves the learning even after training to detect
unknown attacks. Unsupervised machine learning algorithms
such as clustering and outlier analysis can identify the samples
that are deviated from benign patterns. This methodology
in the existing works [8], [9] can solve the zero-day attack
identification at a baseline level.
To further validate our observations, in this paper, we
systematically evaluated the performance of multistage, hierarchical IDS which is proposed by Verkerken et al. [10]
against unknown attacks. In their work, the IDS has given
96% balanced accuracy in the overall classification and 87%
zero-day attack classification for CIC_IDS_2017 dataset. This
multi-tier hierarchical IDS has been designed with supervised and semi-supervised algorithms in two tiers and the
results are well-tuned with the set of calculated thresholds

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

and hyper-parameter optimization algorithm, i.e., TPE (Treestructured Parzen Estimator) in the classification model. We
have analyzed the general solution capacity of this IDS over
unknown attacks on other IDS datasets such as UNR [11],
5G_IDD [12], and WUSTL [13]. Interestingly, this system
does not produce impressive results in other datasets. In small
datasets like UNR and 5G, the classification accuracy for
unknown attacks is notable, yet the misclassification rate for
known attacks is still quite high. Known attacks are misclassified as unknown attacks. Whereas this system achieves
nearly 80% classification accuracy for unknown attacks in
large datasets like CIC_IDS_2017 and WUSTL.
Motivated from this, we extended the framework of [10]
with various alternative supervised, unsupervised and semisupervised machine learning and deep learning algorithms
in its two stages and evaluated the outcome under permutation and combination of such algorithms. The proposed
OSR classifier is also optimized by Gaussian Process-based
Bayesian optimisation (BOGP) technique. The implementation
results are extensively analyzed to find the best algorithms
for anomaly detection (stage1), multi-class known attack
detection, and unknown attack (combined stage) detection
in the multitier IDS architecture. Our work observed that
the optimization algorithm BOGP performs better than TPE
and produces very similar high classification accuracy for
benign samples like in state-of-the-art [10]. The known attacks
are classified by the proposed enhanced OCR IDS with
the highest accuracy than in existing IDS. Interestingly this
enhanced multi-tier IDS can classify unknown attacks better
for CIC_IDS_2017 and UNR datasets. By considering the
overall classification accuracy including all labels; benign,
known, and unknown attacks, the proposed enhanced multitier IDS gives similar or better values in four datasets.
Our contributions are as follows:
1) In our empirical study, we have reproduced the work
done by Verkerken et al. [10] in which the authors have
proposed a multi-stage IDS against unknown attacks.
After our rigorous evaluation of their work, we have
investigated that the performance of the model is limited
to certain data types and overall, not effective to detect
unknown attacks.
2) To bridge this identified gap, we have proposed a
multitier hierarchical IDS framework with various alternative supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised
machine learning and deep learning algorithms, in its
two stages. We have also used BOGP technique to
optimize the classification model. These enhancements
produce impressive results in the classification rate
of unknown, known, and benign attacks. This is a
significant contribution in the design of the proposed
hierarchical and hybrid intrusion detection system for
open set problem that consists of unknown or zero-day
attacks.
3) Finally, we have further evaluated and compared the
performance of the existing and proposed enhanced
multi-tier hierarchical IDS on different network datasets.
This gives us insights about a) the important role
of hyper-parameter optimization algorithm in the

5565

classification model and b) the way to use the appropriate machine learning, deep learning, deep reinforcement
learning, and federated learning algorithms for the
design of OCR IDS for a zero-day attack detection.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In the
next section, existing works in the intrusion detection system
designed for unknown or zero-day attacks are discussed.
Section III describes the benchmark network intrusion datasets
used in this empirical study. Section IV presents various methods and algorithms adapted in the design of an unknown attack
detection system. The experimental results and comparison of
the performance of various techniques in the hierarchical IDS
are presented in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the
paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
The misclassification rate of unknown attacks in conventional single-layer intrusion detection systems is in the
unavoidable range that leads to severe data breaches and
network instability. In recent years, many initiatives have
been taken against unknown or zero-day attacks to design
adaptive intrusion detection systems that automatically tune
when faced with new patterns in network traffic [8], [9]. Based
on this requirement, existing work designed the hierarchical
IDS to classify unknown attacks from known attacks and
benign traffic. The multilevel, hybrid IDS has been designed
with anomaly and signature-based techniques to separate
the learning process as benign and adversarial traffic. In
the state-of-the-art work [4], [8], [10], [14], [15], benign
network activities are learned well by the semi-supervised or
unsupervised algorithms, whereas known attacks are learned
by the supervised learners. The taxonomy of the existing IDSs
for unknown attacks is given in Fig. 1 and summary of such
works is presented in Table I.
Zero-day attacks in the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) caused
by vehicles and external networks connected to vehicles have
been detected by Yang et al. [14] multilevel hybrid (MTH)
intrusion detection system. The normal and known traffic
patterns are learned by the signature-based IDS. The unknown
attack traffic samples are grouped using anomaly-based IDS.
They evaluated the efficiency of the designed MTH using the
CAN and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets. The limitation of this work
is the less F1 score, i.e., 0.8 obtained for the CIC_IDS_2017
data set. A set of appropriate preprocessing steps has been
identified to improve the quality of the data set before training.
k-means clustering for data sampling, SMOTE-based balanced
dataset, label encoding, and z-score normalization algorithm
are in the first phase of the MTH-IDS for preprocessing.
For training, only optimal features are selected using IG
(Information Gain), FCBF (Fast Correlation Based Feature
Selection), and KPCA (Kernel Principal Component Analysis)
techniques. Signature-based IDS is implemented by supervised
algorithms such as Decision Tree, Random Forest, Extra
Tree, and XGBoost for known attacks detection. CL-k mean
classifier used to implement anomaly-based IDS to label zeroday attacks. Bayesian Optimization-Tree of Parzen Estimator
(BO-TPE) [16], [17], [18] and Bayesian optimization based

5566

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Taxonomy of Zero-Day Attack IDS.

on Gaussian processes used to optimize the supervised and
unsupervised learning algorithms in this MTH.
The model retraining phase is enhanced with Proportional
Progressive Pseudo-Labeling (PPPL) technique [19] by
excluding uncertain samples in the beginning stages of the
training loops. Using the reinforcement learning method [20],
[21] or experts labeling, the new class labels are named
for the unknown samples and models will be retrained by
including those new samples in the original dataset. The
performance of IDS on zero-day attacks also improved by
the model’s hyper-parameters optimization techniques like
Bayesian Optimization and Tree-structured Parzen estimator [16]. Also, the zero-day attack signature extraction is very
difficult if it overlaps the known attacks or normal traffic
samples [22].
In the state-of-the-art work, very limited papers have been
published on adaptive IDS to detect zero-day attacks in
the open set problem space. The clustering-based open-set
recognition models such as DOC (Deep Open Classification),
OpenMax, and AutoSVM are initially introduced for zeroday attack detection in the IDS by Soltani et al. [8]. In
two ways, the open-set IDS have been designed in stateof-the-work; (i) setting appropriate threshold in the baseline
models [10], [23] and (ii) Unsupervised or semi-supervised
anomaly detection in the multi-tier IDS framework to filter
unknown attacks prior to supervised classification model for
known attacks [3], [8], [10].
Soltani et al. [8] designed an adaptable deep learning-based
IDS in this category with four phases; (i) Open set recognition
used AutoSVM to classify known and unknown attack samples,
(ii) unknown attack samples are grouped using a clustering
algorithm with deep model in its last layer, (iii) supervised
labeling used experts to label clusters of the unknown samples

into a new benign, unknown attack, temporary anomaly and
(iv) retrain the model with newly labeled samples to classify
zero-day attacks. Another work in this category, proposed by
Wu et al. [9] explored deep Q-network (DQN) to design an
IDS under active against unknown attacks in the network.
Active DQN consists of three phases; (i) NIDS classifier
to generate belief vector for benign and malicious samples,
(ii) sample selection phase selects valuable samples based on
the belief vector and confidence score and (iii) annotator labels
the new group samples and added in the existing dataset to
retrain the model. With the help of deep learning techniques
such as Evaluation Net and Target Net, the deep-Q network
reinforcement learning process is enhanced.
Nguyen and Le [15] designed a reliable unknown
DoS/DDoS attack detection system for IoT networks using the
combination of supervised and unsupervised hybrid IDS. The
soft-ordering CNN model is trained by the benign network
traffic patterns. The unsupervised algorithms Local Outlier
Factor (LOF) and isolated-based Nearest Neighbor Ensemble
(iNNE) identified the abnormal traffic patterns in the IoT
network. The sequentially deployed SOCNN (Soft Ordering
CNN), LOF, and iNNE models detect the test samples as
normal or abnormal and forward the abnormal samples to the
admin to handle the unknown attacks.
Recently, Fog and Edge Computing Architecture in the IoT
network requires edge-device-oriented federated learning to
detect zero-day botnet attacks [24]. Further, Popoola et al. [25]
applied a Deep Neural Network to create the local and global
classification model in different places of the network. The
federated learning algorithm aggregates local model updates,
and via polling the global model is updated to learn the new
samples in the network. Verma et al. [3] designed a zeroday guardian against IIoT in the 5G network using federated

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

5567

TABLE I
D ISCUSSION OF E XISTING IDS FOR U NKNOWN ATTACKS

learning IDS. Dual synchronized Autoencoders have been
used to train the normal and attack samples in this FLbased IDS. Kim et al. [26] used an autoencoder to implement
the reliable profiling-based approach to automatically detect
zero-day malware. In the training phases, the autoencoder
generates the latent representation Z for the training samples,
and then Z is passed as an input for the one-class classifier
to learn the benign software and malware. One-class learner
reads latent representations of the training samples rather than
the actual training dataset. The same technique was adopted
by Li et al. [27] to design the MS-ZeroWall, a multistep

attack detection system for smart homes. The Variational
Autoencoder and Hidden Markov Model are used to learn the
known and unknown attack samples. The latent space is very
close to the normal Gaussian distribution for known attacks
rather than unknown attacks.
Interestingly, Mbona and Eloff [28] and Zoppi et al. [29]
used only the semi-supervised machine learning algorithms
for zero-day attack detection in the IoT network. Gaussian
Mixture Model and the One-Class SVM semi-supervised
algorithms have been adapted to design the IDS. In addition to
the primary target of detecting zero-day attacks, the IDS is also

5568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

designed to optimize its performance in detection accuracy.
High-biased and low-variance issues in the prediction of
unknown attacks in the model have been reduced by [4]
concatenating the results of auto-encoder, CNN, and LSTM in
the ensemble Intrusion Detection Systems for IoT and wired
networks. The overfitting problem in the training process of
unknown attacks IDS was solved by Hairab et al. [30] using
CNN along with regularization techniques L1 and L2.
Remarks: The existing works in the open-set IDS design for
the unknown or zero-day attack detection are very limited [3],
[4], [5], [8], [10]. Also, the IDSs in the state-of-the-art
have been designed for a particular network like 5G, IIoT,
and IoT. The datasets used in such works are related to
specific networks. There is no such general Open-Set IDS for
unknown attack classification for different types of networks.
In our work, we analyze the performance of out-performed
multi-tier hierarchical IDS on unknown attacks that registered
on CIC_IDS_2017 dataset against various IDS datasets of
different networks. The poor results obtained in our empirical
study drive us to enhance the existing hierarchical IDS for
zero-day attack classification.
III. DATASETS D ESCRIPTION
We have used 4 datasets in our comparative study. The
description of the data sets are given below.
CIC_IDS_2017: This dataset is generated by the Canadian
Institute of Cybersecurity (CIC) in 2017 [31]. This data
set is intended to evaluate the performance of IDS and
IPS. This dataset consists of 53,92,441 samples including
benign and various attacks such as DDoS, Port Scan, Brute
Force, Web-Attack, Botnet, Infiltration, and Heartbleed. For
the implementation of the purpose of the empirical study, infiltration and heartbleed samples have been considered unknown
attacks due to the smaller number of samples in the entire
dataset.
UNR-IDD: University of Nevada - Reno Intrusion
Detection Dataset (UNR-IDD) [11] is an NIDS dataset with
additional special feature network port statistics collected from
switch or route.
5G-NIDD: This Network Intrusion Detection dataset is
generated over 5G wireless networks testbed by the University
of Oulu, Finland [12]. The data is collected from the base
station that is connected with normal and attacker user nodes.
This dataset consists of DoS and port scan attack samples.
WUSTL-IIoT 2021: The cybersecurity attacks in Industrial
IoT have been collected emulated and collected from the
testbed. This dataset [13] consists of nearly 93% samples from
normal traffic in the total dataset whereas the remaining 7%
is occupied by Reconnaissance, command injection, DoS, and
backdoor attacks. Using Argus tool, the best 41 network flowrelated features are identified.
IV. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we discussed the methodologies used in
the state-of-the-art of multi-tier IDS against unknown attacks
detection.

A. Unsupervised Machine Learning
1) AutoEncoder: The zero-day attack detection system in
the state-of-the-art utilized Autoencoder as an unsupervised
machine learning algorithm to learn the patterns in normal
network traffic to classify them from abnormal traffic. As
mentioned in [10], [32], for known samples, the latent domain
in the autoencoder is closer to the normal Gaussian distribution
N(0,1) than in the unknown samples. The design of a Zeroday attack Intrusion Detection System used Autoencoder in
the following ways;
1) Single Autoencoder to classify the normal data using a
One-Class classifier [26]
2) A Single Autoencoder for benign data and its encoder
hidden layers are built by CNN [27]
3) Dual synchronized Autoencoder for normal and attack
data [3]
The encoder of the AE is connected with the classifier
using the latent representation zi of the input data xi using an
activation function Ae of the encoder
 


(1)
Qp x i = Ae Wx i + b
with W and b represent the weight and bias values. The encode
Ae maps x i into a latent representation or bottleneck z i .
2) iForest [33]: iForest uses a partition-based anomaly
isolation method other than other methods such as densitybased and distance-based to build the model for normal or
anomaly samples. The tree is constructed with two child nodes,
i.e., binary tree to profiling the normal instances, the deviation
is identified as an anomaly. The analytical model of the iForest
uses the height of the isolation tree h(x) for the instance x to
isolate the anomaly instances from the normal. If the path of
the leaf node x from the root is more, then it is classified as
normal otherwise anomaly.
x


Edge + +

(2)

c(n) = 2H (n − 1) − (2(n − 1)/n)

(3)

Edge = 0; h(x ) =

i=root
E (h(x )
− c(n)

s(x , n) = 2
⎧
if s(x , n) > 0.8
⎨ Anomaly;
if s(x , n) < 0.5
A(x , n) = Normal ;
⎩
NoAbnormality; if s(x , n) ≈ 0.5

(4)
(5)

3) iNNE [34], [35]: The unknown DoS/DDoS attacks were
detected using isolation using the nearest neighbor ensemble
model, [15]. iNNE is a distance-based method to build
the ensemble model for anomaly isolation. The axis-parallel
clustering in iForest induces an anomaly masking problem
that reduces the anomaly detection accuracy. This problem
is resolved in iNNE by forming hyperspheres for selected
subsamples with size ψ. Each instance x in the subsample
S is covered by hypersphere H(x) centered with x and
calculated radius r(x). The instance x with long radius H(x)
is more isolated from its neighbors. If H(x) intersects other
hyperspheres, then x is very close to neighborhoods. The dense
hypersphere contains normal instances whereas there is more
chance for the sparse hypersphere formed by anomalies. In
this way, the isolation score is calculated between 0 and 1 for

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

the x t h instance in S. For the subsample S with n number
of instances, the anomaly score A for the training dataset is
calculated by the average of isolation score I of each instance;
A=

n

Ii
i=1

(6)

n

The test sample t is classified as anomaly or normal by
calculating the average isolation score of t sample from n
number of hyperspheres H(x) generated for x instances in the
subsample with ψ size;
n
I (t, H (xi ))
(7)
A(t) = i=1
n
An anomaly score A(t) of test sample t is more than the
threshold value then it’s classified as an anomaly;
t=

Anomaly, if A(t) > threshold
Normal , otherwise

(8)

4) LOF [36]: This mechanism learns outlier patterns rather
than normal patterns in the input samples. The parameter
Local Outlier Factor gives the degree of isolation for the
outlier objects. This outlier factor depends on the outlierness of the object against its k-neighborhood. The LOF of
an object is calculated via the sequence of calculations such
as k-distance of an object (k-dis), reachability distance of
an object (r_dis), reachability density (r_den) and outlier
factor (f). The LOF is calculated by the following combined
formula;



LOF (p) =

o∈NM inPts(p)

 o∈NM inPts(p)

Reach _Dist(p,o)

algorithms. The multi-tired IDS [14] has been designed to
detect unknown cyberattacks on the Internet of Vehicles.
In the Four-tired IDS, the first and second layers were
implemented using multiclass supervised learning algorithms
with hyper-parameters optimization to detect known attacks.
Four tree-based learners with Tree Parzen Estimator Bayesian
optimization algorithm have been stacked in the first two
layers of the IDS. The Decision Tree, Random Forest, Extra
Tree, and Extreme Gradient Boosting are the base learners in
the ensemble model whereas high accuracy learner from this
set is used as the meta classifier. The base models RF, ET
and XGBoost are ensemble models of multiple decision trees.
The Random Forest Supervised machine learning algorithms
such as AdaBoost, Logistic Regression and Naive Bayes are
adopted for the zero-day attack detection IDS for the IoT
networks [30].
2) Deep Learning: Deep Learning model framework has
been designed [8] with the help of DOC and OpenMax to
classify known and unknown samples in the repeated training
along with labeling via clustering technique.
Deep Open Classification [37]: Instead of, training the
model in the closed environment, the learning process is
done in a dynamic and open environment in the DOC, an
extension of Open-class SVM. DOC should identify the new
class samples that are not used in the model learning phase is
called an open classification problem. DOC generates M(i+1)
one-vs-rest models for i number of seen class labels li in the
training dataset D and additional label for rejection class that
represents unseen samples.



o  ∈NM inPts(o) Reach _Dist(o ,o)

|NM inPts(p)|

(9)
Reach _Dist(p, o) = max (kd ist(o), d(p, o)).p, o ∈ D

(10)

LOF finds outliers using local analysis rather than global
analysis from k-nearest neighbors of an object. MinPts represents the nearest neighbors of an object.
B. Semi-Supervised Machine Learning
1) One-Class Learner(OC-SVM): In the hierarchy intrusion detection system for an unknown attack [10], [28], the
anomaly samples are classified from benign traffic in the first
phase. The labeled benign samples train the model to learn
the one-class pattern in the dataset. Gaussian kernel form
the hypersphere around similar samples in the feature space
instead of forming hyperplanes in default SVM. The complex,
non-linear boundary builds for hyper_sphere in the OCSVM.
In these works, the hyperparameters of OCSVM are optimized
to induce the best AOC for anomaly detection. The one-class
RBF of OCSVM is given as follows:
2

K xi , xj = exp−||Xi −Xj || /2σ

2

(11)

C. Supervised Learning Algorithm
1) Machine Learning Algorithm: One of the layers in
the hybrid Intrusion Detection System included [10], [14],
[30] to detect known attacks in networks that classify
unknown attacks from them using the multiclass classifier

5569

ŷ =

Reject,
if Sigmoid(di ) < ti , ∀i ∈ li
(12)
max (Sigmoid(di )), ∀i ∈ li otherwise

The Open Space risk of Sigmoid function is reduced by
adjusting the threshold value ti equivalent to 0.5.
OpenMax [5], [23]: The penultimate layer of the Softmax
layer gives the score for an input that is not specific to any
known classes. This score is called the activation vector, which
is considered as the main information for OpenMax. Using the
Meta-Recognition technique, OpenMax finds the distance of
input from known classes. If the input is far away from known
data, then it is classified as unseen sample. The Softmax layer
computes the probability of detection under class label j for
an input x;
e vj (x )
(13)
P (y = j |x ) = N
vi (x )
i=1 e
y ∗ = argmaxj P (y = j |x )
(14)
∗
∗
Reject, if y == 0(or)P (y = y |x )<
ŷ =
(15)
otherwise
y ∗,
CNN: The Convolutional Neural Networks [3], [25] and
LSTM are ensembled with Auto Encoder to detect unknown,
known and benign classes, [4]. The ensemble model considered threshold-based design to deal the open-set problems.
The CNN architecture with L1 and L2 regularizations is used
in the IDS [30]. By reducing the over-fitting problem, the
detection of a zero-day attack has been improvised by L1
and L2 regularization techniques. L2 performs better when

5570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

compared to L1 since L2 uses the square value of magnitude
rather than absolute value in L1. The regularizers integrate the
additional term, that is, penalty, with the cost function of CNN
model;
λ 
||wi ||
2m

(16)

λ 
||wi ||2
L2 = Loss(ŷ, y) +
2m

(17)

m

L1 = Loss(ŷ, y) +

i=1
m

E. Hyper-Parameter Optimization [39] (HPO)

i=1

The L2 considers all features to tune the parameters by
calculating the square of magnitude that makes the less
coefficient features nearer to 0 rather than 0. At the same time,
the L1 method directly removes the less important features that
have 0 value from the model construction process. Hence, L1
fits for outlier analysis, whereas L2 fits for complex network
traffic with uncertain features to design an IDS against zeroday attacks.
Soft Ordering CNN: The traditional CNN architecture is
modified in SOCNN by including the feature expansion
layer before to feature extraction and classification layer to
classify unknown DoS/DDoS attack detection system for IoT
networks [15]. The fully connected layer is added first in the
SOCNN architecture to extend the input vector x into an output
matrix in nxm size where n is the existing features and m
is the soft ordering feature set. The intention of SOCNN is
re-ordering the features to find an optimal order with high
detection rate of unknown attacks.
FCout = g(Wx + B )

where, Rcorrect = +1, Rwrong = −1 and Rmodify = 0 represent the action for correct, wrong classification and expert’s
request for class labeling for an input sample x. yˆx and
yx means the predicted and actual class value. The LSTMbased Evaluation and Target Net models of this framework are
used to calculate the Q value using Q(current_state,a), ∀a ∈
actions pace and updated Q value after the reward has been
calculated.

(18)

where, FCout is the output matrix of fully connected layer
with nxm size. g() is the activation function and B is the bias
value. W is the m matrix in nxn size.
LSTM [4] and BiLSTM [9]: The LSTM-based Evaluation
and Target Net models of the ADQN NIDS [9] framework are
used to calculate the Q value using Q(current_state,a), ∀a ∈
actions pace and updated Q value after the reward has been
calculated. ADQN NIDS is designed to learn spatial, temporal
and spatio-temporal features in the input samples by integrating BiLSTM, CNN and fusion of these two architectures
connected via fully connected layer.
D. Reinforcement Learning
Deep Q Network combined with BiLSTM [9] selects the
zero-day attack samples for annotation along with the probability distribution before classifying them using the ADQN
algorithm. Using DQN [38], the dynamic active learning
process is featured in IDS to retrain the model with newly
annotated unknown attack samples that will improve the
overall performance of the detection. The reward function
of ADQN is defined as follows with two different action
spaces Ak , ∀k - class labels in the dataset and AE - expert’s
requisition for label annotation for unknown sample;
⎧
/ AE and yˆx ≡ yx
⎨ Rcorrect , if ax ∈
/ AE and yˆx = yx
rx = Rwrong , if ax ∈
(19)
⎩
Rmodify , if ax ∈ AE

The hyperparameters of the model are improved by two
different variations of Bayesian Optimization algorithms; Treestructured Parzen Estimator [16] and Gaussian process [40]. In
the [10] research work, TPE is used as a sampling algorithm.
The k-value in the k-means unsupervised clustering algorithm
is tuned using the GP-BO method in the work [14]. The
Gaussian distribution in GP-BO method predicts the class label
y for an input x in the hyper-parameter space D with mean μ
and covariance σ.


(20)
p(y|x , D = N y|μ̂, σ̂ 2
The prediction of next hyper-parameter value in TPE is
calculated using two density functions l(x) and g(x) with the
predefined threshold y*. These two functions are defined for
good region and poor region which is adjusted by l(x)/g(x) to
obtain optimal values for hyper-parameters.
p(x |y, D) =

l (x ), if y < y∗
g(x ), if y > y∗

(21)

V. I MPLEMENTATION M ECHANISM
In this section, we discuss the proposed enhanced IDS
to detect unknown attacks and compare it with the existing multi-tier hierarchical IDS [10]. We have considered
Verkerken et al. [10] IDS for an empirical study over different
networks based IDS datasets. This IDS is a three-tier, multistage framework to detect benign, known, and unknown attack
samples using anomaly-based and signature-based approaches.
Totally three stages namely anomaly detection, known attack
detection and unknown attack detection are used to build this
hierarchical IDS. To improve the unknown attacks classification accuracy, anomaly scores generated in stage1 and stage2
for the test samples are compared with the corresponding
phase revised thresholds τB , τM and τV of the unsupervised and supervised classification algorithms rather than
their default threshold values. The anomaly detector model’s
threshold τB is calculated from the maximum f-score in the
F1 to F9 scores of the classification algorithm. In the second
stage, F1 score of the multi-class classification algorithm is
set as threshold τM . This work compared and identified One
Class Support Vector System algorithm performs better than
Auto Encoder for an unsupervised algorithm to classify benign
samples in the anomaly detection stage. Whereas, Random
Forest performs better than Neural Networks for a supervised
algorithm to classify the known attacks in the multiclass
classification stage. The performance of the stage1 and stage2
classification models is improved by the optimization of the
hyper-parameters using the TPE method. The CIC_IDS_2017

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

Fig. 2.

5571

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier Hierarchical IDS Architecture with various Implementation Techniques.

dataset has been considered to evaluate the IDS performance.
The major drawbacks we have identified in the existing
work are (i) the efficiency of this system has not compared
with other multi-tier zero-day attack detection systems. This
system is compared only with simple open-set IDS which
tunned the RF baseline threshold (ii) other intrusion detection
benchmark datasets have not been considered to analyze the
IDS performance under different characteristics of various
networks and (iii) it can’t achieve the high classification
accuracy for zero-day attacks.
We initiated our work by considering this setback in
Verkerken et al. [10] work and the notable technologies in
other zero-day attack detection systems which are discussed
in Sections II and III. In our work, we adapted the basic
structure of Verkerken et al. [10] IDS with an adjustable
threshold since the framework with clustering and classification is the best one for unknown attack detection in
open-set problems. The novelty in our work is the multi-stage
hierarchical IDS is designed against zero-day attacks with
different algorithms mentioned in the state-of-the-work. The
proposed framework shown in Fig. 2 is designed with three
stages such as anomaly detection, known attack detection,
and unknown attack confirmation which is similar to existing
hierarchical IDS. The enhancement is introduced via two
ways; (i) find the best combination from the permutation of
clustering and classification algorithms to design the open-set
IDS to provide a general solution and (ii) BOGP optimized

models. The anomaly detector model is trained using the
alternative methods LOF, iNNE, iForest, k-means clustering,
PAE, and CNN with AE to classify the samples as benign
or not. In stage2, the multi-class classification model is build
using various algorithms and ensemble techniques to classify
known attacks. The sample which is with less anomaly score
scored in stage2 than the stage2 threshold value τM then
it forwards to stage3 otherwise this is classified as known
attack by the stage2. In the final stage, the anomaly score
of unclassified samples is compared with stage1 and stage3
threshold values. If the anomaly score generated in stage2 for
unclassified samples is less than stage3 threshold τV then it
is classified as an unknown attack. The BOGP is applied to
tune the hyper-parameters of the models in both stages.
The existing and enhanced IDS (represented as “Alternative”
in Fig. 2) performance is analyzed using various intrusion
detection benchmark datasets such as CIC_IDS_2017, 5G,
UNR and WUSTL. To introduce an unknown attack in the
dataset for implementation, a known attack class with less
occurrence is considered for that purpose which is mentioned
in Table II.
VI. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
A. Implementation Environment and Performance Metrics
We used high end GPU platform, NVIDIA H100 80GB
PCIe 5.0 x 16 for the implementation of hybrid, multi-tier

5572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

TABLE II
D ETAILS OF U NKNOWN ATTACK S AMPLES IN THE I MPLEMENTATION OF THE P ROPOSED E NHANCED M ULTI -T IER IDS

IDS with optimized parameters. It is the most powerful GPU
chip on the market and is designed specifically for artificial
intelligence (AI) applications. The configuration details of
H100 is with the processors in 2 x 24-core (48 cores), memory
in 1TB, OS storage in 1 x 1.9TB NVMe PCIe, file storage in
3 x 14TB SATA 6Gb/s 7.2K and NVIDIA NVLink Bridge.
The four datasets CIC_IDS_2017, WUSTL, 5G and UNR IDD
intrusion detection benchmark datasets of different networks
are stored in the server and executed using the python code
with appropriate packages such as PyTorch and TensorFlow
etc. The metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, balanced
accuracy, and F-score have been measured to analayze the
performances of the hierarchical intrusion detection system.
Out of that, the formula for balanced accuracy and F-score are
given below:
Balanced accuracy: This is one of the vital metrics for
highly imbalanced datasets by considering the accuracy of
both positive and negative cases. The datasets used in our
experiments are highly imbalanced. We have not adapted any
techniques to balance the actual dataset since they reduce the
quality of the dataset. Hence, balanced accuracy is the perfect
measure to analyze the system under this case.
Sensitivity + Specificity
(22)
2
F score: It combines Precision and Recall to analyze the
performance of the algorithm.


Precision . Recall
Fβ = 1 + β 2
(23)
2
(β . Precision) + Recall
Balanced Accuracy =

where, β various from 1 to 9 for calculating F1 score to
F9 score.
B. Performance Evaluation and Results Analysis
The existing multi-tier hierarchical IDS [10] is implemented
and evaluated its’ performance using various benchmark intrusion datasets such as UNR, 5G and WUSTL. In three stages of
the IDS architecture, the performance of the machine learning
algorithm is observed for an evaluation of binary and multiclassification models to detect normal, known and unknown
attacks. Using various benchmark datasets, the pros and cons
of the existing hybrid IDS design are well analyzed. The
metrics such as training time, test time, accuracy, balanced
accuracy, precision, recall and F scores are identified as
appropriate to evaluate the performance of the design of an

TABLE III
G ENERATED T HRESHOLDS BY THE E XISTING IDS [10]

IDS to detect unknown attacks along with benign and known
attacks.
The implementation in our work has been carried out for
three major observations:
1) Existing multi-tier IDS vs other networking benchmark
IDS datasets: These results evaluate the efficiency of the
existing multi-tier IDS using different IDS datasets
2) The Proposed Enhanced multi-tier IDS: The techniques
used in the state-of-the-art of zero-day attack detection
system are applied in anomaly detection and multi-class
attack detection stages in the Existing multi-tier IDS
3) BOGP vs TPE Optimization techniques: The Proposed
Enhanced multi-tier IDS is evaluated with a different
optimization technique BOGP than the proposed one
TPE to tune the hyper-parameters of the anomaly detection and classification models
We present the implementation results in the following
sections to discuss the efficiency of the proposed enhanced
IDS along with TPE and BOGP optimization techniques and
the limitations of the existing work on various datasets.
C. Existing Multi-Tier IDS vs Various Benchmark IDS
Datasets
In this section, the limitations of the existing multi-tier
IDS [10] are discussed in stage-wise detail with the help of
various IDS datasets. The limitations outlined here emphasize
the significance of the general open-set approach-based IDS
framework against unknown attacks regardless of the features
specific to the datasets. Primarily, we focused on the execution time and classification performances to analyze the
performance of the IDS on various datasets and presented
these results in Table III to Table V, and Fig. 3–Fig. 6.
1) Execution Time of the IDS: The training time of stage1
and stage2 and the testing time of all three stages of the
existing system are shown in Table V. The stage1 training
time of WUSTL is recorded as high, i.e., 1min 39s ± 924 ms
and CIC_IDS_2017 is observed as low 0.771 s ± 21 ms

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

5573

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF E XISTING M ULTI -T IER H IERARCHICAL IDS

Fig. 3.

Confusion Matrix of Stage1 and Stage2 of Existing IDS for 5G Dataset.

TABLE V
T IME C OMPLEXITY OF P ROPOSED IDS VS E XISTING IDS [10]

out of 4 considered datasets. The WUSTL dataset contains
11,07,448 benign samples to train the OC_SVM model which
is higher than UNR and 5G datasets that induce the high
training time for WUSTL. Interestingly, the test time is high
for CIC_IDS_2017 with 8.117 s ± 277 ms and UNR secures
low with 122.6 ms ± 20.75 ms due to how complex the
model converges to find the solution. The known attacks
detected in 1.813 s ± 8.387 ms for 5G dataset that is the
high value observed in the 4 datasets. Similarly, the unknown
classification takes more time in 5G and CIC_IDS_2017

datasets such as 5.65 s ± 43.49 ms and 8.043 s ± 65 ms
respectively. It shows how complex these two datasets are to
derive the unknown attacks.
2) Anomaly Detection Phase: The unsupervised and
semisupervised algorithms correspondingly AE and OCSVM
are used in the anomaly detection model of the existing system
and identified OCSVM outperforms AE. The classification
model is optimized by TPE technique. Hence, we implemented
the first stage of the existing system using OCSVM and AE
and then observed the high value generated by these two
methods. The confusion matrix generated in stage1 for the
datasets 5G, WUSTL and UNR are presented in Fig. 3, Fig. 4
and Fig. 5 correspondingly. From Fig. 3, the accuracy of
anomaly detection in stage1 for the 5G dataset is observed
very less, i.e., 75% than for other two datasets WUSTL and
UNR which are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. For that two
datasets, anomaly labels are classified with more than 92%.
Table VI shows the other performance metrics such as
recall, precision and F1-score in stage1 for all four datasets.
Correspondingly, the Recall value of the attack class shown
in Table VI reached 79% for the 5G dataset which is lower
than in other datasets whereas the precision is comparatively lesser than others. The anomaly samples are wrongly
classified as benign which reduces the recall of attack
and precision of benign samples for UNR and WUSTL.
Another interesting observation noticed in the stage1 results
is the dataset CIC_IDS_2017 secured less accuracy 68.7%

5574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 4.

Confusion Matrix of Stage1 and Stage2 of Existing IDS for WUSTL Dataset.

Fig. 5.

Confusion Matrix of Stage1 and Stage2 of Existing IDS for UNR Dataset.

for benign sample prediction. Correspondingly, the recall of
benign samples and precision of attack samples are observed
as less than the other datasets. The reason behind this is more
number of benign samples in the CIC_IDS_2017 dataset are
wrongly classified as attacks. That reduces the recall of benign
and the precision of attack classes. In general, OCSVM in
stage1 performs better for UNR and WUSTL datasets than
5G and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets for attack and benign sample
detection.
3) Multiclass Known Attack Detection Phase: The major
design intention of stage2 is to classify known attacks with
high accuracy. The multiclassification algorithm, Random
Forest used to train the Stage2 classifier. The threshold tau_m
in this stage is calculated from the high score registered in
the range F1 to F9 scores. Refer Table III for the threshold
obtained in stage2 for different datasets. The confusion matrix
of 5G, WUSTL and UNR are shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 4 and Fig. 5
respectively. The low accuracy 80.93% registered for known
attacks in UNR dataset due to its small size dataset than other
datasets. Simultaneously, UNR registered less recall 81% for

known attacks since more known attack samples are wrongly
classified into other classes like benign. More negative cases
are wrongly classified as known attacks in 5G dataset which
causes low precision 0.55 for this dataset.
4) Unknown Attack Detection Phase/Extension Stage: This
stage finalizes the unknown attacks. The known attack is
classified from benign by stage1 and then stage2 confirms it.
Table VI shows the overall performance of the existing multitier IDS. The classification accuracy for unknown attacks
for CIC_IDS_2017 and WUSTL datasets are registered less
values 87% and 83%. More benign and known attack samples
are wrongly classified as unknown attacks in CIC_IDS_2017,
UNR and WUSTL datasets which reduces the precision to
less than 0.5. At the same time, more unknown attack samples
are wrongly classified which reduces the recall value near
to 0.8. Fig. 6 shows the confusion matrix of the complete
system of UNR, WUSTL and 5G datasets. Table III shows the
threshold values of each stage. The threshold value tau_b is
calculated from F-scores obtained from stage1 prediction algorithm. Tau_b is observed as low 0.00047 in CIC_IDS_2017

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

Fig. 6.

Confusion Matrix of the Complete System in the Existing IDS for(a) UNR (b) WUSTL and (c) 5G.

Fig. 7.

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for 5G with TPE.

and high 0.2068 in 5G dataset to classify the attacks from
benign.
D. Performance Analysis of the Proposed Enhanced
Multi-Tier Hierarchical IDS
This section applies different techniques from state-ofthe-art for anomaly detection and multi-class classification
under deep learning and machine learning. For stage1 of
multi-stage IDS, anomaly detection is implemented using
unsupervised algorithms such as LOF, iForest, iNNE, CNN
with AE, k-means, one-class SVM under two different model
optimization techniques TPE and BOGP. The implementation
results are shown in Table VI. The top 5 algorithms are chosen
from Table VI to implement stage1 in the multi-stage IDS. For
UNR and WUSTL datasets, LOF_TPE, LOF_GP, iForest_GP,
and OC-SVM_GP are best algorithms for anomaly detection
to classify benign and non-benign samples. The algorithm
iForest_TPE is an additional one for WUSTL dataset whereas
iNNE_GP is in the top list of UNR. The top 5 performers
of 5G dataset are LOF_TPE, LOF_GP, CNN_GP, iNNE_GP
and OC-SVM_GP and for CIC_IDS_2017 dataset, CNN_TPE,
CNN_GP, iNNE_GP, and OC-SVM_GP.
In the second stage, known attacks are classified using the
following supervised algorithms from deep learning CNN, Soft
CNN, LSTM, GRU and all types of multi-class classification

5575

algorithms from machine learning. The ensemble machine
learning models like AdaBoost, XGBoost etc and customized
ensemble model from deep learning and machine learning
under bagging are also used to implement the stage2 of multistage IDS. The results of complete IDS for 5G, UNR, WUSTL
and CIC_IDS_2017 datasets are shown in Fig. 7 to Fig. 12
along with different optimization algorithms TPE and BOGP.
For UNR dataset that shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, under
BOGP optimization algorithm nearly 75% overall accuracy
scored by the J48G machine learning algorithm in stage2
for known attacks classification and LOF_TPE as well as
iForest_GP algorithms in stage1 for benign samples detection.
The unknown attacks are identified in 99.94% but benign
and known attacks samples are classified with only 50%.
Hence, we considered the next low-level top performers GRU,
MLP and XGB with LOF_TPE or LOF_GP secured 82%
known and benign samples classification accuracy. In this set
of algorithms, XGB and MLP provides nearly 30% detection
accuracy for unknown attacks with LOF_TPE and LOF_GP
algorithms in stage1 correspondingly. For the UNR dataset
shown in Fig. 9 with TPE model optimization algorithm, the
stage2 algorithms such as MLP, CNN and XGB provide high
benign and known attacks accuracy in the final detection result
like 99.97% and 68% correspondingly. The algorithms such
as LOF_TPE, LOF_GP, iForest_GP are best combination in
stage1 along with a set of selected stage2 algorithms. Finally,

5576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

TABLE VI
S TAGE 1 P ERFORMANCES IN THE E XISTING IDS AND THE P ROPOSED E NHANCED IDS

the XGB and MLP are identified as a best stage2 algorithms
for entire IDS with iForest_GP in stage1. They secured
100%:58%:38% and 100%:68%:32% for benign, known and
unknown attacks in the complete multi-stage IDS.

The same kind of analysis we have applied for other
datasets CIC_IDS_2017, 5G and WUSTL to find the best
combination of algorithms in stage1 and stage2 along with
model optimization technique. For the WUSTL dataset with TPE

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

Fig. 8.

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for 5G with BOGP.

Fig. 9.

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for UNR with TPE.

Fig. 10.

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for UNR with BOGP.

model optimization technique shown in Fig. 11, MLP and Extra
Tree are identified as best algorithm at stage2 and iForest_GP
in stage1. The algorithms MLP and ET secured 98%:65%:32%
and 98%:58%:38% detection accuracy in the final stage of
the multi-stage IDS for benign, known attacks and unknown
attack samples. For BOGP model optimization algorithm for
WUSTL dataset shown in Fig. 12, the MLP and Extra Tree
stage2 algorithms secure high detection accuracy in the final
stage with LOF_TPE and LOF_GP algorithms in stage1. These
algorithms provide 99.97%:68%:29% detection accuracy in the
final stage for benign, known attacks and unknown attacks.
For 5G dataset, Extra Tree algorithm in stage2 and
CNN_GP in stage1 provides best detection accuracy for
benign, known attacks and unknown attacks with 99.4%,
74.8% and 76.8% respectively. This result is shown in

5577

Fig. 7 under TPE model optimization technique. For BOGP
optimization technique in the model for 5G dataset shown
in Fig. 8, MLP classifier in stage2 secures high detection accuracy 97.9%:81.8%:73.5% for benign, known attacks
and unknown attacks. The best combination algorithm in
stage1 is CNN_GP for MLP (Multi Layer Perceptron) in
stage2 to obtain this best results. For CIC_IDS_2017 dataset,
Verkerken et al. [10] system provides high accuracy than other
alternative algorithms in stage1 and stage2.
E. Existing Multi-Tier IDS vs the Proposed Enhanced
Multi-Tier IDS
The existing multi-tier hierarchical IDS proposed by
Verkerken et al. [10] performance over the various benchmark

5578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 11.

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for WUSTL with TPE.

Fig. 12.

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for WUSTL with BOGP.

better than existing IDS. However, the unknown attack samples
classification rate is impressive in the enhanced IDS but that
are not upto the level of existing IDS. In general, the overall
classification rate is high in the proposed enhanced multi-tier
IDS with less computation complexity than the existing multitier IDS.
F. Discussions and Implications
Fig. 13.
BOGP.

The Proposed Enhanced Multi-tier IDS for CIC_IDS_2017 with

network IDS datasets is compared with our enhanced multi-tier
IDS and presented in Fig. 14. The best combination of stage1
and stage2 algorithms is identified in all four datasets under
TPE and BOGP optimization algorithms for this comparison.
For the 5G dataset, CNN with GP in stage1, Extra Tree with
BOGP in stage2 is the best combination for the proposed
enhanced IDS. For the WUSTL dataset, LOF with GP in
stage1, the deep learning technique GRU with BOGP in stage2
is the best combination for enhanced IDS. For the UNR
dataset, LOF with GP in stage1, Extra Tree with TPE in
stage2 is the best combination for the proposed enhanced IDS.
For the CIC_IDS_2017 dataset, CNN or OCSVM with GP in
stage1, AdaBoost with BOGP in stage2 is the best combination
for enhanced IDS. The benign samples are generally well
classified in all the datasets by the existing and our enhanced
IDS. Known attack samples in the enhanced IDS are classified

The following points are observed from the meticulous
analysis in the results generated from our implementation:
1) Overall, the machine learning algorithms such as MLP,
Extra Tree and XGB are the best performers in the
stage2 of the proposed enhanced multi-tier, hierarchical
IDS
2) For stage1, iForest_GP, LOF_GP, LOF_TPE and
CNN_GP are identified as the best algorithms to achieve
high results in the final stage of our enhanced multi-tier,
hierarchical IDS
3) BOGP model optimization technique performs well to
detect benign, known attacks and unknown attacks for
all 4 datasets than the TPE
4) From the overall observation, MLP and iForest perform
better in stage2 and stage1 of our enhanced multi-tier
IDS for multi-class known attacks classification and
benign samples detection
5) For 5G and UNR datasets, the benign, known
and unknown attack samples are detected in high

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

Fig. 14.

5579

The Proposed Enhanced Multitier IDS vs Existing Multitier IDS.

percentage which is more than 85% than other datasets
CIC_IDS_2017, UNR and WUSTL
6) For stage1, the Gaussian-based optimization algorithm
produces better results than TPE
7) For stage1, the unsupervised and semi-supervised algorithms such as LOF, OCSVM, and the deep learning
technique CNN give the best results for anomaly detection
8) For stage2, GRU, Ada Boosta and Extra Tree perform better for multiclass classification in known
attacks
VII. C ONCLUSION
The traditional, single-level intrusion detection system does
not perform well against zero-day attacks due to its closed-set
recognition nature. Hence, the hierarchical, and hybrid nature
intrusion detection systems is implemented and well-analyzed
in this empirical study with different alternative techniques
from the state-of-art works. The alternative techniques for
stage1’s unsupervised or semi-supervised learning and stage2’s
supervised learning are identified and observed performance
metrics of the proposed IDS. We adopted different hyperparameter optimization algorithms such as Tree-structured
Parzen estimator and Bayesian optimization with Gaussian
processes for model fine tunning. These techniques improve
the detection accuracy of unknown attacks especially along
with threshold optimization at baseline classifier. In this
empirical study, the efficiency of the proposed enhanced multitier IDS is evaluated using various IDS datasets such as
CIC_IDS_2017, UNR, WUSTL and 5G. From this detailed
study, we identified the best algorithms for each layer of the
multi-tier IDS with suitable model optimization algorithms.
The advantages of our proposed work are the design of the
best unknown attack IDS over more datasets, better detection
accuracy, and less computation complexity in training and
inference time. The combination of suitable hybrid algorithms
at multi-levels, an adjustable threshold in the classifier, hyperparameter optimized models, zero human/expert intervention,
one-shot learning, and the fusion of DL and ML techniques
makes the proposed IDS to perform well on unknown-attacks.
Three major drawbacks are in line for future work: (i) improve
the overall detection accuracy better than the achieved one with
advanced feature learning method and (ii) confront the realtime traffic in open-set recognition problem with less positive
rate and inference time.

A PPENDIX
N OMENCLATURE
IDSs
HIDS
IoT
IIoT
OSR
TPE
BOGP
IoV
MTH
IG
FCBF
KPCA
BO-TPE
PPPL
FL
AE
DL
ML
FGSM
CW
DoS/DDoS
DVAE
DQN
LOF
iNNE
SOCNN
CIC
UNR-IDD
OC-SVM
HPO
GP
MLP

Intrusion Detection Systems
Hierarchical IDS
Internet of Things
Industrial-IoT
Open Set Recognition
Tree-structured Parzen Estimator
Gaussian
Process-based
Bayesian
optimisation
Internet of Vehicles
multilevel hybrid
Information Gain
Fast Correlation Based Feature Selection
Kernel Principal Component Analysis
Bayesian Optimization-Tree of Parzen
Estimator
Proportional Progressive Pseudo-Labeling
Federated Learning
Autoencoder
Deep Learning
Machine Learning
fast gradient sign method
Carlini Wagner
Denial of Service/ Distributed DoS
VAE-based dual-domain defense
deep Q-network
Local Outlier Factor
isolated-based Nearest Neighbor Ensemble
Soft Ordering CNN
Canadian Institute of Cybersecurity
University of Nevada - Reno Intrusion
Detection Dataset
One-Class Support Vector Machine
Hyper-parameter Optimization
Gaussian Process
Multi Layer Perceptron

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the Department of
Science and Technology (DST), India, under the Fund
for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure in Universities and
Higher Educational Institutions (FIST) Program [Grant No.

5580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

SR/FST/ET-I/2022/1079], and a matching grant from VIT
University. The authors are grateful to DST-FIST and VIT
management for their financial support and the resources
provided for this work.
R EFERENCES
[1] U. Sabeel, S. S. Heydari, K. El-Khatib, and K. Elgazzar, “Unknown,
atypical and polymorphic network intrusion detection: A systematic survey,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1190–1212,
Feb. 2024.
[2] O. Urečková, M. Jureček, M. Stamp, F. Di Troia, and R Lórencz,
“Classification and online clustering of zero-day malware,” J. Comput.
Virol. Hacking Tech., vol. 20, pp. 579–592, Feb. 2024.
[3] P. Verma, N. Bharot, J. G. Breslin, D. O’Shea, A. Vidyarthi, and
D. Gupta, “Zero-day guardian: A dual model enabled federated learning
framework for handling zero-day attacks in 5G enabled IIoT,” IEEE
Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3856–3866, Feb. 2024.
[4] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “A deep
learning ensemble approach to detecting unknown network attacks,” J.
Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 67, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 103196.
[5] R. Yoshihashi, W. Shao, R. Kawakami, S. You, M. Iida, and T. Naemura,
“Classification-reconstruction learning for open-set recognition,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2019,
pp. 4011–4020.
[6] A. A. Korba, A. Boualouache, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Zero-X: A
blockchain-enabled open-set federated learning framework for zero-day
attack detection in IoV,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9,
pp. 12399–12414, Sep. 2024.
[7] C. S. Shieh, F. A. Ho, M. F. Horng, T. T. Nguyen, and P. Chakrabarti,
“Open-set recognition in unknown DDoS attacks detection with reciprocal points learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 56461–56476, 2024.
[8] M. Soltani, B. Ousat, M. J. Siavoshani, and A. H. Jahangir, “An
adaptable deep learning-based intrusion detection system to zero-day
attacks,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 76, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 103516.
[9] Y. Wu, Y. Hu, J. Wang, M. Feng, A. Dong, and Y. Yang, “An
active learning framework using deep Q-network for zero-day attack
detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 139, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 103713.
[10] M. Verkerken et al., “A novel multi-stage approach for hierarchical
intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3,
pp. 3915–3929, Sep. 2023.
[11] T. Das, O. A. Hamdan, R. M. Shukla, S. Sengupta, and E. Arslan, “UNRIDD: Intrusion detection dataset using network port statistics,” in Proc.
IEEE 20th Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2023, pp. 497–500.
[12] S. Samarakoon et al., 2022, “5G-NIDD: A comprehensive network
intrusion detection dataset generated over 5G wireless network,” Dataset,
IEEE Dataport.
[13] M. Zolanvari, M. A. Teixeira, L. Gupta, K. M. Khan, and R. Jain,
(Washington Univ. St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA). WUSTL-IIOT-2021
Dataset for IIoT Cybersecurity Research. (2021). [Online]. Available:
http://www.cse.wustl.edu/ jain/iiot2/index.html.
[14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered
hybrid intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
[15] X.-H. Nguyen and K.-H. Le, “Robust detection of unknown DoS/DDoS
attacks in IoT networks using a hybrid learning model,” Internet Things,
vol. 23, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 100851.
[16] S. Watanabe, “Tree-structured Parzen estimator: Understanding its algorithm components and their roles for better empirical performance,”
2023, arXiv:2304.11127.
[17] R. Garnett, Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 2023.
[18] S. Theodoridis, Machine Learning: A Bayesian and Optimization
Perspective. Cambridge, MA, USA: Academic, 2015.
[19] M. J. Hashemi, E. Keller, and S. Tizpaz-Niari, “Detecting unseen
anomalies in network systems by leveraging neural networks,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2515–2528, Sep. 2023.
[20] A. H. Celdrán et al., “RL and fingerprinting to select moving target
defense mechanisms for zero-day attacks in IoT,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5520–5529, 2024.
[21] Y. Cao, K. Liu, Y. Lin, L. Wang, and Y. Xia, “Deep-reinforcementlearning-based self-evolving moving target defense approach against
unknown attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 20,
pp. 33027–33039, Oct. 2024.
[22] A. Touré, Y. Imine, A. Semnont, T. Delot, and A. Gallais, “A framework
for detecting zero-day exploits in network flows,” Comput. Netw.,
vol. 248, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 110476.

[23] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2016,
pp. 1563–1572.
[24] U. Zukaib, X. Cui, C. Zheng, D. Liang, and S. U. Din, “Meta-fed IDS:
Meta-learning and federated learning based fog-cloud approach to detect
known and zero-day cyber attacks in IoMT networks,” J. Parallel Distrib.
Comput., vol. 192, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 104934.
[25] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
[26] C. Kim, S.-Y. Chang, J. Kim, D. Lee, and J. Kim, “Automated, reliable
zero-day malware detection based on autoencoding architecture,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3900–3914, Sep. 2023.
[27] T. Li, Z. Hong, W. Feng, L. Yu, and Z. Wen, “MS-ZeroWall: Detecting
zero-day multi-step attack in smart home using VAE and HMM,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 13278–13291, Sep. 2024.
[28] I. Mbona and J. H. P. Eloff, “Detecting zero-day intrusion attacks using
semi-supervised machine learning approaches,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 69822–69838, 2022.
[29] T. Zoppi, A. Ceccarelli, and A. Bondavalli, “Unsupervised algorithms to
detect zero-day attacks: strategy and application,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 90603–90615, 2021.
[30] B. I. Hairab, M. S. Elsayed, A. D. Jurcut, and M. A. Azer, “Anomaly
detection based on CNN and Regularization techniques against zero-day
attacks in IoT networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 98427–98440, 2022.
[31] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[32] V. Böhm and U. Seljak, “Probabilistic autoencoder,” 2022,
arXiv:2006.05479.
[33] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., 2008, pp. 413–422.
[34] T. R. Bandaragoda, K. M. Ting, D. Albrecht, F. T. Liu, Y. Zhu, and
J. R. Wells, “Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
ensembles,” Comput. Intell., vol. 34, pp. 968–998, Nov. 2018.
[35] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly
detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Disc. Data, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 3, 2012.
[36] M. M. Breunig, H. P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2,
pp. 93–104, 2000.
[37] L. Shu, H. Xu, and B. Liu, “DOC: Deep open classification of text
documents,” in Proc. 2017 Conf. Empir. Methods Nat. Lang. Process.,
2017, pp. 2911–2916.
[38] S. Shen, C. Cai, Z. Li, Y. Shen, G. Wu, and S. Yu, “Deep Q-networkbased heuristic intrusion detection against edge-based SIoT zero-day
attacks,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 150, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 111080.
[39] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna: A nextgeneration hyperparameter optimization framework,” in Proc. 25th ACM
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2019, pp. 2623–2631.
[40] C. K. Williams and C. E. Rasmussen, Gaussian Processes for Machine
Learning. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006.

Menaka Pushpa Arthur received the Bachelor of
Engineering degree in computer science and engineering from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2002,
the Master of Engineering degree in computer science and engineering from Anna University in 2004,
and the Ph.D. degree from the Faculty of Information
and Communication Engineering, Anna University.
She is an Associate Professor with the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Vellore Institute
of Technology (Chennai). She has nearly 15 years
of teaching and research experience. She has published numerous research articles in international journals and prestigious
conferences. She has also secured research funding for projects related to IoT
product development, large language models, and cyber security. Her research
focuses on mobile and wireless networks, multicast communication, routing
security, intrusion detection systems, UAV networks machine learning, and
deep learning. She has received two Best Paper Awards in the International
and National level Conferences organized by MIT and Anna University. She
actively serves as a reviewer and an editorial board member for high-impact
journals.

ARTHUR et al.: EMPIRICAL STUDY OF HIERARCHICAL IDSs FOR UNKNOWN ATTACKS

Ganesan Ramachandran received the Doctor
of Philosophy degree in computer science from
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, in 2011.
He is a Professor and the former Dean of the
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Vellore Institute of Technology (Chennai), where
he has been serving as the Deputy Director of the
Career Development Centre since August 2025. He
served as the Assistant Director of the Office of
International Relations from 2018 to 2021 and the
assistant director for outreach programs from 2018
to 2019. He was the Program Chair for B.Tech. Computer Science and
Engineering from 2013 to 2017. Earlier, he was an Associate Professor and
the Head of the Department of Computer Science Department, PSG College
of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, from 1998 to 2012. He is having more than
24 years of teaching experience. His area of research work is information
security and network security. Under his supervision, eight research scholars
have successfully completed their Ph.D. degree in computer science and
one research scholar is pursuing the Ph.D. degree. He has published several
research papers in the peer reviewed national and international level journals
and had delivered various guest lectures in the field of information security.
He is a reviewer for various national and international journals. Also, he was
a certified ISO Internal Auditor by TUV Rheinland (India) Pvt. Ltd. in 2007.

Keshav Sood (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Bachelor of Technology degree (Hons., with
Distinction) in electronics and communications engineering and the Master of Technology degree
in optical fiber engineering in 2007 and 2012,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in information
technology (software-defined networking security)
from Deakin University, Melbourne, in 2018, under
the supervision of Prof. S. Yu. He was a trainee
with the Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory
(TBRL, DRDO, Ministry of Defense), Chandigarh,
India. He was the recipient of the Professor of IT Award given by the
School of IT for his outstanding academic achievements during his Ph.D.
degree. He was a Postdoctoral Fellow with The University of Newcastle,
New South Wales, Australia. He is currently working as a Senior Lecturer of
Cyber Security with the School of IT, Deakin University. His work in cyber
security for next generation networks has been published in top-notch security and networking venues, i.e., IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION
F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON D EPENDABLE AND
S ECURE C OMPUTING, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, and
IEEE Network Magazine.

5581

Pavan Kaarthik received the B.Tech. degree in
computer science and engineering from the Vellore
Institute of Technology (Chennai). He currently
works as a Software Engineer with HSBC, where
he enables data ETL and migration for downstream
consumption and analytics. His current research
interests are in machine learning and deep learning,
specifically in the field of cyber security.

Srivarshinee Sridhar is currently pursuing the
B.Tech. degree in computer science with the Vellore
Institute of Technology (Chennai), with a passion for
pushing the boundaries of cutting-edge AI research.
Her academic and research pursuits span natural
language processing, machine learning, mechanistic
interpretability, and network security with a particular emphasis on building trustworthy and transparent
machine learning systems. She is deeply motivated
to bridge the gap between theoretical foundations
and real-world impact, aiming to develop AI models
that are not only powerful but also explainable, reliable, and aligned with
human values.

Morshed Chowdhury received the Ph.D. degree
from Monash University, Australia, in 1999. He
is currently an Academic Staff Member with the
School of Engineering and Information Technology,
Melbourne Institute of Technology (MIT). He also
serves as the Course Coordinator of Graduate
Diploma in Networking and the Master of
Networking. Prior to joining MIT, he has served with
the School of IT, Deakin University with various
academic position from 1999 to 2021. He produced
23 Ph.D. as a principal/associate supervisor. Some
of his Ph.D. graduates are computing well established in various institutes
in Australia and overseas. He was invited as a guest speaker with the
Institute of Kyoto institute of Technology, Kyoto, and Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. He published more than 168 Journal and conference papers
in the reputed Journals and international conferences. He assessed more
than 22 Ph.D. theses in Australia and India. He has been reviewing journal
papers of several reputed journals, such as IEEE/ACM T RANSACTION
ON N ETWORKING , Computer Network (Elsevier), IEEE T RANSACTION
ON I NDUSTRY A PPLICATION , Artificial Intelligence in Medicine (Elsevier),
Measurement (Elsevier), Sustainable Computing (Elsevier), IEEE I NTERNET
OF T HINGS J OURNAL , Applied Energy (Elsevier), and International Journal
of Intelligent Systems (Wiley).