IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

331

Encrypted Traffic Classification Through Deep
Domain Adaptation Network With Smooth
Characteristic Function
Van Tong , Cuong Dao , Hai-Anh Tran , Duc Tran , Huynh Thi Thanh Binh , Thang Hoang-Nam ,
and Truong X. Tran , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Encrypted network traffic classification has become
a critical task with the widespread adoption of protocols such
as HTTPS and QUIC. Deep learning-based methods have
proven to be effective in identifying traffic patterns, even within
encrypted data streams. However, these methods face significant
challenges when confronted with new applications that were
not part of the original training set. To address this issue,
knowledge transfer from existing models is often employed to
accommodate novel applications. As the complexity of network
traffic increases, particularly at higher protocol layers, the
transferability of learned features diminishes due to domain
discrepancies. Recent studies have explored Deep Adaptation
Networks (DAN) as a solution, which extends deep convolutional
neural networks to better adapt to target domains by mitigating
these discrepancies. Despite its potential, the computational
complexity of discrepancy metrics, such as Maximum Mean
Discrepancy, limits DAN’s scalability, especially when applied
to large datasets. In this paper, we propose a novel DAN
architecture that incorporates Smooth Characteristic Functions
(SCFs), specifically SCF-unNorm (Unnormalized SCF) and SCFpInverse (Pseudo-inverse SCF). These functions are designed to
enhance feature transferability in task-specific layers, effectively
addressing the limitations posed by domain discrepancies and
computational complexity. The proposed mechanism provides a
means to efficiently handle situations with limited labeled data or
entirely unlabeled data for new applications. The aim is to limit
the target error by incorporating a domain discrepancy between
the source and target distributions along with the source error.
Two statistics classes, SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse, are used
to minimize this domain discrepancy in traffic classification. The
experimental results demonstrate that our proposed mechanism
outperforms existing benchmarks in terms of accuracy, enabling
real-time traffic classification in network systems. Specifically, we
achieve up to 99% accuracy with an execution time of only three
milliseconds in the considered scenarios.
Received 15 November 2023; revised 1 April 2024 and 19 September
2024; accepted 24 January 2025. Date of publication 27 January 2025; date
of current version 14 March 2025. This research was funded by Vingroup
Innovation Foundation (VINIF) under project code VINIF.2022.DA00183 for
Huynh Thi Thanh Binh and Hai-Anh Tran. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Y. Diao.
(Corresponding author: Hai-Anh Tran.)
Van Tong, Hai-Anh Tran, Duc Tran, and Huynh Thi Thanh Binh are
with the School of Information and Communication Technology, Hanoi
University of Science and Technology, Hanoi 10000, Vietnam (e-mail:
vantv@soict.hust.edu.vn; anhth@soict.hust.edu.vn; ductq@soict.hust.edu.vn;
binhht@soict.hust.edu.vn).
Cuong Dao and Thang Hoang-Nam are with the Faculty of Information
Technology, Hanoi University of Civil Engineering, Hanoi 11600, Vietnam
(e-mail: cuong28264@huce.edu.vn; thanghn@huce.edu.vn).
Truong X. Tran is with the School of Science, Engineering and Technology,
Penn State Harrisburg, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
PA 16802 USA (e-mail: truong.tran@psu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3534791

Index Terms—Traffic classification, deep learning, deep adaptation network, multi-kernel maximum mean discrepancy and
smooth characteristic function test.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the proliferation of the Internet and Internet
of Things (IoT), various applications have emerged,
including video streaming, file transfer, and chat services.
Additionally, catering to user-specific requirements, such as
high reliability and minimal data loss, has become a critical
concern [1], [2]. In this landscape, traffic classification, which
categorizes network traffic, has assumed paramount importance, especially in the realm of encrypted traffic protocols
like VPN, HTTPS and QUIC [3], [4]. The primary aim is
to enhance network management capabilities, encompassing
Quality of Service (QoS) provisioning, intrusion detection,
application-aware mechanisms, firewalling, and more. The
diagram of traffic classification is described in Figure 1.
In the past, many solutions have been designed to identify
network applications [5], [6], such as port-based classification approaches, deep packet inspection, and statistics-based
approaches. However, these approaches suffer from several
limitations such as dynamic port allocation, hidden signatures
in encrypted traffic, frequent behavior updates in tunneling
services and so on. To deal with these limitations, many studies
put a special focus on payload-based encrypted traffic classification using Deep Learning (DL) [7], [8], which converts the
payload of the packets to byte values and analyzes it using
DL to identify the applications. The payload-based approaches
focus on ‘existing applications’, which contain labeled data in
the training dataset. In detail, this approach collects a large
amount of labeled application data and trains the learning models to identify these applications. However, these approaches
encounter challenges with ‘new applications’, which are not
in the training dataset and contain unlabeled data or limited
labeled data. Concretely, manual labelling is limited due to
being time-consuming and costly. With the emergence of
Transfer Learning (TL), many recent studies illustrate that DL
algorithms can learn implicit features from an original domain
(e.g., existing applications, etc.) and transfer it to a new
domain (e.g., new applications, etc.) in order to identify new
applications with limited labeled data [9]. In TL algorithms,
the parameters in the task-specific layers cannot be learned
effectively due to the increase in domain discrepancy during

W

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

332

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

The diagram of traffic classification.

the feature transferability from the original domain to the new
domain [9], [10]. Hence, it is essential to reduce the dataset
bias and improve the feature transferability to adapt to new
applications.
To address the decrease in feature transferability, numerous studies have investigated the Deep Adaptation Network
(DAN) architecture in the context of traffic classification,
exploring methods such as Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) [11], [12], [13], semi-supervised learning [14], and
others. While achieving good performance in the considered scenarios, the usage of MMD comes with several
limitations [15]. Firstly, MMD employs a smooth witness
function, which proves to be less effective in high-dimensional
spaces. Additionally, relying on the witness function does not
maximize test power, as it fails to provide a direct indication of
distributional features. In statistics, the power of a hypothesis
test denotes the probability of correctly rejecting the null
hypothesis, representing the likelihood of true positive detection. Secondly, MMD-based approaches demand significant
training time when dealing with large input datasets, attributed
to the computational complexity of calculating MMD between
the source and target domains.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel
encrypted traffic classification mechanism to identify
new applications using DAN architecture and novel
Smooth Characteristic Functions (SCFs): SCF-unNorm
(Unnormalized SCF) and SCF-pInverse (Pseudo-inverse
SCF). These characteristic functions are built on the analytic
representations of probability distributions that have greater
power than MMD. Moreover, the time complexity of
characteristic functions is lower than MMD. The proposed
mechanism offers opportunities to deal effectively with limited
labeled data or unlabeled data of new applications. Consider
a use case where the Internet is divided into numerous
Autonomous Systems (ASs), each managed by an Internet
Service Provider (ISP). ISPs need to implement traffic
classification approaches to support network management.
In the case where there is a new AS with limited labeled
data, or unlabeled data of novel applications which did not
exist in other ASs, using knowledge (pre-trained models)
from existing ASs to identify novel applications leads to
inaccurate classification results. Therefore, the proposed
mechanism helps to enhance the performance of encrypted
traffic classification in the context of limited labeled data or
unlabeled data.
This work is an extended version of our previous paper [16].
Our previous efforts concentrated on employing DAN with

MMD and Mean Embedding (ME) for encrypted traffic
classification. However, these approaches were hampered by
extensive training durations. Furthermore, the experimental
results presented in that study were incomplete, indicating
that the proposed solution lacked efficacy. Consequently, in
this paper, we expand upon this research by introducing a
deep domain adaptation network incorporating novel SCFs to
overcome these shortcomings. The contributions of the paper
are presented as follows:
• Collection of Encrypted Traffic Dataset for Domain
Adaptation: This work introduces DAQUIC, a dataset
specifically designed for domain adaptation in encrypted
traffic classification, addressing the lack of publicly available datasets. The dataset is accessible on GitHub [17].
• Payload-based Encrypted Traffic Classification with a
Balance Between Accuracy and Processing Time: A
Deep Learning-based encrypted traffic classification
mechanism is proposed, offering high accuracy while
maintaining efficient processing times.
• DAN-based Encrypted Traffic Classification Using Novel
SCFs: To reduce domain discrepancies in task-specific
layers, a DAN-based encrypted traffic classification
method using novel Smooth Characteristic Functions
(SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse) is proposed.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
introduces related work in encrypted traffic classification and
existing studies using Transfer Learning. In Section III, the
paper presents the formalization of the problem related to
traffic classification. Section IV illustrates the methodology
of the proposed payload-based encrypted traffic classification
algorithm, the proposed DAN-based solution, and the domain
adaptation networks using two-sample test statistics: SCFunNorm, SCF-pInverse, and MK-MMD. Section V describes
the experimental results of the proposed mechanism for both
existing and new applications. Finally, the paper concludes
with Section VI, which highlights our future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
This section presents an overview of studies on encrypted
traffic classification and the use of TL in this domain.
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification
According to [3], [18], there are three popular encrypted
traffic classification mechanisms: approaches using Transport
Layer Security (TLS) features, statistic-based approaches, and
payload-based approaches.
The TLS-based traffic classification mechanism takes into
account TLS-specific features extracted from the TLS handshake in the first few packets of a flow. The header of TLS
packets contains useful information to identify the applications. Cui et al. proposed “Only Header” [19], which combines
a segmentation mechanism and Capsule Neural Networks to
classify traffic while avoiding privacy risks. Similarly, He et al.
proposed DSCU [20], a skew-based classification approach for
classifying TLS applications that analyzes the window-based
segmentation using a one-class classifier to identify unknown
traffic from the known ones. However, these approaches suffer

TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK

from several limitations. “Only Header” may miss critical
payload information, which is often encrypted in TLS, leading
to potential misclassification, while DSCU falters with the
variability and encryption of TLS traffic, causing difficulties
in accurately classifying new traffic patterns.
The statistic-based mechanism conveys the first several
packets or all packets of a network flow to extract flow-based
features (e.g., packet length, inter-arrival time, etc.) for traffic
classification. Fathi-Kazerooni et al. [21] proposed a traffic
classification mechanism using the Random Forest algorithm
to identify six kinds of applications. This mechanism takes
into account ten flow-based features from all packets of flows
and analyzes them to determine Chrome, WhatsApp, OneNote,
Spotify, Google Drive, and OneDrive. However, traffic classification mechanisms using flow-based features from all packets
of a flow cannot early identify the network applications
because it is required to gather information after a flow terminates. Therefore, many studies focus on traffic classification
approaches that consider flow-based features from the first
several packets of a flow to early identify the applications.
Qin et al. proposed HFC [22], a method for unsupervised
traffic classification by exploring the flow features and link patterns. This method formulates the traffic identification task as a
graph co-clustering problem with topology and edge attributes
and leverages both features and linkage information to classify
traffic. Moreover, Shaheem et al. presented a classification
technique using an ensemble of deep learning architectures on
packet, payload, and inter-arrival time sequences [23]. This
approach analyzes the high-level features from network data
using ML algorithms. Despite achieving good performance,
these approaches require human intervention to identify predefined flow-based features. Besides, they are ineffective when
application behaviors change with additional services (e.g.,
Virtual Private Network, etc.).
The payload-based mechanism considers the byte value in
the payload of a packet within a flow to identify the network
applications. Lotfollahi et al. [8] proposed a novel traffic
classification using the DL algorithm called Deep Packet. This
approach takes into account 1500 bytes in the payload of a
packet and analyzes them to classify the network traffic into
different kinds of applications (e.g., email, chat, torrent, etc.)
in the context of VPN (Virtual Private Network) and non-VPN.
Deep Packet uses all information in the header of a packet,
so this can lead to inaccurate classification because many
applications use the same port numbers (e.g., port 443, etc.).
Wang et al. [24] proposed an encrypted traffic classification
approach to identify 15 kinds of applications (e.g., Gmail,
Facebook, etc.) for home networks. This mechanism considers
the first 1480 bytes of a packet and analyzes it using different
learning algorithms such as Multi-layer Perceptron, Stacked
Auto-encoder, and so on. Using a large number of byte values
leads to high processing time, which is not appropriate for realtime classification, so Wang et al. [7] proposed another traffic
classification approach which only uses the first 784 bytes
of a packet to identify six VPN and non-VPN applications.
Although these payload-based mechanisms can achieve good
performance, they require a long processing time due to using

333

a large number of byte values in the input. However, the tradeoff between performance and time processing is not considered
thoroughly in existing studies.
While numerous payload-based approaches exist for identifying network applications, they prove ineffective when
encountering novel applications that have not been previously
trained, leading to inaccurate results. This presents significant
challenges for network management.
B. Traffic Classification Using Transfer Learning
According to a recent study [25], there are many solutions
for encrypted traffic classification, such as Federated Learning
(FL), TL, and so on. FL requires labeled data from network
applications to identify them, but it is difficult to obtain labeled
data of novel emerging applications. In this context, many TLbased approaches are designed to identify novel applications.
Taghiyarrenani and Farsi [13] proposed a domain adaptation mechanism for traffic classification, which trains a
model using labeled samples from a network and adapts it
to another network with only a few labeled samples using
MMD. Moreover, Ning et al. [14] proposed a novel traffic
classification approach based on domain adaptation and semisupervised learning. This approach generates a model using
a semi-supervised learning algorithm from a large amount of
unlabeled data and a few labeled samples. Then, this approach
adapts the pre-trained model from the source to the target
domain using MMD. However, using MMD to calculate the
domain discrepancy between the source and the target domains
does not maximize the test power and requires high training
time.
Similarly, Gu et al. [26] proposed Zen-tor, a zero-knowledge
known-unknown traffic classification mechanism using GAN
and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for home networks.
Zen-tor considers labeled known flow samples and analyzes
them to train Flow Discriminator D and Fake Flow Generator
G so that Zen-tor can classify the new network traffic
from the existing one without any prior information about
new traffic. The objective is to protect the privacy of the
home network with only labeled existing traffic. Similarly,
Hu et al. [18] proposed ZSL, a novel attribute-based zero-shot
learning framework for traffic classification. ZSL generates
a feature-attribute embedding model using both flow features and attributes to identify different kinds of existing
applications. After that, ZSL generates FAE-G, a GAN-based
feature generation model, to synthesize traffic samples of new
applications from the existing ones. Finally, the traffic samples
of both existing and new applications are fed into a twostep classification method using gradient-based rejection to
identify different kinds of applications. ZSL can achieve good
performance for existing applications with over 95%, but it has
not good performance for new applications with approximately
21%. Besides, Nukavarapu et al. [27] proposed MirageNet,
a GAN-based synthetic network traffic generation framework
to generate synthetic models of protocols, applications, and
devices. The GAN-based traffic classification mechanisms
offer opportunities to classify new traffic from existing ones

334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

without any knowledge about new traffic. However, the classification performance for new traffic is limited. FixMatch [28]
is a semi-supervised learning that considers unlabeled data
to improve the classification. FixMatch generates pseudolabels for weakly-augmented unlabeled data via a classification
model. Then, it uses the pseudo-labels with high confidence to
train the model with strongly-augmented data. Despite achieving good performance in considered scenarios, FixMatch
suffers from limitations with the misclassification of pseudolabels. Minimum Class Confusion (MCC) [29] is a novel
general loss designed to adapt to various domain adaption
scenarios such as closed-set, partial-set domain adaptation
and so on. MCC can achieve other approaches in considered
scenarios, particularly the DomainNet dataset. However, MCC
is ineffective with imbalanced data when the number of
samples in the source domain is significantly higher than in
the target domain.
Numerous existing studies incorporate TL for traffic classification, employing methods such as MMD, GAN, etc.
However, these approaches encounter challenges related to
accuracy limitations and substantial computational complexity. While the MMD approach demonstrates commendable
performance under specific circumstances, it often prolongs
training durations. Conversely, the GAN approach proves
inadequate for handling novel applications, resulting in inaccuracies. Hence, the proposed DAN-based traffic classification
mechanism strives to achieve optimal performance with new
applications while maintaining reasonable training times.
III. T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION P ROBLEM
Encrypted traffic classification identifies the network traffic
generated from different applications and categorizes it into
various categories (e.g., video streaming, e-commerce, etc.).
The proposed mechanism considers byte-level features from
the first few packets of a flow to classify the network traffic
into different categories. The traffic classification using the
byte values in the payload can be effective with existing
domain data (e.g., existing applications, etc.). However, there
is insufficient data to train the learning models for the new
domains (e.g., new applications, etc.). The proposed method
considers both existing and new applications.
For the existing applications that contain labeled data in the
training dataset, consider set D = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 of n samples,
where xi is the byte-level features of the i-th samples and yi
is the category of the i-th samples. Byte-level features of a
sample are described in Equation (1):
⎞
⎛
b11 b12 · · · b1k
⎜
.. . . .. ⎟
xi = ⎝ ...
(1)
. . ⎠
.
bm1 bm2 · · · bmk

where k is the number of byte values used in the payload of a
packet within a flow (≤ maximum byte of a packet), m is the
i is the i-th
number of consecutive packets used in a flow, bm
byte of the m-th packet in a flow and byte x 00 ≤ bi ≤ xﬀ .
The objective of traffic classification is to build a deep neural
network y = θ (x) which can minimize the target risk (θ) =
Pr[θ (x) = y].

As for the new applications not in the training dataset, an
unsupervised domain adaptation is utilized to classify them
s
into different categories. Denote by Ds = {(xis , yis )}ni=1
a source domain with ns labeled samples, and denote by
t
a target domain with nt samples. The
Dt = {(xit , yit )}ni=1
target domain Dt is composed of both labeled data Dl =
l
u
and unlabeled data Du = {(xiu )}ni=1
. A few
{(xil , yil )}ni=1
labeled samples are required for the new applications, so
Dl << Du . The total dataset is all the available samples
D = Ds ∪ Dt . The source and target domains are related but
have different distributions. The probability distribution of the
source domain and target domain are p and q, respectively.
Besides, p is different from q. The goal is to learn a deep
neural network y = f (x) which can learn transferable features
between different domains to reduce the discrepancy between
source and target domains and minimize the target risk R(f ) =
Pr(x ,y)∼q [f (x ) = y]. In the considered experiments, the
number of bytes k in the payload is set to 256 or 512 while
the number of packets in a flow m is set to 20. The number
of samples in the dataset is described in Table II. The details
are analyzed in the experimental results.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
This section proposes novel two-sample test statistics (SCFunNorm and SCF-pInverse) in DAN, the payload-based
mechanism, and the DAN-based mechanism to classify the
encrypted traffic.
A. Novel Sample Statistic Functions and Comparative
Benchmark
The domain adaptation is limited when the target domain
contains no prior information or limited information about new
applications. According to related work [9], [30], there are
many studies aiming to bound the target error by adding a
domain discrepancy between the source and target distribution
p and q with the source error. The two-sample testing refers to
which accepts or rejects the null hypothesis p = q using two
samples generated from these distributions. In this case, three
statistics classes are considered: SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse,
and MK-MMD [9], [31]. With the large input sequences of
traffic classification, calculating MK-MMD leads to a high
computational time, influencing the training time. Hence,
SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse are proposed to reduce the
domain discrepancy in traffic classification.
1) Novel Smooth Characteristic Functions: SCF [15] is a
kind of test statistic that uses a form of Hotelling’s T-squared
statistic. The detail of SCF is described in Equation (2):
−1
Mk (Ds , Dt )  max nz
n Sn zn .
v

(2)

where Ds is the
 source domain1data,
nDt is the target domain

data, zn  n1 ni=1 zi , Sn  n−1
i=1 (zi − zn )(zi − zn ) ,
s
s

t
t

zi := [f̂(φ(xi ))sin(φ(xi ) vj ) − f̂(φ(xi ))sin(φ(xi ) vj ),
f̂(φ(xis ))cos(φ(xis ) vj ) − f̂(φ(xit ))cos(φ(xit ) vj )]Jj=1 ∈
R2J , f̂ = Rd exp(−i uT x)f(u)d u denotes the Fourier transform of f (x) and f:Rd → R is an analytic translation-invariant
kernel. φ is a nonlinear feature mapping function of hidden representations. SCF relies on J test locations V =

TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK

335

{vj }Jj=1 ⊂ Rd , which are in frequency domain. Let ψp (v) =
Rd ϕp (w)l (v − w)d w be the smooth characteristic function
of p where ϕp (w) is the characteristic function of p. The SCF
is considered as a normalized distance of empirical ϕp (v) and
ϕq (v) by using Sn−1 .
In the payload-based traffic classification mechanism, zero
padding in the input data results in a singular matrix, so it is
difficult to measure the covariance matrix. SCF is composed
of an inverse of a matrix Sn−1 described as in Equation (3):
Sn−1 =

Sn
detSn

(3)

where Sn = (aij )n×n , Sn is the adjoint matrix of Sn and
detSn is the determinant of Sn .
Following the Leibniz formula [32], detSn is depicted as in
Equation (4):
n

detSn =

sgn(σ)
σ∈Sn

ai,σ(i)

Fig. 2.

The encrypted traffic classification architecture.

where φ is a nonlinear feature mapping of hidden representations.
Ds and Dt are the samples from the distributions p and q.
The formulation of MK-MMD is converted to Equation (9):

(4)
Mk (Ds , Dt ) 

i=1

In several cases, detSn is zero, so the inverse of a matrix
Sn−1 is undefined. Therefore, two customizations of SCF is

proposed to deal with the problem of the singular matrix: SCFunNorm and SCF-pInverse.
The SCF-unNorm refers to the unnormalized SCF which
skips Sn−1 . Besides, SCF-unNorm is demonstrated as a metric
on the space of probability measures for any V and to act for
two-sample testing in a manner comparable to the normalized
SCF [33]. The SCF without using Sn−1 does not require
considering the covariance matrix. The detail of SCF-unNorm
is depicted as in Equation (5):
Mk (Ds , Dt )  max nz
n zn .
v

(5)

SCF-pInverse considers the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse [34] instead of the inverse matrix Sn−1 in Equation (2).
The detail of SCF-pInverse is depicted as in Equation (6):
+
Mk (Ds , Dt )  max nz
n Sn zn .
v

(6)

where Sn+ is the Moore–Penrose inverse of matrix Sn . The
Moore–Penrose inverse of the matrix Sn is described as in
Equation (7):

Sn+ =

Sn Sn




−1 
S , if Sn has linearly independent columns.
n
(7)
 −1

Sn Sn Sn

, if Sn has linearly independent rows.

2) Comparative Benchmark: MMD [9], [31] is a test
which minimizes the Type-II error and maximizes the twosample test power (e.g., rejecting a false null hypothesis, etc.).
Let assume that Hk is the reproduction of kernel Hilbert
space (RKHS) possessing a distinctive kernel k. The mean
embedding of distribution q in Hk is a distinct element μk (p)
where Ex ∼p f (x ) = f (x ), μk (p) Hk with all f (x ) ∈ Hk .
MK-MMD between probability distributions p and q is considered as the RKHS distance between the mean embeddings
of p and q. The formulation of MK-MMD is described as
Equation (8):

(8)
Mk (p, q)  ||Ep [φ(x s )] − Eq φ x t ||2Hk .

1
ns2
+

ns

ns



k xis , xjs

i=1 j =1
nt n t



1
t t
k
x
,
x
i j
nt2 i=1 j =1

2
−
ns nt

ns

nt

i=1 j =1



k xis , xjt .

(9)

A noticeable feature from Equation (8) is that p=q if
Mk (p, q) = 0 [31]. The characteristic kernel k (xi , xj ) =
φ(xi ), φ(xj ) is considered as the convex combination of m
positive-definite kernels ku :


m
m
K k =
βu ku :
βu = 1, βu ≥ 0 ∀u . (10)
u=1

u=1

where the constraints on coefficients βu are required to ensure
that the multi-kernel k is characteristic.
To guarantee the test power and minimal test error, the
kernel chosen for the mean embeddings of p and q is essential.
The multi-kernel k can use various kernels to improve the
MK-MMD, resulting in a principled technique for the optimal
kernel selection.
B. Payload-Based Encrypted Traffic Classification Approach
The payload-based mechanism aims to analyze the network
traffic and categorize it into different applications. This mechanism contains two main stages: pre-processing and feature
extraction. As illustrated in Figure 2, in the beginning, the
data traffic is processed in the pre-processing to create a
matrix representing a network flow. After that, this matrix
is fed into a feature extractor to classify the network traffic
into different categories: e-commerce, video on-demand, and
interactive data.
In the pre-processing stage, the network traffic is processed
to create uniform data for the feature extraction. This stage
comprises four steps: byte conversation, zero padding, normalization, and data formatting. The proposed traffic classification
mechanism takes into account the payload of each packet in

336

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

The DAN-based encrypted traffic classification mechanism using SCF.

a flow for the traffic classification, so the other information
(e.g., data-link header, Ethernet header, etc.) is skipped due
to an unnecessity [8]. Then, the bit value in the payload
is converted to byte values to reduce the input size in the
byte conversation. The proposed payload-based mechanism
considers m first bytes in the payload of packets. If the number
of selected bytes is m, and the payload length of a packet is
less than m, the payload is padded zero values at the end to
make an equal length in the normalization. To enhance the
performance, the byte values are then normalized into a value
from 0 to 1 in the normalization. To represent a network flow,
the payload of the first k consecutive packets within a flow
are grouped to create a 2-dimensional vector as in the existing
study [35].
After processing the network traffic, this 2-dimensional
vector is analyzed by a feature extractor (e.g., ResNet50,
DarkNet53, etc.) to classify the network traffic into different
types of applications (e.g., YouTube, VoIP, Chat, Amazon,
etc.). To adapt to the traffic classification, the fully-connected
layer of the feature extractor is replaced by two other fullyconnected layers. Then, the output from these layers is put
into the softmax function, which normalizes the output to a
probability distribution over predicted applications.
C. DAN-Based Encrypted Traffic Classification Mechanism
In order to enhance the performance of traffic classification,
the proposed payload-based mechanism aims to minimize the
target risk which is defined in Equation (11):
1
min
n
Θ

n

(θ(xi ), yi ),

(11)

i=1

where θ(xi ) is the conditional probability that the classifier
assign xi to all labels, and  is the cross-entropy loss function

which is depicted as Equation (12):
c

(θ(xi ), yi ) = −

tj logθj (xi ),

(12)

j =1

where θj (xi ) is the softmax activation function on the final
fully-connected layer, which computes the probability of
assigning point xi to class j, c is the number of classes, and
tj is a truth label taking the value of 0 or 1. If yi equals the
actual label, tj is set to 1. Otherwise, tj is set to 0.
In domain adaptation, it is challenging to transfer knowledge
from a source domain to a target one because the target
domain contains no information or a few labeled data on new
applications. Therefore, it is prone to over-fitting or difficult
to fine-tune the pre-trained models. It is due to the domain
discrepancy between the source and target domains. As a
result, this leads to a reduction of feature transferability in
task-specific layers (e.g., fully-connected layers). Therefore, in
this section, a DAN-based mechanism is proposed to overcome
these limitations. Concretely, in the deep adaptation network,
we take into account the Smooth Characteristic Function with
two modifications in the inverse of the covariance matrix
(SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse) to deal with the problem of
the singular matrix. In the domain adaptation, the distribution
of source and target domains are not too different. In this
context, the proposed DAN-based solution aims to make the
distribution of source and target domains nearly similar in the
fully-connected layers. Consequently, a multi-layer penalty is
added to the target risk, which is described in Equation (13):
min max

Θ k ∈K

1
n

n

(θ(xi ), yi ) + λ
i=1

∈L

Mk (Ds , Dt ), (13)

where L represents the list of hidden layers applying the
multi-layer penalty for the source and target domains, and
is the index of the hidden layer to which the penalty is

TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK

applied. λ is a trade-off parameter, and Mk is the SCF
between Ds and Dt . Denote Ds = {φ(xis )} and Dt =
{φ(xit )} as the -th hidden layer representations of the source
and target domains, respectively. In the proposed DAN-based
mechanism, the multi-layer penalty is applied only to the last
two fully connected layers. The detail is depicted in Figure 3.
The feature extraction process generates outputs that are
fed into the first fully connected layer, known as fc1. This
stage yields the hidden representations for the first layer of
both the source and target domains, represented by φ(xis1 )
and φ(xit1 ). These representations undergo processing through
either the SCF-unNorm or SCF-pInverse functions, as outlined
in Equations 5 and 6, which produce a metric termed the
transfer loss.
Similarly, the second fully connected layer, fc2, receives
φ(xis2 ) and φ(xit2 ), which are similarly subjected to SCFunNorm or SCF-pInverse operations akin to fc1. Within
the source domain, φ(xis2 ) is passed through the softmax
function to yield the conditional probability θ(xis ), which
is subsequently put into the cross-entropy loss function, as
specified in Equation (12). The cumulative cross-entropy loss
for the samples, along with the aggregate transfer loss from
both fc1 and fc2, are computed in Equation (13), and this result
is utilized for the backpropagation process.
In contrast, the target domain differs in that φ(xit2 )
solely undergoes the softmax function, which computes the
prediction probability for the unclassified application.
In Figure 3, the implicit features extracted from the input
evolve from general to specific as they progress through
the network. Consequently, the features derived from the
convolutional layers of the feature extractor are general, warranting their freezing. Meanwhile, the fully-connected layers
are customized to suit the new task, and thus, they are adapted
with SCF. This adaptation process enables the DAN-based
mechanism to learn implicit features from the source domain
and effectively transfer them to the target domain, allowing it
to address new tasks.
V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
This section offers a detailed overview of the traffic
classification dataset, covering aspects such as data characteristics, collection methodology, and partitioning. Additionally,
it delineates the performance metrics and experimental configurations. The concluding segment of this section provides an
extensive analysis of performance outcomes derived from three
specific experiments: the classification of existing applications,
new applications, and partially known applications.
A. Experimental Setups
1) DAQUIC Dataset: To evaluate the performance of our
method and the benchmarks, we build a DAQUIC dataset,
which is captured at two different periods. The first part
was captured during three weeks in March 2018, including
YouTube, Google Hangout Chat (Chat), and Google Hangout
VoIP (VoIP). The second part was captured recently from
March to April 2023, including video streaming of Facebook
(called Facebook or FB for short) and commercial websites

Fig. 4.

337

The setup for the data collection.

in Southeast Asia such as Shopee, Tiki, Thegioididong, eBay,
Amazon, and Alibaba. Various applications, such as Chat,
VoIP, video streaming, and commercial websites, are considered.
These applications are considered due to two reasons:
• Dominant applications in network traffic: According
to a recent report, e-commerce, video on-demand, and
interactive data comprise over 80% of global IP traffic by
2022. Those 3 applications would represent the general
cases of the real network traffic environment.
• Domain adaptation requires a larger size of the source
domain compared to the target domain, hence the selection of source and domain sets for testing is preferred
to preserve this characteristic. During the periods of
March 2018 and March 2023, we gathered a substantial
dataset comprising over 200GB of network traffic. Within
this dataset, we identified approximately 20,000 flows
across 10 different applications. The process of domain
adaptation necessitates that the source domain contains a
larger volume of data compared to the target domain. This
requirement stems from our methodology of pre-training
on the source domain and subsequently transferring
the pre-trained models to classify categories within the
target domain. To adhere to this principle, we divided
the dataset into distinct source and target domains, as
outlined in the manuscripts. It is essential to note that
shuffling the applications randomly across both domains
may inadvertently result in the target domain containing
a greater volume of data than the source domain. Such
an imbalance can lead to inaccuracies in our findings and
analyses. Therefore, careful consideration must be given
to maintaining the integrity of the source-target domain
relationship to ensure the robustness and reliability of our
results.
Setup: To collect the data, the testbed is set as in Figure 4.
A client and a server are dedicated to collecting the data for
an application (e.g., YouTube, Facebook, etc.). In the clients,
selenium [36] tool is used to automate the connections between
clients and servers. Regarding YouTube and Facebook, the
clients watch a list of videos automatically. As for the ecommerce applications, the clients automate access to a list of
links belonging to the e-commerce websites. For interactive
applications (VoIP and chat), Google Hangout is used to
automate access and generate network traffic. To make the data
similar to real scenarios, a random duration (a few minutes)
is set between two connections.
Data Collection: To collect the data of applications,
tshark [37] is installed in each client. During the data collection, several noisy network flows containing only a few

338

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE I
T HE N UMBER OF F LOWS IN THE T RAFFIC DATASET

TABLE IV
ACCURACY AND T ESTING T IME OF D IFFERENT F EATURE S ETS
FOR T WO G ROUPS

TABLE II
T HE DATASET D ESCRIPTION FOR S CENARIO Data Sensitivity

prediction performance on the target domain. The data of this
scenario is derived from Table III.
2) Performance Metrics: Two key metrics are chosen to
evaluate the performance of traffic classification mechanisms:
accuracy and the average prediction time for a flow. The
accuracy of the model reflects how well the model can
correctly predict the outcome. A higher accuracy indicates that
the model learns the data better and can make more reliable
classifications. On the other hand, the average prediction time
for a flow is an essential measure of the efficiency of a model.
This metric provides insight into how quickly a model can
process and predict outcomes for each data flow. A lower
average prediction time signifies that a model is not only
accurate but also efficient, making it highly suitable for realtime applications where speed is of the essence.
Regarding the byte-level features of a sample, the number of
bytes k in the payload is set to 256 or 512, while the number
of packets in a flow m is set to 20. In the payload-based DANbased mechanisms, the fully-connected layer of the feature
extractor is replaced by two fully-connected layers with 256
and 3 nodes, respectively. The learning rate and batch size
are set to 0.0002 and 64, respectively. The stochastic gradient
descent optimizer is used in these two mechanisms. These
parameters are selected via the experiments. The implementation of the proposed method and benchmarks are written
in Python using Pytorch and scikit-learn libraries. These
mechanisms are implemented in a computer with Intel(R) Core
i5-13400F @ 4.6 Ghz, 64GB of RAM, NVIDIA GeForce RTX
3080 10GB, and Ubuntu 20.04. The source code is available
upon request.

TABLE III
T HE DATASET D ESCRIPTION FOR S CENARIO Parameter Sensitivity and for
Partially Known Applications

packets were filtered out to avoid their influence. Regarding
our data collection methodology, the collection process spans
multiple sessions throughout a two-month period. Each session
commences from the moment a Web browser is initiated using
the Selenium tool for automated connections, continuing until
the closure of the Web browser. It is important to note that
different encryption keys are utilized across various sessions
to encrypt data during transmission. As a result, the total count
of session keys is significantly larger than initially conveyed.
Overall, the DAQUIC dataset holds substantial potential for
facilitating the generalization of the proposed approach.
Data Splitting: The number of flows for each application is
shown in Table I, and the applications are grouped into three
categories: e-commerce, video-on-demand, and interactive
data. A category contains the applications which have similar
data distribution. There are three scenarios in this paper. In the
first scenario (data sensitivity), the data of the target domain
is divided into three smaller sets (Table II) to evaluate the
influence of data volume in the target domain on accuracy.
In the second scenario (parameter sensitivity), the data is
separated into two small groups representing the source and
target domains (Table III).
In the last scenario (for partially known applications),
a small part of the data in the target domain is labeled
and combined with the source domain data to evaluate the

B. Performance Analysis
1) For Existing Applications: In this subsection, the
performance of the encrypted network traffic classification
mechanism on the source domain is evaluated. The goal is to
classify the traffic into different applications (e.g., tiki, shopee,
thegioididong, etc.). The dataset is divided into training,
validation, and test sets using a 76:4:20 ratio. The experiment
is conducted five times, and the results are averaged to obtain
the values presented in Table IV.
Feature Extraction: Numerous feature extraction methods
exist for traffic classification, but no standard one prevails.
Three backbones are considered to be suitable feature extractors: ResNet50, DarkNet53, and Mobilevitv2_50. Among
these options listed in Table IV, ResNet50 demonstrates the

TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK

TABLE V
ACCURACY (%) ON D IFFERENT TARGETS W ITH 256 AND 512
F EATURES FOR T HREE M ECHANISMS

highest accuracy for both 256 and 512 features, achieving
89.14% accuracy with 512 features. Besides, ResNet50 also
has the lowest prediction time for all feature sizes, taking
only 2.26 ms with 32 features and 3.08 ms with 512 features.
This indicates that ResNet50 is an appropriate solution in
the considered backbones. The superiority of ResNet50 in
both accuracy and prediction time can be attributed to its
architectural design. ResNet50 utilises residual blocks which
help mitigate the vanishing gradient problem, allowing it
to learn more effectively from a large number of features.
This is particularly beneficial in traffic classification tasks
where subtle features can be crucial for accurate predictions.
The prediction time is the average time required to classify
a sample into one of three categories, excluding the time
for collecting the input traffic and forming the input vector.
Moreover, the lower prediction times of ResNet50 suggest that
its layers are computationally less intensive, making it faster to
process the input data. This is a significant advantage in realtime applications where quick decision-making is essential.
Feature Selection: The performance of the proposed mechanism and the benchmarks are evaluated with various byte
values in the payload of a packet to select an appropriate one
(m ∈ (32, 256, 512)). The results illustrate that increasing the
number of features generally improves the accuracy of the
models but also increases the prediction time. For instance,
DarkNet53, with 32 features, has an accuracy of 82.96%
and a prediction time of 2.55 ms, while it achieves an
accuracy of 88.92% and requires a prediction time of 3.47 ms
with 512 features. ResNet50 can achieve 88.24% accuracy
and require 2.56 ms of prediction time with 256 features.
When the number of features increases to 512, its accuracy
increases to 89.14%, and it requires 3.08 ms of prediction
time. The Mobilevitv2_50 backbones also have similar results.
Depending on the requirements of traffic classification, an
appropriate number of features should selected to balance the
trade-off of accuracy and prediction time.
2) For New Applications: In this subsection, the
performance of the DAN-based mechanism for new
applications is evaluated with various two-sample test
statistics: SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse and MK-MMD. The
experimental results are averaged after five times running with
250 epochs.
Data sensitivity: In this scenario, we evaluate the influence
of the number of samples for the target domain on the accuracy
of three considered mechanisms. We use target domain data
from Table II and the source domain data in Table III. The
objective of this scenario is to show the performance of DAN
with varying amounts of data in the combined domain.

339

TABLE VI
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%) W ITH VARYING λ VALUES

Table V shows the results for 256 features. The accuracy
decreases with the original data for all mechanisms. SCFunNorm can achieve 66.84% accuracy for target 1, but it drops
to 46.98% for target 2 and 42.75% for target 3. MK-MMD
has the lowest accuracy for all targets, reaching only 34.35%
for target 3. The accuracy of SCF-pInverse fluctuates slightly,
decreasing from 57.48% for target 1 to 52.67% for target 3.
These results show that a reduction in the number of samples
leads to a decrease in the accuracy of traffic classification.
Table V also illustrates the results for 512 features. The
accuracy is higher than that for 256 features due to the increase
in the number of features, but it is still not optimal. All
methods achieve over 60% accuracy for target 1, target 2, and
target 3. Besides, SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse outperform
MK-MMD in these targets. This indicates that an increase in
features can partially compensate for the reduced sample size,
though the accuracy remains less than ideal. The data patterns
in the target domain are crucial for classification accuracy. A
small sample size (ranging from 356 to 1475 for targets 1,
2, and 3) fails to bridge the domain discrepancy between the
source and target domains. Specifically, the source and target
domain features remain distinct even after applying DAN,
leading to lower accuracy.
The results, as shown in Table V, demonstrate that the data
patterns in the target domain correlate with the accuracy of
traffic classification. When the number of samples is limited,
the classification accuracy is compromised. The reason is that a
small number of samples cannot adequately bridge the domain
discrepancy. Specifically, the features of the source domain and
the target domain remain distinct even after applying DAN,
leading to lower accuracy. Therefore, subsequent scenarios
will consider a larger number of samples in the target domain.
The number of samples is described in Table III. The target
domain in Table III is composed of target 1, 2, 3 in Table II
while the source domain in the Table III and II is kept
unchanged.
Parameter Sensitivity: Table VI aims to illustrate the accuracy of different mechanisms against various values of λ for
two different numbers of features containing 256 and 512. The
λ parameter controls the trade-off between the cross-entropy
and the transfer loss in the domain adaptation process. The
goal of this scenario is to select an appropriate λ value for the
feature sets with 256 and 512 features.
We can observe that the sensitivity of the λ parameter
varies for each mechanism and number of features. With
256 features, SCF-pInverse has an accuracy of 91.72% with

340

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 6. Training time of MK-MMD, SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse with 256
and 512 features.

Fig. 5. The performance of the DAN-based mechanisms and the solution
without DAN, which pre-trains on the source domain to obtain a pre-trained
model and then directly uses this model to classify the new applications in
the target domain into one of three categories.

λ = 0.05, but it drops to 88.54% with λ = 0.5. In contrast,
SCF-unNorm has a low accuracy of 83.37% with λ = 1 for
256 features, and then its accuracy increases to 95.56% with
λ = 2. On the other hand, MK-MMD has a relatively stable
accuracy across different values of λ for both numbers of
features, ranging from 83.67% to 89% for 256 features and
from 88.81% to over 98% for 512 features.
Accuracy: Figure 5 aims to show that the proposed mechanisms (SCF-pInverse and SCF-unNorm) outperform the other
mechanisms related to accuracy. In this figure, the highest
accuracy of each mechanism is selected which is described
in Table VI. With 256 and 512 features, the accuracy of
SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse are higher than the others.
Regarding 256 features, SCF-unNorm improves by nearly 10%
compared to the solution without using DAN, respectively. As
for 512 features, there is a slight difference between these
mechanisms. SCF-unNorm only improves by nearly 3% in
comparison with the solution without using DAN. Without
using DAN, there is a large domain discrepancy between the
source and the target domains, leading to inaccurate prediction.
In contrast, using DAN (SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse and
MK-MMD) reduces the domain discrepancy between these
domains, enhancing the accuracy. Moreover, with 256 features,
SCF-unNorm improves by nearly 6% compared to MKMMD. However, with 512 features, there is no difference
between these mechanisms. The reason is that MK-MMD uses
the smooth witness function, which does not maximize the
test power, while SCF uses the analytic representations of
probability distributions, which can maximize the power test
better. Besides, using 512 features can achieve better accuracy
than using 256 features. However, the prediction time for 512
features is slightly higher than the figure for 256 features.
Training time: The training time of different mechanisms
for 256 and 512 features is depicted in Figure 6. This scenario
aims to illustrate that the proposed mechanism requires less
training time compared to MK-MMD. Regarding the training
time of MK-MMD, the linear formula is used to measure the
domain discrepancy in deep adaptive networks [9]. However,
the training time of MK-MMD is higher than SCF-unNorm

and SCF-pInverse. Concretely, with 256 features, MK-MMD
requires 3.62 hours to complete 250 epochs of training,
while SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse only require 2.61 and
2.68 hours to complete their training phase. Therefore, MKMMD takes one hour longer than SCF-unNorm (fastest
mechanism). This difference is even more evident with 512
features (Figure 6). MK-MMD takes more than 8 hours to
complete its training, while SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse
require 3.51 and 3.61 hours, respectively. By increasing from
256 to 512 features, the difference in training time between
MMD and SCF-unNorm increases from just over 1 hour to
4.53 hours. In other words, SCF-unNorm can reduce 27.9% of
training time with 256 features and 55.5% of training time with
512 features compared to MK-MMD. The reason is that SCFunNorm uses a simple linear combination of multiple kernels
while MK-MMD optimizes a complex objective function with
multiple constraints. When the number of features increases to
more than 512 (e.g., 1024, 1400, etc.), MK-MMD will reveal
its drawbacks related to the time complexity more clearly.
Besides, the training of SCF-unNorm is slightly lower than
the figure for SCF-pInverse. The reason is that SCF-unNorm
does not need to calculate the matrix Sn+ as in SCF-pInverse.
Benchmarks: The performance of the proposed mechanism
is evaluated with recent studies using the payload as the
input with λ = 1: FixMatch [28], MCC [29], Binary-Zentor and Multi-Class-Zen-tor [26] (in Table VII). The goal
is to show the comparison of the proposed approach and
the recent studies. FixMatch generates pseudo-labels for the
target data using the prediction model and then trains another
model using pseudo-labels to predict on strongly-augmented
samples, while MCC is a general loss function that reduces
the confusion between the correct and ambiguous classes
for the target data. Binary-Zen-tor is a GAN-based binary
classification approach which classifies network traffic into
two classes: existing applications and new ones. Multi-ClassZen-tor is a GAN-based multiclass classification approach
which not only performs binary classification like Binary-Zentor but also identifies different kinds of existing applications.
Table VII shows the accuracy of these mechanisms. Using
DAN with SCF function, DAN-pInverse can learn an adequate
representation of the source domain and transfer it to the target
domain. Therefore, the accuracy of DAN-pInverse is better
than others, achieving 90.51% accuracy. In contrast, FixMatch
generates the pseudo-labels for the unlabeled data, but the
data labeling is not good, influencing its performance (only
achieving 76.12% accuracy). MCC is a general loss function
that is not adapted to the traffic classification. As a result, its

TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK

Fig. 7.

Accuracy of MK-MMD, SCF-unNorm, SCF-pInverse methods with few labeled samples in the target domain.

Fig. 8.

The accuracy against the number of epochs with 0%, 0.5%, 1% of labeled data in the target data with 256 features.

Fig. 9.

The accuracy against the number of epochs with 0%, 0.5%, 1% of labeled data in the target data with 512 features.

accuracy is approximately 62%. Binary-Zen-tor achieves only
36.94% accuracy, while Multi-Class-Zen-tor performs better
with 72.94% accuracy. The discriminator in Binary-Zen-tor
classifies traffic into two categories: existing applications or
new ones. In contrast, the discriminator in Multi-Class-Zentor performs two tasks. The first task is classifying traffic as
either from existing applications or new ones, and the second
task is further classifying existing applications into specific
categories. Multi-Class-Zen-tor incorporates additional loss
functions for the second task, which results in improved
performance.
3) For Partially Known Applications: This subsection is
dedicated to the scenario where a small fraction of the data in
the target domain is labeled. The source and target domains
are depicted in Table III. The proportions of labeled data
considered are 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, and 1%. The details are described
in Figure 7(a) and 7(b). This scenario aims to show that a
small amount of labeled data in the target domain can enhance

341

TABLE VII
ACCURACY (%) OF THE P ROPOSED M ECHANISM AND B ENCHMARKS

the performance of the DAN-based mechanism, achieving up
to over 99% accuracy. There is an upward trend in the accuracy
against the number of labeled data for both 256 and 512
features. The reason is that a higher number of labeled data
makes the training using DAN more effective. The domain
discrepancy is reduced, and the accuracy improves better than
without using labeled data.

342

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2025

For 256 features [see Figure 7(a)], the accuracy of MKMMD increases from 90.6% at 0.05% to 96.89% at 0.1%
of labeled data, then gradually rises to 99.09% at 1%. A
noticeable observation is that SCF-pInverse and SCF-unNorm
outperform MK-MMD in the considered percentage of labeled
data. For 512 features [see Figure 7(b)], the accuracy of SCFpInverse and SCF-unNorm is also higher than the figure
for MK-MMD. However, there is a slight fluctuation in the
accuracy of MK-MMD. In addition, SCF-pInverse with 512
features exhibits slightly lower accuracy than the 256-feature
model. This is likely due to the increased noise introduced by
the additional labeled data, which can negatively impact the
model’s performance.
Figure 8 and 9 aim to illustrate the accuracy of three
mechanisms against the number of epochs for 256 and 512
features. The accuracy of using 1% of labeled data is higher
than the figure without using labeled data for both 256 and
512 features. In addition to higher accuracy, using a small
percentage of labeled data helps to reach high accuracy
faster than unlabeled data. Regarding 256 features, all three
mechanisms can converge to optimal state within from 10 to
15 epochs. Without using labeled data, it is required from 20
to 25 epochs. It is similar to 512 features.
C. Discussion
Regarding the payload-based mechanisms (Table IV), the
accuracy increases against the number of features. However,
the prediction time per flow (sample) also goes up when
the number of features increases from 32 to 512. In three
considered backbones, ResNet50 can obtain 88.24% accuracy
while requiring a suitable prediction time of 2.56 ms.
As for the DAN-based mechanisms, the accuracy of
MK-MMD, SCF-unNorm, and SCF-pInverse are not good
(Table V) when the number of samples in the target domain
is limited, as shown in Table II. When the number of samples
in the target domain increases, as shown in Table III, the
accuracy of these three functions is higher. SCF-pInverse and
SCF-unNorm can achieve up to 98% of accuracy with 512
features. When adding a few percent of labeled data to the
dataset in Table III, the performance of MK-MMD, SCFunNorm and SCF-pInverse are improved significantly, as in
Fig. 7. There is an upward trend in the accuracy of these
functions when the percentage of labeled data increases from
0.05 to 1 percent. The accuracy of SCF-unNorm and SCFpInverse can achieve up to approximately 99% for both 256
and 512 features.
Despite obtaining good performance, the proposed DANbased mechanisms (SCF-unNorm and SCF-pInverse) contain
several limitations. First, the influence of the transfer loss in
the target risk relies on the λ parameter. When λ is small,
the improvement of the accuracy is small. Otherwise, the
improvement of the accuracy is higher, but the deviation of the
accuracy between running times is large. Second, the proposed
DAN-based approaches are effective under the assumption that
the source domain is related to the target domain. For example,
the new applications in the target domain (e.g., eBay, etc.) are
different from existing applications in the source domain (e.g.,

shopee, etc.), but the data distribution of these applications are
related.
Moreover, the performance metrics are produced in the
considered scenarios along with considered parameters in
the experimental results. Besides, the proposed DAN-based
mechanisms are designed for three categories: e-commerce,
video on-demand, interactive data. Implementing the proposed
mechanisms with other categories and different parameter
settings can lead to the results that are not reported in this
research.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a Deep Adaptation Network
using novel Smooth Characteristic Functions (SCF-unNorm
and SCF-pInverse) to enhance the performance of encrypted
traffic classification. The experimental results show that the
proposed mechanism achieves up to 99% accuracy and
requires an appropriate processing time (only 3.08 ms) for 512
features (512 byte values in the payload of packets). Moreover,
to evaluate the performance of this work and benchmarks,
the traffic classification dataset for domain adaptation is built
and provided publicly for the research communities. The
proposed mechanism using the Deep Adaptation Network is
dedicated to identifying new applications that are not trained
prior, while the proposed payload-based encrypted traffic
classification mechanism aims to identify existing applications
that are trained prior. Additionally, we plan to incorporate a
mechanism for classifying network flows into existing or new
applications and integrate it into our framework to create a
complete system. Furthermore, the proposed approach aims
to classify encrypted traffic into different categories (e.g., ecommerce, etc.) with limited labeled data. In the future, we
will enhance the proposed approach to classify traffic into
specific applications (e.g., Facebook, YouTube, etc.)
R EFERENCES
[1] Z. Li et al., “Problem statement and use cases of application-aware
networking (APN),” Internet Eng. Task Force, Internet-Draft draft-ietfspring-segment-routing-16, 2020.
[2] V. Tong, S. Souihi, H. A. Tran, and A. Mellouk, “SDN-based
application-aware segment routing for large-scale network,” IEEE Syst.
J., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 4401–4410, Sep. 2022.
[3] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
[4] Y. Yang et al., “A network traffic classification method based on dualmode feature extraction and hybrid neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 4073–4084, Dec. 2023.
[5] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel QUIC traffic
classifier based on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[6] H. Tahaei, F. Afifi, A. Asemi, F. Zaki, and N. B. Anuar, “The rise of
traffic classification in IoT networks: A survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
vol. 154, Mar. 2020, Art. no. 102538.
[7] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning based
encrypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
[8] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020.
[9] M. Long, Y. Cao, Z. Cao, J. Wang, and M. I. Jordan, “Transferable
representation learning with deep adaptation networks,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3071–3085, Dec. 2018.

TONG et al.: ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION THROUGH DEEP DOMAIN ADAPTATION NETWORK

[10] M. Long, Y. Cao, J. Wang, and M. Jordan, “Learning transferable
features with deep adaptation networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2015, pp. 97–105.
[11] F. Zhuang et al., “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning,” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, Jan. 2021.
[12] J. Jiang, Y. Shu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Transferability in deep learning:
A survey,” 2022, arXiv:2201.05867.
[13] Z. Taghiyarrenani and H. Farsi, “Domain adaptation with maximum
margin criterion with application to network traffic classification,” in
Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery
in Databases. Grenoble, France: Springer, 2022, pp. 159–169.
[14] J. Ning et al., “Malware traffic classification using domain adaptation
and ladder network for secure Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17058–17069, Sep. 2022.
[15] W. Jitkrittum, Z. Szabó, K. P. Chwialkowski, and A. Gretton,
“Interpretable distribution features with maximum testing power,” in
Proc. 30th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 29, 2016, pp. 1–9.
[16] C. Dao, V. Tong, N.-T. Hoang, H.-A. Tran, and T. X. Tran, “Enhancing
encrypted traffic classification with deep adaptation networks,” in Proc.
IEEE 48th Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN), 2023, pp. 1–4.
[17] V. Tong and C. Dao. “Traffic classification dataset for deep adaptation network.” Nov. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
vanvantong/Encrypted-Traffic-Classification-using-DAN
[18] Y. Hu, G. Cheng, W. Chen, and B. Jiang, “Attribute-based zero-shot
learning for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4583–4599, Dec. 2022.
[19] S. Cui, J. Liu, C. Dong, Z. Lu, and D. Du, “Only header: A reliable
encrypted traffic classification framework without privacy risk,” Soft
Comput., vol. 26, no. 24, pp. 13391–13403, 2022.
[20] H. He, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, S. Le, and Z. Zhao, “A data skew-based
unknown traffic classification approach for TLS applications,” Future
Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 138, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2023.
[21] S. Fathi-Kazerooni, Y. Kaymak, and R. Rojas-Cessa, “Tracking user
application activity by using machine learning techniques on network
traffic,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf. Commun. (ICAIIC), 2019,
pp. 405–410.
[22] M. Qin, K. Lei, B. Bai, and G. Zhang, “Towards a profiling view
for unsupervised traffic classification by exploring the statistic features
and link patterns,” in Proc. Workshop Netw. Meets AI ML, 2019,
pp. 50–56.
[23] M. S. Raza, K. A. Bhatti, F. M. Malik, and S. A. Sheikh, “Network
traffic classification using deep neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Front. Inf. Technol. (FIT), 2023, pp. 85–89.

343

[24] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Inform. (ISI), 2017,
pp. 43–48.
[25] Y. Li et al., “Federated domain Generalization: A survey,” 2023,
arXiv:2306.01334.
[26] Y. Gu, Y. Lai, and Y. Wang, “Zen-tor: A zero knowledge knownunknown traffic classification method,” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE
Global Commun. Conf., 2022, pp. 885–890.
[27] S. K. Nukavarapu, M. Ayyat, and T. Nadeem, “MirageNet-towards a
GAN-based framework for synthetic network traffic generation,” in Proc.
GLOBECOM IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2022, pp. 3089–3095.
[28] K. Sohn et al., “Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with
consistency and confidence,” in Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 596–608.
[29] Y. Jin, X. Wang, M. Long, and J. Wang, “Minimum class confusion
for versatile domain adaptation,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ECCV), Glasgow, U.K., 2020, pp. 464–480.
[30] S. Ben-David, J. Blitzer, K. Crammer, A. Kulesza, F. Pereira, and
J. W. Vaughan, “A theory of learning from different domains,” Mach.
Learn., vol. 79, pp. 151–175, May 2010.
[31] A. Gretton, K. M. Borgwardt, M. J. Rasch, B. Schölkopf, and A. Smola,
“A kernel two-sample test,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 723–773, 2012.
[32] P. Tang and A. Xu, “Generalized Leibniz functional matrices and divided
difference form of the Lagrange–Bürmann formula,” Linear Algebra
Appl., vol. 436, no. 3, pp. 618–630, 2012.
[33] K. P. Chwialkowski, A. Ramdas, D. Sejdinovic, and A. Gretton,
“Fast two-sample testing with analytic representations of probability
measures,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015,
pp. 1–9.
[34] E. H. Moore, “On the reciprocal of the general algebraic matrix,” Bull.
Am. Math. Soc., vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 394–395, 1920.
[35] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
“Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural
networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
2017.
[36] B. García, M. Munoz-Organero, C. Alario-Hoyos, and C. D. Kloos,
“Automated driver management for selenium WebDriver,” Empirical
Softw. Eng., vol. 26, pp. 1–51, Jul. 2021.
[37] S. Qureshi, S. Tunio, F. Akhtar, A. Wajahat, A. Nazir, and F. Ullah,
“Network forensics: A comprehensive review of tools and techniques,”
Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 879–887, 2021.