IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

781

Enhancing Anti-Interference of Magnetic
Tracking: A MagRobustNet-Based Framework
With Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection and
Measurements Recovery
Shijian Su , Hai Lan, Huxin Gao , Member, IEEE, Houde Dai , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Hongliang Ren , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Magnetic tracking technology shows great
promise for applications in medicine and industry. However, it often suffers from diverse and unpredictable interferences in practical applications, such as hard-/soft-iron
interferences and sensor saturation, leading to reduced
localization accuracy or even tracking failure. Thus, we
propose a two-step framework to mitigate the impact of
interferences based on MagRobustNet, a UNet-like autoencoder network. In the first step, disjoint mask sets are
used in conjunction with MagRobustNet to detect anomalous measurements subject to disturbances. In the second
step, the interfered regions are masked, and MagRobustNet
is applied again to recover their expected measurements
from neighboring normal data. Experimental results from
testing in four interference scenarios showed that the proposed method improved the average position accuracy by
76.2%, enhancing the tracking system’s anti-interference
capability. In addition, the proposed method can indicate
the interfered regions, thereby prompting the adjustment of
the magnetometer array to an interference-free location and
offering a new potential diagnostic method for localizing
ingested foreign bodies in clinical practice.

Received 7 August 2024; accepted 10 September 2024. Date of
publication 17 October 2024; date of current version 7 January 2025.
This work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Research Grants
Council through the Collaborative Research Fund under Grant CRF
C4063-18G, in part by the General Research Fund under Grant GRF
14216022, in part by the NSFC/RGC Joint Research Scheme 2022/23
N_CUHK420/22, in part by the National Academy of Medicine, Healthy
Longevity Catalyst Awards (Hong Kong), in part by the Chinese University of Hong Kong Mainland Postdoctoral Sponsorship Program, and
in part by the Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Macau Technology Research Program (Type C) under Grant 202108233000303. Paper no. TII-24-4005.
(Corresponding author: Hongliang Ren.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was
granted by the Animal Ethics Committee of Qilu Hospital of Shangdong
University under Application No. Dwll-2021-021, and performed in line
with the Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals.
Shijian Su, Huxin Gao, and Hongliang Ren are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong (e-mail: shijiansu@foxmail.com; huxingao@cuhk.edu.hk;
hlren@ee.cuhk.edu.hk).
Hai Lan and Houde Dai are with the Quanzhou Institute of Equipment
Manufacturing, Haixi Institutes, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Jinjiang
362216, China (e-mail: Lanhai09@fjirsm.ac.cn; dhd@fjirsm.ac.cn).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3461774, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3461774

Index Terms—Anomaly detection, anti-interference, magnetic sensing, measurement recovery, robust tracking.

I. INTRODUCTION
AGNETIC tracking is a low-cost, occlusion-free, and
high-precise technique with great potential for numerous applications, including wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE)
localization [1], flexible robot shape sensing [2], automated
guided vehicle (AGV) navigation [3], and body motion capture [4]. However, magnetic tracking systems (MTSs) are sensitive to ferromagnetic materials, which will result in degraded
localization accuracy or even tracking failure. Thus, it is crucial to enhance the tracking system’s anti-interference ability
and robustness to avoid medical malpractices and financial
losses.
The factors affecting tracking robustness can be classified as
related to the tracking algorithm or environmental interferences.
Traditional MTSs are mainly based on the Levenber–Marquardt
(LM) optimization algorithm [5], [6], [7], and therefore are
sensitive to initial guesses. To address this issue, some researchers attempted to provide initial guesses for the LM algorithm using various initial estimation methods, such as particle
swarm optimization (PSO) [8], whale optimization algorithm
(WOA) [9], artificial neural networks (ANN) [10], while others
used end-to-end neural networks to directly regress the magnet
pose [11], [12]. Among these methods, AMagPoseNet [12]
demonstrated superior localization accuracy and computation
latency compared to traditional methods and is also independent
of initial guesses.
Environment interferences in MTSs arise primarily from hard
and soft iron effects [13]. The hard iron effects are caused by
objects that can generate magnetic fields, such as permanent
magnets and electrified wires. The soft iron effect results from
materials that distort the magnet’s magnetic field, such as ferromagnetic surgical instruments or iron plates. Fig. 1(a) shows
the potential interference sources presented in the operating
room. In addition, previous research has identified a reduction in
localization accuracy at lower heights due to sensor saturation,
as depicted in Fig. 1(b).
Sensor-level anti-interference: To address the impact of soft/hard-iron interferences caused by currents and ferromagnetic
materials in the environment, Wu et al. [13] employed the

M

© 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License. For more
information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 1. Factors impacting the robustness of MTS. (a) Potential interference sources presented in the operating room (surgical instruments,
robotic arm, iron plate, et al.). (b) Reduction in localization accuracy
at low heights due to sensor saturation, reported from [12], where the
magnetometer range was set to ±1200 uT.

optimal maximum likelihood method to estimate the parameters
of an error model, while Christensen et al. [14] utilized a neural
network to learn a magnetic field distortion model. However,
existing techniques primarily focus on magnetic compass applications and rely on precollected calibration data in specific usage
environments, rendering them unsuitable for handling diverse
and unpredictable disturbances. As for the saturation induced
by strong magnetic fields, Fu et al. [15] applied an external
electromagnetic coil for interference compensation. Currently,
no available research can address the saturation issue solely by
post-processing without external hardware.
System-level anti-interference: To enhance the resistance of
MTSs to environmental interferences, Su [16] et al. utilized
the Huber loss function to mitigate the impact of hard iron
interference on localization. Still, this method is limited to
traditional optimization-based approaches and cannot identify
which magnetometers are affected. Son [6] and Shi [17] et al.
introduced an actuator’s magnetic field to manipulate WCE with
an embedded magnet. They accurately calculated the actuator’s
magnetic field based on magnetic models and subtracted it from
the raw measurements. However, they cannot address unknown
stochastic interferences caused by soft-/hard-iron effects and
sensor saturation. Song [18] and Shao [19] et al. optimized the
sensor layout using the grid method and SNR evaluation, which
improved the system’s localization accuracy to some extent.
Nevertheless, they were also unable to cope with these random
and diverse interferences.
System-level anomaly detection: Diverse and unpredictable
interferences can cause measured data to deviate from the normal
distribution [20]. Anomaly detection is recognized as a means
to enhance the robustness of sensing systems by detecting and
indicating the presence of interferences. Various anomaly detection techniques are available in sensing systems, including
traditional methods, such as clustering [21] and support vector
machine [22], deep learning-based approaches, such as autoencoders [23] and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [24],
and hybrid methods combining traditional and deep learning,
such as deep one-class classification [25]. However, detecting
interferences is often insufficient for MTSs, as our goal is to
recover their expected measurements and obtain more reliable
localization results.
Current research on anti-interference in MTSs is limited
because it is challenging to separate the magnetic field generated by the tracking target (permanent magnet) from diverse

Fig. 2. Modeling an annular magnet based on the equivalent magnetizing current, the Biot–Savart law, and the superposition principle.

unpredictable interference fields. This study is the first to introduce autoencoder networks to tackle this issue. Specifically,
we propose a two-step framework with anomaly detection and
measurement recovery. The contributions of our framework are
summarized as follows.
1) Designed a UNet-like autoencoder network, MagRobustNet, with partial convolution to accommodate ultralow
resolution (5 × 5) measurements of MTSs.
2) Integrated anomaly detection and measurement recovery
into our framework using only MagRobustNet. This not
only indicates anomalous regions subject to disturbances
but also improves the average position accuracy of MTS
in four interference scenarios by 76.2%.
3) Presented a model-to-real domain adaptation approach to
ensure that our framework can be used for both learningbased and optimization-based tracking methods.
II. MAGNETIC FIELD MODEL
A. Prior Mathematical Model of Annular Magnets
As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), a sensor array composed of N
tri-axes magnetometers is adopted to perceive the magnetic
induction intensity generated by an annular magnet in space. The
ith magnetometer’s position in the magnet coordinate frame {m}
m m m T
is pm
i = [pxi , pyi , pzi ] . Based on the equivalent magnetizing
current model and the Biot–Savart law, the magnetic induction
intensity dBl generated by a surface current element located at
(x0 , y0 , z0 ) on the ith magnetometer can be expressed as
dBl =

μ0 μr Idl × P0
dv × P0
=K
3
4π
|P0 |
|P0 |3

(1)

where μ0 and μr denote the magnetic permeability of vacuum
and the relative magnetic permeability of the medium, respectively, and P0 is the vector from the point (x0 , y0 , z0 ) to point pm
i .
The surface current I = Idl = Js dv, where I and dl represent
the current magnitude and direction, and Js is the current density
(A/m). Let K = Js μ4π0 μr , which is a constant determined by
magnet material.
Assuming that the radius of a cylinder magnet is r1 . The
magnetic induction intensity at pm
i can be estimated by
 r1
m
m
Bci (pi , r1 ) =
dBz
(2)
−r1

SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING

783





where dBz = ab dBl + bc dBl + cd dBl + da dBl is the
magnetic induction intensity generated by the surface current
Iabcda at the point pm
i .
Applying the superposition principle of magnetic fields, the
difference between the magnetic induction intensity produced by
two cylindrical magnets with different radii yields an equivalent
annular magnet with the same magnetic moment direction and
length. Then, the magnetic induction intensity at the point pm
i
due to the annular magnet is given by
m
m
m
m
m
Bm
ai (pi , r1 , r2 ) = Bci (pi , r1 ) − Bci (pi , r2 )

(3)

where r1 and r2 denote its outer and inner radii, respectively.
Given the magnet pose ξ = [x, y, z, α, β, γ] in the system
coordinate frame {s}, which describes the translation tsm =
[x, y, z]T and rotation Rsm = Rx (α)Ry (β)Rz (γ) of the frame
{m} relative to {s}. The ith magnetometer’s position in the
frame {s} is psi = [psxi , psyi , pszi ]T , and the magnetic induction
intensity at psi can be calculated by
m
Bsai = Rsm Bm
ai (pi , r1 , r2 )
−1
s
= Rsm Bm
ai (Rgm · (pi − tgm ), r1 , r2 )

(4)

= F(psi , ξ), (i = 1, 2, . . ., N ).
The prior model (4) enables predicting the measurements of the
magnetometer array for any given magnet pose.
B. Model-to-Real Domain Adaptation
Training MagRobustNet requires a substantial amount of normal data. We can employ the prior model (4) to generate a comprehensive and sufficient dataset, avoiding the laborious process of manual data collection. However, a domain shift arises
between the generated and real-world data, primarily attributed
to several factors, including magnetometer measurement errors,
manufacturing and welding errors in the magnetometer array,
and manufacturing errors in the magnets.
To mitigate the impact of these errors on localization, traditional optimization-based methods introduce a calibration procedure [7], while deep learning-based methods, such as AMagPoseNet, design a CaliNet to facilitate the transfer from the
real-world domain to the mathematical model domain, known
as real-to-model domain adaptation [12].
In this study, we present a method for data generation by
a precalibration operation, which enables model-to-real domain adaptation. Assuming the real measured sensor data of
the ith magnetometer is denoted as B̃sai , a total of L real
measurement samples are used for calibration. The magnetic
induction intensity, Bsai , is a function related to the constant
K, i.e., Bsai = K B̂sai . We define the objective function related
to K as
EK =

L 
2

 s

B̃ai (j) − K B̂sai (j) .
j=1

2

(5)

Minimizing Ek through the linear least squares method yields a
calibrated parameter K̃ specific to the actual magnet, i.e.,
L
B̃sai B̂sai
K̃ = i=1
.
(6)
L
s
s
i=1 B̂ai B̂ai

Similarly, we define the objective function associated with the
magnetometer position and orientation as
Epi =

L 
2


 s
B̃ai (j) − Bsai (j)
j=1

2

L 
2

 s

Eoi =
B̃ai (j) − Oi · Bsai (j)
j=1

(7)

2

where Oi ∈ R3×3 represents the orientation compensation matrix of magnetometer. By minimizing Epi and Eoi , we can
obtain a calibrated magnetometer position p̃si and a orientation
compensation matrix Õi . Substituting the calibrated K̃ and p̃si
into (4), and then, compensating the output Bsai by Õi , we can
generate data that are closer to the real-world measurement.
III. METHODOLOGY FOR ROBUST MAGNETIC TRACKING
A. MagRobustNet-Based Framework for Robust
Tracking
Fig. 3(a) depicts the MagRobustNet-based framework with
anomaly detection and measurement recovery for robust magnetic tracking. The proposed framework can detect and indicate
the interfered regions, offering an effective means for proactive
movement away from interference sources. In addition, our
framework possesses the ability to restore anomalous measurements to their expected values when interference is unavoidable.
The specific workflow of the proposed framework is as follows. First, the measurements obtained from the sensor array
undergo anomaly detection, yielding the reconstruction error
Er . Then, we compare the max(|Er |) with an adaptive threshold
defined in (16) to determine whether the input measurements
contain anomalous components or not. If it includes anomalies,
a corresponding binary mask is generated for MagRobustNet
to recover expected measurements of interfered regions from
neighboring normal measurements. On the other hand, if it does
not contain any anomalous components, the raw measurements
are directly fed to the pose estimation algorithms, such as the
LM-based tracking method and learning-based PoseNet.
B. Network Architecture of MagRobustNet
UNet is a popular autoencoder network that has achieved
remarkable performance in image segmentation. The classical
UNet consists of four critical operations: convolution, downsampling, upsampling, and concatenation. However, the conventional UNet and its variants [26] are primarily designed for
image-related tasks and are not directly applicable to MTSs, in
which the measurement resolution is much lower than that of
images.
Therefore, we elaborately designed the UNet-like network
named MagRobustNet for our study, as shown in Fig. 3(b), which
possesses the following characteristics.
1) Partial convolution operators replace standard convolution operators to reduce the impact of invalid data on the
output of the convolution operation.
2) Downsampling is implemented by setting the padding
number of the convolution operator to zero rather than
through pooling layers or setting the stride size.

784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 3. Illustration of robust magnetic tracking approach. (a) MagRobustNet-based framework for robust magnetic tracking, comprising three key
steps: anomaly detection, measurement recovery, and pose estimation. (b) Network architecture of MagRobustNet. (c) Measurement recovery aims
to restore abnormal measurements to normal data before feeding them into the back-end pose estimation algorithm. (d) Anomaly detection utilizes
three disjoint masks and MagRobustNet to reconstruct input measurements and detect interfered regions based on reconstruction error Er .

3) Similar to downsampling, we adjust the padding number
of the transposed convolution operator to regulate the
output size. Thus, upsampling and downsampling form
a symmetric operation.
In the convolution operation, the invalid data primarily originates from the padding operation and masking operation. Notably, the proportion of invalid data is surprisingly high for the
ultralow resolution measurements of MTSs. For example, given
a 5 × 5 input measurement with 1-pixel padding on each side,
(7 × 7 − 5 × 5)/(7 × 7) = 48.98% of the data will be from
padding. These invalid data can cause sharp spikes or dips in
filter response values, leading to spatial bias in the feature map
and affecting the model performance [27]. Partial convolution
was initially proposed by Liu et al. [28] to reduce the impact
of invalid input data on the output of convolution operation.
Here, W and b denote the convolution filter weights and bias,
respectively, while I[w,h] and M[w,h] represent the input data and
corresponding binary mask for the current convolutional sliding
window. The operation of partial convolution at each position
can be defined as



1[w,h] 1
WT (I[w,h]  M[w,h] ) M
+ b, M[w,h] 1 > 0

I =
 [w,h] 1
0,
otherwise
(8)
where  denotes elementwise multiplication, and 1[w,h] represents the identity matrix with the same dimension as M[w,h] .
As can be seen, output values depend only on the unmasked
inputs. The item 11 /M[w,h] 1 is a scaling factor that applies
renormalization on only valid measurements.
The common downsampling operations, such as the pooling
layer and strided convolution, are not employed in MagRobustNet due to the MTS’s low and odd measurement resolution from
a 5 × 5 magnetometer array. For example, with a convolution
stride of 2, the resolution of the MagRobustNet feature map
in the downsampling path will be 5 × 5, 3 × 3, 2 × 2, and
1 × 1, respectively. However, finding a corresponding inverse
operation to output odd resolutions during the upsampling path

is unfeasible. Furthermore, concatenating feature maps with
matching resolutions between downsampling and upsampling
paths at the same depth level is an essential operation in the
UNet-like network. A general approach to solving this problem
is to resize the input to a power of 2, such as 8 × 8, but this adds
unnecessary computations.
C. Measurement Recovery and Anomaly Detection
In MTSs, when some of the magnetometers are subjected to
interference, we expect to recover the expected measurements
of the interfered regions from neighboring normal data. One
possible way to do this is to estimate the magnet pose using the
normal magnetometers, and then, predict the expected measurements of the interfered magnetometers leveraging the estimated
magnet pose and the magnetic field model. This process can be
formulated as
2
 


ξ̂ = arg min j B̃sai (j) − Bsai (j) , j ∈ SA
(9)
2
B̂sai (j) = F(psj , ξ̂), j ∈ SC .
Here, SA represents the set of normal magnetometers, and
SC denotes the set of interfered magnetometers. In general, two
tri-axis magnetometers are adequate for estimating the 6-D pose
of a magnet. Given the redundant magnetometers in MTSs, far
exceeding the minimal requirement of two, it becomes theoretically feasible to recover the expected measurements from
neighboring normal data.
Masked image modeling (MIM) has emerged as a prominent
framework for self-supervised representation learning in computer vision in recent years [29]. It involves randomly masking
a portion of the image and predicting the missing pixels using
the surrounding context. Inspired by the MIM and driven by
our measurement recovery needs, we can utilize a large number
of normal measurements alongside masks for self-supervised
learning. The corresponding loss function is
Lr = N et(I  Mw ) − I1 , (w < N )

(10)

SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING

where Mw is a binary mask that randomly masks out w from N
magnetometers. MagRobustNet trained by (10) then, possesses
the ability of measurement recovery.
Measurement recovery: As depicted in Fig. 3(c), if the input measurements I contain anomalies, a corresponding binary
mask Mw is constructed by setting anomalous regions to 0 and
valid regions to 1. Supposing Io is output of the MagRobustNet,
the final reconstructed measurements Ir are
Ir = I  Mw + Io  M̄w

(11)

where M̄w is the binary inverse of Mw . Consequently, Ir
contains both the raw normal measurements I  Mw and the
recovered measurements Io  M̄w .
However, a key challenge is how to determine the interfered
regions. The pixel-level reconstruction methods based on autoencoders and GANs are widely adopted in anomaly detection
due to their intuitive nature and outstanding performance [23],
[24]. Considering the requirement of measurement recovery,
we adopt the UNet-like MagRobustNet to reconstruct the input
measurements for anomaly detection.
Anomaly detection: The reconstruction-based anomaly detection relies on the assumption that the trained MagRobustNet can
reconstruct measurements with the same distribution well but
not those with interferences. The possibility of reconstructing
anomalies is far less likely if the anomaly measurements were
not visible to the MagRobustNet. To ensure the reconstructed
measurements are derived from neighboring regions rather than
taking shortcuts, we employ a masking strategy involving k
disjoint masks.
Fig. 3(d) illustrates the anomaly detection process based on k
disjoint masks, which is described as follows.
1) Randomly generate k disjoint binary masks M(i) such
that each measurement cell is masked exactly once. These
masks will satisfy the following mathematical expression:
k
k

1 
M̄(i) = 1
M(i) =
k − 1 i=1
i=1

(12)

where M̄(i) represents the binary inverse of M(i).
2) Masked measurements I  M(i), (i = 1, 2, . . ., k) are
fed into MagRobustNet sequentially, which endeavors
to reconstruct the entire measurements by utilizing the
unmasked measurements, i.e.,
Ioi = N et(I  M(i)), (i = 1, 2, . . ., k).

(13)

3) The output measurements Ioi from the network are
masked and synthesized into the final reconstructed measurements Ira , i.e.,
Ira =

k


(Ioi  M̄(i)).

(14)

i=1

As Ira is extrapolated from neighboring measurements,
excluding the input measurements that are reconstructed,
the possibility of reconstructing anomalies is reduced.
4) Finally, the reconstruction errors Er (difference between
the input and output) can be calculated by
Er = Ira − I =

k

i=1

(Ioi  M̄(i)) − I.

(15)

785

The reconstruction errors are also known as the anomaly
scores, with a higher reconstruction error indicating a
higher likelihood that the measurement is an anomaly.
MagRobustNet can be trained by minimizing the loss function
Er 1 or Lr in (10). The main difference between these two
loss functions is that during each backpropagation, the error
computed by Lr is masking only w/N of the input measurements, while the error computed by Er 1 is masking all the
input measurements once. In our study, we use the disjoint
masking method, i.e., Er 1 , to train MagRobustNet, which
forces the MagRobustNet to reconstruct the masked regions
using information from the neighboring regions.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND VERIFICATION
A. Experimental Platform and Datasets Collection
1) Hardware Platform: We employed a 5 × 5 magnetometer array to perceive the magnetic induction intensities
around the annular magnet (grad: N35, outer radius r1
= 5 mm, inner radius r2 = 3.5 mm, and length L =
20 mm). The sensor array consisted of 25 magnetometers
(STMicroelectronics LIS3MDL) that were evenly soldered on a printed circuit board (PCB) with a spacing of
40 mm between each magnetometer. The measurement
range was set to ±800 uT in this study.
2) Datasets: Our datasets consist of a generated dataset
(2.9376 million samples, of which 98% were used for
training and 2% for testing) and a real-world test dataset,
as shown in Fig. 4. It is worth noting that no interference
was added during the generation of the dataset, meaning
that all samples in the training dataset are normal unlabeled data.
3) Training Details: MagRobustNet was implemented in
Pytorch and trained on the generated training dataset,
employing the Adam optimizer with a base learning
rate of 1 × 10−4 . The learning rate was reduced using
the cosine annealing schedule over 20 training epochs.
Furthermore, PoseNet, an end-to-end pose estimation
network proposed by [12], was also trained on the same
generated dataset.
B. Assessment of Model-to-Real Domain Adaptation
This experiment primarily aimed to assess the efficacy of the
proposed model-to-real domain adaptation approach using the
271 normal samples from the real-world test dataset.
Fig. 5(a) depicts the mean absolute errors (MAEs) between
the measurements generated by the uncalibrated and calibrated
mathematical models and the actual measurements captured
from the sensor array, with values of 1.72 and 0.99 uT, respectively. The t-SNE of samples from the three data domains is
presented in Fig. 5(b). Training PoseNet on the dataset generated
by the uncalibrated mathematical model achieves an average
position accuracy of 2.35 ± 1.48 mm within the height range
of 43–153 mm, as shown in Fig. 5(c). After undergoing the
pre-calibration operation, the localization accuracy of PoseNet
improves to 1.85 ± 1.04 mm. The localization performance of
PoseNet closely aligns with the widely adopted optimizationbased LM method. These results demonstrate that the

786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 4. Overview of our datasets. (a) Generated training dataset was sampled from the prior mathematical model across the working space. (b)
Samples were collected at various heights, including 271 normal samples and 54 saturated samples (abnormal samples). (c) Collecting abnormal
samples under the interference of a ferromagnetic object (M2 hexagon key with 90 mm length). (d) Taking abnormal samples under the interference
of a small magnet (Φ × H = 6 mm × 1.9 mm). (e) Gathering abnormal samples in the presence of hybrid interference arising from a ferromagnetic
object and a small magnet. Samples from (b)–(e) together constitute a real-world test dataset with 271 normal samples and 204 abnormal samples.

Fig. 5. Evaluating the effectiveness of model-to-real domain adaptation. (a) MAE between the data generated by the mathematical model
before and after calibration, and the 271 normal samples from the
real-world test dataset. (b) t-SNE of samples from the three domains,
illustrating that the data generated by the calibrated model is closer to
the real-world domain. (c) Comparison of the position accuracy before
and after calibration for pose estimation algorithms based on LM and
deep learning (DL, PoseNet) methods.

precalibration operation can promote the transfer of generated
data from the model domain to the real-world domain.
C. Anomaly Detection
The magnetic flux density produced by permanent magnets
is inversely proportional to the third power of the distance. Our
datasets were acquired within the height range of 20–160 mm, so

Fig. 6. Adaptive threshold determination and anomaly measurements
detection. (a) Pearson correlation coefficient r for different N , where N
denotes the number of maxima taken from each sample. (b) Correlation
plot between the average of the maximum N values and the maximum
reconstruction error, where the red line indicates the adaptive threshold
function. Note that the samples in the figure are all normal, and the samples at the height of 33 mm are not included due to sensor saturation.
(c) Confusion matrix tested on the real-world test dataset. (d) Snapshots
showing the process of anomaly measurement detection.

the measurement values varied widely, i.e., from approximately
0 uT to ±18 000 uT. This results in significant variations
in reconstruction errors for measurements at different heights.
Thus, it is difficult to distinguish between normal and abnormal
samples using a fixed threshold.
We observed a positive correlation between the maximum
reconstruction error max(|Er |) and the average of the maximum N values of input measurements I. Fig. 6(a) exhibits the
Pearson correlation coefficient r for various N . To get a higher
correlation, we took N = 12.
Further, we used a piecewise linear function to fit the relationship between max(|Er |) and the average of the maximum

SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING

787

The results in Fig. 7(b) show that the reconstructed measurements are closer to the ground truth, as indicated by the smaller
MAE. When the interference source is iron, magnet, or hybrid
(iron + magnet), the MAE distribution of the raw measurements
shows two peaks corresponding to the interference sources
placed at 20 and 30 mm from the magnetometer array during
data collection. In contrast, the reconstructed measurements
exhibited only one peak, also reflecting the effectiveness of
MagRobustNet.
Fig. 7. Performance evaluation of measurements recovery. (a) Several
snapshots show the process of generating a mask using the adaptive
threshold and recovering the desired measurements. (b) Comparison
of MAE metrics before and after performing measurement recovery on
abnormal samples.

N values. The bias term of the piecewise linear function was
adjusted according to the acceptable false positive rate (FPR)
on the normal data. In this study, we set the acceptable FPR
to 0.015, which corresponds to the allowance of misclassifying
four normal samples as abnormal. The adjusted function, which
we refer to as the adaptive threshold function, is shown as the
red line in Fig. 6(b) and can be formulated as
m=

N


top(I, N )/N

i=1

(16)

T (m) = max(0.23m − 15, 20)
where m is the average of the maximum N values from each
input I. It is worth highlighting that the adaptive threshold
function was determined solely based on normal samples.
Fig. 6(c) presents a confusion matrix tested on the real-world
test dataset using the adaptive threshold of (16). MagRobustNet
achieved excellent results with a recall rate of 1.0, a precision of
0.981, and an F1 score of 0.990. These metrics indicate that our
model effectively captures anomalies, maintains a low false positive rate, and demonstrates well-balanced performance. Alternatively, if we assume an acceptable FPR of zero, MagRobustNet
would classify all normal samples correctly but misclassify one
abnormal sample as normal, resulting in a recall rate of 0.995, a
precision of 1.0, and an F1 score of 0.998.
In both threshold cases, the misclassified samples predominantly occur at heights of 43 and 53 mm, where both saturated
and unsaturated samples coexist at the critical saturation boundary. The performance of anomaly detection is influenced by both
the chosen thresholds and the dataset itself.
In our proposed framework, we prioritize a threshold with
high recall, i.e., the threshold corresponding to an FPR of 0.015.
This choice is motivated by the consideration that misclassifying
a normal sample as anomalous merely results in an additional
measurement recovery step, whereas, failing to detect an abnormal sample will directly affect the subsequent pose estimation
algorithm.
D. Measurement Recovery
Fig. 7(a) illustrates generating a mask using the adaptive
threshold and recovering the expected measurements. Further,
we utilized the MAE metric to quantitatively assess the recovery
performance of MagRobustNet on abnormal samples, where the
ground truth was generated from the prior mathematical model.

E. Localization Accuracy Evaluation
Our proposed framework is not restricted to learning-based
pose estimation networks but can also be seamlessly applied to
conventional optimization-based tracking methods. To validate
the superiority of the MagRobustNet-based framework, we conducted a comparative analysis of five tracking methods in four
interference scenarios, as depicted in Fig. 8. The five tracking
methods considered are as follows.
1) LM and 2) PoseNet, where LM refers to the widely adopted
LM-based tracking approach [5], [6], [7], and PoseNet is the
learning-based pose estimation network proposed by [12]. Both
LM and PoseNet are basic tracking methods that do not incorporate anti-interference strategies.
3) MagRobustNet+LM and 4) MagRobustNet+PoseNet,
which utilize our MagRobustNet-based framework with LM and
PoseNet as the pose estimation algorithms.
5) HuberLoss+LM [16], an anti-interference method based
on the Huber loss and LM algorithm. To the best of the authors’
knowledge, HuberLoss+LM is the only previously proposed
solution to cope with the interferences targeted in this study.
The experimental results in Fig. 8 illustrate that the localization accuracy of the LM and PoseNet methods is significantly improved in four interference scenarios after applying the MagRobustNet-based framework. Specifically, the
MagRobustNet-based framework reduces the average position
error of PoseNet by 76.2% (10.18 to 2.42 mm) and the average
orientation error by 68.8% (from 12.69◦ to 3.96◦ ) across the four
scenarios. The improved localization performance (2.42 mm
and 3.96◦ ) has significant practical implications for various
applications, including WCE tracking [1], AGV navigation [3],
and body motion capture [4].
Moreover, the MagRobustNet+PoseNet method exhibits superior anti-interference performance compared to the MagRobustNet+LM method, possibly attributed to the fact that solving
the magnetic tracking problem with the LM algorithm is based
on the assumption of Gaussian distribution. In contrast, PoseNet
and MagRobustNet were trained on the same dataset, following
the same data distribution and underlying patterns. Thus, the
measurements recovered by MagRobustNet better align with
the expected input of PoseNet.
It should be noted that our proposed framework shows no
advantage over the HuberLoss+LM approach in scenarios with
iron interference. The performance difference is due to their
distinct mechanisms for handling interference.
Our proposed framework is based on measurement recovery. When the number of interfered sensors increases, the area
requiring recovery becomes larger, leading to a decrease in
localization accuracy. The HuberLoss+LM approach, on the
other hand, reduces the weight of outlier measurements using
the Huber loss function, which behaves linearly for outliers
and quadratically for normal measurements [16]. Consequently,

788

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Fig. 8. Localization accuracy comparison of different methods under four interference scenarios. The localization accuracy of the methods based
on our proposed framework (MagRobustNet+LM and MagRobustNet+PoseNet) is significantly improved over the conventional LM and PoseNet
methods. When compared to the HuberLoss+LM approach, MagRobustNet+PoseNet demonstrates comparable performance in mitigating the
effects of soft and hard magnetic interferences (iron, magnet, hybrid) while exhibiting superior capabilities in handling sensor saturation.
TABLE I
MAGROBUSTNET PERFORMANCE WITH DIFFERENT MASKING METHODS AND MASKING RATIOS

when the interference source is iron, which introduces smaller
interference magnitudes over a larger area, the HuberLoss+LM
method outperforms our framework. Conversely, when the interference source is saturation, which introduces larger interference
magnitudes over a smaller area, our proposed framework significantly outperforms the HuberLoss+LM method. Despite not
always outperforming the HuberLoss+LM method, our framework offers following advantages.
1) Versatility: It has broader applicability, being suitable for
both deep learning-based and optimization-based tracking methods, whereas the HuberLoss+LM method is only
applicable to optimization-based methods.
2) Enhanced Functionality: In addition to improving localization accuracy similar to the HuberLoss+LM method,
it can also indicate interfered regions, providing a means
to actively avoid interference.
F. Ablation Study
In this study, we trained MagRobustNet using disjoint
mask sets to mask the input measurements. However,

another conventional practice is randomly masking w out of
the 25 magnetometers, as shown in (10). Table I shows the
experimental results of the trained model based on disjoint mask
sets and the traditional masking method. To ensure a fair and
reasonable comparison, each model applied an identical mask
to the same abnormal sample during inference to reconstruct its
expected measurements.
The results from Table I indicate that different values of k
demonstrate their respective advantages in the four interference
scenarios. For instance, when the interference type is a magnet,
MagRobustNet performs optimally with k = 2. On balance, we
selected k = 3 to ensure favorable performance across four types
of interferences. In this case, the mask set consists of three
disjoint binary masks, two of which have a masking ratio of
8/25, and the other one is 9/25.
In addition, the results in Table I validate that the disjoint
masking method outperforms the conventional masking method.
The superior performance of the disjoint mask sets method is
mainly attributed to its strategy to calculate the loss after all input
measurements are masked, rather than only masking part of the
input measurements during each backpropagation, as shown in

SU et al.: ENHANCING ANTI-INTERFERENCE OF MAGNETIC TRACKING

789

interference source, an iron plate in this case, mainly produces
bias errors for localization. Moreover, the errors are nonlinear
and vary with the position of the WCE (the distance between the
two start points is 6.8 mm, and the two endpoints are 8.4 mm
apart). Thus, the proposed method can help ensure accurate and
reliable tracking results.
V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 9. Demonstration of clinical applications in a phantom and in
vivo experiments. (a) Snapshots of the experimental scene and measurements, where Es is derived from the reconstruction error Er after
bicubic interpolation. (b) Positioning errors of the foreign body at different locations. (c) Indicating the presence of interference sources and
prompting the adjustment of the array to an interference-free position.
(d) Motion trajectories of the WCE before and after performing measurements recovery.

(10). In contrast, the disjoint masking method uses (13)–(15) to
calculate the loss, which enforces MagRobustNet to reconstruct
expected measurements from neighboring data.

In this study, we propose a MagRobustNet-based framework
with anomaly detection and measurement recovery to enhance
the anti-interference of MTSs. Experiments on the real-world
test dataset showed a 76.2% improvement in average position
accuracy across four interference scenarios. Compared to the
existing HuberLoss + LM method, the proposed framework
exhibits broader applicability to both deep learning-based and
optimization-based methods, and enhanced functionality in indicating interfered regions. In addition, our method offers a new
potential diagnostic means for detecting and locating ingested
foreign bodies in clinical practice.
A limitation of our proposed method is its inability to address interferences that can disturb all magnetometers, such as
geomagnetic fields, as our approach relies on recovering the
expected measurements of interfered regions from neighboring
normal data. In future research, we will further address the
situation where all magnetometers are subject to interference to
improve the anti-interference capability and application scope
of MTSs.
REFERENCES

G. Demonstration of Clinical Applications
Foreign body ingestion in children is a common occurrence
in clinical practice. As shown in Fig. 9(a), we conducted a
foreign body positioning experiment based on the reconstruction
error Er (also known as score map) on a stomach model. The
experiment involved both the annular magnet and a foreign
body, making it challenging to observe where the foreign body
was directly from the raw measurements I. However, the score
map allows us to visualize the location of the foreign body
intuitively. Since the original score map resolution was only
5 × 5, bicubic interpolation was applied to increase the resolution to 20 × 20. We uniformly collected 16 samples above
the magnetometer array and used the interpolated score map
for position estimation. The positioning accuracy is shown in
Fig. 9(b). The results demonstrate that our method offers a new
potential diagnostic means for detecting and locating ingested
foreign bodies in clinical practice, though currently limited to
ferromagnetic materials.
In addition, detecting and indicating interfered regions is
crucial for achieving high-quality and effective outcomes in
practical applications. In vivo experiment shown in Fig. 9(c),
our proposed framework successfully detected the presence of
an interference source (a metal plate), prompting the adjustment
of the array to an interference-free location. The metal plate was
located in the middle of the operating table, which is often overlooked as a potential interference source. Even in cases where
the MTS cannot avoid interference, our method can significantly
enhance the localization performance by recovering interfered
measurements. Fig. 9(d) compares the motion trajectories before and after performing measurements when the WCE moves
about 30 mm under interference. The results indicate that the

[1] S. Sharma et al., “Location-aware ingestible microdevices for wireless
monitoring of gastrointestinal dynamics,” Nature Electron., vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 242–256, 2023.
[2] S. Song, Z. Li, H. Yu, and H. Ren, “Shape reconstruction for wire-driven
flexible robots based on bézier curve and electromagnetic positioning,”
Mechatronics, vol. 29, pp. 28–35, 2015.
[3] S. Su, H. Dai, S. Cheng, and Z. Chen, “Improved magnetic guidance
approach for automated guided vehicles by error analysis and prior knowledge,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 6843–6852,
Nov. 2020.
[4] C. R. Taylor, S.S. Srinivasan, S. H. Yeon, M. O’donnell, T. Roberts, and
H. M. Herr, “Magnetomicrometry,” Sci. Robot., vol. 6, no. 57, 2021,
Art. no. eabg056.
[5] S. Zeising, A. S. Thalmayer, M. Lübke, G. Fischer, and J. Kirchner,
“Localization of passively guided capsule endoscopes–a review,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 21, pp. 20138–20155, Nov. 2022.
[6] D. Son, S. Yim, and M. Sitti, “A 5-D localization method for a magnetically manipulated untethered robot using a 2-D array of hall-effect
sensors,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 708–716,
Apr. 2016.
[7] C. Hu et al., “Locating intra-body capsule object by three-magnet sensing
system,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 13, pp. 5167–5176, Jul. 2016.
[8] W. Yang . et al., “A six-dimensional magnetic localization algorithm for a
rectangular magnet objective based on a particle swarm optimizer,” IEEE
Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 3092–3099, Aug. 2009.
[9] B. Lv, Y. Qin, H. Dai, and S. Su, “Improving localization success rate
of three magnetic targets using individual memory-based WO-LM algorithm,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 19, pp. 21750–21758, Oct. 2021.
[10] Y. Fu and Y. Guo, “Guideline on initial point finding and search bounds
setting for biomedical magnetic localization,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22,
no. 16, pp. 16492–16504, Aug. 2022.
[11] N. Sebkhi et al., “A deep neural network-based permanent magnet localization for tongue tracking,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 19, no. 20, pp. 9324–9331,
Oct. 2019.
[12] S. Su, S. Yuan, M. Xu, H. Gao, X. Yang, and H. Ren, “Amagposenet:
Real-time 6-DoF magnet pose estimation by dual-domain few-shot learning from prior model,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 9,
pp. 9722–9732, Sep. 2023.

790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

[13] Y. Wu and W. Shi, “On calibration of three-axis magnetometer,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 6424–6431, Nov. 2015.
[14] L. Christensen, M. Krell, and F. Kirchner, “Learning magnetic field distortion compensation for robotic systems,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intell. Robots Syst., IEEE, 2017, pp. 3516–3521.
[15] J. Fu, Z. Ning, B. Li, and T. Lv, “Research on control algorithm of
strong magnetic interference compensation for mems electronic compass,”
Measurement, vol. 207, 2023, Art. no. 112370.
[16] S. Su, H. Dai, S. Cheng, P. Lin, C. Hu, and B. Lv, “A robust magnetic
tracking approach based on graph optimization,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
Meas., vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 7933–7940, Oct. 2020.
[17] Q. Shi, T. Liu, S. Song, J. Wang, and M. Q.-H. Meng, “An optically aided
magnetic tracking approach for magnetically actuated capsule robot,”
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 4003009.
[18] S. Song, X. Qiu, J. Wang, and M. Q.-H. Meng, “Design and optimization
strategy of sensor array layout for magnetic localization system,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1849–1857, Mar. 2017.
[19] G. Shao and Y.-X. Guo, “An optimal design for passive magnetic localization system based on SNR evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 4324–4333, Jul. 2020.
[20] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multiperspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021.
[21] J. Li, H. Izakian, W. Pedrycz, and I. Jamal, “Clustering-based anomaly
detection in multivariate time series data,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 100,
2021, Art. no. 106919.
[22] M. Hosseinzadeh, A. M. Rahmani, B. Vo, M. Bidaki, M. Masdari, and
M. Zangakani, “Improving security using svm-based anomaly detection:
Issues and challenges,” Soft Comput., vol. 25, pp. 3195–3223, 2021.
[23] M. Pota, G. De Pietro, and M. Esposito, “Real-time anomaly detection on
time series of industrial furnaces: A comparison of autoencoder architectures,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 124, 2023, Art. no. 106597.
[24] P. Zhao et al., “Sgad-gan: Simultaneous generation and anomaly detection
for time-series sensor data with generative adversarial networks,” Mech.
Syst. Signal Pr., vol. 210, 2024, Art. no. 111141.
[25] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[26] L. Liu, J. Cheng, Q. Quan, F.-X. Wu, Y.-P. Wang, and J. Wang, “A survey
on u-shaped networks in medical image segmentations,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 409, pp. 244–258, 2020.
[27] B. Alsallakh, N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, J. Yuan, and O. ReblitzRichardson, “Mind the pad–cnns can develop blind spots,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–13.
[28] G. Liu et al., “Partial convolution for padding, inpainting, and image
synthesis,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 5,
pp. 6096–6110, May 2023.
[29] Z. Xie et al., “Simmim: A simple framework for masked image modeling,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 9653–
9663.

Shijian Su received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in electronic science and technology
in 2012, 2015, and 2021, respectively, from
Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China, where he received the Ph.D. degree under the Joint Program of Fuzhou University and the Quanzhou
Institute of Equipment Manufacturing (QIEM),
Quanzhou, China.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the
Department of Electronic Engineering, Chinese
University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Hong Kong.
From 2015 to 2018, he was a Researcher with the QIEM, Haixi Institutes,
Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Quanzhou. His research interests
include magnetic tracking, intelligent perception, and robot localization.

Hai Lan received the bachelor’s degree in applied physics from the College of Science, Minzu
University of China, Beijing, China, in 2009,
and the master’s degree in condensed matter
physics in 2012 from the University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Quanzhou, China, where
he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
in detection technology and automation equipment.
His current research interests include deep
learning and electromagnetic tracking.

Huxin Gao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in mechanical engineering from Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China, in 2018, and the
Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering with
National University of Singapore, Singapore, in
2023, under the supervision of Prof. Ren.
He is a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Chinese
University of Hong Kong (CUHK), Hong Kong.
His research interests include surgical robotics,
robotic simulation, reinforcement learning, and
autonomous control.

Houde Dai (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.Eng. degree in biomedical engineering
from the University of South China, Hengyang,
China, in 2005, the M.S. degree in biomedical engineering from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree
in mechanical engineering from the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, in
2014.
He is currently a Professor with the Quanzhou
Institute of Equipment Manufacturing, Haixi Institutes, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Quanzhou, China. His research
interests include intelligent sensors, information processing, and mobile
robots.

Hongliang Ren (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering (specialized in biomedical engineering) from
the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, in 2008.
He is currently a Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. He has been
navigating his academic journey through the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, UC Berkeley,
Johns Hopkins University, Children’s Hospital
Boston, Harvard Medical School, Children’s National Medical Center,
and the National University of Singapore. His research interests include
robotics, mechatronics, artificial intelligence, actuators, and sensors.
Dr. Ren was the recipient of the IFMBE/IAMBE Early Career Award
2018, Interstellar Early Career Investigator Award 2018, ICBHI Young
Investigator Award 2019, and the Health Longevity Catalyst Award 2022
by NAM and RGC. He has served as an Active Organizer and Contributor on the committees of numerous robotics conferences, including
a variety of roles in the flagship IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, as well as other domain conferences, such
as ROBIO/BIOROB/ICIA. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING and Medical
and Biological Engineering and Computing.