IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

8981

Ensemble Intrusion Detection Based on
Heterogeneous Data Augmentation
and Knowledge Distillation
Longhui Wang , Xu Zhou , Weiping Ding , Senior Member, IEEE, Lifang Chen, and Qi Dai

Abstract—The number and complexity of network attacks and intrusion events are constantly increasing, timely
detection of abnormal intrusion behavior is an important
challenge in the field of network security. To this end, this
article proposes an ensembled intrusion detection model
based on heterogeneous data augmentation and mutual
knowledge distillation (KD), KDEHDA. To enhance the diversity of data, the training set is divided into multiple data
subsets using the bootstrap sampling method, and different data augmentation methods are used on each subset to
obtain multiple balanced data subsets. To enhance the generalization ability of the model, different base CNN models
are trained using balanced data subsets, and KD is used
to transfer the weight information of CNN. The final result
is the voting ensemble of each CNN model. Experimental
results show that the proposed model is superior to the
existing optimal model.
Index Terms—Data augmentation, Ensemble learning, Intrusion detection, Knowledge distillation.

I. INTRODUCTION
ETWORK attack techniques have become increasingly
covert and complex. Intrusion detection, an effective active
defense strategy, has garnered growing attention. Traditional
intrusion detection models incorporating machine learning are
gradually proving inadequate in managing this increasingly
complex attack environment [1]. In recent years, deep learning
models have been widely applied in intrusion detection. The

N

Received 20 May 2025; revised 9 July 2025; accepted 25 July 2025.
Date of publication 13 August 2025; date of current version 17 October
2025. This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology
Project of Hebei Education Department under Grant BJ2025217 and in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
U2433216. Paper no. TII-25-3336. (Corresponding author: Qi Dai.)
Longhui Wang was with the College of Science, North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan 063210, China. He is now
with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huaibei
Vocational and Technical College, Huaibei 235000, China (e-mail:
wlh15636705691@163.com).
Xu Zhou, Lifang Chen, and Qi Dai are with the College of
Science, North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan 063210, China (e-mail: sxzhouxu@126.com; hblg_clf@163.com;
dai18232576157@163.com).
Weiping Ding is with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer
Science, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, China, and also with the
Faculty of Data Science, City University of Macau, Macau 999078, China
(e-mail: dwp9988@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3593924

multilayered structure and high complexity of deep learning
models enable them to capture abstract, nonlinear relationships
in data—crucial for identifying complex attack patterns. Compared to traditional machine learning, deep learning more comprehensively analyzes the internal structure of data, enhancing
its ability to detect hidden threats. Moreover, as hardware computing power improves and algorithm optimization advances,
the efficiency and effectiveness of deep learning continue to
improve, further advancing its role in intrusion detection [2].
Despite deep learning’s impressive performance in intrusion
detection, its complexity and high demand for computational
resources present substantial challenges. Deep learning models
typically involve numerous parameters and hierarchical structures, leading to substantial time and resource consumption and,
consequently, high computational costs. In practical applications, this computational cost becomes a significant barrier to
deploying deep learning models [3]. For resource-constrained
edge devices, such as IoT and mobile devices, large deep learning models are challenging to deploy directly.
Knowledge distillation (KD), a widely recognized model
compression technique, has been extensively applied in intrusion
detection [4]. It compresses models by transferring knowledge
from a large, high-precision model, or “teacher model,” to a
smaller, lightweight model, known as the “student model.”
This process enables the student model to substantially reduce
computing resource requirements while maintaining a degree of
accuracy. This allows for the deployment of compact, distilled
deep learning models that can perform efficient intrusion detection, even on resource-constrained edge devices. However,
traditional KD methods face two main issues [5]. First, the pretraining of teacher networks is often resource-intensive. Achieving a high-precision teacher model usually requires multiple
adjustments and optimizations, making the process complex and
time-consuming. Second, architectural differences between the
teacher and student models may impact the effectiveness of KD.
Research shows that if the disparity between teacher and student
models is too great, it may not only hinder effective learning but
could also degrade performance [6]. These challenges are also
encountered when applying KD to build lightweight intrusion
detection models.
We observed that ensemble learning enhances classification
by constructing and combining multiple classifiers, effectively
optimizing weaker models [7]. In addition, the complexity

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

8982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

of convolutional neural networks escalates exponentially with
added hidden layers. By integrating multiple shallow networks,
we can construct a lightweight intrusion detection model with
both reduced capacity and high accuracy. The main contributions
are as follows.
1) We propose a novel KD method, convolutional knowledge distillation (CKD), enables the transfer of knowledge across different data types within the model, enhancing its adaptability.
2) We apply multiple data augmentation methods to process
intrusion detection datasets, effectively increasing data
diversity and improving model robustness in handling
imbalanced datasets.
3) We develop a new deep ensemble learning framework by
combining CKD with heterogeneous ensemble learning,
to achieve improved classification performance in intrusion detection tasks.
The rest of this article are organized as follows. In Section II, we outline recent advancements in deep learning-based
intrusion detection models, including some lightweight models.
Section III discusses the rationale for introducing heterogeneous
data augmentation and convolutional distillation and explains
the research methodology. Section IV presents the experimental
framework, includes ablation experiments to demonstrate the
effectiveness of convolutional distillation, and provides the experimental results of our method alongside other comparative
methods. Finally, Section V concludes this article.
II. RELATED WORK
In recent years, KD and ensemble learning have emerged as
promising solutions for building efficient and accurate intrusion
detection systems. KD allows for transferring knowledge from
a complex teacher model to a simpler student model, thereby
reducing model complexity while maintaining performance. For
instance, Wang et al. [8] proposed a lightweight model guided
by a teacher with a stable loss function for better convergence.
WangX et al. [9] employed a spatiotemporal residual teacher
network to guide a compact student detector through multiscale KD. Most existing KD methods can be categorized into
response-based, feature-based, and relation-based approaches.
Response-based methods transfer softened logits, while featurebased methods align intermediate representations. More recently, relation-based distillation, such as relational knowledge
distillation (RKD) [10], has gained attention for transferring the
structural relationships among instances instead of direct feature
values.
While these methods show effectiveness, they typically rely
on a manually designed or pretrained teacher model, which introduces significant computational overhead and limits adaptability
to new domains or datasets. Furthermore, most prior KD-based
intrusion detection models do not incorporate diverse data views
or tackle class imbalance simultaneously.
To overcome these limitations, ensemble-based approaches
have been adopted to improve robustness and generalization.
However, existing ensembles often lack intermodel communication during training, resulting in limited knowledge sharing [11].

In contrast, our proposed KDEHDA framework introduces a
novel ensemble-based CKD mechanism, where multiple student
models are trained collaboratively using heterogeneous data
augmentations. The mutual distillation among peer models eliminates the need for a fixed teacher and enables adaptive knowledge transfer. In addition, by integrating various augmentation
strategies tailored to the minority class, our method addresses
data imbalance and overfitting simultaneously.
III. THE PROPOSED METHOD
This section outlines the proposed method, with Section III-A
detailing the algorithm’s motivation, Section III-B presenting
the principle of the Bootstrap sampling method, Section III-C
explaining the CKD, and Section III-D providing the specific
process of KDEHDA.
A. Motivation
In the field of large-scale data applications, deep neural networks are increasingly supplanting traditional machine learning
methods and have proven highly effective for complex tasks,
such as intrusion detection. However, binary classification in
intrusion detection frequently encounters severe class imbalance [12], prompting researchers to employ data augmentation
to enhance dataset size by generating additional instances. Data
augmentation may exhibit variable efficacy across data types,
and a single method may be inadequate to capture the full diversity of the data, increasing the risk of overfitting or underfitting.
This study addresses these issues by proposing KDEHDA,
a novel ensemble KD CNN framework. KDEHDA uses heterogeneous data augmentation, assigning distinct data subsets
to each student model, processed using diverse augmentation
techniques. This method diversifies training instances, thereby
enhancing robustness and adaptability across different environments. KDEHDA eliminates reliance on a pretrained teacher
model; instead, a mutual learning mechanism facilitates knowledge sharing by transferring convolutional kernel weights from
the highest-performing student model to others, which fosters
flexibility in knowledge transfer and improves model generalization without sacrificing computational efficiency—ideal for
resource-constrained intrusion detection systems.
B. Bootstrap Sampling
The bootstrap sampling is a resampling method that incorporates replacement. Given a dataset containing m instances, each
instance is randomly selected and added to the sampling set, then
returned to the initial data set, allowing it to be selected again
in subsequent draws. Following random m draws, a sampling
set of size m is produced. Certain instances in the original data
set may appear multiple times in the sampling set, while others
may not be included at all. The probability of any sample not
1 m
) ,
being selected during these m sampling operations is (1 − m
taking the limit we get.
The instances that remain unsampled after multiple iterations constitute the out-of-bag samples, which can be used as

WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION

validation sets to assess the classification performance of each
subset

m
1
1
(1)
= ≈ 0.368.
lim 1 −
m→∞
m
e

8983

error between the convolution kernels of the final convolution
layer of the student and teacher models as the distillation loss
M

H

W


2
1
t
s
Km,h,w
− Km,h,w
LM SE =
M HW m=1
w=1

(5)

h=1

C. Convolutional Knowledge Distillation
Traditional KD methods can be broadly categorized into
output KD [13] and intermediate-layer KD [14], both of which
typically require the student and teacher models to be trained on
identical or highly similar datasets. This dependence limits their
applicability in heterogeneous or domain-shifted scenarios.
To address this limitation, we propose a novel technique called
CKD, which decouples the distillation process from the training
data. Instead of transferring knowledge via output logits or
feature maps, CKD directly transfers the convolutional kernels
learned by the teacher network. This approach allows knowledge
transfer between models trained on different datasets, enhancing
flexibility and generalization in multisource or heterogeneous
environments.
Assume that the convolution kernel K is a 3-D tensor with
shape (M, H, W ), where M represents the number of output
channels, in our experiments, we set the number of output
channels to be the same, H and W denote the height and width
of the kernel, respectively. K can be represented as a set of points
within a 3-D matrix


Km,h,w | m = 1, 2, . . . , M,
.
(2)
K=
h = 1, 2, . . . , H, w = 1, 2, . . . , W
Generally, convolution kernels typically have sizes of 3 × 3
or 5 × 5, convolution kernels are employed to compute the
distillation loss. When convolution kernel sizes are inconsistent, interpolation is used to resize the smaller kernel to match
the dimensions of the larger kernel. This interpolation method
applies bilinear interpolation, a technique that performs linear
interpolation in two directions. In a 2-D plane, given a set
of known points, bilinear interpolation estimates the value of
an unknown point. Bilinear interpolation involves performing
linear interpolation first in the horizontal direction, then in the
vertical direction, interpolating across H and W (the height and
width of the convolution kernel). For example, change the size
(H, W ) to (H  , W  )
K  (x , y  ) =

1 
1


ωi,j · K(xi , yj )

(3)

i=0 j=0

where K  (x , y  ) denotes the value of the interpolated convolution kernel at coordinate (x , y  ), K(xi , yj ) is the value of
the original convolution kernel at the four neighboring points
(x0 , y0 ), (x0 , y1 ), (x1 , y0 ), and (x1 , y1 ), ωi,j is interpolation
weight
ωi,j = (1 − |x − xi |) · (1 − |y  − yj |) .

(4)

Bilinear interpolation is well-suited for the continuous scaling
of weight tensors, particularly for the smooth adjustment of
convolution kernel weights.
When the convolution kernels of the teacher and student
networks are of the same size, CKD employs the mean squared

t
s
and Km,h,w
denotes the weights of the last
where Km,h,w
convolutional kernel of the student model and the teacher model
at the coordinates (m, h, w).
The key innovation of our method lies in its ability to perform
KD directly on model parameters (convolution kernels), independent of the underlying data. This enables cross-domain and
heterogeneous-model knowledge transfer, which is not feasible
with traditional distillation methods. Our proposed CKD opens
new avenues for collaborative learning and knowledge reuse in
diverse data environments.

D. KDEHDA
The KDEHDA process comprises two main stages: Data
preprocessing and model training, which are detailed in Sections
III-D1 and III-D2.
1) Data Preprocessing: Initially, the intrusion detection
dataset undergoes preprocessing to ensure compatibility with
deep learning models. The dataset includes both numerical and
nonnumerical features. Nonnumerical features are first transformed using one-hot encoding, categorical labels are processed
via label encoding, and numerical features are scaled using
min-max normalization. To conform to the input format required
by 2D-CNN models, the 1-D feature vectors are reshaped into
two-dimensional matrices.
To enable heterogeneous training environments and robust
model generalization, following the common setting used in
practical implementations, such as Scikit-learn [15]. Specifically, we draw five training subsets from the original dataset
via bootstrapping using a sampling ratio of 77% . Each subset is
independently sampled, and approximately 23% of the original
instances are excluded from each sampling. These out-of-bag
instances from all five rounds are then merged and deduplicated
to construct a unified validation set. This ensures that the validation set remains diverse, comprehensive, and disjoint from the
training subsets.
To promote diversity and address class imbalance within the
training subsets, only the first training subset is left unmodified,
serving as a baseline. The remaining four subsets are augmented using different oversampling strategies: SMOTE, ROS,
ADASYN, and GAN-generated synthetic data. In each case,
the minority class is oversampled to match the majority class,
enhancing class balance and learning robustness. This process
yields five distinct training subsets with varying characteristics,
which are later used for ensemble learning.
2) Model Training: During training, multiple CNN models
are trained on the balanced data subsets obtained through different augmentation. The first training round serves as an initialization phase. In subsequent rounds, each CNN model is
evaluated at the start of each round using the validation set,
with Macro − F 1 as the evaluation metric. The CNN model
achieving the highest Macro − F 1 score is designated as the

8984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1: Calculate Distillation Loss.
Input: Convolution kernel in the last layer of the student
Ks , convolution kernel in the last layer of the teacher Kt ,
T(x)
, real
current epoch t, total epoch T , student output qi
label y
Output: Distillation loss L
1: Begin
2: for t = 1 to T do
3:
while H s = H t or W s = W t do
4:
K(H  , W  ) ← K(H, W )
5:
end while
6:
Lsoft ← (Ks , Kt )
T(x)
7:
Lhard ← h(qi
, y)
8:
α(t), β(t) ← (t, T )
9:
L ← α(t) ∗ Lsoft + β(t) ∗ Lhard
10:
t←t+1
11: end for
12: End

teacher model for that round, with the remaining models serving
as student models. Macro − F 1 represents the average F 1 score
across all categories
n
i=1 F 1i

Macro − F 1 =

n

(6)

where F 1i denotes the F 1 of the category.
Macro − F 1 is employed as the evaluation metric for selecting the teacher model, as it comprehensively assesses the
model’s classification performance across all classes. This study
balances the dataset using a heterogeneous data augmentation
algorithm to improve classification performance on minority
classes. However, balancing the dataset with data augmentation
introduces a risk of overfitting. By using Macro − F 1, we maintain the model’s recognition capability for the majority class,
allowing for the selection of the optimal student as the teacher
model to guide other student models.
During training, the loss function for the CNN teacher model
is the cross-entropy loss, while the student model’s loss function
is a weighted combination of the cross-entropy loss and the
convolutional distillation loss. The student model’s loss function
can be expressed as
L = α(t) · Lsoft + β(t) · Lhard
M

= α(t) ·

H

W


2
1
t
s
Km,h,w
− Km,h,w
M HW m=1
w=1

Fig. 1.

Adapative weights α and β.

on its respective training set. The later iterations correspond to
the fine-tuning stage of KDEHDA. As training progresses, each
CNN model approaches convergence. By gradually reducing the
weight of the hard loss, CNN model can enhance its performance
through the guidance of superior CNN models, thereby reducing
the risk of overfitting the training data. α and β are represented
as follows:

 
πt
1
1 + cos
, α(t) = 1 − β(t).
(8)
β(t) =
2
T
When the total number of iterations T is 300, the curves of
α and β changing with the number of iterations t are shown
in Fig. 1. This design is inspired by the cosine learning rate
schedule in SGDR [16], which has demonstrated effectiveness
in improving convergence and reducing overfitting.
The procedure of the calculate distillation loss is described
in the Algorithm 1. The final result is determined through hard
voting among the CNN models, the process of KDEHDA is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
IV. EXPERIMENT STUDY
To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, four
publicly available intrusion detection datasets are chosen for
experiments. In addition, set of ablation experiment are devised
to showcase the effectiveness of each component. Section IV-A
outlines the experimental setup, Section IV-B details the ablation
experiments, and Section IV-C provides the final experimental
results and analysis.

h=1

+ β(t) · h

T(x)
qi
,y

.

(7)

In KDEHDA, α + β = 1, and we aim to avoid keeping the
weights α and β fixed. We set β to follow a cosine decay function
with respect to the epoch, gradually decreasing as the epoch progresses, while α increases correspondingly. In the early stages
of training, each CNN model may not yet be proficient in the
task. At this stage, setting a larger β facilitates the completion
of basic tasks by each CNN model and improves performance

A. Experimental Setting
1) Experimental Environment: The experiments were executed on a system operating the Windows 11 operating system.
The hardware configuration included an Intel Core i5-12400F
processor and 16 GB of RAM. The Python programming
language version 3.7.0 was used for implementation, and
the PyCharm integrated development environment (IDE) was
employed for coding and project management. Based on the
Pytroch framework, the GPU is a GeForce RTX2070 s 8 GB.

WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION

Fig. 2.

8985

KDEHDA flow chart.

TABLE I
DATASET CHARACTERISTICS AND INTRUSION STATISTICS

2) Datasets: We collected four datasets from the University of New Brunswick website, namely KDDCUP99, UNSWNB15, CICIDS17, and AAGM17. KDDCUP99 and UNSWNB15 have provided divided training sets and validation sets. For
CICIDS17 and AAGM17 datasets, we follow previous work [17]
to divide the datasets to ensure fairness in comparative experiments. In addition, to enhance the real-world applicability of
our evaluation and account for evolving threats, we incorporated
the recently published WEB-IDS23 dataset [18], which contains
up-to-date network traffic and attack scenarios. The dataset
description is shown in Table I.
3) Parameter Information: We use three-layer CNN as the
base model, with an initial 8 channels, 32 output channels in
the final layer, dropout layer is applied to each layer to mitigate
overfitting. In our previous study, we observed that when using
CNN as the base model, the loss function consistently converged
within approximately 200 epoch across the four datasets [19],
so we set the epoch to 300. Additional parameters are provided
in Table II.
4) Evaluation Metrics: The evaluation metrics of the intrusion detection model are the overall accuracy (OA) and F 1.
OA is the ratio of correct predictions in the prediction results.

TABLE II
PARAMETER INFORMATION

F 1 is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, where precision
measures the ability of the intrusion detection system to identify
only attacks, while recall can be considered as the ability of the
system to discover all attacks.
B. Ablation Experiment
1) Experiment on MNIST: To demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed CKD method in a controlled and interpretable
setting, we conducted an ablation study using the MNIST
dataset. Although MNIST is not a binary classification dataset,
such as intrusion detection benchmarks, it is widely used in the
deep learning community for evaluating novel training strategies
due to its simplicity and well-understood characteristics. Using

8986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Fig. 3.

Comparison of accuracy and loss on training and validation sets with and without KD using teacher model (3 ∗ 3).

Fig. 4.

Comparison of accuracy and loss on training and validation sets with and without KD using teacher model (5 ∗ 5).

MNIST allows us to isolate and visualize the impact of CKD
without the interference of task-specific complexities such as
class imbalance or data noise.
In this experiment, two teacher models were pretrained using
the full MNIST training set: one with 3 × 3 convolution kernels
and the other with 5 × 5 kernels, representing different receptive
field configurations. To simulate a low-resource scenario, we
trained student models using only 10% of the original training
data, thereby emphasizing the potential of KD to boost performance when labeled data is scarce.
The student models were trained with and without the proposed CKD, where the distillation loss used weighting factors
α = β = 0.5. Throughout training, we recorded accuracy and
loss on both training and validation sets across epochs. Furthermore, the performance differences between student models
with and without distillation are visualized in Figs. 3 and 4. As
observed, the performance gap is more pronounced during the
early training stages, where KD accelerates learning and guides
the student toward more generalizable representations. After
the 10th epoch, the difference narrows, which is expected as

both models gradually converge. However, the sporadic performance peaks throughout training demonstrate that KD provides
a more stable optimization path, and overall, the distilled models
achieve higher final accuracy and lower loss.
2) Experiment on AAGM17 and CICIDS17: To demonstrate
the effectiveness of CKD, we use the CICIDS17 and AAGM17
datasets as examples. We set the number of iterations to 100.
KD refers to CKD without a fixed teacher, while Null represents
each independent CNN model, where the distillation loss is not
computed. Only the original cross-entropy loss is used for backpropagation. The OA and F 1 scores for each CNN validation set
are recorded in every training round. AAGM17 and CICIDS17
represent CNNs trained on data subsets without augmentation,
while the remaining models are trained on balanced data subsets
enhanced by various data augmentation techniques. The results
are plotted as a line graph, as illustrated in the Figs. 5 and 6.
From the results in Fig. 5 it can be observed that on the AAGM
dataset, the ordinate value corresponding to the GAN algorithm
is the largest, indicating that the classification performance of
the data subset enhanced by GAN outperforms that of other

WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION

Fig. 5.

8987

Comparison line chart of OA and F1 of KD and null on AAGM17.

data augmentation algorithms. During the training process, the
classifier trained on the GAN-enhanced data subset serves as
the teacher model more frequently. By comparing the curves of
each classifier, it is evident that the KD curve consistently outperforms the Null curve, demonstrating the guiding role of CKD.
This method successfully transfers the implicit knowledge from
the strong classifier to the weak classifier, thereby improving the
weak classifier’s performance.
From the results in Fig. 6, it can be observed that on the
CICIDS17 dataset, each CNN model exhibits distinct advantages and disadvantages in different rounds, with no fixed or
frequent CNN consistently serving as the teacher model. All
curves utilizing KD outperform those without it. These results
indicate that KD plays an effective guiding role, particularly
through CKD, where knowledge from high-performing models
is successfully transferred to lower-performing models. The
CKD strategy, which does not rely on a fixed teacher model,
can flexibly select the most suitable teacher model for each
task and continuously optimize the student model across multiple training rounds. This approach significantly enhances the
model’s generalization ability, demonstrating the effectiveness
of the CKD method proposed in this chapter.
C. Compare With Other Methods
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method,
it is compared with other existing methods. The comparison algorithms selected are binary classification algorithms

for intrusion detection based on deep learning, including
MAGNETO [17], CNN-LSTM [20], HAE-HRL [21], DeepPacket [22], TSIDS [23], RFG-HELAD [7], AlexNet [24],
VGG99 [25], MobileNetV2 [26], and ShuffleNet [27]. The comparison experiment uses the entire training set for model training
and evaluates the results on the test set. The KDDCUP and
UNSW-NB15 datasets are predivided into training and test sets.
However, the CICIDS17 and AAGM17 datasets do not provide
such divisions. Therefore, this study extracts training and test
sets from the original datasets according to the proportions and
quantities specified by the comparison algorithms. The final
results are presented in Tables III and IV, with the highest
evaluation metrics for each dataset highlighted in bold.
As shown in Tables III and IV, KDEHDA outperforms the
comparison algorithms on the KDDCUP99, UNSW-NB15,
and CICIDS17 datasets. On the AAGM17 dataset, the OA of
KDEHDA is 0.8989, slightly lower than MAGNETO’s 0.9016.
Similarly, the F1-score of KDEHDA reaches 0.7343, while
MAGNETO achieves 0.7361. These results indicate a
marginal performance gap between the two models on
this particular dataset. Unlike the other datasets used in
our experiments—which include multiple categories of attack
types—the AAGM17 dataset focuses solely on Android
malware detection and contains only two types of instances. In
such binary classification settings with limited label diversity,
the advantages of heterogeneous data augmentation and
knowledge ensemble strategies may not be fully exploited. On
the contrary, aggressive augmentation can potentially lead to

8988

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

Comparison line chart of OA and F1 of KD and null on CICIDS17.

TABLE III
OA OF DIFFERENT MODELS ON VARIOUS DATASETS

TABLE IV
F1 OF DIFFERENT MODELS ON VARIOUS DATASETS

overfitting due to the lack of interclass variability. Therefore,
the slightly inferior performance of KDEHDA on AAGM17 is
likely due to the reduced effectiveness.
The superior performance of KDEHDA, compared to other
algorithms, can be attributed to its use of multiple heterogeneous

integration methods. Intrusion detection tasks typically involve
processing tabular data, which differs from image data in terms
of processing techniques. Traditional image data enhancement
techniques, such as cropping and inversion, are designed for
image recognition models, such as AlexNet and are not fully

WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION

Fig. 7.

8989

Robustness experiment of KDEHDA under Gaussian noise with varying σ values.

applicable to tabular data. In contrast, MAGNETO relies solely
on GAN to address data imbalance. Although simple and effective, this approach may not fully capture the complex features
in the data. KDEHDA enhances the model’s generalization and
robustness by utilizing multiple heterogeneous integration methods. This approach not only enhances the dataset, but also
enables multiple models to learn from each other through KD,
further boosting detection performance. KDEHDA combines
the advantages of different models through heterogeneous integration, enhancing adaptability to data diversity. In addition,
KD facilitates mutual learning and knowledge transfer between
models, playing a key role in improving classification accuracy and preventing overfitting. One significant advantage of
KDEHDA over other KD methods is that it does not require
a pretrained teacher model. This feature significantly reduces
training costs and time overhead. Traditional KD methods
typically require pretraining a teacher model and transferring
its knowledge to the student model, increasing both training
complexity and resource demands. KDEHDA omits this step
through distillation integration, making the training process
more efficient and cost-effective.
To further illustrate the efficiency and practicality of the
proposed KDEHDA model, we conduct a quantitative analysis of model complexity and computational cost. As shown
in Table V, KDEHDA has significantly fewer parameters
(0.1939 M) and lower FLOPs (28.34 M) compared to most

TABLE V
MODEL PARAMETERS AND FLOPS

baseline models, including heavyweight architectures, such as
AlexNet (61.00 M parameters) and VGG99 (143.00 M parameters). Even when compared with lightweight models such as
MobileNetV2 (3.50 M parameters) and ShuffleNet (1.00 M
parameters), KDEHDA remains more compact and efficient.
This result supports the claim that KDEHDA is not only accurate, but also highly resource-efficient, making it well-suited for
deployment in real-time or resource-constrained environments.
D. Robustness Experiment Under Gaussian Noise
To evaluate the robustness of the proposed KDEHDA model
under real-world noisy conditions, Gaussian white noise with

8990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2025

zero mean and varying variance σ 2 was added to the input features during the testing phase. The perturbed samples x̃ = x + ε
simulate potential sensor noise or environmental disturbances
that may occur during model deployment. The training data
remained unchanged to isolate the model’s generalization capability under noise.
The experimental results are illustrated in Fig. 7, which shows
the variation in OA and F1-score with increasing noise intensity
σ. As expected, both OA and F1-score exhibit a gradual decline
as σ increases. However, the degradation remains relatively
minor—less than 0.01—across all datasets, indicating strong
noise resilience.
These findings confirm that the proposed KDEHDA model
not only achieves high classification performance under clean
conditions, but also maintains robust and stable behavior under
noisy perturbations. This robustness makes it well-suited for
practical deployment in real-world intrusion detection scenarios.
V. CONCLUSION
Intrusion detection data typically exhibits significant class
imbalance, with normal traffic instances far outnumbering attack traffic instances [28]. Accurately identifying attack traffic
is crucial in practical applications, as it directly impacts the
system’s security and protection capabilities. We propose an
innovative heterogeneous data augmentation ensemble learning
framework that improves dataset diversity by combining multiple augmentation algorithms, thereby enhancing the model’s
ability to identify minority classes. In addition, we introduce
CKD. This method transfers data diversity through the base
model during training, further enhancing the model’s generalization ability. CKD transfers knowledge between models, making
the model more comprehensive and deeper in learning data
features. This enables the model to exhibit greater robustness
and accuracy when handling new instances. We use multiple
shallow convolutional neural networks as base classifiers in our
approach. This approach significantly reduces model complexity
and computational overhead, while maintaining high accuracy.
In summary, our solution, combining heterogeneous dataenhanced ensemble learning and convolution kernel KD, improves intrusion detection model performance, while ensuring
an efficient training process, offering broad practical application
potential. Nonetheless, our method also has some limitations.
First, the use of multiple data augmentation algorithms and
knowledge transfer mechanisms increases the complexity of
the training pipeline, which may lead to higher preprocessing
and training time. Second, the effectiveness of our approach
may depend on the availability and quality of labeled intrusion
datasets, especially for rare attack types. In future work, we plan
to explore automatic selection of augmentation strategies and
extend our method to unsupervised or semi-supervised scenarios
to alleviate data dependency.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Ye, J. Luo, W. Zhou, M. Wang, and Q. He, “An ensemble framework
with improved hybrid breeding optimization-based feature selection for
intrusion detection,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 151, pp. 124–136,
2024.

[2] J. A. Alzubi, O. A. Alzubi, I. Qiqieh, and A. Singh, “A blended deep
learning intrusion detection framework for consumable edge-centric IoMT
industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2049–2057,
Feb. 2024.
[3] Y. Lai et al., “A lightweight intrusion detection system using a finite
dirichlet mixture model with extended stochastic variational inference,”
IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4701–4712, Aug.
2024.
[4] Z. Li and W. Yao, “A two stage lightweight approach for intrusion detection
in Internet of Things,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 257, 2024, Art. no. 124965.
[5] S. Sun, W. Ren, J. Li, R. Wang, and X. Cao, “Logit standardization in
knowledge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2024, pp. 15731–15740.
[6] S. Yang et al., “Learning from human educational wisdom: A studentcentered knowledge distillation method,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 4188–4205, Jun. 2024.
[7] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A robust
fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[8] Z. Wang, Z. Li, D. He, and S. Chan, “A lightweight approach for network
intrusion detection in industrial cyber-physical systems based on knowledge distillation and deep metric learning,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 206,
2022, Art. no. 117671.
[9] X. Wang, Z. Wang, E. Wang, and Z. Sun, “Spatial-temporal knowledge
distillation for lightweight network traffic anomaly detection,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 137, 2024, Art. no. 103636.
[10] W. Park, D. Kim, Y. Lu, and M. Cho, “Relational knowledge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
pp. 3967–3976.
[11] D. Simopoulos, D. Kosmidis, G. Anastassopoulos, and L. Iliadis, “A
stacked ensemble deep learning model for predicting the intensive
care unit patient mortality,” Artif. Intell. Health, vol. 2, pp. 47–59,
2025.
[12] Q. Dai, L.-H. Wang, K.-L. Xu, T. Du, and L.-F. Chen, “Class-overlap
detection based on heterogeneous clustering ensemble for multi-class
imbalance problem,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 255, 2024, Art. no. 124558.
[13] G. Hinton, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,” 2015,
arXiv:1503.02531.
[14] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta, and Y. Bengio,
“FitNets: Hints for thin deep nets,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6550.
[15] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[16] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
warm restarts,” 2016, arXiv:1608.03983.
[17] G. Andresini, A. Appice, L. De Rose, and D. Malerba, “GAN augmentation
to deal with imbalance in imaging-based intrusion detection,” Future
Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 123, pp. 108–127, 2021.
[18] E. Lanfer, D. Brockmann, and N. Aschenbruck, “Technical report: Generating the WEB-IDS23 dataset,” 2025, arXiv:2502.03909.
[19] L.-H. Wang, Q. Dai, T. Du, and L.-F. Chen, “Lightweight intrusion
detection model based on CNN and knowledge distillation,” Appl. Soft
Comput., vol. 165, 2024, Art. no. 112118.
[20] S. S. Bamber, A. V. R. Katkuri, S. Sharma, and M. Angurala, “A hybrid
CNN-LSTM approach for intelligent cyber intrusion detection system,”
Comput. Secur., vol. 148, 2025, Art. no. 104146.
[21] Y. Xue, C. Kang, and H. Yu, “HAE-HRL: A network intrusion detection
system utilizing a novel autoencoder and a hybrid enhanced LSTM-CNNbased residual network,” Comput. Secur., vol. 151, 2025, Art. no. 104328.
[22] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “Attack classification of imbalanced intrusion
data for IoT network using ensemble-learning-based deep neural network,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11888–11895, Jul. 2023.
[23] J. Fu, L. Wang, J. Ke, K. Yang, and R. Yu, “TSIDS: Spatial–temporal fusion
gating multilayer perceptron for network intrusion detection,” Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 263, 2025, Art. no. 125687.
[24] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 84–90.
[25] K. Simonyan, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
[26] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen, “MobileNetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 4510–4520.
[27] N. Ma, X. Zhang, H.-T. Zheng, and J. Sun, “ShuffleNet v2: Practical
guidelines for efficient CNN architecture design,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 116–131.

WANG et al.: ENSEMBLE INTRUSION DETECTION BASED ON HETEROGENEOUS DATA AUGMENTATION

[28] D. Arp et al., “Dos and donts of machine learning in computer security,”
in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., Boston, MA: USENIX Association,
Aug. 2022, pp. 3971–3988. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/arp

Longhui Wang was born in 2001. He received
the B.S. degree in information and computing science from Northeast Forestry University,
Harbin, China, in June 2021, and the M.S.
degree in cyberspace security from the North
China University of Science and Technology,
Tangshan, China, in January 2025.
He is currently with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Huaibei Vocational and Technical College, Anhui, China. His
research interests include network security and
knowledge distillation.

Xu Zhou was born in 1986. He received the
M.S. degree in applied mathematics from Hebei
University, Baoding, China, in 2013. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in mining
engineering with the College of Mining Engineering, North China University of Science and
Technology, Tangshan, China.
His research interests include data mining
and machine learning.

Weiping Ding (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 2013.
He is currently a Full Professor with Nantong University, Nantong, China. From 2014 to
2015, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with
the Brain Research Center, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, China. In 2016, he
was a Visiting Scholar with the National University of Singapore, Singapore. From 2017 to
2018, he was a Visiting Professor with the University of Technology
Sydney, Sydney, Australia. He has published over 380 articles, including
more than 200 IEEE Transactions papers. Twenty of his authored/coauthored papers have been selected as ESI Highly Cited Papers. His
research interests include granular data mining and multimodal machine
learning. He serves as an Associate Editor, Area Editor, or Editorial
Board Member for over ten prestigious journals, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, IEEE/CAA JOURNAL OF AUTOMATICA SINICA,
and Information Fusion.

8991

Lifang Chen was born in 1973. She received
the M.S. degree in technology for computer applications from Yanshan University, Qinhuangdao, China, in 2000. She received the Ph.D.
degree in control theory and control engineering
from the China University of Mining and Technology, Beijing, China, in 2008.
Her research interests include data mining
and processing, neural network modeling, control theory, and engineering.

Qi Dai was born in 1991. He received the M.S.
degree in mathematics from the North China
University of Science and Technology, Tangshan, China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in control theory and control engineering with the Department of Automation, College of Information Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum, Beijing,
China.
His research interests include data mining,
machine learning, and imbalance learning.