IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

3711

ERFS: Efficient Feature Graph Representation for
Intrusion Detection Based on Flow
Semantic Association
Yiqing Luo , Mingshu He , Member, IEEE, and Xiaojuan Wang

Abstract—The detection of network threats remains a fundamental task in cyberspace defense. Graphs are capable of
capturing rich structural information and retaining content
information. They are widely applicable in the field of threat
detection. However, existing graph-based threat detection methods are computationally complex and challenging to apply
in real-world network scenarios, where topologies may be
incomplete or invisible. To address this, we propose ERFS,
an efficient feature graph representation method for intrusion
detection based on flow semantic correlation. This method aims
to enhance the feature representation of network behavior. The
proposed method first constructs a semantic correlation graph
to depict the inherent semantic relationships within and between
network flows. This is followed by the use of a messaging
network to update and learn the information of graph nodes.
The updated nodes are then aggregated into flow-level semantic
feature representations for node classification, thereby achieving
threat detection. The key innovation of this approach lies in
graph construction and learning. The semantic correlation graph
is constructed based on contextual correlation features and does
not rely on topological information. It addresses the existing
dependency issue of traditional graph construction methods on
network topology. On the other hand, it introduces a smallwindow learning mechanism and a global sharing mechanism for
edge weights. These mechanisms enable graph learning within
a small-window range while globally sharing representations
of identical nodes and edge weight values. It also addresses
challenges in current graph construction methods, such as high
computational complexity and low efficiency. Furthermore, the
evaluation results indicate that this method achieved classification
accuracies of 99.99%, 98.81%, 100%, 97.87%, and 99.64% on five
public datasets (CIC IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC DDoS2019,
USTC-TFC2016, and ISCX VPN-nonVPN), respectively. These
results surpass those of existing advanced models. The code is
available on: https://github.com/sixteen23333/ERFS.
Index Terms—Threat detection, high efficiency, semantic association graphs, global sharing mechanisms.

Received 2 October 2024; revised 18 December 2024 and 11 February
2025; accepted 13 February 2025. Date of publication 18 February 2025;
date of current version 10 December 2025. This work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62402053 and
62227805. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and
approving it for publication was C.-H. Lee. (Corresponding author: Mingshu
He.)
Yiqing Luo is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: luoyiqing@bupt.edu.cn).
Mingshu He and Xiaojuan Wang are with the School of Cyberspace
Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China (e-mail: hemingshu@bupt.edu.cn; wj2718@bupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2025.3543357

I. I NTRODUCTION
YBERSPACE has become the second realm of human
existence. Its security concerns have emerged as a new
focal point of national interests. With the rapid advancement
of the Internet and the widespread adoption of information
technology, businesses, organizations, and individuals are
increasingly confronted with cybersecurity threats. These
threats include a wide range of malicious activities, such
as hacker intrusions, phishing attempts, malware infections,
data breaches, among others. These activities result in significant financial and reputational damage for the victims.
As a result, detecting and uncovering threat behaviors is
crucial to safeguarding cyberspace. Within the vast data flow
carried by network activities, a notable characteristic is its
immense scale, extensive temporal and spatial spans, and
widespread distribution. At the same time, malicious behaviors
use encryption, fragmentation, obfuscation, and disguise to
deeply hide within this massive data deluge. This makes it
exceedingly difficult to directly identify threatening behaviors
through raw network flow data analysis.
To effectively differentiate between normal and abnormal
network traffic, feature extraction and application have become
essential. Features serve as crucial indicators for determining
the normalcy of network traffic. They can also accurately
identify abnormal patterns, malicious behaviors, and potential
threats, thereby providing a solid foundation for threat detection. Feature extraction converts complex raw data into a more
representative and easily processed form. This significantly
enhances the efficiency of threat behavior recognition and
detection. Among these, graph-based network behavior feature
representation methods are widely used in the field of threat
detection. By representing the internal semantic relationships
of network flows as a graph structure, behavior can be
analyzed accordingly. Compared to raw data, graph structures
provide a more robust and abstract system view, making
it more difficult for attackers to evade detection. Moreover,
graphs provide richer semantics than raw data by preserving
valuable relational information.
The current methods for representing network behavior
using graph structures still face certain limitations in terms
of both graph construction and scope. In the compositional
approach, existing graph-based flow detection methods focus
on learning node representations and aggregating messages
in networks with known topologies [1], [2], [3]. However,
in practical applications, network topologies are often not

C

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
2332-7731 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

3712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

readily available [4]. For instance, social networks may have
incomplete or unmeasurable structures. Regarding the composition range, current methods typically involve constructing
a graph for the entire database [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. This
approach facilitates better extraction of global features at the
spatial level. Nevertheless, it also presents challenges related to
computational complexity and time consumption, particularly
due to the large number of edges.
In summary, we face two key challenges: (1) How to
construct graph structures that represent behavioral association
relationships in the presence of incomplete network topologies. (2) How to improve learning and testing efficiency of
approaches that construct graphs based on entire databases.
To effectively tackle the task of threat detection and
address the aforementioned challenges, this paper focuses
on improving the composition method and graph learning
approach. Regarding composition, a consistent correlation
between network flow data and network behavior has been
observed across various scenarios. The content correlation
within flow data reflects underlying behavioral patterns,
regardless of topological transmission information. Therefore,
we aim to reduce reliance on the topological information of
graph structure and instead explore network flow behavior
characteristics through dimensions such as contextual relevance and semantic features. In terms of graph learning,
current methods often require recalculating node information
during testing. This adds complexity, consumes time, and
leads to poor generalization. To address this, our efforts focus
on facilitating information sharing between the training and
testing processes. This allows the knowledge acquired from
training nodes to be generalized to testing nodes without the
need for recalculation during the testing phase. As a result,
efficiency is improved and application costs are reduced.
Building on the ideas outlined above, this paper proposes an
intrusion detection method based on flow semantic correlation.
Unlike existing approaches that focus solely on connection
information, this method starts with the original flow data and
treats it as a specialized language. By analyzing the structural
similarity between flow data and text data, we construct a
semantic association graph to reveal underlying behavioral
patterns in the network flow. Based on the constructed semantic association graph, this study aims to address the issues
of complex calculations and low efficiency in existing graph
learning methods. To achieve this, we design a global sharing
mechanism for edge weights and a small-window learning
mechanism. The global sharing mechanism enables the sharing
of node representations and edge weights, eliminating the need
for recalculation during testing. Furthermore, by treating each
flow as a window unit, graph learning and updating unfold on
a smaller scale based on messaging networks.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows.
• This paper proposes an efficient feature graph representation method for intrusion detection based on the semantic
correlation of network flows. Drawing on the similarity
between network flow data and natural language, the
concept of semantic analysis is applied to network threat
detection. Using semantic features as the foundation,
the method learns and analyzes the semantic correlation

between flows. The proposed correlation features reveal
the behavioral semantic characteristics of each type of
network flow, which can serve as “fingerprints” to differentiate them. Unlike existing graph construction methods
that focus on connection information during transmission,
this method emphasizes the semantic feature representation of flow data. As a result, it reduces dependency on
network topology and is suitable for real-world scenarios
where topology is either invisible or incomplete.
• To address the issues of low efficiency in existing graph
construction methods, we propose a global sharing mechanism for edge weights and a learning mechanism for a
small window. This approach involves globally sharing
the representations and edge weights of identical nodes
and generating a graph structure for each network flow.
Additionally, it connects byte nodes within a smaller
window in the flow data, rather than directly and fully
connecting all byte nodes in the database. Evaluation
results demonstrate that this method achieves high accuracy rates with minimal iterative training requirements. It
also ensures fast iteration training processes.
• This method has been evaluated on five public datasets,
which include data from the Internet, the Internet of
Things (IoT), and the encrypted Internet. The results
demonstrate its ability to effectively detect threats in
various scenarios. It exhibits exceptional performance
in the IoT detection scenario, achieving a remarkable
detection accuracy of 100%. Furthermore, the extracted
semantic correlation features exhibit a distinctive recognition capability for various network threat behaviors. Each
of these behaviors has unique behavioral and spatiotemporal characteristics. These threat behaviors include brute
force, HULK, DoS, DDoS, and other types of attacks.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II outlines the motivation, contributions, and model
design considerations for adopting semantic analysis ideas in
threat detection. Section III describes the overall architecture
and design of the semantic association graph-based behavior analysis model. Section IV evaluates and validates the
proposed model and discusses and analyzes the experimental
structure. Section V presents the conclusions and discusses
future work.

II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
A. Background
In existing cyberspace, it can be divided into public
networks and dedicated networks for different scenarios based
on the visibility of network flows, as shown in Fig. 1. The
topology structure of the nodes in the private networks is
invisible, and the private networks are connected to each other
through the topology nodes of the public networks. In such a
scenario, the detection and discovery of network threats can
only be achieved by collecting and detecting flows on the
public network topology path, and then tracing the source to
find the initial threat effector node to contain and block the
spread and development of threats.

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

Fig. 1.

3713

The application scenarios and motivational ideas of this method.

Due to the invisibility of dedicated networks and the
potential topological incompleteness, obtaining transmission
information such as IP addresses and ports poses a significant
challenge. However, the majority of existing graph-based
threat detection methods rely on network topology structures
that encompass IP addresses and port details. While IP
address and port information offer robust behavioral indicators
for distinguishing network traffic from diverse sources and
destinations, they may not effectively fulfill threat detection
tasks in scenarios where acquiring topological information
proves challenging. For example, Zhang et al. [9] constructed
a traffic trajectory map with traffic as nodes, with the edges
being a combination of IP addresses and ports; Ge et al. [10]
constructed a traffic behavior graph and defined nodes based
on tuples of target IP and ports; Deng et al. [11] transformed
the topological structure of flows into graphical representations
for graph learning.
Therefore, graph based threat detection methods need to
break away from the dependence on topological information
and mine network behavior as features from another dimension. Simultaneously, endeavors are imperative to enhance
graph computation and learning methodologies in order to
bolster efficiency and mitigate the cost associated with method
application.
From the initial network flow data, we have observed a
consistent correlation between network flow data and network
behavior across various scenarios. The intrinsic correlation
within the flow data itself and among different flows reflects
underlying behavioral patterns, independent of topological
transmission information. Building upon this observation, our
study aims to investigate the correlational features present
within and between the original flow data. Time and spatial characteristics have been widely proven to have good
representativeness for behavior. In terms of time series, we
attempt to explore the correlation between data within each
flow to describe the semantic composition structure of each

flow. As for space, considering the effectiveness and efficiency
of graph learning, we seek to use edge weight sharing to assign
global information to the data node representation in each
flow, thereby obviating the necessity for recalculating node
representations during testing while maximizing effectiveness
and efficiency. By learning the semantic association graph
constructed in this way, we can obtain the representation of
each byte, and then restore the semantic representation of each
network flow to determine behavior.

B. Related Work
1) Research on Network Flow Detection Based on Context
Features: Network threats are often not isolated, but rather
associated with a series of related events or behaviors.
By extracting contextual features from network flows, the
correlation and dependency between these events or behaviors can be revealed, thus providing a more comprehensive
representation of network behavior. In existing research on
context-based network flow detection, based on the method of
feature extraction, it can be divided into two categories: using
specific methods to extract features and using specific model
algorithms to extract features.
Some studies have utilized text analysis techniques, such
as N-Gram, TF-IDF, and PMI, for network flow detection to extract contextual features. Wang et al. [12], [13]
employed the N-Gram word segmentation method for extracting semantic features in classification, demonstrating effective
identification of malicious flows with minimal false alarms.
AlEroud and Karabatis [14] incorporated time and location information in flow analysis to establish semantic links
between suspicious activities and generate a semantic link
network for preliminary prediction of suspicious nodes.
However, the aforementioned research still exhibits limitations
in terms of granularity and breadth of contextual feature
learning; for instance, AlEroud et al.’s study is constrained by

3714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

a narrow scope of feature extraction focused on network flows
transmitted between the same nodes, resulting in coarse feature
granularity that fails to capture complete flow information.
In addition, several studies employ specific machine learning and deep learning models or algorithms to analyze time
series data and uncover contextual features, such as RNN
and LSTM. Dai et al. [15] proposed a novel cross-modal
fusion model CMFTC that achieves superior performance
through the integration of packet-level features, context, and
flow-level patterns, with the extraction of contextual features
based on packet-level features using stacked extractors consisting of multiple blocks. Gao et al. [16] addressed the
anomaly detection issue in IoT scenarios by introducing
a memory mechanism to suppress the model’s generalization ability and designing a memory-enhanced time series
autoencoder (TSMAE), which incorporates long short-term
memory (LSTM) for decoding and encoding time series data
to obtain contextual features. Li et al. [17] obtained initial
feature representations of payloads based on word embedding
methods and subsequently proposed a network flow context
learning algorithm for payload detection. Ling et al. [18] and
Wu et al. [19] utilized image transformation of network flow
data to conduct a comprehensive analysis of semantic relationships within the graph. Their experiments demonstrated
that models incorporating graph semantic relationships outperformed those focusing solely on graph structural information.
Ling et al. [18] employed hierarchical learning to represent
executable files by capturing the structural semantics of each
function, while Wu et al. [19] applied BERT and Graph
Isomorphism Network (GIN-JK) to capture both semantic
and structural characteristics of control flow graphs. Although
these representations effectively capture local behavioral patterns over time, they may overlook spatial global information
in network behavior analysis.
In conclusion, the context features offer a more comprehensive representation of online behaviors. Nevertheless, current
feature extraction methods still possess certain limitations in
terms of the scope and dimensionality of features. Some studies solely concentrate on the contextual features of individual
online flows, with feature dimensions restricted to time while
disregarding spatial global information.
2) Research on Graph-Based Network Flow Detection:
Graphs often provide a good description of the global relationships in hierarchical structures. In graph-based methods, most
of them construct heterogeneous relationship graphs based
on the topological structure between network flow, and use
graph learning models to train and classify heterogeneous
graphs, as shown in Table I. Considering the focal points
of existing research, we will analyze from two perspectives:
graph embedding features and graph learning methods.
In terms of graph embedding features, effectively inputting
high-dimensional graph structures into neural networks
and other learning models is challenging. Therefore,
existing research designs graph embedding to discover
low-dimensional vector representations of high-dimensional
graphs, achieving dimensionality reduction and representation
of the graph structure by extracting features such as the
overall structure of the graph and relationships between nodes.

Some studies are dedicated to examining the overall characteristics and structural properties of graphs. Cao et al. [20]
and Duan et al. [21] simultaneously consider the embedding features of graph structure in both time and space
dimensions. In their study, Cao et al. [20] utilized data
plane programmable SDN and in-band network telemetry to
sample and perceive the state of switches. They inputted
this network state into a spatiotemporal graph convolutional
detection model to accurately identify the switches through
which DDoS attacks pass. Duan et al. [21] proposed a semisupervised intrusion detection method utilizing the dynamic
line graph neural network to transform the network flow into
a sequence of spatio-temporal graphs. This approach employs
Dynamic GNN to extract spatial information from individual
discrete snapshots and capture the contextual evolution of
communication between IP pairs across consecutive snapshots.
Hu et al. [22] proposed a novel early network intrusion
detection method, Graph2vec+RF, which is based on graph
embedding technology. This approach involves constructing a
flow graph for each bidirectional network flow from initial
interactive packets and utilizing graph embedding technology
to learn vector representations of the flow graphs, followed
by classification using random forest. Wang et al. [23]
proposed a hybrid analysis model BotMark for detecting
zombie networks, which extracted 15 statistical flow-based
traffic features and 3 graph-based features. The behaviour was
analyzed through a combination of detection results based
on similarity score, stability score, and anomaly score. In
addition, some studies focus on the relationship between
nodes to form graph embeddings. Zhao et al. [6] specifically
focused on the detection of robots and constructed a multiattribute heterogeneous graph by modeling IP, response, and
other network flow objects. They employed a node embedding
method based on weight learning to understand the interaction
patterns among robots and incorporated them into a weighted
similarity graph. Finally, the heterogeneous graph was input
into a graph convolutional model for learning.
As for graph learning methods, the traditional GCN model
is still one of the mainstream learning models. Current
research focuses on improving classic models and combining multiple models to embed node and topological
structure information more effectively. Zheng et al. [5]
developed a modified GCN model for detecting encrypted
malicious traffic, utilizing IP addresses as nodes and flows
as edges to construct a traffic trajectory graph. They also
employed an enhanced GCN to effectively capture and learn
the structural and attribute information within the graph.
Chen et al. [24], Chen et al. [25], and Shen et al. [26]
combined multiple neural network models to jointly extract
graph structure features. Chen et al. [24] utilized a transformerbased architecture for automatic learning of graph structures,
graph convolutions, and modeling time-dependent relationships. They introduced influence-propagation convolution in
graph learning and proposed multi-branch attention techniques
to enhance inference speed. Chen et al. [25] introduced
a novel flow-graph expression model WFF, which involves
the transformation of bidirectional flows into graphs based
on Markov properties within flows. The proposed model

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

3715

TABLE I
A NALYSIS OF E XISTING G RAPH BASED T HREAT D ETECTION M ETHODS

implements WFF-based classification using graph convolution
networks, gated graph neural networks, and capsule graph
neural networks, respectively. Shen et al. [26] developed traffic
interaction graphs using bidirectional client-server interaction
features and employed multilayer perceptrons to construct
GNN-based classifiers.
In summary, the majority of current graph-based flow
detection methods commence from the perspective of flows
and packets, analyzing the spatiotemporal relationships of
observed flows in the network over a period of time and
representing flows as graph structures. With regards to graph
embedding, existing methods predominantly rely on spatiotemporal features for identifying flows, which is somewhat
reliable but entails computing statistical features for each
individual flow, resulting in a limited effective range for flow
detection. In terms of graph learning, current methods often
utilize unimproved classic graph learning models such as
GCN, which tends to exhibit high complexity issues.

the representation of x after learning updates by the messaging
network. During the training and testing process, separate
semantic correlation graphs will be constructed for the training
data and testing data. In the training phase, this approach
involves inputting the constructed semantic correlation graph
into an information propagation network for learning, and
saving the updated byte node representations and byte-byte
edge weight information in shared representation matrices
and shared weight matrices. During the testing phase, the
semantic correlation graph constructed for the test data will
acquire corresponding information from the shared representation matrices and shared weight matrices as initial node
representations and edge weights. These will then be input into
an information propagation network for learning, aggregating
the updated byte node representations into a flow-level feature
representation for classification. The overall system diagram
and flowchart are shown in Fig. 3.
A. Unified Data Representation

III. M ETHODOLOGY
The model mainly comprises a semantic association graph
and messaging network, as shown in Fig. 2. This method
performs a unified and standardized semantic field-slicing
process on the network flow based on the characteristics of
its original semantic structure. Then, for each network flow,
a graph structure containing semantic association relations
is constructed with the smallest unit, the byte, as the granularity and the packet as the feature extraction unit. The
node representation and edge weights are shared through a
global sharing mechanism. Subsequently, the message passing
mechanism (MPM) is used to update and learn the graph
node feature information, and the self-attention tool is used to
aggregate the updated node features into flow-level semantic
feature representations, thereby completing behavior detection
and recognition. In Fig. 2, nodes of different colors represent
additional semantic data of network traffic, the solid black
lines between nodes are byte data edges, and R(x) represents

Based on semantic analysis, certain pre-processing operations must first be performed on the network flow data to
realize treating the flow data as text data and then classifying
them based on their semantic association features.
According to the heavy-tailed feature of Internet traffic, we
use the data from the previous part of each flow to analyze the
data effectively. Therefore, in this method, we plan to use the
first 500 bytes of data in each flow to make the technique more
efficient while ensuring the validity of the data. In similarity to
the procedures followed by Wang et al. [13] and Li et al. [17],
we will adopt the strategy of directly utilizing the original
flow hexadecimal number sequence data to maintain the data’s
semantic and content integrity. For graph structures, when the
length of a flow data exceeds or equals 500 bytes, we will
truncate it and directly capture the first 500 bytes of data.
Data that is more minor than 500 bytes will not be processed
at this time. Additionally, to further simulate scenarios with
incomplete network topology in real networks, we removed

3716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 2.

Model architecture.

Fig. 3.

Overall system diagram and flowchart.

the MAC address information in the data link layer and the
IP address information in the IP layer to achieve anonymity.
The traditional view of network traffic examines packets as
a collection of higher-level headers such as IP, TCP, and UDP.
Each header has semantic fields, such as IP time to live, TCP
port number, and UDP length fields. The standard semantic
representation of network traffic collects these semantic fields
into a single representation. We propose a data slicing method
to make semantic analysis more applicable in network threat
detection. This method preserves the original semantics of
the network flows, maximizing the possibility of maintaining
the original data structure while standardizing the processing
of the flow data structure, as shown in Fig. 4. To better
characterize the semantic structure of the network flow, we
retain the original semantic structure of the packet headers
and perform the word separation process accordingly, and for
the payload content, we slice and dice using a fixed window
size Wd .
B. Semantic Association Map
Combining the limitations of existing graph-based threat
detection methods in feature construction, we first consider

avoiding connection features in network flow transmission and
instead start from raw flow data to represent the persistent data
correlation between network behaviors using a graph structure.
Based on the similarity between text data structure and flow
data structure, we use text analysis ideas to construct the
graph.
Based on the inherent correlation between network flow
and behaviour, it is observed that flows within the same
behaviour category exhibit certain similarities at the data level.
Considering the structural characteristics of flow data, we
propose to employ semantic analysis methods to investigate
the correlation between data. Text analysis is a method used
in the fields of natural language processing and computational
linguistics, with the goal of achieving a comprehensive understanding and interpretation of textual data through techniques
such as statistics, pattern recognition, and machine learning.
Previous studies have utilized text analysis methods to explore
features related to behavioural relationships [12], [13], [27],
[28]. Recent studies have uncovered a significant resemblance
between flow protocol data, mobile flow data, and natural
language [13], [27]. The n-gram word sequences in flow
exhibit highly skewed frequency rank distributions similar to
those found in natural language [13]. As a result, it is viable

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

Fig. 4.

3717

Unified expression form for network flow data (payload slice with fixed window size N=2 for example).

to consider flow data as text data for the purpose of text analysis, enabling extraction of fine-grained semantic information
contained within the flow for behaviour identification. For
instance, features such as transmission time and packet length
can be derived from packet header data, while behavioural
content features can be extracted from the overall structure of
payload data.
For each network flow, based on its smallest unit, bytes, we
model the entire corpus of flow data and construct a semantic
association graph with byte data as nodes and their contextual
association relations as edges, using the flow as a unit.
Each byte in a packet is treated as a node, and edges are
constructed between adjacent nodes. Furthermore, to address
the poor scalability and high complexity of traditional graph
learning models, we globally share exact node representations
and edge weights. Boundaries with fewer than k occurrences
in the training set are evenly mapped to a “common” edge,
enabling full parameter training. Finally, the constructed graph
is represented as G = (V, E), where V is the set of nodes and
E is the set of edges, as follows:
V = {vi |i ∈ [1, l ]}.


E = eij |i ∈ [1, l ], j ∈ [i − p, i + p] .

(1)
(2)

where vi is the i-th byte data node, l is the number of byte
data in that network flow, eij is the edge between nodes vi
and vj , and p denotes the number of adjacent words connected
to each word in the graph.

C. Messaging Network
The message passing paradigm is a paradigm that aggregates neighboring node information to update central node
information, extending the convolutional operator to the
domain of irregular data and connecting graphs with neural
networks. Due to its powerful information propagation and
integration capabilities, as well as its flexible and efficient
characteristics, the message passing paradigm has been widely
applied in fields such as social networks, bioinformatics, and
finance. Based on this, this method adopts the message passing
mechanism proposed by Gilmer et al. [29] to learn and update
graph structures.
MPM initially gathers information from neighboring nodes
and adjusts its representation based on both its original data

and the gathered information. The process of message-passing
can be formulated as follows:
Mn = maxp ean va .

(3)

vn = (1 − ωn )Mn + ωn vn .

(4)

a∈Nn

Mn is the message received by node n from its neighbors;
max is a reduction function that combines the maximum
values in each dimension to form a new vector as the output.
p
Nn denotes the node with the p words closest to n in the
original text. ean is the edge weight from node a to node n,
which can be updated during training; vn denotes the previous
representation of node n. ωn is the node n which is a trainable
variable that indicates how much vn information should be
retained. vn denotes the updated representation of node n.
The MPM mechanism causes a node’s representation to
be influenced by its neighbors, meaning that the representation can bring information from the surrounding context.
Therefore, the semantic meaning of the same data byte
can be determined by the weighted information from the
neighbors. Additionally, the parameters of the text-level graphs
are extracted from a globally shared matrix, meaning that these
representations can also encode global information like other
graph-based models.
After being updated sufficiently, the graph nodes are
aggregated into flow-level semantic representations using a
self-attentive mechanism. The concept behind this is that each
data byte plays a role in characterizing part of the semantics
in the network flow, while the critical node data should have
a more explicit contribution. Ultimately, the representation of
all nodes in a flow is used to predict behavioral labels:
⎛
⎛
⎞⎞

vn + b ⎠⎠.
(5)
yi = softmax ⎝Relu ⎝W
n∈Ni

where W is the matrix that maps the vectors to the output
space, Ni is the set of nodes of the network flow, and b is the
deviation.
Algorithm 1 describes the training and testing stages of this
method.
IV. E VALUATION
The proposed method was evaluated using five publicly available datasets: CIC IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC
DDoS2019, USTC TFC2016, and ISCX VPN-nonVPN. One

3718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1 Training and Testing Phase
Input: Training Graph Gtrain (Vtrain , Etrain ), Nodes a, n ∈
Vtrain , Training labels {Yi , i is the sample of the training
set}; Testing graph Gtest (Vtest , Etest ), Nodes b, m ∈
Vtest , Testing labels {Yj , j is the sample of the testing
set}; L is the loss function
Output: Prediction Results {yi , i is the sample of the training
set}, {yj , j is the sample of the testing set}
1: for epoch = 1, 2, · · · do
2:
for n ∈ Ni do
3:
Mn ← maxa∈Nnp ean va
4:
vn ← (1 − ωn )Mn + ωn vn
5:
end for
6:
yi = softmax (Relu(W n∈Ni vn + b))
7:
L = −Yi × log(yi ) − (1 − Yi ) × log(1 − yi )
8:
Update {ean , a, n ∈ Vtrain }, {vn , n ∈ Vtrain },
{ωn , n ∈ Vtrain }
9: end for
10: for Batch b in Vtest do
11:
for m ∈ Nj do
12:
ebm ← ean
Vm ← Vn
13:
14:
ωm ← ωn
15:
Mm ← maxa∈Nmp ebm vb
 ← (1 − ω )M + ω v
16:
vm
m
m
m m
end for
17:
 + b))
18:
yj = softmax (Relu(W m∈Nj vm
19: end for

dataset consists benign traffic and multiple types of malicious
traffic in an Internet scenario, two datasets contain various
types of DoS and DDoS attacks in an IoT scenario, and the
remaining dataset includes encrypted and unencrypted raw
traffic in the encrypted Internet scenario.

A. Evaluation Setup
1) Dataset: We validated the method using the CIC
IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC DDoS2019, USTC TFC2016,
and ISCX VPN-nonVPN datasets. The detailed information of
the dataset is shown in Table II.
CIC IDS2017 dataset contains both benign and up-to-date
common attack data, with mild background traffic generated
by the Canadian Institute for Cyber Security using the BProfile system to characterize abstract behaviors of human
interactions, constructed for 25 users based on HTTP, HTTPS,
FTP, SSH, and email protocols. The attack behavior data
include Brute Force FTP, Brute Force SSH, DoS, Heartbleed,
Web Attack, Infiltration, Botnet, DDoS, etc.
CIC DOS2017 dataset used different tools to make four
attacks on the ten web servers with the highest connections
in the ISCX dataset. It obtained eight separate application
layer DoS attack tracks, with a total size of 4.6 GB. DoS
attacks are one of the common attacks in IoT networks, and
the CIC DOS2017 dataset validates the possible application
of this model in IoT scenarios.

CIC DDoS2019 dataset contains benign traffic and the
most up-to-date common DDoS attacks (volumetric and application: low volume, slow rate), resembling real-world data.
This dataset includes modern reflective DDoS attacks such as
PortMap, NetBIOS, LDAP, MSSQL, UDP, UDP-Lag, SYN,
NTP, DNS, and SNMP. DDoS attacks are also one of the
common attacks in IoT networks, and the CIC DDoS2019
dataset validates the possible application of this model in IoT
scenarios.
USTC TFC2016 dataset contains ten types of malicious
traffic under eight kinds of applications, including Zeus,
Virus, Tinba, etc. This dataset consists of two parts, including
encrypted and unencrypted raw traffic. The first part contains
2015 types of malicious software traffic from public websites
collected by researchers at the Czech Technical University
(CTU) from a natural network environment from 10 years to
2011. The second part contains ten types of regular traffic
collected using the network traffic simulation device IXIA
BPS. The addition of the USTC TFC2016 dataset can help
verify the potential application of this model in encrypted
Internet scenarios.
ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset is widely used in encrypted
network flow classification. This data set captures a regular
and a VPN-based session for each traffic type. Therefore,
it includes seven kinds of normal encrypted traffic, such as
VoIP, VPN-VoIP, P2P, VPN-P2P, and seven types of protocolencapsulated traffic, totaling 28GB. The ISCX VPN-nonVPN
dataset validates the possible application of this model in
encryption scenarios.
2) Parameter Setting: We provided training and testing sets
for all datasets, with the training set randomly split into a
7:3 ratio for training and validation. The performance on
the validation set was adjusted based on hyperparameters,
including setting the initial learning rate of Adam optimizer to
0.0005, L2 weight decay to 0.0001, neighborhood connectivity
parameter p to 3, and weight threshold parameter k to 2.
3) Evaluating Metrics: In this work, we used accuracy,
precision, recall, and F1-score to evaluate the classification
ability of the proposed method. These indicators are defined
as follows:
Accuracy (ACC) is the ratio of the correctly labeled subjects
to the whole pool of subjects, i.e.,
TP + TN
.
(6)
Accuracy =
TP + FP + FN + TN
Precision (PRE) is the ratio of the correctly positive labeled
subject to all positive labeled subjects, i.e.,
TP
Precision =
.
(7)
TP + FP
Recall (REC) is the ratio of the correctly positive labeled
to all who are positive in reality, i.e.,
TP
.
(8)
Recall =
TP + FN
F1 score (F1) is the harmonic mean (average) of precision
and recall, and we use a microscopic approach to this calculation, i.e., Macro-F1.
2 ∗ Recallm ∗ Precisionm
(9)
F 1 − Score =
Recallm + Precisionm

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

3719

TABLE II
DATASET D ETAILS

TABLE III
A NALYSIS OF THE R ANGE OF DATA E XPRESSION

TABLE IV
A NALYSIS OF PACKET H EADER DATA E XPRESSION S LICING M ETHODS

Precisionm =
Recallm =

n
i=1 Precisioni

n
n
i=1 Recalli
n

(10)
(11)

B. Evaluation Results
We used the Python language for the evaluations Pytorch
for the network framework, and all evaluations were run
on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti graphics card. The
experiment is divided into five parts: data representation
analysis, parameter optimization analysis, overall comparison
analysis, learning efficiency analysis, and application scenario
analysis. The first two parts explore the possibility of model
optimization in terms of data and parameters, while the latter
three mainly focus on model performance and analyze from
the aspects of overall comparison, model efficiency, and model
application scenarios.
1) Data Expression Analysis: The representation of data
plays a crucial role in behavior characterization. The effectiveness of language association graphs in representing behavior is
directly influenced by different data ranges and segmentation
methods. Therefore, this section begins with the standardized
expression of data and examines the efficacy of data representation range and segmentation method, encompassing both the
data packet header and payload. The objective is to identify
the optimal approach for data representation and investigate
the impact of various data representation methods on behavior
characterization.

a) Analysis of the range of data expression: The raw
network flow data is organized into packets, each comprising a
header and payload. Following the application of our proposed
method for unified representation of network flow data processing, we specifically selected three types of data ranges:
packet headers, payloads, and complete contents encompassing
both headers and payloads. The model’s detection performance
was assessed on various datasets for each corresponding
data range as presented in Table III. It is important to note
that when evaluating the detection performance of a specific
segment of the data representation range, other factors such as
data segmentation methods and model parameters were kept
consistent to control variables.
Overall, the payload data possesses a greater capacity for
expressing behavioral information compared to the header

3720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

TABLE V
A NALYSIS OF PAYLOAD DATA E XPRESSION S LICING M ETHODS

data. There exists a significant differentiation between standard
and malicious behaviors in terms of packet transmission
content, which can be leveraged to enhance the identification
of network behaviors through the construction of a semantic
correlation graph aimed at characterizing its data features.
b) Analysis of data representation cuts: The data packet
header contains packet-level statistics, including timestamps
and lengths. Following the unified representation proposed
in this method, we selected segmentation windows of 2, 4,
8, and 16 to assess the model’s detection performance on
various datasets with different packet header segmentation
methods, as presented in Table IV. It is important to note
that when examining the detection performance of a specific
data segmentation method, other factors such as data range
and model parameters are kept constant to ensure controlled
variables.
Table IV Illustrates that the header has a specific data
expression structure. Although fixed window sizes of 2 and
4 provide more fine-grained data analysis, they also destroy
the original data expression structure, which can lead to poor
detection results. In the unified expression of the header data,
each field contains specific semantic information, most of
which is statistical numerical information, such as storage
length, timestamp high and low bits, etc. Slicing them according to a specific fixed-size window will not directly change
the information difference between the data, and the network
behavior can still be identified by the statistical characteristics
between the data. Therefore, the impact of different slicing
window sizes on the semantic slicing of data is limited. In the
comprehensive representation of header data, each field contains specific semantic information, predominantly comprising
statistical numerical data such as storage length and timestamp
high and low bits. Slicing these fields according to a fixed-size

window does not significantly alter the informational variance
between the data, and the behavior can still be identified by the
statistical characteristics between the data. Thus, the impact
of varying slicing window sizes on semantic data slicing is
minimal.
The payload of a data packet refers to the specific content
being transmitted across the network. To investigate the impact
of different data segmentation methods on packet payload data,
we utilized the unified representation proposed in this method
to process network flow data. Subsequently, we selected four
distinct segmentation windows (2, 4, 8, and 16) and assessed
the model’s detection performance on various datasets using
different packet payload segmentation methods, as presented
in Table V. It is important to note that when examining
the detection performance of a particular data segmentation
method, other factors such as data range and model parameters
are kept consistent to control variables.
Overall, in comparison to header, the size of the payload
slicing window can significantly impact the effectiveness
of detecting network behavior. Although payload data lacks
a specific structural expression, its detection accuracy is
enhanced through a more fine-grained data slicing approach. In
a unified representation of payload, the original transmission
content is processed using a minimum grain size window 2,
similar to previous research by [12], [27], which involves analyzing payload content and extracting statistical and content
features for classifying and identifying network behavior. For
instance, attacks such as DDoS and DoS exhibit significant
feature information in both temporal and spatial dimensions
of the payload; therefore, load feature information can be
extracted with maximum granularity through semantic slicing
of payload information.
2) Parameter Optimization Analysis: A crucial aspect of
training graph neural networks involves fine-tuning the
hyperparameters to balance variance, bias, and classification
performance. Therefore, this section focuses on analyzing the
number of neighboring words (p) connected to each word in
the semantic association graph and the weight threshold (k)
associated with shared edges. The model effect is analyzed
explicitly by setting the magnitude of the values of the
different parameters and adopting precision as a performance
metric.
The network flow classification effects under different
numbers of neighborhood connections parameter p and other
weight threshold parameter k are shown in Fig. 5(a) and
Fig. 5(b). The findings suggest that optimal byte co-occurrence
information is achieved with a neighborhood connection window size of 3. A window size that is too small fails to capture
sufficient global word co-occurrence information, while a window size that is too large may introduce connections between
nodes with weak associations. Furthermore, the weighting
threshold assigned to joint edges can be effectively balanced
for training the learning center of gravity when set at 2, thereby
enhancing learning efficiency without compromising feature
learning effectiveness.
3) Baseline Comparative Analysis: This section presents
a comparison of the proposed method with several classical
machine learning models, including CNN, Lenet, Resnet, and

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

Fig. 5.

3721

Analysis of model effects under different parameters.

TABLE VI
C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS R ESULTS B ETWEEN T HIS M ODEL AND
BASELINE M ODELS

RNN. Following parameter tuning, the learning rate for all
baseline models is set to 0.01, with a batch size of 200.
The network depths for the CNN, Lenet, Resnet, and RNN
models are determined to be 7, 5, 18, and 2 respectively.
It is important to note that the original network flow data
utilized by both this method and all baseline models for
comparison remains consistent. The experimental results are
detailed in Table VI. Based on the experimental results, it
is evident that this model demonstrates superior detection

performance compared to various other models across all three
datasets. The detection accuracy reaches 99.99%, 98.81%,
100%, 97.87%, and 99.64% for the CIC IDS2017, CIC
DOS2017, CIC DDoS2019, USTC-TFC2016, and ISCX VPNnonVPN datasets, respectively.
Overall, the CNN and Lenet models utilize convolutional
kernels for information extraction from images, while the
Resnet model incorporates skip connections within the CNN
architecture to facilitate learning of residual mappings. The
RNN model is capable of exploring both temporal and semantic information in the data.
The baseline models, such as CNN, Lenet, and Resnet,
aim to map the original network flow data to a new data
space in order to analyze the differences in feature dimensions
between normal and abnormal network flows. These models
use convolutional layers to extract feature representations with
spatial characteristics, while RNN models use recurrent layers
to extract feature representations with temporal characteristics.
Similarly, this method also maps the data to a new feature
space but differs from the baseline methods by extracting
semantic features containing temporal relationships and transmission content through constructing a semantic association
graph. Subsequently, it updates graph information through
message passing networks to extract feature representations
with spatial characteristics. This detection mechanism allows
for simultaneous extraction of time and space dimension
data feature representations, providing a more comprehensive
pattern representation.
4) Comparative Analysis of Other Methods: To further
investigate the efficacy of this approach, in addition to the
baseline model, this section compares it with several advanced
network threat detection methods. The original network flow
data used for comparison remains consistent, and parameters
such as learning rate and batch size are set according to the
optimal parameters proposed by the model. The experimental
results are presented in Table VII.
From the presented results, it can be observed that the
detection performance of this model across all five datasets
exceeds that of all other evaluated models. As a whole, threat
detection models can be divided into three parts: data, feature

3722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

TABLE VII
C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS R ESULTS B ETWEEN T HIS M ODEL AND S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ODELS

selection, and feature learning, and most of these models
have some similarity with the present method in one or two
aspects. Below, a comparative analysis will be conducted from
four aspects: detection mechanism, data, feature selection, and
feature extraction.
In terms of detection mechanism, analysis of existing
advanced models reveals that these models aim to transform
the original flow data into a new space in order to investigate
the disparities in feature dimensions between normal and
abnormal flows. Similar to these models, this method also
seeks to map the data into a new feature space. In contrast
to existing methods that extract temporal and associative
features for analysis, this approach extracts semantic features
containing temporal relationships and transmission content
by constructing a semantic association graph. Subsequently,
it updates the graph information through message passing
networks to extract feature representations with spatial characteristics. This detection mechanism enables this method to
concurrently extract data feature representations in both time
and space dimensions, thereby providing a more comprehensive pattern representation.

On the data side, existing state-of-the-art research has also
focused on mining feature information from raw network
flow data to characterize the flow using data slicing. Xu and
Zhou [30] constructed vocabularies for feature extraction and
payload embedding on a single-byte basis based on raw flow
data. DID [31] uses the flow’s basic content bytes as input
to effectively differentiate content-based attacks. PBCNN [32]
automatically extracts abstract features from packet bytes
in the raw Pcap file, with a subsequent stage constructing
representations from packets in the flow or session to fully
leverage fundamental data information. METC [42] uses the
raw packet data to input the CNN model. Zhao et al. [46]
divides the basic network flow into sessions and the packets
within each session into 784-byte slices, using the sliced
data to describe the flow. Compared with these methods, this
approach utilizes the original flow data. It expresses the data
at a uniformly fine-grained level based on the semantic idea,
retaining as much complete information as possible while
describing the behavior at a deeper level.
Regarding feature selection, some existing advanced
research starts from the relationship between individual

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

network flows and behaviors, extracts relationship feature
information, and expresses it in graph form. For instance,
GraphDDoS [33] transforms flow data into an endpoint traffic
graph that encapsulates details about packet relationships
(within a single flow) as well as burst and periodic information
across multiple flows. Similarly, Pujol-Perich et al. [35] have
captured individual flow features and inter-flow relationship
features, presenting them through graphical representations.
Sun et al. [2] constructed a K-nearest neighbor (KNN) traffic
graph containing flow similarity information to represent the
flow data structure. They used an autoencoder to form the
self representation of the flow data. GCN-TC [1] combines
traffic statistical features and traffic tracking maps in the
GCN model. ICLSTM [47] converts flow data into ordinary
grayscale images and extracts key features using the constructed ICLSTM neural network. Compared with the above
research, this method focuses more on the feature information
of the network flow itself. By mining the internal structural
relationships of the flow data, a semantic association graph
is constructed with byte data as nodes and its contextual
relationships as edges.
For feature extraction, graph neural networks are commonly used to process graph-structured data by their strong
information aggregation ability. Liu et al. [45] converted the
flow data into a single-channel grayscale image, which was
then fed into a GAN to achieve the learning of the original
flow features. Izadi et al. [48] combined CNN, Ant-Lion
Heuristic Algorithm (ALO), and Self-Organizing Maps (SOM)
for encrypted flow identification. Lin et al. [49] proposed
a network structure based on CNN and RNN to learn spatiotemporal features of encrypted flow data. Compared with
the above studies, this method focuses more on aggregating
neighborhood information. It can use a reduction function
to effectively recombine the information in the nodes for
update and aggregate it into a semantic representation at the
flow level using a self-attention mechanism. The neighborhood information aggregation can help the model capture the
contextual information of the nodes better, while the selfattention mechanism allows for precise aggregation, enabling
more accurate prediction results.
5) Generalization Ability Analysis: In the face of the intricate and constantly evolving network environment, diverse
traffic from various backgrounds, varied network topologies,
extensive business scenarios, and evolving attack patterns, it
is imperative to generalize models. To verify and enhance the
generalization of network security methods, this section selects
different datasets for cross-testing validation. These datasets
exhibit variations in terms of network environment, topology,
and business scenarios. By applying the trained model to
datasets distinct from the training set, we can assess its
performance in new environments and conditions. This process
aids in testing the model’s capability to identify unknown or
unseen network traffic and attack patterns. During the evaluation process, the parameters of the model remain consistent
across all evaluation experiments, as detailed in the section on
parameter settings.
The effectiveness of this method in detecting various
datasets used as training and testing data sources is illustrated

3723

Fig. 6.

Classification accuracy of training models on different datasets.

in Figure 6. Generally, the detection performance improves
when the business scenarios of the training and testing datasets
are more similar. For instance, CIC DOS2017 dataset primarily consists of dos attacks while CIC DDoS2019 dataset
mainly contains DDoS attacks, both causing depletion of
key resources through a large volume of requests or data to
the target system. These datasets share similarities in attack
principles, methods, and impact. Consequently, they contain
similar attack features and based on traffic characteristics in
the training dataset, the model can recognize behaviors in the
testing dataset as well.
In the event of substantial disparities between the business
scenarios in the training and testing datasets, our method
still achieves a detection accuracy of over 65%. For instance,
while the CIC IDS2017 dataset encompasses common Internet
attacks such as Brute Force FTP, Brute Force SSH, and DoS,
the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset comprises 7 types of regular
encrypted traffic and 7 types of protocol encapsulated flow.
The visibility and features of normal network flow differ
significantly from those of encrypted flow. The model trained
on the ids2017 dataset encounters challenges in applying its
learned flow features to the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset due
to these differences. Moreover, commonly used payload features are ineffective in characterizing encrypted flows because
they cannot access packet payload content. In this scenario,
packet header features and overall distribution characteristics
play a crucial role in identifying encrypted flows, such as
packet length and timing. While semantic correlation graphs
constructed using our method are effective only for part of
the packet header data when it comes to encrypted flows;
their effectiveness is limited which results in poorer detection
performance.
6) Learning Efficiency Analysis: The primary innovation
of this approach in terms of model efficiency lies in the
proposal of a global weight sharing mechanism for edges and
a small window learning mechanism. This eliminates the need
to calculate edge weights during the testing phase, allowing for
graph learning and updating on a smaller scale. Consequently,
this section conducts an analysis of the overall complexity

3724

Fig. 7.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Analysis of learning efficiency of this method on various datasets.
TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON OF L EARNING E FFICIENCY B ETWEEN T HIS M ETHOD AND OTHER G RAPH L EARNING M ETHODS ON VARIOUS DATASETS

and learning efficiency of the method and compares it with
graph learning methods such as GCN and Transformer in
terms of efficacy. During the evaluation process, consistent
data was used, and after constructing the same semantic
correlation graph, different graph learning methods such as
GCN and Transformer were applied to learn from the semantic
correlation graph. Following parameter tuning, the baseline
models were configured with a learning rate set to 0.01, batch
size at 200, and network depths for GCN, Transformer, MLP,
and GGNN models established at 2, 12, 3, and 7 respectively.

In terms of model complexity, we initially conducted a
theoretical analysis of the time and space complexity of this
approach. The space complexity primarily hinges on the size
of the constructed semantic correlation graph, which is directly
linked to the number of nodes and edges. Following definitions
from previous methods for semantic correlation graphs, its
space complexity can be denoted as O(Vtrain ∗ p + Vtest ∗ p).
Here, Vtrain represents the training node set, Vtest denotes the
testing node set, and p signifies the neighborhood connection
quantity. With regards to time complexity, we analyze it

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

across three dimensions: constructing semantic graphs, graph
learning, and aggregating node representations. The time complexity for constructing a semantic correlation graph depends
on the number of nodes and has a complexity of O(Vtrain +
Vtest ). During graph learning based on message passing
networks, its time complexity is related to the number of node
updates and can be represented as O((Vtrain + Vtest ) ∗ 2).
After updating learning for testing nodes, it is necessary to use
self-attention mechanism to aggregate updated node features
into flow-level feature representation; this part has a time
complexity of O((Vtest )2 ).
The training and testing accuracy of this method under
different iterations is shown in Fig. 7. It can be observed that
this method only requires a small amount of iterative training
to achieve high accuracy, and each iteration requires less time
for training, thereby enhancing the overall efficiency of method
deployment.
The efficiency comparison analysis between this method
and other graph learning methods is shown in Table VIII.
Compared with this method, the compared method adopts a
unified composition method, but adopts different graph learning methods. To better display performance differences, other
graph learning models do not incorporate global edge weight
sharing mechanisms and small window learning mechanisms.
The hyperparameter settings for all methods remain consistent.
Analysis shows that this method has significant advantages in
learning efficiency. The byte nodes in this method are only
connected to adjacent byte nodes in the network flow data,
while other graph learning models connect nodes within a
relatively large window. Furthermore, the global sharing of
edge weights obviates the necessity for recalculating weight
relationships between nodes during the testing process, thereby
reducing computational overhead. We also found that this
method performs better than other graph learning models.
Based on the semantic association graph composition method,
the GCN model connects graph nodes within a large window,
which cannot distinguish the importance between different
byte nodes. In contrast, our proposed method incorporates a
self-attention mechanism to enable differential expression of
byte data in various network flows. Additionally, the edge
weight global sharing mechanism facilitates training of each
byte data node across the entire corpus containing all network
flow data with consistent configuration.
7) Application Scenario Analysis: The evaluation of this
model utilized five public datasets, which can be classified into
three types of real network detection scenarios: Internet, IoT,
and encrypted Internet. Specifically, the CIC IDS2017 dataset
represents Internet scenarios, while the CIC DOS2017 and
CIC DDoS2019 datasets represent IoT scenarios. The USTCTFC2016 and ISCX VPN-nonVPN datasets are indicative of
encrypted Internet scenarios. The model demonstrated strong
detection performance across five datasets. However, notable
variations in detection performance were observed among the
different datasets. Given that these datasets represent diverse
application scenarios, a comprehensive analysis of the model’s
specific detection performance in various application scenarios
is essential. Therefore, this section conducts an in-depth
examination of the model’s specific detection performance on

3725

each dataset representing distinct application scenarios and
investigates its ability to detect various threats across different
datasets, as illustrated in Figure 8.
In the context of the Internet, the CIC IDS2017 dataset
encompasses malicious traffic such as Botnet, Brute Force,
DDoS, FTP, GoldenEye, Heartbleed, Hulk, infiltration,
PortScan, and others. As depicted in Fig. 8, this method
demonstrates effective identification of most attacks including
Brute Force, HULK, infiltration and Slowloris. These attacks
all have prominent behavioral characteristics in the time
dimension. Their primary behavioral disparities stem from
their varied methods of attack: Brute Force involves attempting
weak passwords to gain unauthorized access; HULK generates
numerous falsified network flows on the web server to directly
target its resource pool; infiltration employs a comprehensive
array of tactics for network penetration; and Slowloris utilizes
slow HTTP requests to maliciously occupy server connections
without releasing them. These attacks present significant variations in flow data content and are better characterized by
semantic features based on network flow content.
In the IoT scenario, the CIC DOS2017 dataset encompasses
eight types of DoS attacks and benign traffic, while the CIC
DDoS2019 dataset comprises seven common types of DDoS
attacks and mild traffic. Malicious behavior consumes network
bandwidth and resources by sending numerous packets and
forging the source address of packets, ultimately paralyzing
hosts and network systems. In this scenario, denial of service
attacks such as DoS and DDoS have obvious spatiotemporal
characteristics, with behaviors that possess unique semantic
representations. By extracting co-occurrence information to
characterize the semantics of traffic behavior, benign network
flows can be effectively distinguished from abnormal ones.
For the encrypted Internet scenario, the USTC TFC2016
dataset contains ten types of malicious flows across eight
kinds of applications, and the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset
includes seven types of regular encrypted flows and seven
types of protocol encapsulated flows. Unlike regular network
flows, encrypted network flows conceal their payload contents.
Most existing methods for identifying encrypted flows rely
on statistical features such as packet length and packet time,
which have been proven to be effective [50], [51]. For some
simple encrypted malicious traffic, this method has a good
detection effect, such as Zeus, Virut, Tinba, etc. However,
its effectiveness is somewhat reduced for Neris and Cridex
attacks. This may be due to the fact that the core features of
these attacks are not fully captured in flow data. Specifically,
the Neris attack operates as a spam zombie network primarily
using port 25, making characteristics such as port number,
transmission time, and packet quantity crucial. The Cridex
attack spreads through removable drives and implants itself in
infected systems by modifying registry key values.
To further investigate the representativeness of raw flow data
on behavior, we conducted attention visualization experiments
on flow data using the CIC DDoS2019 dataset. Taking a
denial-of-service attack as an example, our method achieved a
detection accuracy of 93.41% on the CIC DDoS2019 dataset
after 50 training iterations, as shown in Fig. 9. Due to
limitations in data length, only the initial 30 bytes of data were

3726

Fig. 8.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

The classification performance of this method in different application scenarios.

extracted. As the raw network flow data passes through the
attention layer of the message passing network, it demonstrates
varying role weights. Notably, in IoT scenarios, the highweighted attention values primarily focus on payload data,
with increased emphasis on recurring data content. Combined
with the principle and process of a DDoS attack, this method
can more effectively uncover behavioral patterns by capturing semantic content relationships within the raw flow
data.
V. C ONCLUSION
This study presents a novel threat detection method based
on semantic association graphs. In this method, flow data is

treated as a specific language and semantic correlation graphs
are constructed to capture the inherent semantic correlations
within the flow data. To enhance the effectiveness of our
method, we have designed a global sharing mechanism that
enables the sharing of node representations and edge weights.
Utilizing a messaging network facilitates small-scale graph
learning and updating, which are then aggregated into flowlevel semantic representations for threat detection and behavior
recognition. The final evaluation results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in extracting flow data features across
various scenarios, achieving high classification accuracies of
99.99%, 98.81%, 100%, 97.87%, and 99.64% on the CIC
IDS2017, CIC DOS2017, CIC DDoS 2019, USTC TFC2016,
and ISCX VPN-non VPN datasets.

LUO et al.: ERFS: EFFICIENT FEATURE GRAPH REPRESENTATION

Fig. 9.

Attention Visualization of flow Data in CIC DDoS2019 Dataset.

This method is currently only suitable for more straightforward encrypted Internet scenarios, but it has some ability to
detect encrypted network threats. In future research, we plan
to create a model specifically for encrypted network traffic
scenarios to meet different threat detection needs. We will also
focus on tracking and tracing threats to strengthen defense
capabilities and improve security strategies.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical
features for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[2] B. Sun, W. Yang, M. Yan, D. Wu, Y. Zhu, and Z. Bai, “An encrypted
traffic classification method combining graph convolutional network and
autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf.
(IPCCC), 2020, pp. 1–8.
[3] L. Zhang, H. Shi, K. Zhang, H. Sun, and W. Zhang, “GraphMAL:
A network malicious traffic identification method based on graph
neural network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Netw. Appl. (NaNA), 2023,
pp. 262–267.
[4] Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Deng, K. Huang, and C. Yang, “Complex networks
identification using Bayesian model with independent laplace prior,”
Chaos, vol. 31, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 13107.
[5] J. Zheng, Z. Zeng, T. Feng, and L. Maglaras, “GCN-ETA: Highefficiency encrypted malicious traffic detection,” Security Commun.
Netw., vol. 2022, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Jan. 2022.
[6] J. Zhao, X. Liu, Q. Yan, B. Li, M. Shao, and H. Peng, “Multi-attributed
heterogeneous graph convolutional network for BOT detection,” Inf. Sci.,
vol. 537, pp. 380–393, Oct. 2020.
[7] N. Okui, Y. Akimoto, A. Kubota, and T. Yoshida, “A graph construction
method for anomalous traffic detection with graph neural networks using
sets of flow data,” in Proc. IEEE 47th Annu. Comput. Softw. Appl. Conf.
(COMPSAC), 2023, pp. 1017–1018.
[8] X. Zhong and G. Wan, “Six-graphsecurity: Industrial Internet intrusion
detection based on graph neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Inf.
Technol. Mechatron. Eng. Conf. (ITOEC), vol. 7, 2023, pp. 1340–1344.
[9] L. Zhang, L. Tan, H. Shi, H. Sun, and W. Zhang, “Malicious traffic
classification for IoT based on graph attention network and long shortterm memory network,” in Proc. 24st Asia–Pac. Netw. Oper. Manag.
Symp. (APNOMS), 2023, pp. 54–59.
[10] R. Ge, Y. Zhang, C. Si, G. Zhou, and W. Zhou, “MateGraph: Toward
mobile malware detection through traffic behavior graph,” in Proc. IEEE
24th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. 8th Int. Conf. Data
Sci. Syst. 20th Int. Conf. Smart City 8th Int. Conf. Depend. Sensor
Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl. (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), 2022,
pp. 801–809.
[11] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow
topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in
label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.

3727

[12] S. Wang, Q. Yan, Z. Chen, B. Yang, C. Zhao, and M. Conti, “Detecting
android malware leveraging text semantics of network flows,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1096–1109, May 2018.
[13] S. Wang et al., “TextDroid: Semantics-based detection of mobile
malware using network flows,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2017, pp. 18–23.
[14] A. F. AlEroud and G. Karabatis, “Queryable semantics to detect cyberattacks: A flow-based detection approach,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
Cybern., Syst., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 207–223, Feb. 2016.
[15] J. Dai, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “CMFTC: Cross modality fusion efficient multitask encrypt traffic classification in IIoT environment,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3989–4009, Nov./Dec. 2023.
[16] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang,
“TSMAE: A novel anomaly detection approach for internet of things
time series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[17] Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Cheng, and H. Xu, “Word embedding-based contextsensitive network flow payload anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd
Int. Conf. Appl. Mach. Learn. (ICAML), 2021, pp. 191–194.
[18] X. Ling et al., “MalGraph: Hierarchical graph neural networks for robust
windows malware detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
(IEEE INFOCOM), 2022, pp. 1998–2007.
[19] B. Wu, Y. Xu, and F. Zou, “Malware classification by learning semantic
and structural features of control flow graphs,” in Proc. IEEE 20th
Int. Conf. Trust Security Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), 2021,
pp. 540–547.
[20] Y. Cao, H. Jiang, Y. Deng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, and W. Luo, “Detecting
and mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN using spatial-temporal graph
convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19,
no. 6, pp. 3855–3872, Nov./Dec. 2022.
[21] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
2023.
[22] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward
early and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831,
2023.
[23] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “BotMark:
Automated BotNet detection with hybrid analysis of flow-based
and graph-based traffic behaviors,” Inf. Sci., vol. 511, pp. 284–296,
Feb. 2020.
[24] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.
[25] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, D. Niu, X. Qiu, Y. Zhao, and Y. Zhou, “WFF-EGNN:
Encrypted traffic classification based on weaved flow fragment via
ensemble graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn. Commun.
Netw., vol. 1, pp. 389–411, 2023.
[26] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[27] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “A semantics-aware approach
to the automated network protocol identification,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 583–595, Feb. 2016.
[28] Y. Liu, N. Xi, and Y. Zhi, “NLEU: A semantic-based taint analysis for
vetting apps in Android,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Netw. Appl. (NaNA),
2021, pp. 327–333.
[29] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
“Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. 34th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
[30] T. Xu and P. Zhou, “Feature extraction for payload classification: A
byte pair encoding algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Comput.
Commun. (ICCC), 2022, pp. 1–5.
[31] M. Soltani, M. J. Siavoshani, and A. H. Jahangir, “A content-based
deep intrusion detection system,” Int. J. Inf. Security, vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 547–562, Jun. 2022.
[32] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
Art. no. 108117.
[33] Y. Li et al., “GraphDDoS: Effective DDoS attack detection using graph
neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported
Cooper. Work Design (CSCWD), 2022, pp. 1275–1280.

3728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

[34] R. Doriguzzi-Corin, S. Millar, S. Scott-Hayward, J. Martínez-del Rincón,
and D. Siracusa, “LUCID: A practical, lightweight deep learning
solution for DDoS attack detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 876–889, Jun. 2020.
[35] D. Pujol-Perich, J. Su’arez-Varela, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and P. BarletRos, “Unveiling the potential of graph neural networks for robust
intrusion detection,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 111–117, 2021.
[36] H. S. Ilango, M. Ma, and R. Su, “A feedforward–convolutional neural
network to detect low-rate dos in IoT,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 114,
Sep. 2022, Art. no. 105059.
[37] Z. Deng et al., “SequenceShield: A robust and accurate DDoS detection
method via serializing the traffic with direction information,” in Proc.
IEEE 24th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. 8th Int. Conf.
Data Sci. Syst. 20th Int. Conf. Smart City 8th Int. Conf. Depend. Sensor
Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl. (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), 2022,
pp. 499–507.
[38] Z. Wu, H. Zhang, P. Wang, and Z. Sun, “RTIDS: A robust transformerbased approach for intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 64375–64387, 2022.
[39] M. S. Elsayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, S. Dev, and A. D. Jurcut, “DDoSNet: A
deep-learning model for detecting network attacks,” in Proc. IEEE 21st
Int. Symp. World Wireless Mobile Multimedia Netw. (WoWMoM), 2020,
pp. 391–396.
[40] Y. Jia, F. Zhong, A. Alrawais, B. Gong, and X. Cheng, “FlowGuard: An
intelligent edge defense mechanism against IoT DDoS attacks,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9552–9562, Oct. 2020.
[41] W. Xu, J. Jang-Jaccard, T. Liu, F. Sabrina, and J. Kwak, “Improved
bidirectional GAN-based approach for network intrusion detection using
one-class classifier,” Computers, vol. 11, no. 6, p. 85, 2022.
[42] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted
traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation,
lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
[43] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, and Y. Guo, “deep − full − range: A
deep learning based network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion
detection framework,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45182–45190, 2019.
[44] M. He, X. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Xi, L. Jin, and X. Wang, “Deep-featurebased autoencoder network for few-shot malicious traffic detection,”
Security Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, no. 6, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2021.
[45] Liu et al., “A weakly-supervised method for encrypted malicious traffic
detection,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Grids Clouds PoS(ISGC), 2022, pp. 1–9.
[46] G. Zhao, Z. X. Wang, and Z. Yang, “An encrypted traffic classification
model based on the raw traffic and spatiotemporal characteristics,”
in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Technol. Comput. Eng., 2022,
pp. 1208–1213.
[47] B. Lu, N. Luktarhan, C. Ding, and W. Zhang, “ICLSTM: Encrypted
traffic service identification based on inception-LSTM neural network,”
Symmetry, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 1080, 2021.
[48] Izadi, M. Ahmadi, and R. Nikbazm, “Network traffic classification using
convolutional neural network and ant-lion optimization,” Comput. Elect.
Eng., vol. 101, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 108024.
[49] C. Y. Lin, B. Chen, and W. Lan, “An efficient approach for encrypted
traffic classification using CNN and bidirectional GRU,” in Proc. 2nd Int.
Conf. Consum. Electron. Comput. Eng. (ICCECE), 2022, pp. 368–373.
[50] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPIC: A generic representation for
encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jul. 2021.
[51] W. Chen, F. Lyu, F. Wu, P. Yang, G. Xue, and M. Li, “Sequential
message characterization for early classification of encrypted Internet
traffic,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3746–3760,
Apr. 2021.

Yiqing
Luo
is currently pursuing the
Doctoral degree with the School of Electronic
Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, China. Her research interests
include behavior recognition, anomaly detection,
and deep learning.

Mingshu He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree from the Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2022,
where he is currently an Assistant Professor with
the School of Cyberspace Security. His research
interests include network security, anomaly detection, and machine learning.

Xiaojuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree in electronic science and technology from the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, where
she is currently an Associate Professor with
the School of Cyberspace Security. Her research
interests include deep learning, complex networks,
and human gesture recognition.