IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

801

Facing Differences of Similarity: Intra- and
Inter-Correlation Unsupervised Learning
for Chest X-Ray Anomaly Detection
Shicheng Xu , Wei Li , Zuoyong Li , Member, IEEE, Tiesong Zhao , Senior Member, IEEE,
and Bob Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract — Anomaly detection can significantly aid doctors in interpreting chest X-rays. The commonly used
strategy involves utilizing the pre-trained network to extract
features from normal data to establish feature representations. However, when a pre-trained network is applied
to more detailed X-rays, differences of similarity can limit
the robustness of these feature representations. Therefore,
we propose an intra- and inter-correlation learning framework for chest X-ray anomaly detection. Firstly, to better
leverage the similar anatomical structure information in
chest X-rays, we introduce the Anatomical-Feature Pyramid
Fusion Module for feature fusion. This module aims to
obtain fusion features with both local details and global
contextual information. These fusion features are initialized
by a trainable feature mapper and stored in a feature bank
to serve as centers for learning. Furthermore, to Facing
Differences of Similarity (FDS) introduced by the pretrained network, we propose an intra- and inter-correlation
learning strategy: 1) We use intra-correlation learning to
establish intra-correlation between mapped features of
individual images and semantic centers, thereby initially
discovering lesions; 2) We employ inter-correlation learning
to establish inter-correlation between mapped features of
different images, further mitigating the differences of similarity introduced by the pre-trained network, and achieving
effective detection results even in diverse chest disease
Received 11 August 2024; accepted 11 September 2024. Date of
publication 16 September 2024; date of current version 4 February
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62471207 and Grant 62276146; in
part by Key Technological Innovation and Industrialization Projects in
Fujian Province (School-Enterprise Joint) under Grant 2024XQ002; in
part by the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province under Grant
2021J011014, Grant 2023R1050, and Grant 2023J011390; and in part
by the Scientific and Technological Major Special Project of Fujian Provincial Health Commission under Grant 2021ZD01004. (Corresponding
author: Zuoyong Li.)
Shicheng Xu is with the College of Computer and Information Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China
(e-mail: fafuxsc1121@163.com).
Wei Li is with the College of Computer Science and Mathematics, Fujian University of Technology, Fuzhou 350118, China (e-mail:
liwei33660@163.com).
Zuoyong Li is with Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Processing and Intelligent Control, School of Computer and Big Data, Minjiang University, Fuzhou 350121, China (e-mail: fzulzytdq@126.com).
Tiesong Zhao is with Fujian Key Laboratory for Intelligent Processing
and Wireless Transmission of Media Information, Fuzhou University,
Fuzhou 350108, China (e-mail: t.zhao@fzu.edu.cn).
Bob Zhang is with the PAMI Research Group, Department of Computer
and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau, China (e-mail:
bobzhang@um.edu.mo).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMI.2024.3461231

environments. Finally, a comparison with 18 state-of-theart methods on three datasets demonstrates the superiority
and effectiveness of the proposed method across various
scenarios.
Index Terms— Medical anomaly detection, correlation
learning, feature fusion, transfer learning, chest X-ray.

I. I NTRODUCTION
-RAY images are commonly used by physicians to diagnose and evaluate various medical conditions, such as
pneumonia, chest fractures, and pneumothorax. Despite being
considered intuitive, accurate, and an efficient diagnostic tool,
X-ray images still require interpretation by skilled radiologists.
Even experienced practitioners, who rely on visual inspection
of chest X-ray images, face challenges such as time-consuming
analysis and the potential for missed diagnoses and misdiagnoses. Several deep learning methods have shown significant
efficacy in automatically analyzing X-ray images, thus easing
the workload burden on radiologists [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].
However, the scarcity of large, well-annotated X-ray datasets
impedes supervised learning performance. Therefore, unsupervised anomaly detection has become a primary research focus
in X-ray medical imaging [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13],
[14]. However, compared to natural datasets, the differences
between normal and abnormal data in X-ray images are more
subtle. Therefore, this poses significant challenges for chest
X-ray anomaly detection.
Currently, anomaly detection models solely utilize normal
data to construct feature representations. During the testing
phase, these models identify anomalies by analyzing whether
the feature representations significantly deviate from the normal distribution. Most medical anomaly detection [7], [8], [9],
[10] relies on simulating pseudo-anomalous data to construct
effective feature representations. Due to the diverse and unpredictable nature of anomalies, simulating pseudo-anomalous
data does not closely match real anomalies. Moreover, simulating an anomaly set containing all possible anomalies is
impractical [15]. Methods based on Teacher-Student architectures [12], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20] implicitly describe
the normal feature distribution by optimizing the differences
between teacher and student features distribution (learning normal feature distribution). However, the student network may
unexpectedly produce abnormal feature distribution similar to

X

1558-254X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

802

those in the teacher network. To overcome this issue, methods
based on distribution mapping (mapping the normal feature
distribution to a specific distribution) have shown improved
potential. Recently, distribution mapping methods primarily
employ techniques such as normalization flows [21], [22],
[23] and feature fine-tuning [13], [14], [24], [25], [26], [27].
The normalization flow-based methods primarily transform the
output of the pre-trained network into a Gaussian distribution.
Feature fine-tuning methods primarily map the output of the
pre-trained network to the feature distribution in a memory
bank or reduce the feature distribution differences between various positive samples through contrastive learning strategies.
The pre-trained network plays a crucial role in distribution
mapping methods and is also essential for the field of medical
anomaly detection [28]. However, the pre-trained network is
trained on large-scale datasets like ImageNet [29], which do
not include medical images. Although these methods perform
well on datasets such as MVTecAD [30], their application to
more subtle X-ray datasets may be limited by the introduction
of bias [31], [32]. These biases stem from differences of
similarity between the pre-trained dataset domain and the
target dataset domain. For example, in the ImageNet, the
structure of objects and scenes is conveyed through a combination of color, shape, and texture, which are highly complex
and variable. In contrast, structures in X-rays are typically
more direct and apparent because X-rays primarily depict the
internal anatomical structures of the body in a straightforward
and intuitive manner, focusing mainly on internal rather than
external features of objects.
The motivation here is to address the bias introduced
by using the pre-trained network, while detecting subtle
lesions–from the way humans discover anomalies. When
an ordinary person without medical knowledge detects lesions
on chest X-rays, apart from obvious lesions (intra-correlation
learning), the most effective method is to search for lesions by
pairwise comparison of the same positions (inter-correlation
learning). Inspired by this, we propose an intra- and intercorrelation learning framework for anomaly detection in chest
X-rays, aimed at Facing Differences of Similarity (FDS).
Firstly, we consider that X-ray images usually focus on specific
body regions and therefore exhibit similar structural features.
To fully utilize this fixed anatomical structure information,
we propose an Anatomical-Feature Pyramid Fusion (AFPF)
module for feature fusion. The features fused by the AFPF
module are initialized by a trainable feature mapper and stored
in a feature bank as semantic centers. Next, we reevaluate the
relationship between mapped features and semantic centers,
identifying two mapping scenarios that influence the detection of subtle lesions: fuzzy mapping and error mapping.
Fuzzy mapping refers to mapping features close to multiple
related semantic centers. Error mapping involves mapping features near semantic centers that are semantically mismatched.
Therefore, we propose intra- and inter-correlation learning to
optimize the mapping ability of the feature mapper, enabling
it to detect subtle lesions. Specifically, intra-correlation learning establishes intra-correlation between individual images
and semantic centers. In the face of fuzzy mapping, intracorrelation is established to determine the unique center

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 1. (a) The use of a network pre-trained on ImageNet has led to
differences of similarity, thereby causing significant differences in feature
distribution. (b) Through intra-correlation learning, features are mapped
into hyperspheres corresponding to their semantics, thereby effectively
constructing feature representations. (c) By integrating inter-correlation
learning, error mapping caused by differences of similarity are corrected,
thereby alleviating significant differences in feature distribution. (Note:
Features of various colors represent distinct semantics.)

of fuzzy mapping features, resulting in a higher-density
representation of mapped features. Inter-correlation learning
establishes inter-correlation between different images. In the
case of error mapping, the mutual antagonism of intra- and
inter-correlation learning guides the optimization direction of
error mapping, as shown in Fig. 1. Finally, the feature mapper
trained by the intra- and inter-correlation learning framework
can be used for anomaly detection. Our FDS is compared with
several state-of-the-art methods on the pediatric pneumonia
ZhangLab dataset, the adult pneumonia RSNA dataset, and
the multi-disease CheXpert dataset. The results show that
our proposed method outperforms other methods in anomaly
detection performance. The main contributions are as follows:
• We proposed an intra- and inter-correlation learning
framework FDS for chest X-ray anomaly detection, which
applies Facing the Differences of Similarity to mitigate
the biases introduced by the pre-trained network. This
framework is able to construct more robust feature representations, thereby demonstrating exceptional capabilities
in anomaly detection.
• We have developed an AFPF module specifically for
X-ray images, designed to preserve local details while
enhancing its effectiveness in capturing subtle yet
large-scale lesion patterns, including patchy, cloudy,
or filamentous appearances.
• We conducted comprehensive experiments using three
distinct datasets: the pediatric pneumonia ZhangLab
dataset, the adult pneumonia RSNA dataset, and the
multi-disease CheXpert dataset. We compared FDS with
several state-of-the-art baseline methods. Results from
these experiments showed that our FDS consistently
outperforms other methods in detecting anomalies across

XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING

pediatric and adult populations, as well as under various
disease conditions.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
discusses the application of anomaly detection in natural and
medical images. Section III offers an in-depth explanation
of our proposed FDS framework for chest X-ray anomaly
detection. Section IV presents extensive experimental results
to validate the effectiveness of FDS. Section V discusses the
advantages and disadvantages of FDS. Finally, Section VI
provides a summary of our work.

803

In the field of medical anomaly detection, [11] introduced a
contrastive learning paradigm to address the issue of collapse
in Teacher-Student architecture. Reference [12] achieved accurate classification of X-ray images by dynamically maintaining
a memory queue based on spatial position information to
suppress abnormal features. However, when attempting to
minimize the differences between normal feature distributions,
the student network may unexpectedly generalize and produce
abnormal feature distributions similar to those in the teacher
network [19].

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Anomaly Simulation-Based Anomaly Detection
While there are no abnormal data in the training dataset for
anomaly detection, it is possible to simulate pseudo-anomalous
data, thereby training the anomaly detection model in selfsupervised learning. A simple and effective strategy, known
as CutPaste [33], randomly selected a rectangular region in
the original image and then copied and pasted the content to
different locations in the image.
In the field of medical anomaly detection, Tan et al. successfully utilized foreign patch interpolation (FPI) [7] and Poisson
image interpolation (PII) [8] to simulate anomalies based on
natural variations in normal anatomy, particularly in abnormal
images of brain MRI and abdominal CT scans. NSA [9]
also explored simulating more natural synthetic anomalies in
X-ray images through the integration of Poisson image editing
and parameter adjustments for anomaly localization. AnatPaste [34] introduced an anatomical-aware pasting method
that uses a threshold-based lung segmentation preprocessing
task to create pseudo-anomalies in normal chest X-ray. Due
to the subtle differences in medical images compared to
natural datasets, [10] proposed CropMixPaste to generate
enhanced predictions of density shadow-like anomalies and
encouraged the model to detect local irregularities. However,
the occurrence of synthetic anomalies does not closely match
real anomalies. In practice, simulating an anomaly set that
includes all possible lesions is impossible due to the diverse
and unpredictable nature of lesions [15].
B. Teacher-Student Architecture-Based Anomaly
Detection
The Teacher-Student architecture is based on a pre-trained
teacher network and a trainable student network, accurately
localizing by leveraging the expression differences between the
teacher and student networks. Various solutions have been proposed in the past to enhance the discrimination and localization
capabilities of different anomaly phenomena. For instance,
[17] and [18] designed decoder architectures for the student
network, avoiding the drawbacks of having identical architectures and data flows between teacher and student networks.
Reference [19] introduced simulated anomalies to enhance the
constraints on anomalous data. Simultaneously, [19] employed
a segmentation network to adaptively fuse multi-level feature
similarities, aiming for more accurate anomaly localization.
Reference [20] mitigated the limitations of Teacher-Student
architecture by compressing the latent space and simulating
pseudo-anomalous data to suppress anomalous features.

C. Distribution Mapping-Based Anomaly Detection
Methods based on distribution mapping utilize a pre-trained
network to extract embedding vectors from normal training images, subsequently mapping these embedding vectors
into a specific distribution. Distribution mapping is primarily achieved through techniques such as normalization
flow [21], [22], [23] and feature fine-tuning [13], [14], [24],
[25], [26], [27]. During the testing phase, anomaly scores
are determined by calculating the distance between the test
images and the feature distribution. Csflow [21] and Fastflow [22] suggested transforming normal feature distributions
into Gaussian distributions through normalization flow [35].
Padim [24] performed feature extraction on sample patches,
estimated the Gaussian distribution of patches, and calculates
anomaly scores using Mahalanobis distance. On the other
hand, PatchCore [25] constructed a feature bank with the
most representative patches to maximize normality. CFA [26]
adopted feature adaptation based on a coupled hypersphere
layer, enhancing the distinguishability of subtle anomaly. Reference [27] addressed the collapse issue that occurs within
the unit space with standard contrastive loss by proposing the
Mean-Shifted contrastive loss.
In the field of medical anomaly detection, there is relatively less exploration of methods based on distribution
mapping. Reference [13] employed differentiable top-k feature
adaptation to learn an attention-enhanced patch descriptor,
improving the ability to detect anomalies in complex medical
imaging data. Reference [14] proposed SubMSF to address the
challenges of model collapse or feature deterioration that may
occur in the abnormal detection of leukocyte medical images.
However, techniques relying on distribution mapping utilize
extensive datasets such as ImageNet [29] for pre-training.
While they demonstrate effectiveness on industrial datasets
like MVTecAD [30], their applicability to medical data is
constrained, potentially introducing biases in medical anomaly
detection [31], [32]. Reference [36] attempted to circumvent
pre-trained network by employing defect contrast positioning
but did not observe notable performance enhancements in
detecting subtle anomalies in X-ray images. Consequently,
further investigation is warranted to refine the distribution
mapping method for analyzing chest X-ray images.
III. M ETHOD
A. Overall Framework
In this section, we will introduce the proposed anomaly
detection method FDS for chest X-ray images based on

804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed framework FDS: Initially, we extract features using a pre-trained network and employ an Anatomical-Feature
Pyramid Fusion (AFPF) module to fully leverage similar structures in X-ray images for obtaining fusion features. Subsequently, these fusion features
are initialized by a trainable feature mapper and stored in a feature bank. Next, intra- and inter-correlation learning are utilized to search the feature
bank, thereby guiding the construction of robust feature representations by the feature mapper. During testing, we compute the Euclidean distance
between the mapped features and the feature bank center to derive the anomaly score. (Note: Features of various colors represent distinct semantics,
and examples xi and xj are from the same batch.)

intra- and inter-correlation learning, as shown in Fig. 2.
Reiss et al.’s research [37] suggests that using a pretrained network can output relevant features for anomaly
detection. Therefore, we use the WideResNet50 model pretrained on ImageNet as the initial feature extractor σ . The
initial training dataset X train consists of normal images
(∀xi ∈ X train : yi = 0), where yi ∈ {0, 1} represents whether
the image xi is normal (0) or abnormal (1). The testing
dataset X test includes both normal and abnormal images
(∀xi ∈ X test : yi ∈ {0, 1}). We set the output of the j-th layer
as σ j (xi ), we use the output of the first three blocks ( j ∈
{1, 2, 3}) of the feature extractor σ as the features for subsequent fusion. We use the Anatomical-Feature Pyramid Fusion
Module AF P F(·, ·, ·) to obtain fused features Fi ∈ R T ×D ,
where T = H W , H and W are the height and width of
fused features, and D represents the sum of dimensions of the
feature extractor σ . Current anomaly detection methods [13],
[26] use a network pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset to
extract features. By reducing the distance from features to their
nearest semantic center, it achieves high-density clustering
of features around the semantic center. Therefore, anomaly
detection can be performed based on the degree to which
features deviate from their semantic center. However, it is
noteworthy that because there is a semantic difference between
the ImageNet dataset and the target chest X-ray dataset, these
nearest semantic centers do not necessarily represent semantically similar semantic centers. Therefore, using a network

pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset may lead to biases in
feature mapping. In response to this issue, we have conducted
a detailed analysis of the mapping relationship between features and semantic centers, identifying the following three
main mapping scenarios: (1) Correct mapping: The feature
is accurately mapped near a semantic center that matches
similar semantics. (2) Fuzzy mapping: The feature is mapped
near multiple semantic centers, leading to unclear semantic
expressions. (3) Error mapping: The feature is mapped near a
semantic center that does not match its semantics. The specific
mapping scenarios are shown in Fig. 3. We employ intraand inter-correlation learning to implement distinct coping
strategies tailored to various mapping scenarios. To facilitate
this, we use a feature mapper φ(·) based on the feature bank
c to establish
the relationship between the mapped feature

φ Fi,t and the semantic center ct , transferring knowledge
from the ImageNet domain to the target domain of chest
X-ray images. where, Fi,t ∈ R D , tϵ {1, · · · , H W }, and ct
is the nearest neighbor searched in the feature bank c for the
feature Fi,t . Our objective is to use inter-correlation learning
to leverage the information correlation at the same positions in
different images to transform error mapping into correct mapping. Intra-correlation learning is employed to establish mutual
correlations between the mapped features and the semantic
centers. Intra-correlation learning transforms fuzzy mapping
into correct mapping and ensures high-density expression of
features for correct mapping. Therefore, during the testing

XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING

Fig. 3. Differences between the ImageNet domain and the target chest
X-rays domain give rise to various mapping scenarios. (Case 1) The
mapped feature is close to its corresponding semantic center, termed
Correct Mapping. (Case 2) The mapped feature is equidistant from
multiple semantic centers, termed Fuzzy Mapping. (Case 3) The mapped
feature is close to the semantic center, but contradicts its intended
semantic, termed Error Mapping. (Note: Features of various colors
represent distinct semantics.)

phase, abnormality is measured by calculating the Euclidean
distance between the sample and the semantic centers.
B. Feature Extraction
1) Anatomical-Feature Pyramid Fusion Module: The outputs

from different layers represent distinct information [38]. The
output from lower layers is more characteristic of the structural
properties of X-ray images, while the output from higher
layers contains more semantic information. Therefore, we use
the AF P F(·, ·, ·) to obtain fused features Fi . This helps the
model learn more discriminative features, thereby improving
its performance. The AF P F module is defined as follows:
Fi = AF P F (σ1 (xi ) , σ2 (xi ) , σ3 (xi ))

(1)

Now, let’s delve into the specific details of this module
to understand how to effectively fuse the outputs of lower
and higher-level features to obtain information with both local
details and global context. Notably, the ImageNet pre-trained
network, which is primarily tailored for natural image classification, introduces a bias that is inappropriate for medical
image anomaly detection. Consequently, utilizing the features
extracted by the feature extractor σ is not optimal. To address
this issue, average pooling is employed to average values
within the pooling window, significantly reducing the position
sensitivity of local features and ensuring translation invariance [39]. Considering the structural and positional variations
in X-ray images, average pooling, denoted avg(·), is applied
to σ j (xi ) for j ∈ {1, 2}. Furthermore, max pooling, which
captures the maximum value within the pooling window,
preserves the most significant features and enhances their
discriminability [40]. Given the consistent patient postures
in X-ray anomaly detection and the primarily semantic distinctions between abnormal and normal images, we augment
semantic feature discriminability by extracting local maxima from σ j=3 (xi ) using max pooling, indicated by max(·).
Additionally, the diffuse interstitial pattern of pneumonia is
characteristically manifested by reticular opacities, groundglass opacities, and either fine nodular or patchy infiltrates.
To capture these long-range dependencies and enhance the
model’s sensitivity and generalization to the data, we use
Multihead-Attention to aggregate the features obtained from
max pooling. Finally, the processed features are upsampled to

805

Fig. 4. For similar structures in X-ray images, we propose an AFPF
module. By combining outputs from different levels of the feature extractor, we obtain more comprehensive features.

the same size and concatenated to obtain the required fused
features Fi . The proposed fusion module is shown in Fig. 4
and defined as follows:
(

avg σ j (xi ) ,
j ∈ {1, 2}

f j,i =
(2)
attn max σ j (xi ) , j ∈ 3



Fi = Con f 1,i , i f 2,i , i f 3,i
(3)
where avg(·) represents average pooling, max(·) represents
max pooling, attn(·) represents Multihead-Attention, i(·) represents upsampling using bilinear interpolation, and Con[·, ·, ·]
represents Concatenation operation.
2) Feature Bank: In order to better utilize the anomaly-free
image features extracted by the model, current methods [13],
[25], [26], [37] use a feature bank for storage. By building
a feature bank, we can better guide the feature mapper
φ (·) for intra-correlation and inter-correlation learning to face
differences of similarity. Feature bank is represented as c ∈
RT ×D , where T = H W is the size of the feature bank,
which corresponds to the number of semantic centers. H
and W represent the height and width of the fused features,
respectively. We dynamically update our feature bank using
the Exponential Moving Average (EMA):
(n − 1)cn−1 + φ (Fn )
(4)
n
where n represents the number of updates to the feature bank.
After N updates, the feature bank c will contain the overall
average semantic features of all data, where N represents the
number of images in the training dataset. The formula for the
entire process unfolds as follows:
cn =

N

1X
c=
φ (Fi )
N

(5)

i

C. Intra-Correlation Learning
In the field of medical anomaly detection, pre-trained networks play a crucial role [28]. Most current methods [24],
[25], [26] utilize these networks for feature extraction. These
pre-trained networks provide generic features (such as texture and edge features) from the ImageNet domain to the
target domain, enabling transfer learning capabilities [41]. This
generic feature indicates a certain degree of similarity between
the ImageNet domain and the target domain. We leverage this similarity to establish associations between mapped
features and semantic centers through intra-correlation, effectively handling both correct mapping and fuzzy mapping.

806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Initially, intra-attraction ensures that during correct mapping,
the mapped features exhibit high-density expression around
the semantic centers. However, due to differences of similarity
between the ImageNet and target domains, mapped features
may not anchor to a semantic center, leading to fuzzy mapping.
To address this issue, fuzzy mapping is transformed into
correct mapping through intra-repulsion using additional hard
negative semantic centers.
1) Intra-Attraction: To achieve primarily the transfer learning
from the pre-trained dataset to the target chest X-ray
dataset,

we guide the correctly mapped features φ Fi,t to densely
surround the feature
 bank c. By searching for the K nearest
 
semantic centers ctk k ∈ argmin D φ Fi,t , ct
in the
K

feature bank c, the mapped feature φ Fi,t is then mapped
into a hypersphere with a radius of R centered at ctk . The value
of R allows gradient descent, and by continuously adjusting
R, the mapped features exhibit a high-density representation.
L intra−att is set as a penalty when the distance from ctk
exceeds the radius R:
T K
n


o

1 XX
max 0, D φ Fi,t , ctk − R 2
L intra−att =
TK
t=1 k=1

(6)
2) Intra-Repulsion: In X-ray imaging, we observe the ‘overlap’ phenomenon of various internal tissue structures, which
occurs because multiple layers of tissues with different densities are presented simultaneously on the same plane image.
This overlapping effect causes some tissue structures to appear
similar in the image, thereby leading to fuzzy mapping.
To address the situation of fuzzy mapped feature φ Fi,t
simultaneously belonging to multiple semantic centers ctk ,
we employ additional hard-negative semantic centers to repel
the fuzzy mapped
 feature, thereby mapping the fuzzy mapped
feature φ Fi,t to the correct semantic center ct . By searching
( for the K -th to K + J -th )nearest semantic centers
 
j
ct j ∈ arg min D φ Fi,t , ct
from the mapped feature
 [K ,K +J ]
φ Fi,t to the neighboring semantic center ct , we then repel
the mapped feature φ Fi,t from a hypersphere centered at
j
ct with a radius
 of R. This process maps the fuzzy mapped
feature φ Fi,t to the correct ctk hypersphere. Therefore, we set
j
L intra− f ar as the repulsion penalty imposed by ct :

L intra−r ep =

T
J
n

o
 j
1 XX
max 0, R 2 − D φ Fi,t , ct −α
TJ
t=1 j=1

(7)
The hyperparameter α is used to control the balance between
intra-attraction and intra-repulsion.

Fig. 5. The optimization process of intra-correlation learning effectively
handles fuzzy mapping, ensuring a unique semantic center for fuzzy
mapping. However, when features are erroneously mapped, it results in
incorrect optimization and shifts the feature to the wrong semantic center.
(Note: Features of various colors represent distinct semantics.)

we used a network pre-trained on ImageNet [29], which
does not contain medical images, and there are significant
differences between the ImageNet domain and the chest
X-ray dataset domain [31], [32]. These differences imply
that features semantically similar in the ImageNet domain do
not necessarily maintain the same semantic similarity in the
chest X-ray image domain. For example, in the ImageNet,
similar colors or grayscale levels do not consistently reflect
similarity, as they might contain completely different objects
or scenes. However, in X-ray images, similar gray levels
may indicate similar types of tissues or pathological states.
These differences of similarity across domains may lead to
error mapping, significantly affecting the model’s ability to
represent features and further impacting the accuracy of lesion
detection. As illustrated
in example xi in Fig. 5, if the mapped

feature φ Fi,t is semantically dissimilar to its neighboring
semantic center ct , then during the intra-correlation learning
process, this feature might be erroneously attracted into the
hypersphere of the dissimilar neighboring semantic center ct .
To address this issue, we propose inter-correlation learning
to establish relationships between mapped features of different X-ray images. Our aim is to approximately capture the
semantic information within the target X-ray image domain
by utilizing the inter-correlation between different X-ray
images. This approach guides the erroneously mapped features
φ Fi,t towards semantic centers ct that are semantically
similar, thereby enhancing the model’s feature representation
capability.
1) Inter-Attraction: Since subjects in X-ray images typically
maintain a fixed posture, features at the same positions usually
have similar semantic information. Therefore, inter-correlation
learning selectively reduces the distance between mapped
features at the same position
 in different images, moving
the mapped features φ Fi,t closer to the correct semantic
center ct , thereby mitigating the issue of error mapping.
Firstly, to achieve
 a uniform distribution of the mapped feature
Ai,t = φ Fi,t around the semantic center, as opposed to the
unit hyperspherical origin o, the distance from the center is
updated from the original origin o to the semantic center ct .

D. Inter-Correlation Learning
When a feature is mapped to a neighboring semantic center,
that feature shares similar semantics with this semantic center.
However, the accuracy of mapping is closely related to the
quality of features extracted by the pre-trained network. Since

→

→

→

Ct Ai,t = O Ai,t − OCt

(8)

→

where Ct Ai,t represents the vector from the semantic center ct
→

to the mapped feature Ai,t , O Ai,t represents the vector from

XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING

807

optimization.
The distance to the G nearest

 mapped features
φ
F
for
the
mapped
feature
φ
F
i,r
i,t

is represented as


g
di,t g ∈ arg min φ Fi,t , φ Fi,r , t ̸ = r . The L inter −cont
G

g

is set to prevent the distances di,t from being extended:
 
g
L inter −con = max di,t
(11)

Fig. 6. The Importance of inter-constraints: Sole reliance on interattraction does not ensure the correct optimization direction. Through
inter-constraints, the mapped features influenced by inter-attraction can
adjust their positions based on the distance to neighboring features,
thereby avoiding erroneous optimization. (Note: Features of various
colors represent distinct semantics, and examples xi and xj are from
the same batch.)
→

the origin o to the mapped feature Ai,t and OCt represents
the vector from the origin o to the semantic center ct . To learn
semantic information between different images, we divide each
batch size into two parts, and sequentially obtain images xi and
x j . By calculating the cosine similarity between the mapped
features Ai,t and A j,t at the same positions in different images
xi and x j , we can obtain the similarity measures at different
locations.
→

→

Ct Ai,t · Ct A j,t

→
→
sim (Ct Ai,t , Ct A j,t ) = 1 −

→
Ct Ai,t

(9)

→

· Ct A j,t
→

The subsequent use of sim i j,t is to represent sim(Ct Ai,t ,

→

Ct A j,t ). When sim i j,t is smaller, it indicates a higher semantic
similarity between Ai,t and A j,t . We selectively reduce the
distance between the H most semantically similar mapped
features, i.e., decreasing their similarity measure. The similarity measure between
the H most similar mapped
features



is expressed as sim i j,h h ∈ arg min sim i j,t . L inter −att is

Therefore, the combined use of intra- and inter-correlation
learning for transfer learning to optimize the parameters of
φ(·) is defined by the total loss as follows:
Loss = L intra−att + L intra−r ep + L inter −att + L inter −con
(12)
E. Anomaly Score
Inspired by [13] and [26], we adopt the Euclidean distance
between
 the K nearest semantic centers and mapped features
φ Fi,t to calculate the anomaly score of mapped features,
as follows:

Di,t,k = min k D(φ Fi,t , ct )
(13)

The closer the mapped feature φ Fi,t is to the semantic
center ctk , the more evident the normal feature is. We employ
the so f tmin function to calculate the weights of the feature
φ Fi,t with respect to these K centers.
e−Di,t,0
· Di,t,0
Si,t = P K
−Di,t,k
k=1 e

(14)

where Si,t represents
the anomaly score of the mapped

feature φ Fi,t . We use the maximum feature anomaly
value Si,t in the image as the image’s anomaly value
Simagei = Max (S i,t ). By calculating the Precision and
Recall between each image’s anomaly value Simagei and its
label yi , we determine the F1. Finally, we use the F1 of the
image to determine the threshold for the image anomaly score,
as follows:

H

defined as the penalty based on sim i j,h :
L inter −att =

H
1X

H

sim i j,h

2 × Precision × Recall
( Precision + Recall
1, Simagei ≥ argmax(F1)
Scor ei =
0, Simagei < argmax(F1)
F1 =

(10)

h=1

2) Inter-Constraints: As shown in the Fig. 6, relying solely
on inter-attraction could lead to an incorrect optimization
tendency during the mapping process, where correctly mapped
features are wrongly attracted to semantic centers that are
not semantically similar. We refer to this phenomenon as
erroneous optimization. Inspired by previous research [42],
which suggests preventing mismatches by limiting the distance
between the most similar matching pairs, we establish
inter-

constraints by limiting the distances from φ Fi,t and φ F j,t
to their respective G most similar mapped features in the
image. As shown in the Fig. 6, through
inter-constraints,


the targets of inter-attraction, φ Fi,t and φ F j,t , can
adjust their positions based on the distance to neighboring
features, allowing the inter-attraction to guide the feature
mapping in a more accurate direction and avoid erroneous

(15)
(16)

where argmax(·) represents the function that returns the index
of the maximum value in the F1 array.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
A. Public Benchmarks
We utilized three publicly available chest X-ray image
datasets to evaluate the performance of the FDS, including:
the ZhangLab dataset for pediatric pneumonia, the RSNA
dataset for adult pneumonia, and the CheXpert dataset covering 12 complex diseases. These datasets were developed
and curated by their respective authors and included ethical
statements for research purposes, ensuring the absence of
potential biases.
The ZhangLab Chest X-ray dataset [43] was released by
the Shiley Eye Institute, University of California San Diego,

808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE I
B ENCHMARK T ESTING R ESULTS FOR THE T ESTING DATASETS . T HE I NDICATORS FOR THE TOP T HREE P OSITIONS IN THE B ASELINE A RE
R EPRESENTED BY O RANGE , B LUE , AND G REEN , R ESPECTIVELY. T-S R EFERS TO THE T EACHER -S TUDENT A RCHITECTURE

USA. It comprises 5,232 pediatric chest X-ray images. The
training dataset comprises 3,883 images depicting pneumonia
cases and 1,349 images depicting normal cases. The testing
dataset includes 234 normal images and 390 pneumonia
images from a total of 624 patients. Based on the settings
described in [12], we completed the model training on the
training dataset. To prevent the leakage of information from
the testing dataset, we tested using the weights obtained in the
last epoch of the training phase.
The RSNA dataset [44] released by the Clinical Center of
the National Institutes of Health, USA, includes chest X-ray
images from 26,684 patients. Among these images, 8,851 are
marked as normal, 6,012 show pneumonia, and another 11,821
are neither normal nor indicative of pneumonia. Following the
setup in [34], we train our models on the training dataset and
use the model weights from the final training epoch for testing.
The Stanford CheXpert dataset [45] was released by
the Department of Radiology, Stanford University, USA.
It encompasses 12 diseases, namely Pleural Effusion, Enlarged
Cardiomediastinum, Lung Opacity, Consolidation, Pleural
Other, Fracture, Atelectasis, Lung Lesion, Cardiomegaly,
Edema, Pneumonia, and Pneumothorax. Our evaluation was
limited to anterior-posterior (PA) view images, comprising
5,249 normal chest X-ray images and 23,671 chest X-ray
images exhibiting diseases. Following the setup in [12],
we trained on the training dataset and tested using the weights
from the last epoch.
B. Experimental Settings
The experiments in this paper were conducted using Python
3.9 and PyTorch 1.12.1 on the Ubuntu system, equipped
with an Intel i5-12490F CPU and an NVIDIA GEFORCE
RTX 3090 24G GPU. We chose to use the WideResNet50
pre-trained on ImageNet as the backbone network for the
initial experiments and the WideResNet50 backbone network
was fully frozen. We used 1 × 1 CoordConv as the feature

mapper and optimized it during the training phase. In the
preprocessing phase, the size of each chest X-ray image was
resized to 224×224 pixels, the same size as the images pretrained on ImageNet. During training, we used AdamW as
the optimizer, set the batch size to 8, and the training period
to 100 epochs. The learning rate was set to 5 × 10−4 , and
the weight decay was set to 3 × 10−5 . Finally, in the intracorrelation learning, the hyperparameters K and J were both
set to 3. The initial value of the radius R was set to 1 × 10−5 ,
and gradient descent was allowed. In the inter-correlation
learning, the hyperparameters H were set to 3, and G was
set to 1. All hyperparameter selections were based on good
experimental performance achieved on the selected network
(WideResNet50).
C. Comparison With State-of-the-Art
We employed 18 advanced baseline models for training
and testing on the ZhangLab Chest X-ray and Stanford
CheXpert and RSNA datasets, which encompass methods
such as anomaly simulation, Teacher-Student architecture, and
distribution mapping. They are: PatchCore [25], Padim [24],
RD [17], RD++ [20], Csflow [21], Fastflow [22], Pyramidflow [36], Simplenet [15], CFA [26], NSA [9], PII [8],
FPI [7], CutPaste [33], CropMixPaste [10], SQUID [12],
EDC [11], AnatPaste [34], Mean-Shifted [27]. We evaluated
their performance using standard metrics: Area Under the ROC
Curve (ROCAUC), Accuracy (ACC), and F1 Score (F1). The
performance of our proposed FDS and various state-of-the-art
baseline models is presented in Table I.
1) ZhangLab Chest X-Ray: We attained superior results
compared to other baselines, achieving ROCAUC, F1, and
ACC of 0.979, 0.967, and 0.959, respectively. The methods
PII and CropMixPaste, employing Anomaly Simulation techniques, yielded favorable results due to their effective anomaly
simulation strategies, achieving ROCAUC of 0.871 and 0.868,
respectively. Based on this, AnatPaste further enhances the

XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING

process by using a threshold-based lung segmentation preprocessing task to directly create pseudo-anomalies in the
thoracic area of X-ray images, achieving ROCAUC of 0.901.
The Teacher-Student Architecture method RD++, employed
on the ZhangLab dataset, which exclusively contains pneumonia anomalies, achieved excellent results through compact
feature representation and the suppression of abnormal features, with ROCAUC, ACC, and F1 of 0.913, 0.882, and
0.859, respectively. Among Distribution Mapping-based
methods, Fastflow demonstrated outstanding results owing to
its Transformer-based architecture’s ability to better attend to
anatomical structures in X-ray images. Additionally, CFA utilizing proposed coupled hyperspherical adaptation, enhances
feature distinctiveness. Mean-Shifted achieved ROCAUC of
0.938 through its contrastive loss.
2) RSNA: The dataset includes imaging related to adult
pulmonary diseases, primarily focusing on pneumonia and its
complications. In comparison with other benchmark models,
our method achieved ROCAUC, F1, and ACC values of 0.829,
0.755, and 0.757, respectively. In the anomaly simulation
methods, PII and AnatPaste, which simulate anomalies based
on the natural changes in normal anatomical structures, both
achieved good ROCAUC results of 0.775. EDC based on
a Teacher-Student architecture, effectively and consistently
learned the features of X-ray images through the introduction of a contrastive learning paradigm. In the distribution
mapping methods, Fastflow primarily learns data distributions
through bijective transformations, focusing heavily on local
texture features, which resulted in poor performance in global
semantic understanding and thus did not meet expectations in
the RSNA dataset. Meanwhile, CFA maintained good performance in processing images of adult lung turbidity through its
adaptive strategy.
3) Stanford CheXpert: We achieved superior results compared to other baselines, with ROCAUC, F1, and ACC
reaching 0.861, 0.791, and 0.798, respectively. The Anomaly
Simulation method proposed by CropMixPaste tends to
generate lesions resembling density shadows, leading to
improved performance on the more complex CheXpert dataset,
which includes 12 diseases. Meanwhile, AnatPaste specifically
designed for simulating pneumonia lesions, also demonstrates
good performance on the CheXpert dataset. The TeacherStudent Architecture method RD++ demonstrated superior
performance on the ZhangLab dataset. However, its performance is not as good on the more complex CheXpert dataset
compared to our method, indicating that complex medical
lesions affect the effectiveness of RD++’s compact feature
representation and suppression of abnormal features. SQUID
utilizing spatial-aware memory queues to detect lesions,
exhibits a better focus on lesion areas in more complex chest
X-ray images. In the Distribution Mapping-based methods,
Csflow achieves excellent results on complex datasets through
joint likelihood estimation of multiscale features, achieving
ROCAUC of 0.778.
D. Ablation Studies
1) Impact of Different Modules: Table II presents the results
of an ablation study assessing the contributions of different

809

TABLE II
W E E VALUATED THE P ERFORMANCE OF M ODELS W ITH D IFFERENT
C OMPONENTS ON THE Z HANG L AB C HE X PERT AND RSNA DATASETS .
R ED I NDICATES THE D ECREASE IN I NDICATORS D UE TO THE
L ACK OF I NTER -C ONSTRAINTS

TABLE III
O N THE Z HANG L AB , C HE X PERT, AND RSNA DATASETS ,
W E E XAMINED THE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT ATTENTION
M ODULES ON O UR AFPF M ODULE

components of FDS. Initially, using only intra-attraction for
transfer learning to address correct mapping scenarios yielded
ROCAUC scores of 0.889, 0.699, and 0.742 on the ZhangLab,
CheXpert, and RSNA datasets, respectively. Utilizing the
AFPF module allows the retention of local details while
effectively capturing subtle lesions in the chest area, significantly influencing the ZhangLab dataset, which contains
only pneumonia abnormalities, achieving ROCAUC of 0.947.
Incorporating intra-repulsion effectively manages fuzzy mapping, achieving ROCAUC scores of 0.971, 0.785, and 0.797 on
the ZhangLab, CheXpert, and RSNA datasets, respectively.
When only inter-attraction is used to address error mappings,
the ROCAUC on the ZhangLab and RSNA datasets reaches
0.978 and 0.815, respectively. However, due to some correct mappings lacking inter-constraints and being mistakenly
optimized as error mappings, the ACC and F1 scores on the
ZhangLab dataset decrease by 0.002 each, and the F1 score on
the RSNA dataset decreases by 0.001. By introducing interconstraints, optimal results are achieved on the ZhangLab,
CheXpert, and RSNA datasets, with ROCAUC values of 0.979,
0.861, and 0.829, respectively.
2) Impact of Attention: In Table III, we evaluated the performance of various attention mechanisms in the feature fusion
module. Coordinate [46] embeds positional information into
channel attention, capturing long-range dependencies while
preserving precise location information. Shuffle Attention
(SA) [47] optimizes information processing by combining spatial and channel attentions with Shuffle units and channel shuffle operations. HaloNet [48] enhances accuracy by introducing

810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 7. ROC Curves for the ZhangLab, CheXpert, and RSNA datasets are presented. When the TPR (True Positive Rate) reaches 0.95, the
intersection of the red line with the ROC Curves indicates the corresponding FPR (False Positive Rate), referred to as FPR@TPR95.

chunked local attention and attention downsampling techniques. ECA [49] effectively captures local cross-channel
interactions using one-dimensional convolutions. Triplet [50]
effectively captures cross-dimensional interactions through a
three-branch structure. SK [51] enhances the neural network’s
adaptability by introducing a dynamic selection mechanism
among multiple kernel sizes. Upon comparisons, we found
that the Multihead-attention module is more suitable for our
Anatomical Feature Pyramid Fusion (AFPF) and outperforms
other modules in performance. Therefore, we believe that
after employing the Multihead-attention module, it can better
capture the anatomical structures in X-ray images.
3) Impact of Hyperparameters: We investigated the impact
of four hyperparameters, namely K, J, H, and G, within the
intra- and inter-correlation learning Top-k setting of FDS.
As illustrated in Table IV, the best results were obtained when
K, J, and H were all set to 3, with model performance declining
as these values increased. The optimal result was achieved
when G was set to 1; however, Setting G to 2 or 3 resulted
in a notable decline in model performance due to increased
constraints, which restricted intra-attraction and consequently
led to a significant decrease in performance.
4) ROC Curve: As shown in Fig. 7, we have demonstrated
the image AUC curves of the FDS method on the ZhangLab,
CheXpert, and RSNA datasets. The key metric (FPR@TPR95)
is the false positive rate (FPR) when the true positive rate
(TPR) reaches 0.95, marked with a red line. FPR@TPR95 is
the proportion of healthy samples misdiagnosed as diseased
when nearly all true cases are detected, which is crucial
for medical judgment in healthcare applications. The more
leftward the intersection of the AUC curve with the standard
red line (TPR=0.95), the lower the FPR@TPR95, indicating
a lower rate of misdiagnosis. In these three chest X-ray image
datasets, the FDS method achieved the lowest FPR@TPR95,
demonstrating its potential high accuracy in the field of
medical anomaly detection. This series of quantitative analyses further validates the FDS method’s exceptional anomaly
detection performance across different styles of chest X-ray
image datasets.
E. Robustness Experiment
1) Whether Pre-Trained Bias Is Mitigated?: Due to biases
introduced by using an ImageNet pre-trained network for

TABLE IV
T HE S ETTING OF THE TOP - K H YPERPARAMETERS K, J, H, G IN I NTRA AND I NTER -C ORRELATION L EARNING H AVE AN I MPACT ON THE FDS

feature extraction, we conducted ablation studies with a model
pre-trained on medical images to explore whether the FDS can
mitigate these biases.
ChexNet [52] provides DenseNet121 weights (called ChexDense) pre-trained on 112,120 frontal chest X-ray images
involving 30,805 unique patients with 14 disease labels.
RadImageNet [53] provides DenseNet121 weights (called
RadDense) and ResNet50 weights (called RadRes) pre-trained
on 1.35 million annotated images of musculoskeletal, nervous
system, oncology, gastrointestinal, endocrine, and pulmonary
pathologies from CT, MRI, and ultrasound images. These
images include medical images marked with 3 modalities,
11 anatomical structures, and 165 pathology labels.
As shown in Fig. 8(a), the model pre-trained on ImageNet
achieved ROCAUC of only 0.441 in the first epoch, which
was due to significant bias from the pre-trained weights.
In contrast, the ChexDense weights, pre-trained on medical
data, reached ROCAUC of 0.676, while the RadDense weights
achieved ROCAUC of 0.722. As training progressed, it was
observed that FDS could reduce the bias from using ImageNet
pre-trained weights, showing significant improvement by the
second epoch and surpassing the performance of models using

XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING

811

Fig. 8. Training processes of (a) DenseNet121 and (b) ResNet50 networks pre-trained on various datasets.

medical pre-trained weights by the third epoch, maintaining higher performance in subsequent training. Additionally,
Fig. 8(a) also demonstrates that models pre-trained on larger
medical datasets can achieve better detection performance,
although their performance still did not exceed that of the models pre-trained on ImageNet, because the large data volume of
ImageNet provides richer and more discriminative features for
the model, which is why we continued to use the ImageNet
pre-trained model as the feature extractor.
Similarly, we compared the performance on ResNet50,
as shown in Fig. 8(b). The model pre-trained on ImageNet
achieved ROCAUC of 0.506 in the first epoch, indicating
an initial bias caused by the pre-trained ImageNet data. The
RadRes weights achieved ROCAUC of 0.705 in the first epoch,
showing a better initial performance. As training progressed,
it was demonstrated that FDS could effectively alleviate the
bias introduced by the ImageNet pre-trained data, enhancing
model performance.
2) Disease-Free Training Requirement?: In medical anomaly
detection, so-called unsupervised methods are not fully unsupervised, as the model requires training on healthy images.
The removal of images without lesions depends on manual
annotation of healthy or diseased labels at the image space.
Consequently, there is a phenomenon where abnormal samples
are erroneously labeled. To assess the robustness of the model,
we evaluated our approach against four other distribution
mapping paradigms within the ratios (disease images/ healthy
images) of 0% to 40% proportions. As shown in Fig. 9,
when the ratio is between 0% and 4%, FDS experiences a
significant decline from 0.979 to 0.837. This is because FDS
learns abnormal patterns through intra-attraction that we do not
want to learn. However, as the ratio gradually increases from
4% to 40%, FDS does not exhibit a continued severe decline
as anticipated. This is because intra-correlation better ignores
some abnormal patterns due to its handling of fuzzy mapping,
while the constraints of inter-correlation learning ensure a
better optimization direction for error mapping. Conversely,
as the ratio escalates, CFA consistently shows a downward
trend. Padim, which models the normal class probabilities
using a multivariate Gaussian distribution, undergoes a gradual
decrease after experiencing slight fluctuations between 8%12%. On the other hand, PatchCore, employing core subset
sampling to reduce redundancy while potentially missing some
abnormal patterns, exhibits a variability range from 0% to
40%.

Fig. 9. Several advanced models of the distribution mapping type
undergoing robustness analysis.

F. Visualization Results
Grad-CAM has been employed for anomaly localization [10], [25], [33]. Given the similarity between normal
and abnormal textures, obtaining pixel-level labels for localized anomalies in chest X-ray images can be challenging.
Therefore, we utilize Grad-CAM visualization [54] to identify
regions most likely to exhibit anomalies. In Fig.10, we present
the visual comparison results of pneumonia X-ray images
(from the pediatric pneumonia ZhangLab dataset and the
adult pneumonia RSNA dataset) and multi-disease chest X-ray
images (from the CheXpert dataset). We utilize features from
the final convolutional layer of each model to compute gradients for Grad-CAM.
1) Pneumonia X-Ray: In Fig. 10(a), we showcase the localization capabilities of several advanced algorithms for pediatric pneumonia (ZhangLab) and adult pneumonia (RSNA).
FDS demonstrates a strong ability to focus on the entire lung,
effectively covering the entire lesion area. Through the lung
segmentation preprocessing task, AnatPaste can effectively
simulate and focus on local lesions in the lungs; however,
it may overlook anomalies in the diffuse interstitial pattern.
The method proposed by CropMixPaste mainly concentrates
on specific local areas, which may lead to the neglect of the
entire lesion. Additionally, since its anomaly simulation is not
limited to the lungs, it may cause attention to be diverted to
areas outside the lungs. NSA seems to focus on overly subtle
areas, which may make representation learning challenging
as it pursues naturally simulated anomalies. In complex chest
X-ray images, RD++ utilizes a student network to learn normal
feature distributions, with the learned content tending toward
the corners of chest X-ray images. SQUID using spatial-aware

812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 10. (a) Visual results of Grad-CAM for pneumonia using CropMixPaste, SQUID, NSA, AnatPaste, RD++, and our proposed method. (b) Visual
results of Grad-CAM using our proposed method on the CheXpert dataset for twelve different diseases.

memory queues for anomaly detection, can effectively focus
on the lungs. However, due to automatically omitting patterns
of minority groups, when medical instruments are present,
it may lead to attention being concentrated on areas we do
not wish to emphasize.

2) Multi-Disease X-Ray: Given the diversity of chest diseases, in Fig. 10(b), we further present the Grad-CAM
visualization results of FDS on the CheXpert dataset, which
comprises 12 diseases. We observe that FDS currently struggles to precisely locate anomalies at the pixel level. However,

XU et al.: FACING DIFFERENCES OF SIMILARITY: INTRA- AND INTER-CORRELATION UNSUPERVISED LEARNING

this limitation is understandable for several reasons. Firstly,
FDS operates as an unsupervised approach, unlike methods
such as [1], [2], [3], [4], and [6], which rely on pixellevel annotations for normal and abnormal images. Secondly,
the diverse nature of chest diseases can lead to various
complications. For instance, pneumonia may cause fluid accumulation between the lung and the pleura (the thin tissue layer
surrounding the chest cavity), resulting in pleural effusion.
Consequently, the complexity of chest X-ray images further
hampers pixel-level localization. Nonetheless, FDS demonstrates the ability to comprehensively cover lesion areas for
the 12 diseases provided by the CheXpert dataset, thereby
effectively aiding medical experts in diagnosis.
V. D ISCUSSION
Based on our experimental results, our method outperforms existing methods on the pediatric pneumonia ZhangLab
dataset, the adult pneumonia RSNA dataset, and the multidisease CheXpert dataset. In methods based on anomaly
simulation, the significant differences between simulated
pseudo-lesions and real lesions in the test datasets greatly
limit the performance of such models. In methods based on
teacher-student networks, due to the subtlety of the lesions,
the student network tends to generalize and generate abnormal
feature distributions similar to those of the teacher network.
Methods based on distribution mapping inevitably use pretrained networks as feature extractors. Although Pyramidflow
attempts to avoid using the pre-trained network through defect
contrast localization, the results are not ideal. Existing distribution mapping-based methods mainly rely on similarity
measures (e.g., Euclidean distance, Mahalanobis distance,
cosine similarity) for transfer learning and anomaly detection.
For instance, CFA and PatchCore use Euclidean distance as
a similarity measure for training. This neglects the similarity
differences between different dataset domains, thereby affecting the model’s feature representation capability. Mean-shifted
through an improved contrastive loss, brings the positive
samples closer together, allowing the model to indirectly learn
the similarity of the target X-ray dataset, thus achieving a good
detection performance. However, the data augmentation methods Mean-shifted employs might introduce anomalies (e.g.,
Flipping X-ray images may cause abnormal phenomena such
as situs inversus), thereby hindering detection performance.
Therefore, we address the similarity differences by distinguishing between possible mappings (correct mapping, fuzzy
mapping, erroneous mapping) and using intra-correlation and
inter-correlation learning. Our method avoids the risk of
introducing anomalies, while approximating the similarity of
the target domain, thereby enhancing the model’s feature
representation capability.
Although our method FDS, demonstrates excellent anomaly
detection performance across several datasets, it confronts a
common challenge faced by most X-ray anomaly detection
methods: accurately localizing lesions. This difficulty stems
from the presence of tissues with varying densities on the same
plane in X-ray images, which creates only subtle differences
between lesions and normal tissues.

813

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose an intra- and inter-correlation
framework FDS for exploring anomaly detection in chest
X-ray images. Firstly, our FDS introduces an AFPF module
that can fully utilize the anatomical structural information in
chest X-ray images. Subsequently, we employ an intra- and
inter-correlation learning strategy for facing the differences of
similarity introduced by the pre-trained network. With these
techniques, the method can alleviate the challenge of anomaly
detection in diverse chest disease environments. To assess the
effectiveness of our approach, experiments were conducted
on two different types of datasets. The experimental results
demonstrate that our method surpasses several state-of-the-art
methods in chest X-ray anomaly detection.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. Li, X. Lu, and J. Yuan, “MHA-CoroCapsule: Multi-head attention
routing-based capsule network for COVID-19 chest X-ray image classification,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1208–1218,
May 2022.
[2] K. Sanchez, C. Hinojosa, H. Arguello, D. Kouamé, O. Meyrignac, and
A. Basarab, “CX-DaGAN: Domain adaptation for pneumonia diagnosis
on a small chest X-ray dataset,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 41, no. 11,
pp. 3278–3288, Nov. 2022.
[3] F. Wang et al., “Lumbar bone mineral density estimation from chest
X-ray images: Anatomy-aware attentive multi-ROI modeling,” IEEE
Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 257–267, Jan. 2023.
[4] A. Souid, N. Sakli, and H. Sakli, “Toward an efficient deep learning model for lung pathologies detection in X-ray images,” in
Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. (IWCMC), May 2022,
pp. 1028–1033.
[5] E. Tiu, E. Talius, P. Patel, C. P. Langlotz, A. Y. Ng, and P. Rajpurkar,
“Expert-level detection of pathologies from unannotated chest X-ray
images via self-supervised learning,” Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 6,
no. 12, pp. 1399–1406, Sep. 2022.
[6] R. O. Ogundokun, A. B. Adelodun, A. A. Adebiyi, M. Daniyal, and
M. Odusami, “Application of pre-trained CNN methods to identify
COVID-19 pneumonia from chest X-ray,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Sci.,
Eng. Bus. Sustain. Develop. Goals (SEB-SDG), vol. 1, Apr. 2023,
pp. 1–6.
[7] J. Tan, B. Hou, J. Batten, H. Qiu, and B. Kainz, “Detecting outliers
with foreign patch interpolation,” Mach. Learn. Biomed. Imag., vol. 1,
pp. 1–27, Apr. 2022.
[8] J. Tan, B. Hou, T. Day, J. Simpson, D. Rueckert, and B. Kainz,
“Detecting outliers with Poisson image interpolation,” in Proc. 24th Int.
Conf., Strasbourg, France, Sep. 2021, pp. 581–591.
[9] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic
anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2022, pp. 474–489.
[10] W. Li, G.-H. Liu, H. Fan, Z. Li, and D. Zhang, “Self-supervised
multi-scale cropping and simple masked attentive predicting for lung
CT-scan anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 43, no. 1,
pp. 594–607, Jan. 2024.
[11] J. Guo, S. Lu, L. Jia, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “Encoder-decoder contrast
for unsupervised anomaly detection in medical images,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imag., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1102–1112, Mar. 2024.
[12] T. Xiang et al., “SQUID: Deep feature in-painting for unsupervised
anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 23890–23901.
[13] Y. Huang, G. Liu, Y. Luo, and G. Yang, “ADFA: Attentionaugmented differentiable top-K feature adaptation for unsupervised
medical anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process.
(ICIP), Oct. 2023, pp. 206–210.
[14] W. Li, T. Lai, G. Liu, H. Fan, and Z. Li, “Novelty detection of leukocyte
image via mean-shifted feature and directly optimized subspace,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023.
[15] Z. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Xu, and Z. Wang, “SimpleNet: A simple network
for image anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2023, pp. 20402–20411.

814

[16] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
“Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 14902–14912.
[17] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[18] J. Guo, L. Jia, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “ReContrast: Domain-specific
anomaly detection via contrastive reconstruction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, 2024, pp. 1–20.
[19] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 3914–3923.
[20] T. D. Tien et al., “Revisiting reverse distillation for anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2023, pp. 24511–24520.
[21] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully
convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
pp. 1088–1097.
[22] J. Yu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization via 2D
normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2021, pp. 19–25.
[23] Y. Zhao, Q. Ding, and X. Zhang, “AE-FLOW: Autoencoders with
normalizing flows for medical images anomaly detection,” in Proc. 11th
Int. Conf. Learn. Represent, 2022, pp. 1–14.
[24] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489.
[25] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and
P. Gehler, “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
pp. 14318–14328.
[26] S. Lee, S. Lee, and B. C. Song, “CFA: Coupled-hypersphere-based feature adaptation for target-oriented anomaly localization,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 78446–78454, 2022.
[27] T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “Mean-shifted contrastive loss for anomaly
detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 2,
pp. 2155–2162.
[28] J. Bao, H. Sun, H. Deng, Y. He, Z. Zhang, and X. Li, “BMAD:
Benchmarks for medical anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 4042–4053.
[29] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition
challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252,
Dec. 2015.
[30] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
[31] T. Fernando, H. Gammulle, S. Denman, S. Sridharan, and C. Fookes,
“Deep learning for medical anomaly detection—A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1–37, 2021.
[32] N. Tajbakhsh et al., “Convolutional neural networks for medical image
analysis: Full training or fine tuning?” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 35,
no. 5, pp. 1299–1312, May 2016.
[33] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 9664–9674.
[34] J. Sato et al., “Anatomy-aware self-supervised learning for anomaly
detection in chest radiographs,” iScience, vol. 26, no. 7, Jul. 2023,
Art. no. 107086.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING, VOL. 44, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

[35] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, “Variational inference with normalizing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), vol. 37, 2015,
pp. 1530–1538.
[36] J. Lei, X. Hu, Y. Wang, and D. Liu, “PyramidFlow: High-resolution
defect contrastive localization using pyramid normalizing flow,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023,
pp. 14143–14152.
[37] T. Reiss, N. Cohen, L. Bergman, and Y. Hoshen, “PANDA: Adapting
pretrained features for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 2806–2814.
[38] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2014, pp. 818–833.
[39] Y.-L. Boureau, J. Ponce, and Y. LeCun, “A theoretical analysis of feature
pooling in visual recognition,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
(ICML), 2010, pp. 111–118.
[40] F. Saeedan, N. Weber, M. Goesele, and S. Roth, “Detail-preserving
pooling in deep networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 9108–9116.
[41] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable are
features in deep neural networks?” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 27, 2014, pp. 1–9.
[42] C. Zhao, Y. Ge, F. Zhu, R. Zhao, H. Li, and M. Salzmann, “Progressive
correspondence pruning by consensus learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, pp. 6464–6473.
[43] D. S. Kermany et al., “Identifying medical diagnoses and treatable diseases by image-based deep learning,” Cell, vol. 172, no. 5,
pp. 1122–1131, Feb. 2018.
[44] A. Stein et al. (2018). RSNA Pneumonia Detection Challenge.
[Online]. Available: https://kaggle.com/competitions/rsna-pneumoniadetection-challenge
[45] J. Irvin et al., “CheXpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 590–597.
[46] Q. Hou, D. Zhou, and J. Feng, “Coordinate attention for efficient
mobile network design,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13713–13722.
[47] Q.-L. Zhang and Y.-B. Yang, “SA-Net: Shuffle attention for deep
convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2021, pp. 2235–2239.
[48] A. Vaswani, P. Ramachandran, A. Srinivas, N. Parmar, B. Hechtman,
and J. Shlens, “Scaling local self-attention for parameter efficient visual
backbones,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 12894–12904.
[49] Q. Wang, B. Wu, P. Zhu, P. Li, W. Zuo, and Q. Hu, “ECA-Net: Efficient
channel attention for deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 11534–11542.
[50] D. Misra, T. Nalamada, A. U. Arasanipalai, and Q. Hou, “Rotate to
attend: Convolutional triplet attention module,” in Proc. IEEE Winter
Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 3139–3148.
[51] X. Li, W. Wang, X. Hu, and J. Yang, “Selective kernel networks,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2019, pp. 510–519.
[52] P. Rajpurkar et al., “CheXNet: Radiologist-level pneumonia detection
on chest X-rays with deep learning,” 2017, arXiv:1711.05225.
[53] X. Mei et al., “RadImageNet: An open radiologic deep learning research
dataset for effective transfer learning,” Radiol., Artif. Intell., vol. 4, no. 5,
Sep. 2022, Art. no. e210315.
[54] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.