IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

279

FALL: Prior Failure Detection in Large Scale System
Based on Language Model
Jaeyoon Jeong , Insung Baek , Byungwoo Bang , Junyeon Lee , Uiseok Song , and Seoung Bum Kim

Abstract—As the scale of high-performance computing systems
(HPC) continues to expand, the frequency of failures within the
system also increases. The follow-up steps in the event of a failure
are necessary because efficient prevention measures are absent.
These actions, however, result in decreased operating efficiency as
the system normalizes. To solve this problem, recent research has
utilized deep learning to predict failures in advance by examining
log messages. One common method uses log ID extracted from
log messages as input data. However, these methods could lead to
information loss in log messages and may not accurately capture
log message properties. In this study, we propose the prior failure
detection in large-scale systems using language models (FALL) that
reflects the properties of log messages. The FALL uses log messages
as text data and only uses normal data for training. The FALL
makes use of sharpening, which concentrates on the minimal lexical
change between normal and abnormal log messages. In addition, by
leveraging the characteristics of log messages with limited vocabularies, the FALL utilizes only some tokens for anomaly detection.
The experiments’ results from log data from real industry-based
HPC systems show that the FALL achieves superior performance
in early failure detection.
Index Terms—Self-supervised learning, language model,
anomaly detection, sharpening, limited vocabulary, HPC system.

I. INTRODUCTION
HIGH-PERFORMANCE computing (HPC) system is a
powerful computational platform that is capable of quickly
processing complex calculations [1]. It is usually composed
of high-performance hardware and software. In the past, HPC
systems were mostly employed for engineering simulations requiring a lot of computing power, as those in nuclear, and particle
physics. However, with the advent of artificial intelligence and
information technology, HPC systems have become increasingly
vital for processing and analyzing large datasets [2], [3]. This has

A

Manuscript received 1 April 2023; revised 12 March 2024; accepted 16
March 2024. Date of publication 2 May 2024; date of current version 16
January 2025. This work was supported in part by the Samsung Advanced
Institute of Technology, Brain Korea 21 FOUR, in part by the Ministry of
Science and ICT (MSIT) in Korea under the ITRC support program supervised,
in part by the Institute for Information Communication Technology Planning
and Evaluation under Grant IITP-2020-0-01749, and in part by the National
Research Foundation of Korea grant funded by the Korea government under
Grant RS-2022-00144190. (Corresponding author: Seoung Bum Kim.)
Jaeyoon Jeong, Insung Baek, and Seoung Bum Kim are with the School
of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841,
South Korea (e-mail: jj950310@korea.ac.kr; insung_baek01@korea.ac.kr;
sbkim1@korea.ac.kr).
Byungwoo Bang, Junyeon Lee, and Uiseok Song are with the Samsung
Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics Company Ltd., Suwon 16678, South Korea (e-mail: byungwoo.bang@samsung.com; junyeon2.
lee@samsung.com; us.song@samsung.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2024.3396166

increased demand for HPC systems across different industries,
and as a result, HPC system manufacturers are creating more
complex and substantial systems. However, because of their
complexity and substantial number of parts, HPC systems scale
significantly in size while also increasing the incidence of system
breakdowns [4], [5].
HPC systems are prone to a wide range of failures, which can
lead to the shutdown of the system in question if the failure is
severe. The system that was shut down must be restarted and its
burden transferred to another system as part of the subsequent
step needed to get things back to normal [6], [7]. However,
during the process of restoring normal operation to the affected
node, the large-scale loading of existing calculations results in
a substantial delay, thus reducing the availability of the HPC
system. [8], [9]. As a result, the ability to accurately predict
system failure is an important aspect because it can improve
the availability of the HPC system and reduce the time and cost
associated with failures [10]. Utilizing the system log message
data produced by the HPC system is an effective way to address
this issue.
System log message data is a form of real-time information
that reflects the present status of the different components that
make up the HPC system, such as nodes [11]. System log
message data possesses unstructured characteristics because
of its expression in natural language sentences. Furthermore,
the collection is unbalanced, with relatively few anomalous
log message records compared to regular log message records.
In addition, as each component concurrently produces system
log messages, a large amount of redundant data is obtained in
real-time [12]. System log message data is therefore a prime
resource for determining an HPC system’s status [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15], [16].
The study of the state of HPC systems using system log
message data can be broadly divided into two fields: failure
detection [11], [15], [16], [17] and failure prediction [12], [14],
[18], [19]. Finding out whether some given log message data is
normal or abnormal is the goal of the research field of failure
detection. This area of study is being actively pursued from
different perspectives, utilizing methods such as machine learning [20], [21] and deep learning [11], [15], [16], [17]. The goal
of failure prediction, on the other hand, is to identify pre-alerts
in the log sequence, a collection of log messages, to anticipate if
failures will occur in the HPC system in the future [19]. However,
research in this field is more difficult than failure detection
because predicting future failures is challenging [12]. Although
the log message data was supplied in the form of natural language

1545-5971 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

phrases in earlier studies on failure prediction, the problem was
only handled from the standpoint of mapping log messages to
log IDs and using them [12], [14], [18]. However, this approach
not only results in a loss of information within the log message
but also fails to fully consider the unique characteristics of the
log message data. This study introduces the failure detection in
large-scale systems using language models (FALL), a technique
for the early detection of system failures based on natural
language processing (NLP). Unlike prior studies on failure
prediction, which have mainly relied on mapping log messages
to log IDs, this study addresses the problem by applying NLP
methods, recognizing that log messages are expressed in natural
language sentences. Additionally, this study uses an anomaly
score for early failure identification that takes into account the
restricted language included in log message data as well as the
two separate vocabulary similarities between normal and abnormal log messages. An experiment was performed using data
obtained from an actual HPC system to show the effectiveness
of the proposed FALL, which achieved the best performance.
The main contributions of this study are as follows:
r We present a novel method in the field of early failure
detection by applying system log message data as natural language sentences. Unlike previous studies that have
mainly used log IDs, this study utilizes the natural language characteristics of log messages to predict failures
and enhance performance in different scenarios.
r The proposed method considers the limited vocabulary
characteristic of log messages as well as the small vocabulary difference between normal and abnormal log messages. Moreover, a failure prediction strategy for anomaly
detection that is well suited to handling imbalanced data is
provided for the first time.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides an overview of the related research on natural language
anomaly detection and system log-based failure prediction.
Section III explains the proposed FALL in detail. Section IV
presents the data and experimental setup used in the study as
well as the results of the experiment. The study is concluded
in Section V by summarizing the key findings and outlining
prospective directions for further research.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Anomaly Detection for Text
Obtaining high-quality abnormal data, in reality, can be a
time-consuming, and costly task. To address this, the anomaly
detection method utilizes only normal data to train the network
to identify normal features and effectively classify abnormal
and normal instances [22], [23]. This technique has been used
for several text classification applications, such as document
classification and sentence classification, with the usage of oneclass support vector machine (OCSVM) for document classification serving as a representative example [24]. Furthermore,
other studies have proposed anomaly detection methods for
classifying normal documents and abnormal documents using
a clustering algorithm based on latent Dirichlet allocation [25]
and a non-negative matrix decomposition algorithm [26]. These

approaches are examples of applying anomaly detection techniques to the text field, but they have a limitation in that the
embedding is conducted on word units, thus the model may not
accurately learn information about the structure and meaning of
sentences.
With the development of deep learning, anomaly detection has
also gained attention under the name of deep anomaly detection,
and various methods have been proposed. Deep anomaly detection allows for the effective learning of complex data which can
enhance the performance of the model. Similar investigations
using deep anomaly detection in the field of text have also
been conducted [27], [28]. As an illustrative example of prior
research, [28] proposed the use of an long short-term memory
(LSTM)-based autoencoder and showed improvement in the
performance of document classification. The model was nevertheless limited in that it could not efficiently learn contextual
information because of the vanishing gradient problem inherent
to LSTM.
To overcome these limitations, recent studies have suggested
anomaly detection methods appropriate for text data [29], [30].
In particular, [30] proposed a representation learning method
that combines the replacement masked detection (RMD), a new
self-supervised learning technique with efficiently learning an
encoder that classifies token replacements accurately (ELECTRA) [31], a language model. They also proposed a text fieldappropriate anomaly detection method tailored for sequence data
and demonstrated the superior performance of their proposed
method using 20 Newsgroups [32] and AGNews [33] datasets.
However, the system log message data used in this study differs
from the dataset utilized in [30] because it possesses the features
of ’similar vocabulary between normal and abnormal’ and ’limited vocabulary.’ Therefore, this study aims to adapt the method
in [30] to suit the characteristics of this system log message data
to establish an appropriate method for early failure detection.
B. Failure Prediction in HPC System
Failure prediction is a more difficult field of research than
failure detection because it involves predicting future failures
that may occur in the system based on the data obtained thus far.
Prior research has used a variety of machine learning techniques
including decision trees, support vector machines and principal
component analysis to anticipate mistakes in HPC systems [21],
[34], [35]. Some studies have used deep learning methods to
predict system failures [14], [18]. Specifically, [14] used a total
of three LSTM layers and proposed an algorithm that predicts
failures in the HPC system by assigning an ID to each log
message and using it as input to the model. However, the log
message itself was not used in these experiments; instead, the
log’s ID was used, which may have resulted in the loss of
message-specific information and a failure to adequately account
for the special properties of log message data.
A recent approach utilizing a transformer model was proposed
in [12] in which natural language-based preprocessing was applied to system log message data to extract the format of the log
messages, which were then assigned an ID and used as input for
the model. The model creates a log sequence that is projected to

JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL

Fig. 1.

281

Example of the preprocessed log message.

happen in the future and, if an abnormal log is present, forecasts
an anomaly. The model produces a log sequence that is expected
to occur in the future and predicts an anomaly if an anomalous
log is present in the generated sequence. This technique uses
self-supervised learning of the log creation to attempt to predict
errors, however, it has drawbacks due to the classification-based
approach and the insufficient use of the log messages as natural
language.
III. MAIN METHOD - FALL
This section presents the proposed method, FALL. By adding
lexical similarity and limited vocabulary, which are traits of
system log message data, into the detecting anomalies in text
using ELECTRA (DATE) [30], a text-based anomaly detection
approach, the FALL is created to be better suitable for early
system failure identification. The proposed method involves the
following three key phases: preprocessing, training, and testing.
A. Preprocessing and Windowing
In contrast to previous studies [14] and [18], which utilized
log IDs in the preprocessing stage, this study does not employ
log IDs, and only conducts minimal preprocessing of system log
message data such as converting to lowercase, removing punctuations, and processing numbers. In particular, the numbers in the
system log message data are substituted with the word “NUM”
as in [11]. Through this preprocessing, the loss of information
contained in the system log message can be minimized while
enabling the anonymization of sensitive information within the
log messages [36]. Fig. 1 shows the system log message as a
result of the preprocessing. In addition, repetitive and sequential
logs are eliminated during the preprocessing stage, leaving only
one instance [36].
In this study, the preprocessing system of log message data is
divided by node, which is a component of the HPC system, and
then sorted in chronological order. Fig. 2 shows the labeling process for the sorted log message. Each log message, represented
as x, consists of a total of n tokens, which can be expressed
as x = (t1 , t2 , . . . , tn ). To serve as input for the model, the
log sequence, Si , is composed of 30 consecutive log messages,
with Si = (xi , xi+1 , . . . , xi+29 ). In other words, Si consists of
h tokens, which represent the total number of tokens in 30 log

Fig. 2.

Illustration of labeling process of log sequence.

messages, and can be expressed as Si = (ti , ti+1 , . . . , th−1 , th ).
The label for the log message sequence Si is determined based
on the occurrence of failures within a defined future time interval
after the lead time from the last log message xi+29 in the
sequence. It is classified as normal if there are no failures within
this period; otherwise, it is classified as abnormal. Furthermore,
the sliding window technique was applied by considering the log
message sequence Si as one window, with the window stride
set to 15 based on the system log message xi . That is, when
the current log sequence is Si , the next log sequence becomes
Si+1 = (xi+15 , xi+16 , . . . , xi+44 ).
The window size and stride were set based on the advice of
industry experts. First, the window size, if too small or too large,
would result in either too little or too much information used for
the model’s judgment. Second, the choice of stride was made
to ensure the availability of log sequence data and to enhance
the diversity of log message arrays within log sequences. Subsequently, industry experts reviewed the collected log sequence
dataset to determine whether data should be removed. This process aims to prevent biased learning and training inefficiencies
through the removal of duplicate data. Finally, the labeled log
sequence dataset was only used for training with the normal data.
B. Replaced Token Detection and Replaced Mask Detection
The structure and training method of the proposed FALL is
similar to the DATE, which is based on ELECTRA [31]. Fig. 3
shows the overall training process of the FALL. A discriminator
and a generator are the two primary parts of the FALL.
The generator, functioning as a masked language model
(MLM), substitutes the masked tokens in the input with different tokens. Here, masked tokens are those concealed by the
model in a manner that obscures their meanings within the input
sentence. Specifically in this study, a random generator is used
as the generator, implying that masked tokens are replaced by
uniformly selecting words from the vocabulary generated by the
tokenizer. The discriminator performs two tasks simultaneously:
the replaced mask detection (RMD) task which predicts the
masking pattern applied to the input and the replaced token

282

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 3. A schematic overview of training phase. First, masking is applied to Si . Second, the masked token in Ŝi is replaced with another word. Finally, S̃i is fed
into the discriminator to carry out the RTD and RMD tasks.

detection (RTD) task which predicts whether each token in
the input is a replaced or original token. Both generator and
discriminator are composed of transformer encoders. While the
discriminator is also utilized in the evaluation stage to detect
early failures, the generator is only used for model training.
As mentioned above, the input of the FALL is a normal log
sequence, S in which 30 log message data tokens are sequentially
connected. The total number of tokens in S, denoted as ‘h,’
will either be greater or less than the model’s hyperparameter,
the max sequence token length. When ‘h’ is less than the max
sequence token length, we use meaningless [PAD] tokens to fill
the gap and match the token count to the max sequence token
length. On the other hand, when ‘h’ is greater than the max
sequence token length, the sentence is divided into sequences
based on the max sequence token length, and they are processed
sequentially.
For the input S of the model, K masking patterns, determined
in advance, are randomly applied, with the masking pattern
being a predefined format that determines the masking locations
applied to the tokens within the input sentence. For example,
assuming that mi is one of K masking patterns and S to which
, t4 , . . . , th ).
mi is applied can be expressed as Ŝ = (t1 , t2 , tmask
3
The generator receives Ŝ as an input, and the mask token inside
Ŝ is replaced with another word according to the probability of
the vocabulary learned by the generator. Finally, the generator
 which can be expressed as follows:
produces S,


S̃ = t1 , t2 , t3 , t4 , . . . , th

ti ,
˜
ti =
ri ∼ PG (ti |S̃ : θG ),

The discriminator consists of a transformer encoder with RTD
head and RMD head, and receives the output S generated by the
generator as its input. The RTD head is responsible for evaluating
if each token in the input is an original token or a replacement
token, allowing the discriminator to differentiate between log
sequences based on token units. Simultaneously, the RMD head
detects the masking pattern applied to the log sequence input,
enabling the discriminator to learn the ability to discriminate
log sequences in terms of their sequence-level characteristics. In
other words, the generator and discriminator learn the contextual
properties of tokens and sequences for normal log sequences.
At this stage, the model learns the overall loss, comparising
MLM loss, RTD loss, and RMD loss as detailed in (3), (4), and
(5). This overall loss is governed by (2), with λ and μ serve as
hyperparameters defining the ratio of RTD loss to RMD loss.
Ltotal = LM LM + μLRT D + λLRM D
⎡
⎢
LM LM = E ⎢
⎣
⎡
⎢
LRT D = E ⎣

h
i=1

⎥
−logPG (ti |S̃; θG )⎥
⎦

s.t.ti =tmask
i

h

⎤

(2)

(3)

⎤

⎥
−logPG (tmask
|S̃; θD )⎦
i

(4)

i=1

ti =[CLS]

LRM D = E[−logPM (m = mi |S̃; θD )].

(5)

C. Anomaly Score Based on Characteristics of Log Sequence
ti = tmask
i
ti = tmask
i

(1)

The performance of the model is assessed through the
anomaly detection task by using only the discriminator. Based

JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL

283

Fig. 4. A schematic overview of testing about the FALL. First, we use the trained discriminator to compute the replacement probability of the input. Second, we
apply sharpening method to the calculated replacement probabilities. Finally, we generate the anomaly score by sorting the probabilities in descending order and
utilizing only a portion of them.

on the likelihood that each token exiting the RTD head is a
replacement token, the anomaly score is determined to decide
whether it is normal or abnormal. For instance, when a normal
log sequence is an input into the discriminator during evaluation,
the tokens in the log sequence are tokens learned by the model,
so the discriminator assigns a low probability to each token.
However, because the model has not learned the abnormal log
sequence, it is concluded that it has been substituted and a higher
probability is provided than the token of the usual log sequence.
These reasons lead to the establishment of an anomaly score that
depicts the traits of the log sequence based on the likelihood that
emerges from the RTD head.
In this study, the anomaly score was determined by considering the unique characteristics of log sequences in the probability
calculated by the RTD head as shown in Fig. 4. The performance of early failures detection was specifically enhanced by
adding the properties of log sequences into an existing text-based
anomaly detection algorithm. Log sequences have two distinct
characteristics: “small lexical difference between normal and
abnormal log sequence” and “restricted vocabulary.”
First, the lexical difference between normal and abnormal
log sequences is relatively small. Natural language typically
shows a wide range of vocabulary usage in certain topics such
as economy, medicine, and sports. We can solve the problem
of identifying abnormality in natural language-based environments by making use of lexical variations. However, in the
context of log sequences, the distinctions in vocabulary are not
signed because the system log pertains to a specific domain and
comprises both normal and abnormal entries. In Fig. 5, we can
find the normal log message ‘Memory device at location arg1
is present’ and the abnormal log message ‘Memory device at

Fig. 5. Examples of slight lexical differences between normal and abnormal
log sequences.

location arg1 is overheating. These two log messages are nearly
identical in all words except for ‘present’ and ‘overheating.’
In essence, the differentiation between normal and abnormal
hinges on a small portion. Additionally, because system log
messages in a log sequence combine normal and abnormal log
messages, the lexical differences between log sequences are even
less distinguishable.
As a result, we used the sharpening method to effectively
distinguish between normal and abnormal log sequences. Sharpening is a technique to regulate the difference in input values
while preserving the relative ranks of each label. Sharpening
can be done by (6) in which L and T represent the number of
labels and a temperature that regulate the degree of difference.
Tokens associated with early failure indicators are given higher
probabilities by applying sharpness to the probabilities from the
RTD head, while the other tokens are given lower probabilities.
1

sharpen(S, T ) :=

tiT

1

L
T
j=1 tj

.

(6)

284

Fig. 6.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

The overall flow of how FALL performs anomaly detection involves taking 30 log messages and predicting the early detection of future errors.

Second, the vocabulary utilized in system log messages is restricted compared to general natural language. Sentences written
by humans are included in the datasets used for natural language
processing, which results in a broad and diversified vocabulary.
However, because the log message is a sentence generated
based on a predefined format, following the status of the HPC
system, the number, and types of vocabulary are quite limited
in comparison to typical natural language processing datasets.
Indeed, the complete dataset of log messages we collected
consisted of a total of 18,779 words. This number is significantly
lower than the words commonly used in everyday language
and slightly more than half of the word count used in large
language models, which is 30,522. Given the limited vocabulary,
the vocabulary related to pre-alert failures is also limited. For
instance, consider a system log message that reads ‘The storage
battery for disk drive bay arg1 is absent.’ In this message, the
only word that serves as an indication of pre-alert and error is
‘absent.’
Consequently, computing the anomaly score solely using the
subset of tokens that are most likely to be alternate tokens is more
effective for early failure detection than evaluating the probability of all other tokens for each token from the RTD head. Given
the characteristics of these log messages, only a proportion of
1/n tokens with a high likelihood of being replacement tokens
among all tokens in the log sequence were used to calculate the
anomaly score. The resulting anomaly score reflecting the two
characteristics of the log sequence can be defined as follows:

Anomaly score
⎛ m
⎞
n
n ⎝
(reverse sort(Sharpen(S, T ))⎠ .
=
m i=1

(7)

TABLE I
DESCRIPTION ABOUT DATASET

IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Dataset and Experiment Setup
To measure the effectiveness of the proposed FALL, which
operates similarly to Fig. 6, we collected and used as a dataset
the baseboard management controller (BMC) log messages and
syslog messages among the system log messages of the HPC
system in actual operation. The BMC is a specialized microcontroller that is integrated into many computer systems and gathers
information on the physical conditions of a computer, server,
or another hardware device such as temperature and humidity.
Based on these data, the BMC expresses the status of the device
as a log message, referred to as a BMC log message. Syslog
is a log generation and management tool commonly used in
Linux/Unix environments, which records all events occurring
on devices as log messages [37]. Therefore, syslog messages
are valuable data that allows device administrators to monitor
issues, performance, and other conditions of the devices. In this
experiment, the two types of system log message data were
combined into a single dataset, rather than being treated as separate datasets. By evaluating both the general health of the HPC
system and the physical condition of its hardware components,
one can predict failures effectively. Table I shows a summary
of the dataset containing over 33 million system log messages
that were gathered from October 7, 2021 to July 30, 2022. The
system log messages consist of approximately 3 million BMC

JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL

TABLE II
DESCRIPTION OF FIVE EXPERIMENT SCENARIOS ABOUT
CLASSIFICATION MODEL

TABLE III
DESCRIPTION OF FIVE EXPERIMENT SCENARIOS ABOUT ANOMALY
DETECTION MODEL

log messages and about 30 million syslog messages, collected
in a ratio of 1:10.
Following the preprocessing and labeling processes outlined
in Section III-A, a series of scenarios was developed by varying
the lead time and prediction interval. These scenarios were then
applied to the obtained log message dataset as presented in
Tables II and III. Based on the current log sequence, there are a
total of five scenarios that estimate the probability that an error
will happen in 10 seconds, 30 seconds, 60 seconds, 180 seconds,
and 300 seconds in the future.
The process of building each scenario dataset is as follows:
The collected log sequence dataset is initially divided into
normal and abnormal datasets. Subsequently, each dataset is
split into training and test dataset while preserving the dataset’s
time-series structure. The normal and abnormal training data are
merged into the training dataset, and the normal and abnormal
test data are merged into the test dataset. Finally, both the
resulting training and testing datasets are randomized using a
predetermined seed number to mitigate potential bias in the
model’s learning process.
The training dataset used about 350,000 log sequences for
each scenario out of all log sequences, and among them, about
3,000 log sequences, indicating failures, accounted for only 1%
of the entire dataset. The validation dataset used approximately
110,000 log sequences for each scenario, and about 20,000 logs
that are errors in the entire dataset. The training dataset was

285

constructed to reflect the reality of having a low proportion
of failures within the dataset, while the validation dataset was
composed of a larger number of failures log sequences to assess
the model’s ability to identify a diversity of failures.
Tables II and III provide summaries of the classification
model and anomaly detection model datasets, respectively. The
anomaly detection model in Table III does not employ error data
during training, and this aspect is duly accounted for. Except
for this difference, the remaining aspects of both datasets are
identical.
The proposed FALL that consists of generator and discriminator uses transformer encoders in the first layer for the generator and transformer encoders in the fourth layer for the
discriminator. A word from vocabularies chosen using a uniform
distribution replaces the mask token as a result of the generator’s
random selection. In addition, the masking pattern was set to K
= 50, and the maximum length of the log sequence, which serves
as the input of the model, was set to 128. The hyperparameter
for the sharpening method, T, was set to 1/2, particularly 1/n =
1/4 when calculating the anomaly score. Furthermore, the ratio
of loss functions used for model training was set to μ = 50 and λ
= 100, and AdamW was used as the optimizer. A total of 20,000
training steps were performed in a batch of 128. We performed
experiments by using the same evaluation protocols on three
different random seeds and used the averaged performance and
standard deviation.
The majority of the experiment involved two comparison tests
using classification models and one comparison experiment using a text-based anomaly detection technique. The classification
models including recurrent neural network (RNN), LSTM [38],
gated recurrent unit (GRU) [39], and 1D convolution neural
network (1D CNN) were evaluated after training using both
normal and failure log sequences. On the other hand, isolation
forest [40], OCSVM [41], deep support vector data description
(deep SVDD) [42], and DATE [30] were used in comparative
tests with anomaly detection models, and only normal log sequences were used for training.
B. Evaluation Metrics
In this study, we assess the performance of early failure
detection using both the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC), a commonly used metric in the field
of anomaly detection and the average number of false positives
(FP) as key evaluation metrics.
For all key values, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve shows the true positive rate (TPR) (8), which is the ratio of
errors predicted by the model to real errors, and the false positive
rate (FPR) (9), which is the ratio of mistakes falsely predicted
by the model to the actual number of normal cases.
TP
TP + FN
FP
.
FPR =
FP + TN
TPR =

(8)
(9)

The ROC curve is a graph showing the change in performance
of the model about the change in the threshold value. The area

286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE IV
COMPARISON RESULTS FOR RNN, LSTM, GRU, 1D CNN, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE
DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AUC SCORE

under the ROC curve is referred to as AUC and ranges from 0.5
to 1. A higher value indicates better performance of the model.
In other words, it was projected that the proposed FALL would
operate normally after the lead time if its anomaly score did not
exceed a particular threshold and that an error would happen
after the lead time if it did. Finally, after calculating TPR and
FPR by changing the threshold value, the ROC curve, and AUC
value were computed.
Furthermore, in this study, we used the average number of FP
as the second evaluation metric. FP refers to the errors where
the model incorrectly classifies actual negatives as positives.
This evaluation metric is particularly significant in the field
of early failure detection. The reason is that misclassifying
normal situations as failure situations can lead to substantial
costs. If the HPC system is predicted to experience an error in a few minutes even though it is functioning correctly,
administrators will take subsequent actions accordingly. This
results in unnecessary interventions incurring both temporal
and financial costs. While the first evaluation metric, AUC,
is commonly used in anomaly detection tasks, it still has the
potential to overlook the occurrence of FP. Therefore, we
adopt the average occurrence of FP as well as AUC as an
evaluation metric, ensuring a more precise and comprehensive
assessment.
C. Results
Table IV, shows the comparative experimental results of the
proposed FALL and the classification model, revealing that the
FALL achieved superior performance in all scenarios except for
first one. In general, all scenarios indicate AUC performance
of around 0.7 or higher for RNN-based models because they
are usually well-suited for sequence data. Additionally, even
though abnormal log sequences are uncommon, RNN-based
models seem to have predicted failures very effectively probably
because latent representations for them were trained. Furthermore, the 1D CNN model demonstrates performance above
0.9, which is higher AUC value in all scenarios than RNNbased models. The results also present that the 1D CNN model
achieved superior performance in the first scenario, surpassing
other models. This outcome can be attributed to the efficacy

of max pooling in identifying pre-alert tokens during the 1D
CNN process. However, the CNN filters, although leveraging
local features of the log sequences, do not fully capture the
contextual information. This results in decreased performance in
the scenarios except for the first scenario. On the other hand, in
the case of the FALL, we found performance above 0.91, which
is a higher AUC value in all scenarios except for first scenario
than other comparative models, showing that failures can be
effectively predicted early. In contrast to RNN-based models,
which perform worse in scenarios with shorter prediction intervals than those with longer prediction intervals, the proposed
FALL exhibits a constant performance of 0.91 or higher across
all prediction intervals.
Furthermore, Table V demonstrates that the proposed FALL
model outperforms other classification models in three scenarios. Overall, the results in Table V exhibit notable discrepancies
from those in Table IV. For instance, looking at the performance
of the GRU in the first scenario, Table IV positioned it as the
third best model, while in Table V, it generates over 25,000
FP. Similarly, when considering the results for the LSTM in the
second scenario, Table IV ranked it as the fourth best model,
whereas in Table V, it produced the lowest number of FPs, with
just 235. As discussed in Section IV-B earlier, this illustrates
how the actual number of FPs is concealed by AUC performance.
However, the proposed FALL model consistently achieved commendable performance in both Tables IV and V. Particularly, the
number of FPs generated is impressive, staying below 700 in all
scenarios.
Tables VI and VII presents the comparative experimental
results of the proposed FALL and the anomaly detection models.
Because isolation forest, OCSVM, and deep SVDD are not
anomaly detection models that are particularly suited for text
data, additional embedding techniques were required. In this
case, embedding was conducted in a total of three ways. The
first method was the global vectors for word representation
(GloVe) average approach that proceeds with embedding in word
units through GloVe [43] and computes the average of each
word vector. The second technique used the fastText average
method which calculates the average of each word vector after
embedding in word units using fastText [44]. Finally, we used InferSent [45] that conducts embedding on a sentence-by-sentence

JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL

287

TABLE V
COMPARISON RESULTS FOR RNN, LSTM, GRU, 1D CNN, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE
DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP

TABLE VI
COMPARISON RESULTS FOR ISOLATION FOREST, OCSVM, DEEP SVDD, DATE, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION
UNDER FIVE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AUC SCORE

TABLE VII
COMPARISON RESULTS FOR ISOLATION FOREST, OCSVM, DEEP SVDD, DATE, AND FALL IN TERMS OF AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION
UNDER FIVE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP

basis. We trained and assessed the three models by altering
the three embedding methods, and the final performance was
calculated based on the highest performance for each model.
It can be seen that the performance of the isolation forest, OCSVM, and deep SVDD models, which are optimized
for an image or structured data, is lower than that of RNNbased models. In contrast, DATE and FALL, which are
text-data-specific anomaly detection methods achieved 0.9 or
greater in all scenarios. The proposed FALL yielded higher
performances than the DATE in all scenarios, albeit not significantly. These tests show that the proposed FALL is successful for early failure detection by properly taking into

account the characteristics of log sequences. Table VII follows a similar trend. In comparison to Table V, it is evident that the performance of the classification models, on
the whole, lags behind. Additionally, despite DATE displaying generally high performance in Table VI, the significantly
higher count of FPs can be observed. In essence, one can
conclude that FALL is better suited for log data compared to
DATE.
Additional experiments were conducted to confirm the impact
of sharpening and the utilization of selective tokens on the FALL.
Table VIII depicts the extent to which each factor influenced
the proposed method by AUC performance. Consequently, both

288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 7. Graphs depicting average and range of false positive values for each principal scenario according to method. The left graph illustrates the false positive
performance results for classification models, and the middle graph represents the false positive performance results for anomaly detection models. The right graph
illustrates the false positive performance results for each component of FALL. In each graph, the solid line represents the average false positive value, and the band
around the line signifies the minimum and maximum values.

TABLE VIII
PERFORMANCE RESULTS FOR EACH COMPONENT OF THE FALL IN TERMS OF
AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE
DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON AUC SCORE

TABLE IX
PERFORMANCE RESULTS FOR EACH COMPONENT OF THE FALL IN TERMS OF
AVERAGED SCORES AND THEIR STANDARD DEVIATION UNDER FIVE
DIFFERENT SCENARIOS BASED ON FP SCORE

variables had an effect on AUC performance, and the FALL that
used both variables had the greatest AUC value. In addition,
when each element was applied individually, it can be shown
that performance gradually increased in the DATE, the baseline
model, except for the second scenario. Sharpening increases the
lexical difference between the regular log sequence and the abnormal log sequence, allowing the model to distinguish between
the two types of logs with accuracy. The experiment reveals
that the AUC value on average was increased by approximately
0.0008 for each scenario. Additionally, utilizing only certain
tokens reflects the characteristics of log messages with a limited
vocabulary, by choosing, and utilizing tokens that are essential
for early error detection. This also resulted in an increase in the
AUC value by an average of 0.004 for each scenario. In the end,

the FALL, which merged these two components, outperformed
the baseline model DATE by boosting the AUC value by an
average of roughly 0.008 for each scenario.
Furthermore, in Table IX, it is evident that the application of
individual elements leads to a reduction in the number of FPs.
Notably, when using only partial tokens for anomaly score, as
opposed to sharpening, a substantial improvement is observed.
However, when additional elements are incorporated into the
existing DATE, an increase in standard deviation is noticed,
indicating instability in its performance.
Fig. 7 presents graphs illustrating the mean false positive
values and the range (minimum/maximum) for each principal
scenario categorized by methodology. We intended to conduct
performance comparisons that include not only standard deviation but also comparisons of minimum and maximum values.
This approach allows for precise comparisons among models
with similar false positive values. The x-axis represents the
lead time in seconds, and the y-axis denotes the count of false
positives. Specifically, the left graph represents the false positive
performance graph for classification models. In the case of other
classification models, notable performance discrepancies were
observed depending on the scenario. However, for the proposed
FALL model demonstrate consistent and stable performance
across all scenarios. Moreover, upon inspecting the graph for
anomaly detection in the center and the graphs for each component of FALL on the right, it becomes evident that FALL
outperforms other models. Especially, considering the entire
range (min/max), the proposed model consistently exhibited superior performance. In essence, FALL not only exhibits superior
performance but also demonstrates a universal efficacy.
Lastly, additional experiments were conducted to determine
if the proposed model FALL performs effectively on different
datasets. The datasets used for these experiments were the
Thunderbird [46] and BGL [46] datasets, which are benchmark
datasets [47] in the field (https://github.com/logpai/loghub).
Both datasets consist of log messages collected from highperformance computing (HPC) systems, aligning well with the
scenarios assumed in this paper. Tables X and XI present the
evaluations of DATE and FALL based on the Thunderbird and
BGL datasets, respectively. In the Thunderbird dataset, it is
evident that FALL outperforms DATE in terms of AUC in all
scenarios except the second one. Particularly noteworthy is the
significantly lower average number of FP achieved by FALL.

JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL

TABLE X
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN DATE AND FALL BASED ON THE
THUNDERBIRD DATASET, USING AUC AND THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP AS
PERFORMANCE METRICS

TABLE XI
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN DATE AND FALL BASED ON THE
BGL DATASET, USING AUC AND THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF FP AS
PERFORMANCE METRICS

289

such area for development. Currently, only numbers are replaced
with a token called NUM, which may lead to loss of information.
It is expected that the model would be able to acquire more
predictive information and perform better by tokenizing specific aspects like IP addresses or file locations within the log
messages.
Furthermore, research into the number of node failures and the
correlation analysis between them would be highly meaningful.
In this paper, we focus solely on predicting the future occurrence of node failures through the model. For example, in [48],
research was conducted on examining the correlation between
failures when one or more node failures occurred. Based on
this research, conducting a post-analysis on the correlation of
failures after early detection of node failures could lead to even
more significant research.
Finally, research on predicting specific errors among system
failures such as CPU errors, DRAM errors, etc., using a natural
language prediction model is a plausible avenue. In this paper,
we designed a model optimized for predicting node failures and
demonstrated its effectiveness. However, we did not explore
research on specific error types that lead to node failures. Investigating specific errors poses additional challenges, requiring
more extensive data and potentially encountering imbalanced
data, which could impede effective learning by natural language
models. Addressing these challenges with natural language
models has the potential to enhance the efficiency of error prediction within HPC systems, with the added benefit of simplified
maintenance for the natural language prediction model.
REFERENCES

This advantage of FALL is equally evident in the BGL dataset.
As observed in Table XI, FALL exhibits superior performance
compared to DATE in the first, third, and fifth scenarios, accompanied by consistently lower average FP counts in all scenarios.
Thus, FALL demonstrates its robust performance across different log data sources.
V. CONCLUSION
This study presents a text-based anomaly detection method,
FALL, for the early detection of failures in HPC systems. For
the first time in the field, the FALL creates tasks for anomaly
detection using log sequences as natural language. To address
the problem of misclassification caused by the small vocabulary
difference between normal and error log sequences, the proposed
method utilizes a sharpening. Furthermore, by focusing on the
features of limited vocabulary, anomaly detection performance
is improved by using only some tokens that are essential for
early failure detection. Empirical findings show that the FALL
enhances early failure detection by utilizing the characteristics
of log sequences. Experiments demonstrate that the FALL outperforms other methods, achieving an average AUC value of
more than 0.91.
While the FALL showed excellent performance in early failure detection of HPC systems, there are opportunities for future
research to enhance the method. Preprocessing log messages
with domain-specific tokens appropriate for system logs is one

[1] S. Almeida, “An introduction to high performance computing,” Int. J.
Modern Phys. A, vol. 28, no. 22/23, 2013, Art. no. 1340021.
[2] W. Fan, F. Xiao, J. Fan, Z. Han, L. Sun, and R. Wang, “Fault-tolerant
routing with load balancing in LeTQ networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 68–82, Jan./Feb. 2023.
[3] D. Xiang, B. Li, and Y. Fu, “Fault-tolerant adaptive routing in dragonfly
networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 259–271, Mar./Apr. 2019.
[4] M. Schulz, B. Lucas, T. Macaluso, D. J. Quinlan, and J. Wu, “Inter-agency
workshop on HPC resilience at extreme scale,” Nat. Secur. Agency Adv.
Comput. Syst., Feb. 2012. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:15095322
[5] F. Cappello, G. Al, W. Gropp, S. Kale, B. Kramer, and M. Snir, “Toward
exascale resilience: 2014 update,” Supercomput. Front. Innovations: Int.
J., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–28, 2014.
[6] M. Rodríguez-Pascual, J. Cao, J. A. Moríñigo, G. Cooperman, and R.
Mayo-Garc ía, “Job migration in HPC clusters by means of checkpoint/restart,” J. Supercomput., vol. 75, pp. 6517–6541, 2019.
[7] N. El-Sayed and B. Schroeder, “Understanding practical tradeoffs in
HPC checkpoint-scheduling policies,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 336–350, Mar./Apr. 2018.
[8] F. Cappello, “Fault tolerance in petascale/exascale systems: Current
knowledge, challenges and research opportunities,” Int. J. High Perform.
Comput. Appl., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 212–226, 2009.
[9] E. N. Elnozahy and J. S. Plank, “Checkpointing for peta-scale systems: A
look into the future of practical rollback-recovery,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 97–108, Second Quarter 2004.
[10] A. Gainaru, F. Cappello, M. Snir, and W. Kramer, “Failure prediction for
HPC systems and applications: Current situation and open issues,” Int. J.
High Perform. Comput. Appl., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 273–282, 2013.
[11] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “LAnoBERT: System log anomaly detection
based on BERT masked language model,” 2021, arXiv:2111.09564.
[12] K. A. Alharthi, A. Jhumka, S. Di, and F. Cappello, “Clairvoyant: A logbased transformer-decoder for failure prediction in large-scale systems,”
in Proc. 36th ACM Int. Conf. Supercomput., 2022, pp. 1–14.

290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

[13] K. Zhang, J. Xu, M. R. Min, G. Jiang, K. Pelechrinis, and H. Zhang,
“Automated it system failure prediction: A deep learning approach,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2016, pp. 1291–1300.
[14] A. Das, F. Mueller, C. Siegel, and A. Vishnu, “Desh: Deep learning for
system health prediction of lead times to failure in HPC,” in Proc. 27th
Int. Symp. High- Perform. Parallel Distrib. Comput., 2018, pp. 40–51.
[15] S. Huang et al., “HitAnomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly
detection in system log,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 2064–2076, Dec. 2020.
[16] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Selfattentive classification-based anomaly detection in unstructured logs,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1196–1201.
[17] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust anomaly detection and localization for interleaved unstructured logs,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2762–2780, Jul./Aug. 2023.
[18] A. Das, F. Mueller, and B. Rountree, “Aarohi: Making real-time node
failure prediction feasible,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Parallel Distrib. Process.
Symp., 2020, pp. 1092–1101.
[19] J. R. Campos, E. Costa, and M. Vieira, “Online failure prediction for complex systems: Methodology and case studies,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3520–3534, Jul./Aug. 2023.
[20] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based
problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf.
Softw. Eng. Companion, 2016, pp. 102–111.
[21] Z. Lan, Z. Zheng, and Y. Li, “Toward automated anomaly identification
in large-scale systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 174–187, Feb. 2010.
[22] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and E. Vázquez,
“Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, systems and
challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, no. 1/2, pp. 18–28, 2009.
[23] C. C. Aggarwal, Outlier Analysis Second Edition. Springer Int. Publishing, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.co.kr/books?id=
KyG1DQAAQBAJ
[24] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classification,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, pp. 139–154, 2001.
[25] A. Mahapatra, N. Srivastava, and J. Srivastava, “Contextual anomaly
detection in text data,” Algorithms, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 469–489, 2012.
[26] R. Kannan, H. Woo, C. C. Aggarwal, and H. Park, “Outlier detection for
text data: An extended version,” 2017, arXiv: 1701.01325.
[27] L. Bontemps, V. L. Cao, J. McDermott, and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Collective
anomaly detection based on long short-term memory recurrent neural
networks,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Future Data Secur. Eng., Can Tho City,
Vietnam, Springer, 2016, pp. 141–152.
[28] L. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class document classification via neural
networks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 70, no. 7/9, pp. 1466–1481, 2007.
[29] L. Ruff, Y. Zemlyanskiy, R. Vandermeulen, T. Schnake, and M. Kloft,
“Self-attentive, multi-context one-class classification for unsupervised
anomaly detection on text,” in Proc. 57th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4061–4071.
[30] A. Manolache, F. Brad, and E. Burceanu, “DATE: Detecting anomalies in text via self-supervision of transformers,” in Proc. Conf. North
Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: Hum. Lang. Technol., 2021,
pp. 267–277.
[31] K. Clark, M.-T. Luong, Q. V. Le, and C. D. Manning, “ELECTRA: Pretraining text encoders as discriminators rather than generators,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020, pp. 1–18. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/pdf?id=r1xMH1BtvB
[32] K. Lang, “NewsWeeder: Learning to filter netnews,” in Proc. 12th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., A. Prieditis and S. Russell, Eds. San Francisco CA:
Morgan Kaufmann, 1995, pp. 331–339.
[33] X. Zhang, J. Zhao, and Y. LeCun, “Character-level convolutional networks
for text classification,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015,
pp. 649–657.
[34] C. A. Rincón, J.-F. Pâris, R. Vilalta, A. M. Cheng, and D. D.
Long, “Disk failure prediction in heterogeneous environments,” in
Proc. Int. Symp. Perform. Eval. Comput. Telecommun. Syst., 2017,
pp. 1–7.
[35] E. W. Fulp, G. A. Fink, and J. N. Haack, “Predicting computer system
failures using support vector machines,” in Proc. 1st USENIX Conf. Anal.
Syst. Logs, 2008, Art. no. 5.
[36] S. Ghiasvand and F. M. Ciorba, “Assessing data usefulness for failure
analysis in anonymized system logs,” in Proc. 17th Int. Symp. Parallel
Distrib. Comput., 2018, pp. 164–171.
[37] R. Gerhards, “The syslog protocol,” RFC, Tech. Rep., vol. 5424, pp. 1–38,
Mar. 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5424
[38] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.

[39] J. Chung, Ç. Gülçehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,”
2014, arXiv:1412.3555. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
3555
[40] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[41] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt,
“Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 1999, pp. 582–588.
[42] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[43] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “GloVe: Global vectors
for word representation,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang.
Process., 2014, pp. 1532–1543.
[44] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching word
vectors with subword information,” Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
vol. 5, pp. 135–146, 2017.
[45] A. Conneau, D. Kiela, H. Schwenk, L. Barrault, and A. Bordes, “Supervised learning of universal sentence representations from natural language inference data,” 2017, arXiv: 1705.02364. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02364
[46] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five
system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst.
Netw., 2007, pp. 575–584.
[47] J. Zhu, S. He, P. He, J. Liu, and M. R. Lyu, “Loghub: A large collection of
system log datasets for AI-driven log analytics,” 2020, arXiv: 2008.06448.
[48] S. Ghiasvand, F. M. Ciorba, R. Tschüter, and W. E. Nagel, “Lessons learned
from spatial and temporal correlation of node failures in high performance
computers,” in Proc. 24th Euromicro Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Netw.Based Process., 2016, pp. 377–381.

Jaeyoon Jeong received the BS degree in applied
statistics from Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2021. He is currently working toward the MS
degree with the School of Industrial and Management
Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea.
His research interests include anomaly detection and
their industrial applications.

Insung Baek received the BS degree from Korea
University, Seoul, Korea, in 2016, where he is currently working toward the PhD degree in industrial
and management engineering. His research interests
include explainable artificial intelligence algorithms
and their application to games and visions.

Byungwoo Bang received the BS degree in computer engineering from Dongguk University, in 2007,
and the MS degree in software engineering from
the Graduate School of the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul,
South Korea, in 2014. He is currently working toward
the PhD degree on the topic of RAS with the Department of Industrial Management, Korea University,
while working with Samsung Advanced Institute of
Technology, Suwon, South Korea. He is currently the
leader of the RAS team. His research interests include
detecting supercomputer’s failure using various techniques in high performance
computing systems.

JEONG et al.: FALL: PRIOR FAILURE DETECTION IN LARGE SCALE SYSTEM BASED ON LANGUAGE MODEL

Junyeon Lee received the BS degree in human environment and design from Yonsei University, in 2013,
and the MS degree in software from the Graduate
School of the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, South Korea,
in 2021. He is currently a staff researcher with the
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Suwon,
South Korea. His research interests include improving reliability and availability in high performance
computing systems.

Uiseok Song received the BS degree in computer science and the MS degree in distributed computing from
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2016
and 2018, respectively. He is currently a researcher
with the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology,
Suwon, South Korea. His research interests include
AI and fault analysis for systems and devices.

291

Seoung Bum Kim received the MS degree in industrial and systems engineering, and the PhD degree in industrial and systems engineering from the
Georgia Institute of Technology, in 2001 and 2005,
respectively. He is a professor with the School of
Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University. From 2005–2009, he was an assistant professor with the Department of Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Texas
at Arlington. His research interests utilize machine
learning algorithms to create new methods for various
problems appearing in engineering and science. He has published more than 150
internationally recognized journals and refereed conference proceedings.