2266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

FeCoGraph: Label-Aware Federated Graph
Contrastive Learning for Few-Shot Network
Intrusion Detection
Qinghua Mao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Xi Lin , Member, IEEE,
Wenchao Xu , Senior Member, IEEE, Yuxin Qi , Student Member, IEEE, Xiu Su , Member, IEEE,
Gaolei Li , Member, IEEE, and Jianhua Li , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—With increasing cyber attacks over the Internet,
network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) have been an
indispensable barrier to protecting network security. Taking
advantage of automatically capturing topology connections,
recent deep graph learning approaches have achieved remarkable
performance in distinguishing different types of malicious flows.
However, there remain some critical challenges. 1) previous supervised learning methods rely heavily on abundant and high-quality
annotated samples, while label annotation requires abundant time
and expert knowledge. 2) Centralized methods require all data
to be uploaded to a server for learning behavior patterns, which
results in high detection latency and critical privacy leakage. 3)
Diverse attack scenarios exhibit highly imbalanced distribution,
making it hard to characterize abnormal behaviors. To address
these issues, we proposed FeCoGraph, a label-aware federated
graph contrastive learning framework for intrusion detection
in few-shot scenarios. The line graph is introduced to directly
process flow embeddings, which are compatible with diverse
GNNs. Furthermore, We formulate a graph contrastive learning
task to effectively leverage label information, allowing intraclass embeddings more compact than inter-class embeddings. To
improve the scalability of NIDS, we utilize federated learning
to cover more attack scenarios while protecting data privacy.
Experiment results show that FeCoGraph surpass E-graphSAGE
with an average 8.36% accuracy on binary classification and
6.77% accuracy on multiclass classification, demonstrating the
efficiency of our approach.
Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, few-shot learning,
graph contrastive learning, graph neural networks.
Received 28 May 2024; revised 14 November 2024 and 30 December 2024;
accepted 4 February 2025. Date of publication 13 February 2025; date of
current version 26 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62202302 and
Grant U21B2019. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was Dr. Weizhi Meng. (Corresponding
author: Xi Lin.)
Qinghua Mao, Xi Lin, Yuxin Qi, Gaolei Li, and Jianhua Li are with Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for Information
Security, School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Institute of Cyber Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: mmmm2018@sjtu.edu.cn; linxi234@sjtu.edu.cn;
qiyuxin98@sjtu.edu.cn; gaolei li@sjtu.edu.cn; ljh888@sjtu.edu.cn).
Wenchao Xu is with the Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, and also with Shenzhen Research Institute,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail:
wenchao.xu@polyu.edu.hk).
Xiu Su is with the Big Data Institute, Central South University, Changsha
410075, China, and also with the School of Computer Science, Faculty
of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
(e-mail: xisu5992@uni.sydney.edu.au).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3541890

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE last few decades have witnessed an increasing
number of cyberattacks towards Internet infrastructures
around the world. Consequently, network intrusion detection
systems (NIDS) have been an essential component in rapidly
detecting emerging security threats. There are two kinds of
methods, including signature-based [1] and anomaly-based
methods [2]. While signature-based methods suffer from low
detection rates and poor scalability, anomaly-based approaches
have broader prospects with the potential to detect emerging
and diverse attacks.
Previous studies have introduced deep learning methods to
solve NIDS problems. High-level discriminative features are
extracted from statistical features for classification. Although
they have achieved excellent performance, they don’t consider the relation between network flows. Some advanced
attacks launched by a cluster of computers, such as distributed
denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks [3], can be depicted as
host interactions. When we convert network traffic into a
graph, these host interactions can be captured by graph neural
networks (GNNs) to enhance the topology-aware expressive
capabilities [4].
The last few years have seen an increased number of GNNbased solutions for network intrusion detection. Some studies
proposed tailored GNN models for automatically detecting
malicious botnet nodes [5], [6]. However, only the structural
information is used. Regarding intrusion detection as an edge
classification problem, E-GraphSAGE [7] reformulated GraphSAGE to aggregate neighboring edge features. Chang et al.
[8] incorporated the residual connection into E-GraphSAGE
to tackle the imbalance issue. Other works are based on timespatial analysis, with the time correlation-aware graph [9] or
the interaction history [10]. The above methods are used as
supervised models, requiring a huge amount of labeled data.
However, annotating numerous labels is a time-consuming and
labor-intensive task, hindering adaptation to unknown attacks.
Recent studies integrate self-supervised learning techniques
into GNN models in the absence of labeled data. In AnomalE [11], deep graph infomax objective [12] is leveraged to
increase the amount of shared information between local and
global representation. TS-IDS [13] enhances the expressive

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

ability of edge embedding by predicting nodes’ properties
based on the volume of traffic traversing them. Compared with
Anomal-E, TS-IDS provides an end-to-end training paradigm,
which obviates the need for selecting the pooling function [14]
and optimizing the encoder and classifier separately.
Although these two approaches have demonstrated considerable performance without requiring labeled data, they still
encounter three critical challenges. First, recently attack behaviors usually exhibit intricate patterns, while limited network
traffic samples are available. This might increase the difficulty
of malicious network flow detection with restricted samples. Secondly, cyber attacks usually demonstrate imbalanced
distribution and vague boundaries between different attack
scenarios, making it hard to accurately characterize abnormal
behavioral patterns. Considering long-term APT attacks as an
example, the attackers can constantly adjust attack strategies
until reaching their goal of extracting critical information,
leading to the complexity and chronicity in extracting intrinsic
features of such an attack. Finally, existing centralized NIDS
approach will inevitably cause heavy computation overheads
and high latency, thereby resulting in detection delay of abnormal behaviors and poor scalability in large-scale networks.
Since network flow data are collected from different institutions, centralized data transmission and storage also heavily
incurs privacy concerns [15]. Given the challenges brought by
diverse emerging attacks, limited number of available samples
and privacy concerns about distributed data, it is of great
significance to develop an effective federated graph learning
framework towards label-scarce NIDS scenario.
To address the above challenges, we propose FeCoGraph, a
novel federated graph contrastive learning framework for network intrusion detection in few-shot scenarios. We construct
a label-aware graph contrastive learning module to efficiently
exploit scarce labeled samples. Intra-class similarities and
inter-class differences are extracted via a semi-supervised
learning strategy, thereby enhancing the discriminative ability
of network flow embeddings. Furthermore, we incorporate
the label-aware graph contrastive module into a federated
NIDS framework to improve detection efficiency for abnormal
activities, while encouraging knowledge sharing in a privacypreserving way. The main contribution of our work can be
summarized as follows:
• In this paper, we propose a label-aware federated graph
contrastive learning framework to efficiently utilize scarce
labels and non-IID data in federated NIDS. The proposed
federated NIDS can maintain accurate and efficient performance even with few-shot labels.
• We propose a label-aware graph contrastive learning
strategy. With the proposed method, both inter-view
and intra-class similarities are extracted from network
flows by minimizing label-aware positive pairs’ distances,
thereby obtaining robust and discriminative flow embeddings.
• Additionally, a personalized FL algorithm is employed to
allow collaborative training between distributed devices
in a privacy-preserving manner. The bi-level optimization
strategy can alleviate data heterogeneity of different scenarios and boost detection capability of distributed NIDS.

2267

• We conduct extensive experiments on three recently
released NIDS public datasets. Experimental results show
that FeCoGraph surpasses E-graphSAGE and Anomal-E
with an average 5.30% accuracy.
The remaining sections of the paper follow this structure.
Section II covers the review of related works. Section III
introduces the system model and Section IV elaborates on
the design rationale and essential components of FeCoGraph.
Then Section V evaluates FeCoGraph and discusses the experimental results. Section VI concludes the whole paper.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Machine Learning-Based Intrusion Detection
While signature-based methods cannot easily generalize
to emerging attacks, anomaly-based schemes can identify
unknown threats. Machine learning-based approaches have
received much attention in anomaly-based NIDS. These
approaches include both conventional machine learning and
deep learning approaches.
For traditional machine learning solutions, feature engineering is first adopted to extract features from abundant network
flows, along with a shallow classifier. Various machine learning methods have been utilized to build NIDS, including
K-nearest neighbors (KNN), support vector machine (SVM),
naive Bayes, and decision trees. The work by Wang et al.
[16] proposed a two-stage IDS method, in which SVM and a
density-based clustering algorithm are used for classification.
Gu et al. [17] implemented a naive Bayes model to process
original data for obtaining high-quality data with obvious
feature categories. Ding et al. [18] investigated the explainable
artificial intelligence issue by utilizing the decision tree model,
thereby enhancing trust management in intrusion detection.
The limitation of the above methods lies in feature engineering. Abundant time and domain knowledge are necessary to
select and process appropriate features.
On the contrary, deep learning (DL) methods [19] automatically extract flow features from raw data. Current DL-based
methods generally process network traffic in the form of packet
sequences. For example, Vinayakumar et al. [20] extensively
evaluated the performance of CNN and its variant architectures on intrusion detection and demonstrated the capability
of extracting high-level abstract features. Jiang et al. [21]
proposed a multi-channel LSTM-based detection method to
explore the temporal correlations between network sequences.
By merging the strengths of CNN and RNN, Hasson et
al. [22] suggested a hybrid model to extract meaningful
local features and retain long-term dependencies among them.
Some researchers address network anomaly detection with
unsupervised methods such as Deep Belief Network (DBN)
[23] or various iterations of Auto Encoder (AE) [24]. Other
works exploited advanced deep learning techniques, including
meta-learning [25], reinforcement learning [26], to realize
improved detection performance. Nevertheless, current deep
learning-based techniques primarily concentrate on extracting
statistical features from network flows in isolation, leading
to a deficiency in modeling intricate topology patterns within
multiple types of traffic flows.

2268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF GNN-BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS

B. GNN-Based Network Intrusion Detection
Network traffic can be naturally formed as a graph,
where entities (computers, routers) represent nodes and their
interaction denotes edges. Since intrusion behaviors usually
manifest as suspicious patterns underlying the interactions
between network entities, complex structure patterns are
essential for identifying specific attack types, such as
advanced persistent threats (APT), whose signals are too
weak to effectively detect [27].
With the ubiquitous application of graph neural networks
(GNN), the last few years have witnessed an increasing
number of graph-based NIDS approaches. Zhou et al. [5]
propose a tailored GNN to automatically detect botnets by
capturing the intrinsic properties of botnet structure. Similarly,
XG-BoT [6] integrates a reversible residual connection into
a graph isomorphism network for detecting malicious botnet
nodes in large-scale networks. Automatic network forensics is
performed with a GNNExplainer to help identify abnormal
subgraphs and corresponding botnet nodes. However, only
the topological structure is considered, leaving node or edge
attributes unused.
GCN-TC [28] is One of the initial studies to integrate both
flow statistical features and graph structure simultaneously
in the network traffic classification. It can enhance classification performance even with a limited amount of labeled
data. The work by Lo et al. [7] proposed E-graphSAGE,
which formulates NIDS into an edge classification problem.
In E-graphSAGE, node representations are acquired by aggregating edge attributes from the sampled neighborhood nodes.
Although topology information and network flow features are
utilized simultaneously, the processing of mapping the original
source IP into random IP addresses would inevitably disturb
the spatial distribution of network flows. Chang et al. [8]
proposed to incorporate residual learning into the original
E-graphSAGE architecture, to retain the original graph feature
and improve the performance on minority class samples.
Meeting the challenge of limited labeled data in large-scale
IoT networks, some recent studies have leveraged the temporal
correlation between network flows. Deng et al. [9] constructed
an interval-constrained traffic graph and enhanced statistical
and structural features through a topology adaptive GCN.
Duan et al. [10] proposed a dynamic line graph neural network,
which is utilized to extract structural information from spatialtemporal graphs and the interaction history of IP addresses
from successive snapshots. However, the above supervised
learning approaches require extensive labeled data, which limits their ability to detect unfamiliar attacks and scale effectively
in large-scale IoT environments.

Recent works have investigated how to build effective
GNN-based NIDS given few-shot labeled samples. Hu et al.
[29] proposed to extract flow graph features using subgraph
topology from a small number of initial interactive packets,
achieving fast and accurate intrusion detection. Anomal-E [11]
adapts E-graphSAGE to self-supervised learning with Deep
Graph Infomax (DGI) [12]. TS-IDS proposed by Nguyen et al.
[13] incorporates a predictive-based self-supervised learning
module to enrich the node embedding by categorizing endpoint
nodes based on the volume of traversing traffic. Unlike the
previous Graph-based network intrusion detection methods,
we suggest a label-aware graph contrastive learning framework
to tackle the challenges of few-shot learning and imbalanced
data in NIDS.
FeCoGraph differs from existing methods in three aspects.
Firstly, compared with supervised GNN approaches [7], [8]
and spatial-temporal GNN methods [9], [10], we consider a
more generic and realistic scenario, e.g., few-shot network
intrusion detection based on static attack flow graph analysis.
Our method is built on semi-supervised learning scenario
with only a few labeled samples. Secondly, compared with
self-supervised GNN methods [11], [13], the proposed labelaware graph contrastive learning strategy could learn robust
and discriminative flow embeddings by exploiting inter-class
differences and intra-class similarities. Our method facilitates
the effective utilization of both labeled and unlabeled data.
Finally, we particularly investigate the impact of graph-specific
non-IIDness in federated learning and propose an effectively
personalized federated learning strategy. A comprehensive
comparison of GNN-based intrusion detection methods is
shown in Table I.
C. Contrastive Learning on Graphs
Contrastive learning is a self-supervised learning approach
that focuses on acquiring discriminative representations. It
achieves this by reducing the embedding distance between
positive pairs while increasing the embedding distance from
negative samples. Augmentation techniques to generate negative samples and contrastive learning objectives have been
extensively studied in the vision domain [30], [31], [32],
[33], while there are a relatively limited number of researches
on graph contrastive learning. Deep Graph Infomax (DGI)
[12] focused on maximizing the mutual information between
local node-level embedding and global graph-level embedding.
GRACE [34] performed node-level contrastive learning on
augmented graphs by randomly dropping edges and masking
node attributes. Based on GRACE, GCA [35] further explored
adaptive augmentation schemes to preserve important edges

MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

2269

and feature dimensions. GraphCL [36] performs data augmentation by subgraph sampling, randomly disturbing nodes or
edges, and feature masking. Apart from contrasting positive
and negative pairs without any label information, some recent
studies used labels to improve self-supervised learning performance. Inspired by supervised contrastive learning, Wan et al.
[37] contrasted the output of GCN and hierarchy GCN through
a combination of supervised contrastive loss and generative
loss. Akkas et al. [38] proposed a joint contrastive learning
strategy to exploit the benefits of both unlabeled data and
limited labeled data.
D. Federated Learning Over Graphs
The integration of federated learning and graph neural
networks has received unprecedented attention in recent years,
with an extensive courage including recommender systems
[39], [40], molecular graphs [41] and fraud detection [42].
Existing literature can be divided into two categories, i.e.,
intra-graph FL where each client owns a set of graphs and
intra-graph FL where each client owns a subgraph from an
entire graph. Data heterogeneity is a critical challenge in
FL, while graph-specific data heterogeneity is less explored.
Fedgraphnn [43] and Spreadgnn [41] simulate graph-level
non-IIDness in distributing graph datasets to multiple clients.
GraphFL [44] addresses the issue of graph-level non-IIDness
and novel domain occurrence with model-agnostic metalearning. FedStar [45] enables the structural information
sharing in FL via feature-structure disentanglement. In the
NIDS scenario, related works have been proposed to enable
intelligent intrusion detection via federated graph learning.
Given the distributed and heterogeneous nature of network
data and the need for privacy protection, it is reasonable to
model the distributed network environment using subgraph
federated learning. Zhang et al. [46] propose a GNN-based
CAN bus NIDS to simultaneously detect multiple CAN
attacks, where a two-stage classification is deployed to handle
high skewed data. Additionally, federated learning is utilized to
cover diverse driving scenarios while protecting privacy. Krishnan et al. [47] propose a federated GNN-based framework to
facilitate low probability of detection in the wireless network.
FedADSN [48] builds up a decentralized FL framework for
anomaly detection in social networks. However, none of previous works consider effective federated GNN countermeasure
against the realistic but challenging few-shot scenario.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND T HREAT M ODEL
A. System Model
We consider a typical IoT environment consisting of terminal devices, edge servers, and gateway routers. The edge
servers are responsible for real-time data storage and intrusion
model construction, alleviating the computational overload
on cloud servers. Gateway routers play a crucial role in
connecting heterogeneous devices, data forwarding, and protocol conversion. Each IoT device is capable of transforming
sensory data into network traffic packets, which will be transmitted via wireless communication protocols. A sequence of
packets between a source and a destination node during an

Fig. 1. The overview of threat model. A central server aggregates NIDS
models and develop traffic blocking rules. Each local gateway manages IDS
for collecting network flows and detecting abnormal IoT devices.

interval constitutes a network flow, which is characterized by
the source IP address, source port, destination IP address,
destination port, and other statistical features, such as the
incoming number of bytes. Most network flows cannot be
directly transmitted from the source IP to the destination IP.
There are usually multiple forwarding devices on the path.
All the network flows that pass through them are captured by
forwarding devices, whether to be allowed or dropped depends
on the flow table.
The NIDS is usually achieved by the collaboration between
edge servers and gateway routers. The workflow of NIDS
is composed of three main steps, including data collection,
intrusion detection, and alarm response:
• Data collection: numerous network packets are captured
by data collectors deployed on gateway routers. Then
network packets are transformed into network flows and
subsequently uploaded into an edge-level database. Note
that each edge device is served as a local client in federated learning, which has the ability to continuously collect
network flows from interactions with other devices. Network flows owned by different devices are heterogeneous
and class imbalanced.
• Intrusion detection: In federated learning scenario, each
edge device keeps local network flows private and only
uploads model parameters to the edge server. The edge
server aggregates those local parameters to construct a
global GNN model for network flow classification and
intrusion detection. In this way, edge server can conduct
comprehensive intrusion threat analysis with sufficient
data in a privacy-preserving manner.
• Alarm Response: The edge server generates flow tables
on prediction results with global GNN model. Then flow
tables are distributed to edge devices and installed on
gateway routers to determine whether to allow or discard

2270

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 2. The NIDS framework of label-aware federated graph contrastive learning. A label-aware graph contrastive learning module is incorporated into a
personalized FL process.

network flows. When a traffic flow is flagged as abnormal,
its source host is marked as malicious. Subsequently, all
traffic flows originating from this host are blocked by
the flow tables. Consequently, these gateway routers will
discard traffic flows sent by a malicious device.
B. Threat Model
We consider threat model in a typical IoT environment. Both
the edge server and IoT devices are semi-honest and noncolluded. They are honest in adhering to agreements. Although
they are curious about the private data of other entities, they
cannot infer private data from the specific individuals. The
primary threats come from external sources, such as hackers
who target the IoT network. The objective of an attacker is
to gain access to sensitive data or inflict significant damage
towards local devices or the whole network, thereby compromising data integrity and service availability. The capabilities
of attackers include sending manipulated flows or launching a
series of malicious activities, such as sniffing, DoS, backdoor,
and brute-force attacks. The hostile operations are conducted
to take control of benign nodes, and the infected nodes will
send a larger amount of malicious flows to the remaining
normal nodes, ultimately leading to the disorders and collapse
of the entire network system.
IV. L ABEL -AWARE F EDERATED G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE
L EARNING
We propose a novel federated graph contrastive learning
method to tackle the challenges of label deficiency and
imbalance in NIDS. Informative self-supervised signals and
discriminative class label-aware signals are collaboratively
extracted from the clients’ network, under a federated learning
framework. This section systematically presents FeCoGraph,
the proposed method.
A. An Overview of FeCoGraph
An overview of the proposed federated NIDS framework is
shown in Fig. 2. The framework is composed of the following
key components:

• Graph Construction. The initial traffic graph is converted
into its line graph structure for generating node-level
flow embeddings. Network flows in the original traffic
graph are transformed into nodes in the line graph, while
an edge is correspondingly created between two nodes
in the line graph if two flows share a common host
IP address.
• Model Architecture. The backbone model is divided
into two branches for supervised classification and contrastive learning, respectively. Three parts are included
in the overall architecture Encoder, projector, and classifier. The encoder is shared by both branches, each of
which extracts node-level representations from line graph
data. The projector then maps these representations to
a space where the contrastive loss is calculated. The
classifier is used to discriminate benign and malicious
flows.
• Adaptive Graph Augmentation. Graph augmentation is a
critical step in learning robust representations that are
invariant to perturbations. We adopt an adaptive augmentation strategy to obtain two graph views, which consider
the impact of nodes and edges and encourage the model
to learn intrinsic patterns underneath the input graph.
• Label-aware Graph Contrastive Learning. To reduce the
distance between embeddings from the same class, contrastive pairs are formulated based on sample selection
and corresponding labels. Positive pairs are sampled with
data from the same class, while data from different classes
are regarded as negative pairs. We propose to optimize
the model with a joint learning strategy, where the loss
function consists of cross-entropy loss and label-aware
contrastive loss function.
• Federated Learning. We utilize personalized federated
learning to enable collaborative knowledge sharing in
a privacy-preserving manner. Each local client owns a
subgraph consisting of network flows, which usually
follow not independent and identically distributed (nonIID) distribution. Each local client first learns a local
model with its local traffic graph and only uploads the
local models to the server for parameter aggregation.

MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

B. The Workflow of Federated Graph Contrastive-Based
NIDS
1) Graph Construction: Network flows can be converted
into a global traffic graph to model the interactions between
different hosts. The source and destination IP are identified
as nodes and network flows are constructed as edges, with
edge attributes containing statistical fields like protocol type,
incoming number of bytes, etc. In this way, we formulate
network intrusion detection as an edge classification problem.
However, while graph convolution layers have shown excellent capabilities in generating node embeddings, they cannot
directly extract sufficient edge features for network intrusion
detection. Motivated by the line graph structure in graph
theory, we convert the original graph into the corresponding
line graph structure. To be specific, each edge in the original
graph G corresponds to a node in the line graph L(G); for
every two edges sharing a common host IP, an edge is created
between the corresponding two nodes in the line graph L(G).
Compared to the original graph G, line graph structure
L(G) offers several advantages. First, every single node vi
corresponds to di (di − 1)/2 links in the line graph L(G), which
suggests that the line graph will pay more attention to the
nodes frequently communicating with others. The increased
connection density encourages graph convolution to aggregate
more information from neighbors. Additionally, the line graph
reduces the quantity of large eigenvalues in the Laplacian
matrix of L(G) with a redundant spectrum, which enhances
the numerical stability of the graph convolution process.
2) Adaptive Graph Augmentation: To preserve the input
graph’s inherent topological patterns and node attributes, we
adopt an adaptive graph augmentation strategy to generate
corrupted graph views. Previous graph augmentation schemes
usually suffered from not capturing the impact of influential
nodes and edges. The behavior patterns extracted from influential flows are conducive to analysis.
To generate positive and negative samples for contrastive
learning, we generate two different but correlated graph
views with stochastic augmentation function G˘1 = t1 (G) and
G˘2 = t2 (G), where t1 and t2 are sampled from augmentation
function set T . In the GCA model, augmentation schemes
are designed to preserve influential attributes and structures,
while perturbing less important edges or features. Specifically,
the probabilities of dropping edges and masking features are
higher for less important feature dimensions and edges, and
lower for important counterparts.
For topology-level perturbation, the augmented edge set is
formulated with probability
P{(u, v) ∈ Ẽ} = 1 − peuv ,

(1)

where (u, v) ∈ E and peuv is the probability of removing (u, v)
and Ẽ is the augmented edge set. We leverage widely-used
node centrality metrics to connect peuv with the importance of
the edge (u, v). Specifically, edge centrality is defined based on
the centrality of two correlated nodes.To simplify, this can be
expressed as the average centrality value between two nodes in
an undirected graph. weuv = (ϕc (u) + ϕc (v))/2, or the centrality
of the destination node on a directed graph as weuv = ϕc (v).
Then we calculate the probabilities of dropping edges based on

2271

edge centrality values. We take the logarithm of edge centrality
to mitigate the issue caused by nodes with extremely dense
connections, i.e., seuv = log weuv . The drop probability of edge
(u, v) can be obtained with a normalization step

 e
smax − seuv
e
· pe , pτ ,
(2)
puv = min
semax − µes
where pe is a scaling hyper-parameter that controls the scale
of the probability of removing edges, semax and µes denotes the
maximum and average of seuv , pτ < 1 is a cut-off probability.
For attribute-level augmentation, node attributes are perturbed with a random mask vector m̃ ∈ {0, 1}F
X̃ = [x1 ◦ m̃; x2 ◦ m̃; . . . ; xN ◦ m̃],

(3)

where F is the feature dimension. Each dimension of the mask
vector is independently drawn from a Bernoulli distribution as
m̃i ∼ Bern(1 − pif ).
Similar to topology-level augmentation, the mask probability pif is designed to gauge the significance of the i-th
dimension of node features. Our assumption is that crucial feature dimensions tend to be more prevalent in influential nodes.
It is reasonable because each dimension of node features
corresponds to a statistical feature of each network flow. Then,
statistical features that occur frequently in influential network
flows should be regarded as important features. Specifically,
for any node u with continuous features and the corresponding
feature dimension i, the dimension weights can be written as
X
wif =
|xui | · ϕc (u),
(4)
u∈V

where ϕc (u) is a node centrality value. Next, we calculate
the probability of masking dimension i based on the feature
dimension weights. First, we take the logarithm of feature
dimension weight to mitigate the overflow issue caused by
nodes with extremely dense connections. Then, the feature
mask probability is obtained by performing normalization on
the weights sif
!
f
smax
− sif
f
pi = min
· p f , pτ ,
(5)
f
smax
− µ sf
where sif = log wif , p f is a hyper-parameter that controls
f
the scale of the mask probability, smax
and µ sf denotes the
f
maximum and average of si , pτ < 1 is a cut-off probability.
3) Model Architecture: We propose a label-aware graph
contrastive module with two branches to enhance the capability to discriminate benign and malicious flows. One branch
of the model is used for classification via cross-entropy loss,
while another branch of the model is used for contrastive
learning via supervised contrastive loss. Since a line graph
has transformed network flows into nodes, the node-level
graph neural networks, e.g. GCN, can be adapted as backbone
models. This eliminates the need for complex neighbor aggregation on edge features. The model comprises an encoder, a
projector, and a classifier. Here is a detailed description of
each component:

2272

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

1) Encoder. The encoder is leveraged to learn node
representations by aggregating information from neighborhood nodes. The aggregation process at the k-th layer
can be expressed as
hkN (v) = AGGk (hk−1
u , ∀u ∈ N (v)),
k
hkv = (Wk · CONCAT (hk−1
v , hN (v) )),

(6)
(7)

where hN (v) is the l-layer representation of node v, and
h0v = xv is the node feature. N (v) denotes neighbors of
node v, AGG(·) denotes the aggregation function which
can vary for different GNN models and Wk denote learnable weights at the k-th layer. Given the raw node feature
X ∈ Rd , the node embedding generated by encoder
layers can be formulated as h = Encoder(X) ∈ Rh .
Then node representations are subsequently shared by
projection layers and classification layers.
2) Projector. The role of projection layers is to map embedding into a representation space with fixed dimension.
The projector is implemented as a two-layer multilayer
perceptron (MLP), thereby enhancing the quality of
representations generated by the encoder. The output
embeddings of projection layers are further normalized
to be situated on the unit hypersphere, which allows us
to measure the distance by employing a dot product in
the projection space. Note that the projector is expected
to be discarded during the inference phase
3) Classifier. The classifier is implemented with a multilayer fully connected neural network, which makes the
prediction probabilities of network flows corresponding
to each category. The final prediction probabilities are
utilized to classify the attack type of test samples.
4) Label-Aware Graph Contrastive Learning Task: Existing
contrastive learning approaches have improved the generalization of graph representation learning in a self-supervised
manner, but they lack the exploitation of limited but valuable label information. Considering the challenges of obvious
class imbalance and ambiguous network flow features in an
ever-changing network environment, label-aware contrastive
learning is adopted to further condense intra-class traffic samples in the embedding space and further clarify the decision
boundary between normal and abnormal flows.
Motivated by visual supervised contrastive learning [33],
suppose the original graph contains N points, there are 2N
sample points in two augmented views. Given an anchor
embedding zi , more than one samples are known to belong to
the same class. Samples from the same class in two views are
considered as positive samples, while samples from different
classes in two graph views constitute negative samples. The
label-aware graph contrastive loss can be defined as:
1 X supcon
Li
,
2N

(8)

i=1

2N
e(zi ·z p /τ)
1 X −1 X
Lisupcon =
log P2N
.
(zi ·za /τ)
2N
|P(i)|
i=1 1[k , i]e
i=1

ŷ = f (x) = so f tmax(W · Enc(x) + b),
n X
c
X
Lce = −
yi j log(ŷi j ).

(9)

p∈P(i)

Note that P(i) denotes the set of positive samples which belong
to the same class and |P(i)| denotes the number of positive

(10)
(11)

i=1 j=1

Note n and c denote the number of training samples and
classes, y and ŷ denote true labels and predictions. The final
loss is a combination of supervised cross-entropy loss and
supervised contrastive loss, which simultaneously encourages
correctly classifying the labeled network flows and obtaining
a more discriminative representation:
L = (1 − λce ) · L supcon + λce · Lce .

(12)

5) Federated Learning: In this paper, we adopt two classic
federated learning schemes, i.e., FedAvg [49] and Ditto [50],
which represent general FL and personalized FL approaches.
The model update process of FedAvg is described as follows.
Each participant owns his private local dataset, which cannot
be shared with other participants. The overall training process
can be achieved between the cloud server and clients for a
number of communication rounds. In each communication
round, local training and parameter aggregation are executed
alternately. Each client Ck first trains a local GNN model Wk
with the client’s private network traffic graph Gk . Specifically,
the derived loss, denoted as f (Wk , Gk ), is computed following
the supervised contrastive loss function in Eq 12. During the
local model update stage, the mini-batch gradient Gτ (Wk ) at
each local iteration τ can be derived with the partial derivatives
of f (Wk ; Gk ). Then, the local model parameter of the i-th client
would be updated as follows:
[Wk ]τ+1 ← [Wk ]τ − ηGτ (Wk ),

(13)

where η represents the learning rate. All the local participants
will upload their updated local models to the cloud server for
parameter aggregation:
N

Wkt+1 =

2N

L supcon =

samples for anchor embedding zi . The optimization of supervised contrastive loss shortens the distance of embeddings
from the same class and enlarges the distance of embeddings
from other classes. The most computationally intensive part is
to calculate the loss function based on cosine similarity scores
of positive and negative pairs. The computation complexity of
contrastive loss is O(N · M), where N is the batch size and M
is the number of negative samples per positive sample. The
computation complexity of cosine similarity is O(D), where
D is the dimension of the feature vectors. Consequently, the
overall computation complexity is O(N · M · D).
For another branch, the cross-entropy loss is deployed for
flow representation classification, which is defined as:

1 X t
Wk .
N

(14)

k=1

where Wkt+1 is the globally learned model, which will be
distributed to clients as the initial model in round t+1.
While FedAvg provides a vanilla formulation of federated
learning, it may significantly suffer from client drift caused by
non-IID data distribution. Since network flow statistics of various clients follow non-IID distribution, FedAvg aggregation

MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

could degrade global-level and client-level performance due to
the issue of client drift. To address this limitation, we introduce
Ditto, a personalized FL scheme that seeks to simultaneously
optimize a local model and a personalized model via bi-level
problem optimization. The local model is updated to the cloud
server for global model aggregation, while the personalized
model is kept private to fit non-IID flow data distribution. The
mini-batch optimization loss function of the i-th client can be
modified into the following form:
µ
(15)
min h(θk , W ∗ ; Gk ) = f (θk ; Gk ) + kθk − W ∗ k2 ,
θk
2
1 XN
s.t. W ∗ ∈ arg min
F(Wk ; Gk ).
(16)
k=1
N
Ditto formulates a federated multi-task learning framework
to better handle flow data non-IIDness, including the global
task F(Wk ; Gk ) and the local task f (θk ; Gk ), which trains a
personalized model using only local data. A regularization
term µ2 kθk − W ∗ k2 is introduced to encourage the personalized model as close to the aggregated model as possible. λ
controls the trade-off between global generalization and local
personalization. When we set λ to 0, it is reduced to local
training. When λ increases, it is focused more on global model
generalization.
Algorithm 1 The Workflow of FeCoGraph
Input: client set I, line graph Gk for each client Ck ,
communication rounds T, local epochs r, personalized
epochs s, local learning rate ηl , personalized learning rate
η p , interpolation factor µ, initialized global model w0 ,
initialized personalized model {v0k }k∈[K]
1: for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do
2:
Server randomly selects a subset of clients S t from I,
and sends wt to them
3:
for client Ck ∈ S t in parallel do
4:
Perform attribute-level and topology-level adaptive
graph augmentation on Gk to get Gk1 and Gk2 .
5:
Calculate supervised contrastive loss Fk with Gk1
and Gk2 according to Eq (17)
t
6:
Set wk to wt and update wtk for r local iterations on
Fk :
7:
wtk ← wtk − ηl ∇Fk (wtk )
8:
Calculate cross-entropy loss fk with Gk according
to Eq (18)
9:
Update θk for s personalized iterations on fk :
10:
θk ← θk − η p (∇ fk (θk ) + µ(θk − wt ))
11:
Send ∆tk := wtk − wt back
12:
end for
13:
Server updatesPwt+1 as
t+1
← wt + |S1t |
14: w
∆tk
k∈S t

15:
16:

end for
return {vk }k∈[K] (personalized), wT (global)

The detailed workflow of FeCoGraph in the personalized
FL setting is shown in Algorithm 1. According to the above
equations, each client contributes to the shared global model
while training a personalized model locally. To accomplish
this, we employ the supervised contrastive loss function as

2273

the global objective to encourage sharing more fundamental
network behavior patterns among clients. Simultaneously, we
leverage a supervised cross-entropy loss to capture specific
knowledge of the local data distribution. The two objectives
are formulated as follows respectively:
F(Wk ; Gk )
= λce · Lce (Wk ; Gk ) + (1 − λce ) · L supcon (Wk ; Gk ),

(17)

f (θk ; Gk )
= Lce (θk ; Gk ).

(18)
V. E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed network intrusion detection methods on
real-world NIDS datasets. First, we present the necessary
information on the experimental setup. Secondly, we report
the experiment results attached with performance analysis.
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: We adopt three widely used benchmark
datasets to evaluate our method, including NF-BoT-IoT-v2,
NF-ToN-IoT-v2, and NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 [51]. All of
these datasets are netflow datasets. Each data sample is a network traffic flow representing a series of packets between two
edge devices. There are total 43 features that show information
on general flow statistics and some specific protocols. All flowbased features are extracted from packet headers rather than
payload information. The detailed descriptions of each dataset
are as follows. The v2 version is an extended version of the
corresponding v1 dataset, which contains more samples and
statistical features. The detailed statistics of three datasets are
shown in Table II
• NF-BoT-IoT-v2 is a netflow-based IoT dataset from a
network environment in 2018. It contains 37,763,497
flows out of which 37,628,460(99.64%) are malicious and
135,037(0.36%) are benign.
• NF-ToN-IoT-v2 is a netflow-based IoT dataset realized in 2019. It contains 16,940,496 data flows
out of which 10,841,027(63.99%) are malicious and
6,099,469(36.01%) are benign.
• NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 is a dataset collected
in 2018. It contains 18,893,708 network flows,
out of which 2,258,141(11.95%) are malicious and
16,635,567(88.05%) are benign.
2) Data Preparation: We perform four pre-processing steps
before converting network flows into network graphs. For each
flow data, we merge the IP address and port number into one
attribute by concatenating two attributes. Since Certain types
of attacks are associated with specific port numbers, only IP
addresses are not sufficient to distinguish them. The merged
attribute are expected to more precisely capture the behavioral
patterns associated with different attacks. Secondly, we fill the
missing and infinite values with zero. Thirdly, we perform
target encoding to convert categorical features into numerical
values. The labels indicating benign/malicious and attack type
are also transformed into numerical values. Finally, a standard
scaler is adopted to obtain the normalized features.

2274

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE II
ATTACK C ATEGORY S TATISTICS OF T HREE NIDS DATASETS

3) Baselines: To provide a comprehensive evaluation, We
compare our methods with two types of baselines, including
machine learning methods and GNN methods.
• The machine learning baseline algorithms include
AdaBoost, k Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Decision Tree,
and tree-based ensemble methods (XGBoost, Random
Forest, Extra Trees). We directly feed network flow-based
features into the machine learning classifier.
• We primarily compare our methods with E-graphSAGE
[7] to showcase the improvement brought by contrastive
learning under few-shot scenarios. It is a supervised
approach that adjusts the message propagation mechanism by aggregating edge features instead of node
features.
• Anomal-E [11] is included to demonstrate the effect
of label information in contrastive learning. It is built
upon an E-graphSAGE encoder, incorporates a modified
DGI (Deep Graph Infomax) objective, and integrates four
traditional anomaly detection algorithms.
• we additionally compare our methods with E-ResGAT
[8]. It incorporates residual learning into the original
GAT architecture to improve the performance of minority
classes and stabilize model training.
4) Evaluation Metrics: Four metrics are leveraged to evaluate the performance of FeCoGraph, including accuracy,
precision, recall, and f1-score. These metrics have been extensively used in numerous previous works. These metrics are
calculated with the number of true positive (TP), false positive
(FP), true negative (TN) and false negative (FN), which can
be formulated as follows:
TP + TN
Accuracy =
,
(19)
T P + FP + T N + FN
the accuracy is calculated as the ratio of correctly predicted
samples to all samples in the dataset;
TP
,
(20)
T P + FP
Precision is defined as the ratio of all correctly predicted
positive samples to all samples predicted as positive.;
Precision =

TP
,
(21)
T P + FN
Recall is defined as the ratio of all correctly predicted positive
samples to all actual positive samples in the dataset;
Recall =

F1 − Score =

2 × Precision × Recall
,
Precision + Recall

(22)

The F1-score is defined as the harmonic mean of precision
and recall. It achieves a balance between two metrics in
imbalanced datasets. Note that we use a macro version of the
above metrics, which are calculated and equally averaged for
each class. Since class distributions are generally imbalanced
in network intrusion detection, macro values are appropriate
for treating each class equally.
5) Experimental Settings: The proposed algorithm is implemented with PyTorch, DGL and PyTorch Geometric. The
backbone encoder is composed of a two-layer graph convolutional network (GCN). The input feature dimension is 39,
which corresponds to the number of network flow features.
The number of hidden units in the two layers is set to 64 and
32 respectively. The dimension of projector hidden layers in
tuned from the parameter set {64, 128, 256}, in which 256 is
selected as the optimal value based on validation performance.
Datasets were uniformly downsampled by label proportion due
to the heavy computation burden of using full dataset, with
a downsampling ratio of 2%. Since the volume of network
flows is relatively large, we calculate supervised contrastive
loss in batches to avoid the issue of CUDA out of memory. All
experiments were performed on Ubuntu 22.04 OS equipped
with 2 NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs. Relevant software
libraries include Python 3.8.8, PyTorch 1.13.0, DGL 1.2, and
PyTorch Geometric 2.3.0, etc.
For machine learning approaches, we directly utilize algorithms to fit training samples and provide prediction results
for test samples. For GNN-based approaches, batch gradient
descent is leveraged with an Adam optimizer. The models
are uniformly trained in 2000 epochs with a learning rate of
0.001. Following the setting in E-graphSAGE with additional
simulation for few-shot NIDS, we split the overall dataset into
train and test graphs. 30% of the data is used for training, and
the remaining 70% for test. Note that the anomaly detector
of Anomal-E is finetuned in an unsupervised manner, it is
unfair to compare it with our method. In line with TS-IDS, we
exclusively utilize the E-graphSAGE encoder from AnomalE to produce edge embeddings. These embeddings are then
utilized to fine-tune an XGBoost classifier.
For FL experiments, it is a common practice in FL experiments to split a centralized dataset into multiple partitions and
distribute them across different clients. The whole network
traffic graph is partitioned into 10 subgraphs based on the
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) Strategy [52]. Specifically,
we partition nodes in each class k into J shards following a
symmetric Dirichlet distribution pk ∼ Dir J (α), where client

MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

2275

TABLE III
B INARY AND M ULTICLASS P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A LGORITHMS . (NF-B OT-I OT- V 2 I S A BBREVIATED AS B OT,
NF-T O N-I OT-V2 I S A BBREVIATED AS T O N, NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018- V 2 I S A BBREVIATED AS IDS2018)

j will be assigned with a shard of pk, j proportion. The total
nodes of client j are obtained by gathering each corresponding
pk, j partition of class k. Then subgraphs are generated by
recovering the original links between some of nodes. For
the consideration of few-shot detection, we subsequently keep
30% of the entire nodes labeled. We uniformly set the number
of communication rounds and local epochs as 100 and 5,
respectively. Evaluation metrics of each individual client are
averaged in FL scenarios. We use best mean testing accuracy
(BMTA) [53] as the primary evaluation metric.
B. Result Analysis
In this part, we first provide binary classification results to
validate the ability of FeCoGraph to differentiate benign flows
from malicious flows. Secondly, the multiclass classification
results are presented to demonstrate FeCoGraph’s capability
to identify different attack types. We also investigate the
impact of label proportion, supervised contrastive loss, and
key hyperparameters. Finally, we illustrate the convergence
performance of FeCoGraph under the non-IID data scenario.
1) Binary Classification Performance: To evaluate the ability of our method to discriminate malicious flows from benign
flows, we conduct the binary classification experiment under
the 30% proportion of labeled samples. The results compared
with other representative GNN-based methods are reported
in Table III, including accuracy, precision, recall and F1score. As shown in the table, our solution performs well on
three datasets. On the NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset, our
method achieves the best F1 score and accuracy. On NF-ToNIoT-v2 dataset, our method obtains an accuracy of 96.9% and
an F1-score of 96.62%. On NF-BoT-IoT dataset, our method
obtains an accuracy of 99.89% and 91.12% of F1-score,
achieving the pinnacle of performance on these two datasets.

Furthermore, our method exhibits commendable results when
compared with graph-based methods, which demonstrate the
potential utility of supervised contrastive loss to learn compact intra-class representations. Finally, tree-based ensemble
learning methods obtain competitive results on all datasets,
which indicates that ensemble learning has led to significant
performance improvement than individual classifiers alone.
2) Multiclass Classification Performance:
a) Comparison with State-of-the-Art Algorithms: To
evaluate the ability to accurately discriminate various attack
categories, the multiclass classification experiment is conducted with 30% proportions of labeled samples, the same
setting as in binary classification. On NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018v2 dataset, our method achieves the best accuracy of
99.52% and the best F1-score of 81.38%. Moreover, the
F1-score achieved by our methods is substantially ahead of
other methods, surpassing XGBoost and obtaining secondbest results by 6.61%. Results on both datasets suggest our
method has advanced capabilities to detect genuine threats
while minimizing the risk of false alarms. Similarly, On NFBoT-IoT-v2 dataset, our method outperforms other methods
across four metrics. On NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset, our method
achieves the best detection performance, with an accuracy of
94.32% and a F1-score of 73.31%.
An interesting phenomenon is that tree-based ensemble
learning methods have showcased a universally high performance on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset for both binary and
multiclass classification, in contrast to the performance on
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset. It can be inferred that
these methods are sufficient to capture complex patterns and
relationships within the data. Besides, the gap between the
performance of our method and the best performance achieved
by the Random Forest algorithm is smaller than that in

2276

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 3. F1-score for each attack scenario on NF-BoT-IoT-v2 dataset.

Fig. 5.
dataset.

F1-score for each attack scenario on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2

Fig. 4. F1-score for each attack scenario on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset.

a binary classification task, showing the superiority of our
methods in distinguishing different network flows via line
graph construction.
b) Detection Performance on Attack Categories: With
the presence of numerous emerging and complicated cyber
attacks, it’s critical to differentiate between malicious flows
and benign flows and further distinguish different types of
abnormal behaviors. Moreover, different types of malicious
flows exhibit a skewed distribution, where certain types of
attacks occur more frequently than others. We compare our
method with E-graphSAGE, one of the state-of-the-art GNNbased approaches, in terms of F1-score values for each
category on NF-BoT-IoT-V2, NF-ToN-IoT-v2 and NF-CSECIC-IDS2018-v2. The proportion of labeled samples is set to
30% on both datasets.
Figure 3 provides the results on NF-BoT-IoT-v2. It includes
4 attack scenarios: Reconnaissance, DDoS, DoS, and Theft.
As shown in the Table, our approach consistently outperforms
E-graphSAGE for all attack scenarios. Especially, EgraphSAGE cannot effectively identify Theft attacks due to
scarce samples, while our approach achieves an F1-score of
57.14%. Theft aims to obtain sensitive data via some disguised
ways, such as social engineering. The results demonstrate the
ability of our approach to detect rare and covert attacks
Figure 4 provides the results on NF-ToN-IoT-v2. It includes
9 attack scenarios: backdoor, DoS, DDoS, injection, MITM,
password, ransomware, scanning and XSS. As seen in the
table, the F1-score of E-graphsage for injection, DDoS and
XSS is 48.36%, 59.37% and 73.56%, respectively. On the
one hand, the number of samples for these three scenarios
is relatively small, so it’s difficult for the model to capture the
behavior patterns of these categories of attacks. On the other
hand, these attacks are more easily misclassified as normal
network flows. Injection involves manipulating or injecting

Fig. 6. Visualization of reduction (a) raw edge features from NF-CSECIC2018-v2 test set. (b) edge embeddings generated by FeCoGraph encoder.

malicious code into data streams to alter the execution path,
Cross-site Scripting (XSS) is also a type of injection operated in web applications. DDoS is a distributed DoS attack
launched by many hosts, attackers can lower the attack rate of
DoS to evade detection. Compared with E-graphSAGE, our
method introduces a supervised contrastive objective along
with a refined graph convolution process via line graph construction. After these operations, the F1-score against DDoS
attacks has improved from 59.37% to 87.96%. The F1-score
against Injection attack has improved from 48.36% to 76.36%.
The F1 score against XSS attack has increased from 73.56%
to 92.57%. Note that E-graphSAGE performs better than our
methods against Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) and ransomware
attacks, which are two extremely rare attack scenarios.
The NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset covers 6 attack scenarios, including BruteForce, bot, DoS, DDoS, infiltration,
and Web Attacks. As seen in Figure 5, the F1-score of
E-graphSAGE against DoS and infiltration attack is only
34.04% and 14.59%, respectively. In addition to the difficulty
of detecting DoS mentioned above, infiltration is another
type of intricate attack. Infiltration may involve insiders with
legitimate access to the system and employ stealth techniques
to avoid detection. After employing a supervised contrastive
objective, the F1-score against DoS attack has improved from
34.04% to 99.14%. Our method also brings a huge increase
to the F1-score against infiltration attack, from 14.59% to
82.76%. The considerable performance improvement on two
datasets has demonstrated the effect of supervised contrastive
learning on classifying different types of malicious flows.

MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

2277

TABLE IV
M ULTICLASS C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE W ITH λ

TABLE V
M ULTICLASS C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE W ITH τ

Fig. 7. Performance of FeCoGraph on specific categories with different
label proportions. (a) NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset; (b) NF-ToN-IoT-v2
dataset.

To intuitively demonstrate the discrimination ability for
different attacks, we visualize the raw edge features and edge
embeddings generated by the GCN encoder of FeCoGraph.
The graph data are sampled from NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018v2 dataset. We apply the t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t-SNE) [54] algorithm to map the high-level
representation into two dimensions. The result is shown in
Fig. 6. In Figure 6a, a large number of malicious flows
are mixed with dominant normal flows. Samples of DDoS
and DoS attacks cannot be easily differentiated. On the
contrary, We can observe clear boundaries between different
attacks(e.g., Dos, DDoS) and more compact distribution(e.g.,
Benign) in Figure 6b. This illustrates the effect of the supervised contrastive objective of separating different traffic flows
in the embedding space, which in turn promotes the detection
performance.
c) The Impact of Different Label Proportions: To further
investigate the performance of our method for varied amounts
of training data, we conduct a series of experiments with 10%,
30%, 50% and 70% labeled samples on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 and
NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 datasets. As seen in Figure 7a, the
performances achieved when label proportion is 10% and 30%
on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2 dataset don’t exhibit a large gap
compared to those achieved when utilizing 50% and 70%

labeled samples. It can be inferred that our method is capable
of learning discriminate flow representations to distinguish
different attack categories with critically limited training data.
As shown in Figure 7b, There is a little different tendency
in detection results on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset, where the f1score against DDoS, injection, password and XSS attacks
increases with the larger proportion of labeled data. It can
be observed that these types of attacks are harder to detect,
therefore more labeled data is required for our model to
enhance the expressive ability of network flow representations
for different attack categories. Note that our method always
almost fails to detect some particular attack categories, such
as web attacks, MITM attack and ransomware attack since
there are few samples.
d) Detection Performance with Different λ and τ: λ
and τ are two important factors in constructing a supervised
contrastive loss function. Consequently, we perform a sensitivity analysis to examine how different values affect detection
performance. The values of λ include 0.03, 0.05, 0.07, 0.3,
0.5 and 0.7. The values of τ include 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7. λ
weighs the significance of label-aware contrastive loss over
supervised learning loss. The smaller λ is, the more weight is
given to minimize the distances between samples belonging
to the same attack category. As shown in Table IV, the four
metrics on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 consistently continue to increase
and achieve the best results when λ is 0.5. The best F1-score
is achieved when λ is 0.03 on NF-BoT-IoT-v2 and 0.07 on

2278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE VI
M ULTICLASS C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS OF A BLATION S TUDY ON C ONTRASTIVE L OSS . “S UP C ON ” D ENOTES L ABEL -AWARE G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE
L EARNING M ODULE , AND “SSLC ON ” D ENOTES S ELF -S UPERVISED G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING M ODULE

NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2, implying that learning class-aware
compact representation is more encouraged.
τ is associated with the temperature parameter, which
affects the sharpness of the probability distribution used in
the contrastive loss function. A higher τ (e.g., larger temperature) results in a more uniform distribution over similarities,
potentially improving generalization. On the other hand, a
lower τ (e.g., smaller temperature) sharpens the distribution,
focusing on maximizing the similarity with positive instances.
As shown in Table V, the best results are obtained when τ
is 0.3 on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 and 0.1 on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018v2, showing that supervised contrastive loss tends to impose
more penalties on hard negative examples. On the contrary,
the best results are obtained when τ is 0.7 on NF-BoT-IoT-v2,
indicating the tendency to encourage global uniformity of flow
representation.
e) Ablation Study: Compared with self-supervised contrastive learning that seeks to reduce the distance of multi-view
embeddings, label-aware contrastive learning leverages label
information to learn compact intra-class representation, we
conduct an ablation study to compare the impact of these two
objectives in both binary and multiclass classification scenarios. As shown in Table VI, the label-aware contrastive loss
function consistently outperforms the counterpart that incorporates self-supervised contrastive learning. On the one hand, the
F1-score improves by 5.16% and 4.53% for binary and multiclass classification on NF-ToN-IoT-v2 dataset. On the other
hand, the F1-score improves by 9.63% and 56.78% for binary
and multiclass classification on NF-CSE-CIC-IDS2018-v2
dataset. The improvements indicate that supervised contrastive
learning enables more effective use of unlabeled data, thereby
more accurately distinguishing different attacks.
3) The Convergence Performance of FeCoGraph: As discussed before, federated learning is an effective strategy for
building distributed intrusion detection systems. To this end,
experiments are designed to evaluate the performance of our
intrusion detection model in the federated learning scenario.
The NetFlow data owned by each client follows non-IID
distribution for different attack categories. The traffic data
are then converted into a line graph following the paradigm
in Section IV-B1. During training, each client trains a local
GNN model with a supervised contrastive learning objective.
The local parameters are subsequently uploaded into a central
server for weight aggregation (e.g., weight-averaging rule).
To ensure a fair evaluation, We compare the performance
of three federated learning algorithms. 1) we adopt a vanilla
GCN-based FL method to detect malicious flows. 2) we

Fig. 8. The performance comparison of three FL algorithms.

Fig. 9. The performance comparison between FedAvg and personalized FL
under shard and dirichlet distribution.

utilize the proposed FeCoGraph intrusion detection model
with a supervised contrastive objective in FedAvg. 3) We
incorporate the FeCoGraph model with supervised contrastive
objective into a personalized FL framework. As shown in
Figure, our model with supervised contrastive loss outperforms
the counterpart without supervised contrastive loss in terms
of detection accuracy, which exhibits similar trends as nonfederated experiments. The green curve shows Personalized FL
converges faster and achieves better convergence performance
compared with other FL settings, demonstrating the capability
of supervised contrasting along with personalization strategy
in non-IID federated learning scenarios.
We further investigate the impact of non-IID factors, including subgraph partition strategy and imbalance level of the
Dirichlet distribution. As shown in Figure 9, the personalized FL method (abbreviated as perFL) exhibits a marginal
improvement compared with FedAvg. It implies a bi-level
optimization strategy can effectively avoid model degradation
caused by the issue of client drift. Moreover, the increase in
accuracy is more pronounced with the shard partition strategy
(12.41% vs 3.52%). Since perFL aims to maintain local data
distribution, it benefits more when training and test data
share a consistent class label distribution. Moreover, Fig 10

MAO et al.: FeCoGRAPH: LABEL-AWARE FEDERATED GRAPH CONTRASTIVE LEARNING

Fig. 10. The performance comparison under different α of the dirichlet
distribution.

demonstrates a decreased tendency of model performance
when the Dirichlet distribution tends to be more balanced,
where the best result is achieved under the most imbalanced
setting. It demonstrates that personalized FL is more compatible with federated NIDS on heterogeneous networks.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose FeCoGraph, a label-aware federated graph contrastive learning framework for few-shot
intrusion detection. FeCoGraph constructs a label-aware graph
contrastive module, promoting the discriminative and expressive capabilities of network flow representations. Furthermore,
We incorporate graph contrastive learning module into a
personalized FL algorithm to support distributed IDS in edge
IoT. Experiment Results on three public datasets show the
superiority of FeCoGraph with an average accuracy of 98.27%
on binary classification and 96.92% on multiclass classification. In particular, our methods can effectively identify rare
and stealthy types of attacks, including DDoS, injection, and
infiltration attacks.
R EFERENCES
[1] V. Kumar and O. P. Sangwan, “Signature based intrusion detection
system using SNORT,” Int. J. Comput. Appl. Inf. Technol., vol. 1, no. 3,
pp. 35–41, Nov. 2012.
[2] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban IDS:
An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT edge
devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, Aug.
2020.
[3] Y. Qing, X. Liu, and Y. Du, “Mitigating data imbalance to improve the
generalizability in IoT DDoS detection tasks,” J. Supercomput., vol. 80,
no. 7, pp. 9935–9960, May 2024.
[4] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[5] J. Zhou, Z. Xu, A. M. Rush, and M. Yu, “Automating botnet detection
with graph neural networks,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06344.
[6] W. W. Lo, G. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann,
“XG-BoT: An explainable deep graph neural network for botnet detection and forensics,” Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 100747.
[7] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “EGraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., Budapest,
Hungary, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–9.
[8] L. Chang and P. Branco, “Graph-based solutions with residuals for intrusion detection: The modified E-GraphSAGE and E-ResGAT algorithms,”
2021, arXiv:2111.13597.
[9] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow
topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection
in label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.

2279

[10] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
2023.
[11] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A selfsupervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030.
[12] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv:1809.10341.
[13] H. Nguyen and R. Kashef, “TS-IDS: Traffic-aware self-supervised learning for IoT network intrusion detection,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 279,
Nov. 2023, Art. no. 110966.
[14] Q. Sun et al., “SUGAR: Subgraph neural network with reinforcement
pooling and self-supervised mutual information mechanism,” in Proc.
Web Conf., Apr. 2021, pp. 2081–2091.
[15] J. Cui et al., “Collaborative intrusion detection system for SDVN: A
fairness federated deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2512–2528, Sep. 2023.
[16] W. Sheng and J. Zhigang, “IDS classification algorithm based on fuzzy
SVM model,” Appl. Res. Comput., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 187–190, 2018.
[17] J. Gu and S. Lu, “An effective intrusion detection approach using SVM
with naı̈ve Bayes feature embedding,” Comput. & Secur., vol. 103, Apr.
2021, Art. no. 102158.
[18] B. Mahbooba, M. Timilsina, R. Sahal, and M. Serrano, “Explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) to enhance trust management in intrusion
detection systems using decision tree model,” Complexity, vol. 2021,
pp. 1–11, Jan. 2021.
[19] P. Wu and H. Guo, “LuNet: A deep neural network for network intrusion
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI), Dec. 2019,
pp. 617–624.
[20] R. Vinayakumar, K. P. Soman, and P. Poornachandran, “Applying
convolutional neural network for network intrusion detection,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Adv. Comput., Commun. Informat. (ICACCI), Sep. 2017,
pp. 1222–1228.
[21] F. Jiang et al., “Deep learning based multi-channel intelligent attack
detection for data security,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 204–212, Apr. 2020.
[22] M. M. Hassan, A. Gumaei, A. Alsanad, M. Alrubaian, and G. Fortino,
“A hybrid deep learning model for efficient intrusion detection in big
data environment,” Inf. Sci., vol. 513, pp. 386–396, Mar. 2020.
[23] N. Gao, L. Gao, Q. Gao, and H. Wang, “An intrusion detection model
based on deep belief networks,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Adv. Cloud Big
Data, Nov. 2014, pp. 247–252.
[24] A. Z. Alalmaie, P. Nanda, and X. He, “Zero trust-NIDS: Extended multiview approach for network trace anonymization and auto-encoder CNN
for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur.
Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2022, pp. 449–456.
[25] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
[26] R. Heartfield, G. Loukas, A. Bezemskij, and E. Panaousis, “Selfconfigurable cyber-physical intrusion detection for smart homes using
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 1720–1735, 2020.
[27] C. Do Xuan, M. H. Dao, and H. D. Nguyen, “APT attack detection based
on flow network analysis techniques using deep learning,” J. Intell. Fuzzy
Syst., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 4785–4801, Oct. 2020.
[28] J. Zheng and D. Li, “GCN-TC: Combining trace graph with statistical
features for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[29] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
[30] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, H. D. III and A. Singh, Eds., Jul. 2020,
pp. 1597–1607.
[31] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[32] R. D. Hjelm et al., “Learning deep representations by mutual information
estimation and maximization,” 2018, arXiv:1808.06670.
[33] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. NIPS, 2020,
pp. 18661–18673.
[34] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph
contrastive representation learning,” 2020, arXiv:2006.04131.

2280

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

[35] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph contrastive
learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. Web Conf., Apr. 2021,
pp. 2069–2080.
[36] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph
contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 5812–5823.
[37] S. Wan, S. Pan, J. Yang, and C. Gong, “Contrastive and generative graph
convolutional networks for graph-based semi-supervised learning,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 11, 2021, pp. 10049–10057.
[38] S. Akkas and A. Azad, “JGCL: Joint self-supervised and supervised
graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. Companion Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 1099–1105.
[39] Z. Liu, L. Yang, Z. Fan, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Federated social
recommendation with graph neural network,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1–24, Aug. 2022.
[40] C. Wu, F. Wu, Y. Cao, Y. Huang, and X. Xie, “FedGNN: Federated
graph neural network for privacy-preserving recommendation,” 2021,
arXiv:2102.04925.
[41] C. He, E. Ceyani, K. Balasubramanian, M. Annavaram, and S. Avestimehr, “SpreadGNN: Decentralized multi-task federated learning for
graph neural networks on molecular data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 36, Jun. 2022, pp. 6865–6873.
[42] T. Suzumura et al., “Towards federated graph learning for collaborative
financial crimes detection,” 2019, arXiv:1909.12946.
[43] C. He et al., “FedGraphNN: A federated learning system and benchmark
for graph neural networks,” 2021, arXiv:2104.07145.
[44] B. Wang, A. Li, M. Pang, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “GraphFL: A federated
learning framework for semi-supervised node classification on graphs,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2022, pp. 498–507.
[45] Y. Tan, Y. Liu, G. Long, J. Jiang, Q. Lu, and C. Zhang, “Federated
learning on non-IID graphs via structural knowledge sharing,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jun. 2023, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 9953–9961.
[46] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for
fast anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023.
[47] S. Krishnan, J. Park, S. Sagar, G. Sherman, B. Campbell, and J. Choi,
“Federated graph learning for low probability of detection in wireless
ad-hoc networks,” in Proc. IEEE Stat. Signal Process. Workshop (SSP),
Jul. 2023, pp. 66–70.
[48] Y. Chen, L. Liang, and W. Gao, “FedADSN: Anomaly detection for
social networks under decentralized federated learning,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Commun., Comput., Cybersecurity, Informat. (CCCI), Oct. 2022,
pp. 111–117.
[49] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, A. Singh
and J.Zhu., Eds., Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[50] T. Li, S. Hu, A. Beirami, and V. Smith, “Ditto: Fair and robust federated
learning through personalization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
2021, pp. 6357–6368.
[51] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Towards a standard feature
set for network intrusion detection system datasets,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 357–370, Feb. 2022.
[52] H. Wang, M. Yurochkin, Y. Sun, D. Papailiopoulos, and Y. Khazaeni,
“Federated learning with matched averaging,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Represent., 2020, pp. 1–23.
[53] Y. Huang et al., “Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-IID
data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 7865–7873.
[54] L. v. d. Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, Jan. 2008.

Qinghua Mao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree in information security
from the School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China, where he is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in cyber security. His current research
interests include federated learning, graph neural
networks, trustworthy machine learning, and cyber
security.

Xi Lin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
from the School of Precision Instrument and Optoelectronics Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
China, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in cyber
security from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2021. He is currently an Assistant
Professor with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University. His research interests include blockchain,
multi-access edge computing, and the Internet of
Things.
Wenchao Xu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and M.E. degrees from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2008 and 2011, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Waterloo, Canada, in 2018. He is currently a Research
Assistant Professor with The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. In 2011, he joined Alcatel Lucent
Shanghai Bell Company Ltd., where he was a Software Engineer for telecom virtualization. He has
been an Assistant Professor with the School of Computing and Information Sciences, Caritas Institute
of Higher Education, Hong Kong. His research interests include wireless
communication, the Internet of Things, distributed computing, and AI enabled
networking.
Yuxin Qi (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from the College of Computer Science and
Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China, in
2020. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China. Her research interests are focusing
on intelligent network and security.

Xiu Su (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and
master’s degrees from Tianjin University and the
Ph.D. degree in computer science from The University of Sydney. Currently, he is a Professor with
the Big Data Institute, Central South University. His
research interests include pattern recognition and
machine learning fundamentals, with a focus on
neural architecture search, channel number search,
detection, and transformer.

Gaolei Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
in electronic information engineering from Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China, and the Ph.D. degree
in cyber security from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. From October 2018 to
September 2019, he visited the Muroran Institution
of Technology, Muroran, Japan, supported by China
Scholarship Council Program. He is currently an
Associate Professor with the School of Electronic
Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University. His research interests include
network security, adversarial machine learning, and privacy computing.
Jianhua Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 1986, 1991,
and 1998, respectively. He is currently a Professor
and the Dean of the School of Cyber Security,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He is also the
Director of the National Engineering Laboratory
for Information Content Analysis Technology, Engineering Research Center for Network Information
Security Management and Service of Chinese Ministry of Education, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Integrated Administration Technologies for Information Security, China.