IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

5723

Fed-RWM: A Robust Watermarking Approach for
Federated Learning Model Ownership Protection
Xin Tong , Student Member, IEEE, Shike Li, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Ni Jin, and Baojiang Cui

Abstract—The interconnected nature of the Internet of Things
(IoT) significantly enhances the efficiency of industries such as
smart manufacturing, but it also raises concerns about data privacy. Federated learning (FL) utilizes an edge-cloud collaborative
mode that shares models in the cloud instead of data, effectively
mitigating data privacy leakage in edge IoT devices. However,
FL suffers from the risk of model leakage, and both the cloud
and the edge may illegally copy and sell the model, infringing
on model ownership. To prevent such misbehavior, it is essential
to design a robust method for verifying the model ownership. In
this paper, we propose Fed-RWM, a novel watermarking method
for FL models that provides robust ownership verification and
avoids both edge and cloud leakage of watermark information.
Fed-RWM trains the watermark by sharing parameters with an
additional model and incorporates a watermark recovery method
during verification to counter complex watermark removal
attacks, which enhances the verification robustness. Fed-RWM
introduces a new training paradigm that performs continuous
watermarking training at the FL task initiator, preventing access
to watermark information at both the edge and the cloud. The
experimental results demonstrate that Fed-RWM performs well
in model ownership verification and fidelity, is robust to different
watermark removal attacks, and can provide reliable protection
for federated learning models.
Index Terms—Internet of Things, federated learning, model
watermarking, ownership verification.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE INTERNET of Things (IoT) enhances the
interconnection of devices like smartphones, smart
appliances, and vehicles by integrating technologies such
as artificial intelligence (AI), 5G communications, and edge
computing, thereby improving daily convenience. These
devices collect vast amounts of private data daily, which are
then transmitted to cloud servers for centralized processing.
In practice, cloud servers are often insecure, posing a risk of
raw data leakage [1], [2], [3]. Federated learning (FL) [4], a
distributed machine learning framework, has been proposed
as an alternative. In the FL system, multiple smart devices
train the model locally, and only model parameters are
exchanged with the cloud server, avoiding direct leakage of

T

Received 25 December 2024; revised 10 June 2025; accepted 30 July 2025.
Date of publication 7 August 2025; date of current version 5 December 2025.
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it
for publication was Y. Miao. (Corresponding author: Baojiang Cui.)
Xin Tong, Ni Jin, and Baojiang Cui are with the School of Cyberspace
Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China (e-mail: cuibj@bupt.edu.cn).
Shike Li is with the School of Computer and Information Technology,
Shanxi University, Taiyuan 237016, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3596692

raw data. This advantage makes FL widely applicable in IoT,
including intrusion detection [5], smart healthcare [6], and
smart manufacturing [7].
FL protects the original data privacy but introduces the
risk of model leakage [8]. These models are collaboratively
trained by task initiators and edge devices (e.g., factories,
hospitals, banks) within the Internet of Things, consuming
significant computational and data resources. The ownership of
the resulting FL models resides with the FL group. FL model
leakage refers to the unauthorized copying, distribution, or sale
of FL models by untrustworthy entities (e.g., compromised
servers or clients) to third parties not involved in the training
process. Such third parties may deploy the stolen models
on embedded devices (e.g., robots, smart vehicles, mobile
phones) for commercial sale or offer online access for profit.
This behavior seriously infringes on the ownership rights of
the FL group, which can lead to substantial financial losses
and undermine the fairness of the market for neural network
models [9]. In the business environment, enterprises, as FL
model producers, should act as the main body to maintain the
legal use of the models, respect originality, reject plagiarism,
and create a healthy market environment. Therefore, protecting
the intellectual ownership of FL models is essential.
Model watermarking can effectively protect FL model
ownership. It embeds a watermark into the FL model without
affecting performance and creates an ownership verification
mechanism to identify model attribution [10]. Existing FL
model watermarking methods are categorized based on watermark embedding and training location into client-side and
server-side watermarking. These methods assume that either
the client-side or server-side is dishonest, with watermark
embedding training completed on the honest side. The honest
party explicitly knows the watermark embedding method
and details (e.g., embedding position, watermark content). In
reality, both the server and clients may be dishonest, making
it easy to use embedding information to precisely remove the
watermark and illegally sell the model. Moreover, while the
dishonest party cannot access the embedding information, it
can still launch several watermark removal attacks that disrupt
the verification process, leading to failure [8], see Fig. 1. We
found that current FL watermarking methods are based on [11]
and not resilient to novel watermark elimination attacks, such
as parameter scaling and hybrid attacks.
To address these issues, we propose a robust watermarking
method, Fed-RWM, for protecting FL model ownership. We
assign the watermark embedding and training tasks to the
honest FL task initiator, thus preventing dishonest server-side

c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1932-4537 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

5724

Fig. 1.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Federated model leakage scenario and watermark removal methods.

or client access to the watermark embedding information. This
pattern is capable of adapting the secure federated learning
framework based on homomorphic encryption. This paper
focuses on describing the watermark training process in this
secure federated learning framework, as detailed in Section V.
More importantly, we design an innovative approach to watermark training and robustness verification. This approach employs a secret neural network, with its parameters divided
into a watermark and a watermark key. The watermark is
embedded in the FL model, and the watermark key is used
for ownership verification. In the validation phase, we design
a watermark recovery method to counter complex watermark
removal attacks, thereby enhancing the robustness of the
watermarking technique.
Fed-RWM is rigorously evaluated using four popular DNN
models (including CNN and RNN) and four benchmark datasets.
It demonstrates advanced performance in the following metrics.
In terms of fidelity, the accuracy of the FL watermarking
model is nearly identical to that of the no-watermarking model,
with a difference of less than 1%. In terms of validity, it
can embed watermarks on both global and local models, and
the watermark validation performance can reach 95%-98%. In
terms of robustness, Fed-RWM is able to robustly cope with
parameter scaling, hybrid novel attacks, and maintains its ownership verification capability without significant degradation.
Furthermore, our method can embed watermarks across various
network architectures with generality.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as
follows:
1) We propose Fed-RWM, a robust watermarking method
for FL models. The method trains a neural network
model, sharing some parameters as watermarks with the
FL model, and using the remaining parameters as keys
for watermark verification. To the best of our knowledge,
this is a novel approach, distinct from existing methods,
and the first FL model watermarking method capable
of preventing both server-side and client-side dishonest
behavior.
2) We design a novel and robust ownership verification
method. It combines watermarking and watermarking
keys within a new secret network model, leveraging
the model’s performance on secret data as an indicator
for ownership verification. Additionally, we integrate a
watermark recovery function to counter novel watermark
elimination attacks, enhancing the robustness of the
verification process.

3) We conduct experiments on Fed-RWM across multiple
models and datasets, including CIFAR-10, MNIST,
IMDB, and WUSTLIIOT-2021, to demonstrate its applicability in image, text, and IOT network intrusion
detection tasks. We also consider non-independent identically distributed (non-IID) and independent identically
distributed (IID) scenarios, the results show that FedRWM performs well in terms of robustness, validity,
fidelity, and local model protection, etc.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section II
reviews recent research on DNN and FL model watermarking.
Section III introduces the preliminaries of FL and FL based
on homomorphic encryption. Section IV introduces the threat
model. Section V explains the composition and workflow
of Fed-RWM. Section VI presents the experimental results.
Finally, Section VII provides the conclusion.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we first introduce the related works on DNN
watermark, and then review the latest development of FL-DNN
watermark methods and discuss their shortcomings.
A. DNN Watermark
Deep neural network watermarking is an effective way to
prevent the unauthorized use of models. This method embeds a
valid watermark into the model’s parameters or functions, and
verifies ownership through a specific validation mechanism,
which prevents plagiarism [12]. Currently, DNN watermarking
methods in academia are primarily categorized as either whitebox and black-box methods.
1) White-Box Watermarking: White-box watermarking
mainly embeds the watermark by modifying the model’s
structure or parameters, requiring access to its internal
architecture and parameter space [12]. During validation, it
verifies ownership by extracting the model watermark and
comparing it to the original watermark.
Uchida et al. [11] proposed the first white-box method,
employing the parametric regularizer to embed an N-bit string
watermark s (s ∈ 0, 1N ) into the convolutional layer weights
during protected model training. They extract watermark ŝ
from the suspicious model Ms , then calculate the hamming
distance between ŝ and s to verify ownership. This method
demonstrates fidelity and verifiability and is robust to finetuning and pruning attacks.
Fan et al. [13] proposed a passport-based DNN ownership
verification scheme, which adds a passport layer after the
convolutional layer. They embed the watermark into the scale
parameters of the BN layers. During verification, they add
the passport layer to the network and detect the watermark to
verify the identity. Chen et al. [14] embed model fingerprint
(watermark) into the probability density function of trainable
weights. They extract the fingerprint and compute the dot product with the owner’s signature to verify models. Nevertheless,
most white-box methods focus on CNN-based models and do
not consider the damage of the parameter scaling attack.
Unlike the above methods, Lv et al. [15] proposed the
HufuNet, which trains an encoder-decoder network, embeds

TONG et al.: Fed-RWM: A ROBUST WATERMARKING APPROACH FOR FL MODEL OWNERSHIP PROTECTION

5725

TABLE I
C ATEGORIZATION OF E XISTING FL WATERMARKING M ETHODS B: B LACK -B OX , W: W HITE -B OX , S: E MBEDDING ON THE S ERVER , C: E MBEDDING ON
THE C LIENT, I: E MBEDDING ON THE I NITIATOR

the encoder as the watermark in the DNN model and utilizes the decoder for verification. It is capable of protecting
models based on CNN and RNN architectures. Inspired by
this approach, we develop a secret network composed of
convolutional and fully connected layers, embedding half of its
parameters in every layer of the protected model and verifying
the model through the remaining parameters. We apply the
designed method to model protection in federated learning.
2) Black-Box Watermarking: Black-box watermarking
employs backdoor attack techniques, constructs key samples,
and includes them as triggers in the training set [16]. This
method embeds the backdoor watermark in the DNN model by
simultaneously learning primary and backdoor tasks. During
validation, the trigger set is input into the model, activating
the backdoor task to verify ownership. Importantly, it does
not require access to the model’s internal architecture.
Bansal et al. [17] proposed a stochastic smoothing technique
that ensures the parameters of the backdoor watermarking
model fluctuate within an l2 normative threshold, minimizing the effect of the watermarking task. This method
enhances robustness against backdoor watermark removal
attacks. Lao et al. [18] modified small-scale parameters in
the protected model, ensuring it outputs pre-specified labels
when inputting key samples, serving as proof of ownership.
Other than that, there are other similar black-box watermarking
approaches [19], [20]. Despite these innovations, the adversaries can impersonate the legitimate owner by searching
for adversarial samples and using them to construct trigger
sets [15].
B. FL-DNN Watermark
In federated learning, some researchers have proposed
various FL model watermarking methods, which we classify
according to the location and embedding method of the
watermark, see Table I.

1) Client-Side Watermarking: Yang et al. [21] proposed a
client-side backdoor watermarking method applied to secure
FL. It places key samples with the FL initiator and increases
their contribution through a scaling factor, thus embedding
the backdoor watermark into the FL model. However, it
compromises fairness in FL systems. Li et al. [10] proposed
FedIPR, allowing clients to generate triggers and features to
embed watermarks during local training through black-box
and white-box techniques. However, due to the existence of
semi-honest clients, FedIPR cannot ensure the embedding of
correct watermarks and cannot resist novel watermark removal
attacks.
2) Server-Side Watermarking: Tekgul et al. [22] introduced
WAFFLE, a server-side black-box watermarking method,
which embeds backdoor watermarking by retraining the global
model. It is the first approach designed to protect FL models.
Chen et al. [9] proposed FedRight, a black-box watermarking
method. It generates adversarial samples from key samples
as model fingerprints. These fingerprints are fed into the
global model, with the output distribution features recorded
and used as training data for a detector. During verification,
the fingerprints are input into the suspicious model, and the
detector analyzes its output features to determine ownership.
Wu et al. [24] proposed the Verifiable Property Federated
Learning framework (VPFL) applied to the IoT, which embeds
white-box watermarking on the server-side for the global
model. Shao et al. [8] developed FedTracker, embeds blackbox watermarks in the global model and distinct white-box
watermarks for every client in the BN layer, which has traceability. Chen et al. [23] designed FedMCT, which considers
the unbalanced resources of heterogeneous clients and groups
them. In this method, the local model of each grouping
has the same black-box watermark, and different white-box
watermarks, which improves the tracking efficiency. However,
these methods are not resistant to novel attacks and ignore
client dishonesty.

5726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

In summary, existing server-side and client-side approaches
fail to account for scenarios where both parties are dishonest.
Although [21] addresses the issue, it expands the initiator’s
contribution, which is obviously not fair. Since black-box
watermarking can be deciphered through input-output analysis, existing white-box methods rely on [11], which fail
to resist novel attacks, thus we propose a novel white-box
watermarking technique, distinct from existing methods. Our
method resists novel attacks and provides enhanced security,
as the watermarking information is known only to the initiator.
Furthermore, it can be adapted to secure federated learning
scenarios based on homomorphic encryption and models with
diverse network architectures.

homomorphic encryption [26], and secure multi-party computation [27], resulting in secure federated learning (SFL). In
this paper, we focus primarily on HE.
Specifically, the HE algorithm generates a pair of public
and private keys (pu_key, pr_key) for clients. The client
Ci encrypts wir using pu_key to obtain Enwir and then
uploads it. S directly aggregates the collected ciphertexts
{Enw1r , . . . , Enwir , . . . , Enwnr } to obtain encrypted global
model parameters Enwgr . Ci decrypts Enwgr using the pr_key.
Through the encryption process, the server is unable to access
the plaintext parameters, effectively preventing its dishonest
actions.
IV. T HREAT M ODEL

III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Federated Learning (FL)
FL is a distributed machine learning framework allowing
multiple participants to train a global model collaboratively
without sharing their data. It is an excellent solution to the
issue of data lack and privacy preservation. A typical FL
system consists of n clients C = {C1 , . . . , Ci , . . . , Cn } and
a central server S. In every round r ∈ {1,2,. . .,R}, client
Ci downloads the global model G r −1 from S. Afterwards,
the parameters wgr −1 of G r −1 are used to initialize the
local model Lir −1 with parameters wir −1 . After iteratively
training (1) using local data D ={D1 , . . . , Di , . . . , Dn }, Ci
uploads wir to S. S performs the aggregation calculation on
the collected {w1r , . . . , wir , . . . , wnr } to obtain wgr and sends
them to clients.


(1)
wir = wir −1 − ρ∇L wir −1 ; Di
wgr =

n


λri wir

(2)

i=1

where i is the index of clients, r is the index of training
round, ρ is the learning rate. L(·; ·) is loss function, wir is
the local model parameters of client Ci in rth round. λri
represents the aggregation weight, wgr represents the global
model parameters in rth round.
The optimization objective of FL is outlined in (3). Through
multiple training rounds, FL will end when the global model
converges or reaches the defined training rounds.
arg minlg (wg ) =
wg

∈ Rd

n


λi li (wg ),



li (wg ) = Exj ∼Di L wg , xj

i=1

(3)
where li represents the local optimisation objective, lg represents the global optimisation objective, xj represents the
sample in Di .
B. Federated Learning Based on Homomorphic Encryption
Researchers have confirmed that FL is only partially secure.
Semi-honest servers can recover local private data from
model gradient parameters [5]. Therefore, they have integrated
privacy-preserving techniques like differential privacy [25],

In this paper, we assume that both the server and the client
are dishonest, and both could potentially use some methods to
remove the watermark and thus steal the model.
1) Adversary’s Objective: They aim to remove the watermark without significantly compromising the performance of
the stolen model. More clearly, their objectives are formulated
as follows:
⎧
= True 
⎨ fv (w )

arg max P yij |xij ; w ≈ arg max P yij |xij ; ŵ
(4)
⎩
s.t. ∀xij ∈ X , ∀yij ∈ Y
where fv (·) denotes the verification procedure, w denotes
the stolen watermarked model parameters, ŵ denotes the
watermarked model parameters after removal attacks, xij and
yij are the jth sample and label in Di , X and Y are the sample
space and label space of D.
2) Adversary’s Knowledge: They possess the stolen FL
model, fully understand its parameters and architecture, and
are proficient in deep learning principles and model watermarking techniques.
3) Adversary’s Capability: They can access local datasets,
high-performance local and global watermarked models, and
attempt to remove watermarks using the following deep
learning techniques:
Fine-tuning. The fine-tuning attack is an adversary retraining the watermarked model on an additional dataset using a
low learning rate [28], [29]. Owing to the non-convex nature
of deep learning [30], the attack drives the model into a
different local optimum, resulting in altered model parameter
distributions and thus removing the watermark.
Pruning. The pruning aims to reduce model complexity
by eliminating unimportant parameters [31]. As pruning may
eliminate watermark parameters, it also can be considered a
threat. In this paper, we implement the pruning attack using the
method described in [11]. Specifically, we rank the parameters
of the watermarked model in every layer by absolute value and
sequentially set them to zero according to the pruning rate.
Parameter scaling. The parameter scaling attack targets neural networks with relu activation functions [32].
Specifically, it scales up the parameters of one layer and scales
down the parameters of the next layer by a factor of m.
The modified neural network’s performance remains nearly
unchanged, but the altered parameters may compromise the
watermark. Therefore, it also poses a threat to the watermark.

TONG et al.: Fed-RWM: A ROBUST WATERMARKING APPROACH FOR FL MODEL OWNERSHIP PROTECTION

TABLE II
S YMBOLS AND E XPLAINS

5727

Algorithm 1 Workflow of Fed-RWM
Input: Total number of clients n, Percentage of training
clients k, Total rounds R, Local learning rate ρl , Local
epoch El , Local dataset Di , Encryption and decryption
keys pu_key, pr _key.
Output: Protected global model parameters. wgR
Initiator:
1: Initialize the parameters of protected model and SNet: wg0 ,
ws0 ;
En(·)
2: wg0 −
−−−−→ Enwg0 ; // Encrypted upload to server
pu _key
3: ws , sp = WatermarkGeneration(); // Alg. 2

Server:
4: for r = 1 to R do
5:
Select nk clients as the training subset C r ;
6:
for i in C r do
7:
Enwir = LocalUpdate(Enwgr −1 );
8:
end for
|D |
9:
Enwgr = i∈C r  ri |D | × Enwir ;
i
i∈C
10:
Enwgr = Embedding_Training(Enwgr ); // Alg. 3,
execute in the Initiator
11: end for
De(·)
12: return EnwgR −−−−→ wgR .
pr _key

Client:
Procedure LocalUpdate()
Hybrid. The hybrid attacks combine three watermark removal attacks: fine-tuning, pruning, and scaling.
Sophisticated adversaries may execute these attacks simultaneously to eliminate watermarks.
Overwrite. The overwrite attack involves an adversary
embedding their watermark into the model using the same
approach, which may result in the original watermark being
overwritten or modified.
V. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD

De(·)
13: Enwgr −1 −−−−→ wgr −1 ;
pr _key
r −1
14: wi
← wgr −1 ;

15: for epoch e = 1, 2, . . . , El do
16:
for each batch b = {x , y} ∈ Di do
17:
wir ← wir −1 − ρl ∇L(wir −1 ; b);
18:
end for
19: end for
En(·)
20: wir −
−−−−→ Enwir ;
pu _key
21: return Enwir .

A. The Components of Fed-RWM
In this paper, we propose Fed-RWM, an approach designed
to protect the ownership of FL model in the IoT. Fed-RWM
comprises three components: an initiator, multiple clients, and
a server. Their capabilities are elaborated as follows.
Initiator. The initiator I (I ∈ C ) represents an industrial
agent or smart device that initiates federated learning tasks
in IoT. It can participate in local model training as a client.
In addition, it undertakes tasks such as watermark generation,
embedding & training, and ownership verification.
Clients. Client groups C represent industrial agents or
smart devices participating in federated learning. They are
mainly responsible for decrypting global model, training and
encrypting local models.
Server. The server S represents the cloud server, which performs homomorphic encryption aggregation on the uploaded
local model, and randomly selecting clients to participate in
the training.
B. The Workflow of Fed-RWM
The main workflow of Fed-RWM is illustrated in Fig. 2
and Alg. 1. The main symbols are presented in Table II.

Specifically, we create a secret network model (SNet), embed
some of its parameters wm into the protected FL model M,
and utilize the remaining parameters wk as the watermarking
key for verification. The combination of wm and wk constitutes the SNet’s complete parameter space ws . We utilize
ws to protect M and to identify suspicious models. The
implementation details of watermark generation, watermark
embedding & training, and ownership verification are provided
in Sections V-C–V-E. Next, we elaborate on Fed-RWM:
1) Initialization: The initiator I issues the FL task to the
clients and the server. Specifically, I first creates the protected
FL model M and initializes its parameters wg0 . Afterwards,
it encrypts and uploads Enwg0 = En(wg0 ) to server S.
Here, En(·) represents the encryption computation. Finally, I
constructs the secret network SNet to handle the watermarking
task and initializes its parameters to ws0 .
After receiving the FL task, S counts the participating
client group C, receives Enwg0 from I, and randomly selects
a subset C r from C to participate in the training round.

5728

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Workflow of Fed-RWM.

These clients in C are required to create local models
L ={L1 , . . . , Li , . . . , Ln } locally based on M.
2) Initiator Generates Watermark: The initiator completes
the watermark generation task at the first FL training round,
thus obtaining the initial watermark wm r and the initial
watermark key wk r (i.e., r = 1). For detailed information,
see Section V-C.
3) Client Local Training: The client Ci downloads and
decrypts Enwgr −1 (De(Enwgr −1 ) = wgr −1 , De(·) is decryption operation) from S, using it to initialize wir −1 . Subsequent,
Ci initiates the LocalUpdate procedure, which uses local data
Di to train wir −1 via gradient descent (1). Finally, the client
encrypts wir and uploads it to the server. Notably, the initiator
can also participate in training as a client if it is selected into
the training subset.
4) Server Aggregation: S aggregates the collected local
model ciphertexts to obtain Enwgr and sends it to the initiator.
Later, it instructs the initiator to start the Embedding_Training
procedure for embedding or training the watermark and
receives Enwgr back from the initiator. Additionally, S is also
required to select the client subset C r +1 for the next round
randomly.
5) Initiator Embeds and Trains Watermark: I receives
and decrypts Enwgr from the server. It then starts the
Embedding_Training procedure, which procedure embeds the
watermark wm in the first round and trains SNet to update the
watermark key wk in the remaining rounds. In every round
of FL, the current wm and wk are saved locally, and the
watermarked wgr is then returned to the server after encryption.
We will describe this procedure in detail in Section V-D.
6) End of Training: Continuously repeat steps 3-5 until
either the number of training rounds R is reached or
convergence is achieved.

C. Watermark Generation
The watermark generation procedure is implemented in the
initiator and consists of two parts: watermark generation and
position generation. Its workflow is shown in Alg. 2 and
Fig. 2.
1) Watermark Generation: SNet is composed of four convolutional layers and one fully connected layer. We define
the first two convolutional layer parameters as wm and the
remaining layer parameters as wk. Here, wm ∪ wk = ws and
wm ∩ wk = ∅. wm and wk are jointly utilized to extract the
features of secret data, with their classification performance
serving as a criterion for verifying ownership. When the
watermark generation process begins, the SNet is trained on
the small secret dataset Ds with a few iteration rounds. It is
important to note that Ds and FL task’s dataset can be entirely
different. After training, wm is used as the watermark to embed
in the first round of FL, while wk serves as the corresponding
watermark key. Both are stored in the initiator.
2) Positions Generation: About the position of the watermark embedding, we generate it using random sampling.
Random generation makes the position information of the
watermark not inferable, and it is difficult for the adversary
to detect the position information by analysing the watermark
parameters and model parameters. Specifically, we count the
number of all parameters of the protected model M except
the softmax layer, denoted as |wg |. After that, we count
the number of parameters in wm, denoted as |wm|. Next,
we randomly generate |wm| values in the range [0, |wg |] as
one-dimensional watermark positions (5). Since the network
structure of M is mostly multi-dimensional, we convert rp into
the corresponding multi-dimensional positions sp, as described
in Alg. 2. Each element in sp is a mask matrix consistent with
the shape of wg (i.e., the value is 1 at selected positions and

TONG et al.: Fed-RWM: A ROBUST WATERMARKING APPROACH FOR FL MODEL OWNERSHIP PROTECTION

Algorithm 2 WatermarkGeneration
Input: M’s parameters wg , SNet learning rate ρs , SNet epoch
Es , Secret dataset Ds .
Output: SNet parameters ws , secret position sp.
Positions Generation:
1: rp ←− Eq.5;
2: layers ←− M’s total number of layers except softmax
layer;
3: sp = {0 · wg }|rp| ;
4: for i = 0 to |rp| do
5:
for ls ≤ layers do
6:
Nls ←− Number of parameters in layer ls;
7:
if rp[i ] ≤ Nls then
8:
Set the value of this position in spi to 1;
9:
else
10:
rp[i ]− = Nls ;
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end for
Watermark Generation:
14: for epoch e = 1,2,. . .,Es do
15:
for each batch b = {x , y} ∈ Ds do
16:
ws ← ws − ρs ∇L(ws ; b);
17:
end for
18: end for
19: return ws , sp.

0 for the rest). The embedding positions defined by sp cover
nearly every layer of M, allowing us to incorporate watermark
information across most of them. In contrast to state-of-the-art
(SOTA) FL white-box methods [8], [10], [23], which embed
watermarks into BN layers, our approach is more versatile and
can be applied even to smaller models that lack BN layers.

rp = rp0 , . . . , rpi , . . . , rpj , . . . , rp|wm| ⊆ 0, |wg |
s.t.

i = j,

rpi = rpj

(5)

where wg denotes the global model parameters of M, i and j
denote the index of rp.
D. Watermark Embedding and Training
The watermark embedding and training in our approach
takes place in the initiator. During the first round of FL
(i.e., r = 1), the initiator receives Enwgr from the server
and decrypts it into wgr . Next, we sequentially embed the
watermark wm generated from Alg. 2 into wgr according
to the position sp. This embedding procedure will result in
watermarked FL model parameters wˆgr . These parameters are
encrypted and sent to the server as the FL global model
parameters wgr for this round. Notably, in the first round, the
model has yet to converge, and the parameters float is vast,
which can effectively ensure the concealment of the embedded
watermark.
In subsequent training rounds, we carry out the following
steps (6)–(9). First, the initiator extracts wm r from wgr using
the predefined position (6). Then, we merge wm r with wk r −1
which from the previous round as the parameters wsr −1 for

5729

Algorithm 3 Embedding_Training
Input: ρs , Es , Ds , pu_key, pr _key, Enwgr , sp, wk r −1 .
Output: Protected encryption global model parameters
Enwgr .
De(·)
1: Enwgr −−−−→ wgr ;
pr _key
2: if r=1 then
divide
3:
wsr −−−−→ [wm r , wk r ]; // wsr from Alg. 2.
4:
wgr ←− Embeding(sp, wm r , wgr ); //Based on sp, wm r
are sequentially embedded in wgr .
5: else
6:
wm r ←− Extract(sp, wgr ); //Extract the watermark in
wgr .
7:
wsr −1 = wm r ∪ wk r −1 ;

for epoch e = 1,2,. . .,Es do
wsr ←− Eq. 8;
10:
end for
11:
wk r ←− Eq. 9;
12: end if
13: Store wm r , wk r ;
8:
9:

14: return

En(·)

Enwgr ←−−−−− wgr .
pu _key

SNet (7). Due to the federated forgetting phenomenon, wgr
changes in every round of FL, which means wm r may
not match wk r −1 . This mismatch could result in wsr −1
underperforming compared to the previous round, thereby
hindering watermark verification. To avoid this, we continuously fine-tune wsr −1 at each round of communication based
on continuous learning, resulting in wsr . Unlike the training
process in the watermark generation phase, we freeze the
parameter space of wm r and update wk r −1 to wk r by gradient
descent (8). In order to prevent the fine-tuning from leading
to SNet overfitting, we set up an early stopping mechanism.
This mechanism saves the model parameters from the previous
round if performance degrades on the validation set. After finetuning, wk r is able to adapt to wm r and wsr will regain its
original performance (9).
⎛
⎞
sp0  wgr

⎠ (6)
···
wm r = Extract sp, wgr = ⎝
sp|sp|  wgr
wsr −1 = wm r ∪ wk r −1



wsr = wsr −1 − ρs ∇wk r −1 L
wk r = wsr \wm r

r

wm , wk

r −1

; Ds



(7)
(8)
(9)

where Extract(·) denotes extract model watermark, wm r
denotes wm in rth round, wsr denotes the full parameters of
the SNet model in the rth round.
Through the simultaneous and coordinated learning of the
watermarked FL model and SNet, the FL model achieves
higher performance on the primary task when SNet also
performs well on Ds . Consequently, the optimization objective
of Fed-RWM can be formulated as shown in (10). It is
important to note that |wm|  |wg |, meaning the number
of parameters in wm is significantly smaller than in wg ,

5730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

minimizing the negative impact of the embedding and training
of the watermark on the protected FL model.
arg minl (wg ) =
w g ∈ Rd

n


ws = wm ∪ wk , wm ⊂ wg

(10)

When participants in FL discover the suspicious model, the
initiator I is notified immediately. I triggers the verification
procedure to verify the model property rights. In this paper,
we set up a test dataset Dst in the initiator with the same
distribution as Ds but without overlapping samples. For clarity,
we notate the watermark extracted from Ms as wms , and the
merged wms and wk as wˆs . We set a validation metric, model
accuracy score AS.



I arg max fwˆs (x ) = y

(11)

(x ,y)∈Dst

where I(·) denotes the indicator function, fwˆs (·) denotes the
prediction of test sample x with wˆs . AS represents the accuracy
of wˆs on Dst . The larger its value, the more watermarking
information the protected model contains. Due to the nonconvexity of the deep model, it is almost impossible for an
innocent model to perform well on AS. On the contrary,
infringing models have higher values on AS. We adopt a hard
threshold β to verify ownership, i.e., if AS ≥ β, the suspected
model is confirmed to be infringement.
Nevertheless, attackers may utilize watermark removal techniques to erase the watermarks, causing AS to fail to identify
infringement on suspicious models following specific attacks.
To enhance the robustness of ownership verification, this paper
designs an enhanced verification method based on watermark
recovery. Specifically, we perform AS validation on Ms . If the
validation is successful (i.e., plagiarism is confirmed), we end
the validation. If the behaviour does not exist, we perform
the watermark recovery method prior to AS validation to
confirm whether the model suffers from the scaling attack and
hybrid attacks, respectively (Other attacks do not significantly
affect the AS performance). The key point of the watermark
recovery is to determine the scaling factor for each layer of
Ms . For more, see Fig. 6, where the specific recovery steps
are described below.
1) Pruning: Pruning and fine-tuning attacks can affect the
accurate calculation of the scaling factor. To address this, we
prune the parameters of each layer in both the watermarked
and suspicious models prior to calculating the scaling factor.
Our goal is to determine the scaling factor sf, and the pruning
rate is designed without considering the impact on the model
performance.
2) 2D Matrix Mapping: We map the multidimensional
parameters of each layer from both the suspicious and watermarking models into two-dimensional matrices Θls and Θlg .
3) Calculation of Scaling Factor Values: For Θls and Θlg ,
we perform singular value decomposition (SVD) to obtain
the diagonal matrices Σls and Σlg (12) respectively. Next, we
calculate the traces of the two diagonal matrices, compute their

∗
∗

Θlg = Ugl Σlg Vgl


sv l = tr Σls /tr Σlg

w s ∈ Rd

E. Ownership Verification

1
|Dst |

Θls = Usl Σls Vsl

λi L(wg ; Di ), arg minl (wk ) = L(ws ; Ds )

i=1

s.t.

AS =

mean. These means are divided to obtain the scaled values
sv l (13) for each layer of the model.

(12)
(13)

where U and V ∗ are the left singular matrix and right singular
matrix after matrix singular value decomposition. sv l is the
l-th layer scaling factor value. tr(·) is the trace of the matrix.
4) Calculate the Scaling Factor Directions: SVD cannot
determine the direction difference between Θls and Θlg . Thus
we calculate their cosine similarity to reflect the direction sd l .
If the similarity is negative, the scaling factor of this layer is
negative, i.e., sd l is −1, otherwise sd l is 1.
⎧
l
l
⎪
⎨ Σl s ·Σg l ≤ 0
sd l = −1
||Σs ||·||Σg ||
(14)
Σl ·Σl
⎪
⎩ wm r −1 l s g l > 0 sd l = 1
||Σ ||·||Σ ||
s

g

5) Watermark Recovery and Verification: We multiply the
sv l and sd l values for each layer to compute the scaling
factor sf l (15) of each layer. The combination of pruning and
fine-tuning attacks causes the pruned parameters to deviate
significantly from the original parameters after fine-tuning.
These deviations are further amplified by the scaling factor,
compromising the recovery of the model and watermark.
Therefore, We eliminate these parameters by properly pruning
the suspicious model before recovery. We utilize the highest
pruning rate p that can maintain the performance of the model.
The scaling factors are then applied to the corresponding layer
parameters of the pruned suspicious model to reconstruct the
original model (16)-(17). Finally, the watermark of the recovered model is extracted and combined with the watermark key
to verify ownership.
sf l = sv l sd l
⎛
⎜
⎜
wrecovery = ⎜
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎞
 0
⎞
prune wsus
,p
0
sf
⎜
⎟
⎜
· · ·
 ⎟
··· ⎟
⎜
⎟
⎟
l
⎜ prune wsus , p ⎟
sf l ⎟
⎟⎜
⎟
⎟
··· ⎠ ⎜
⎝
···
⎠

sf layers

(15)

(16)

layers
prune wsus
,p

prune(w , p) = w  m

1
|wij | ≥ τ (p)
s.t. mi,j =
wm r −1 0
|wij | < τ (p)

(17)

where prune(·) is pruning, p is pruning rate, m is a pruning
mask matrix, τ (·) is a function that determines the pruning
thresholds, layers is the total number of layers, wrecovery are
the parameters of recovered suspicious model Ms . Our validation method demonstrates robustness against both attacks after
watermark restoration. In addition, we also effectively distinguish between innocent, plagiarized, and protected models.
VI. E VALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
1) Experimental Environment: All experiments are
conducted using Python 3.6 and the Keras deep learning

TONG et al.: Fed-RWM: A ROBUST WATERMARKING APPROACH FOR FL MODEL OWNERSHIP PROTECTION

library, running on an Ubuntu 16.04 server with dual Nvidia
TITAN X GPUs.
2) Datasets: We conduct experiments on four datasets:
CIFAR-10, MNIST, WUSTL-IIOT-2021 (IIOT2021) [33], and
IMDB [34]. CIFAR-10, IMDB, and IIOT2021 serve as the
primary datasets for FL tasks, while MNIST is used as the
secret dataset Ds . For CIFAR-10, IMDB, and IIOT2021, we
split their data into training and test sets with an 8:2 ratio. The
training set serves as the data source for the FL tasks across
all clients, while the test set is reserved for validation. It is
partitioned into nk subsets based on IID and non-IID, allocated
as local datasets for every client. Similarly, MNIST is divided
into a training set for training SNet and a test set for ownership
verification. IIOT2021 is an intrusion detection dataset in IIoT,
comprising attack types such as denial of service, exfiltration,
and reconnaissance. We employ it as an FL dataset to simulate
a distributed intrusion detection system for industrial IoT to
demonstrate the applicability of Fed-RWM in IoT.
3) Models: We conduct experiments on four models:
ResNet18 [35], DenseNet121 [36], LSTM [37], and CNN.
Specifically, we train ResNet18 and DenseNet121 in CIFAR10, LSTM in IMDB, and CNN in IIOT2021.
4) FL Setup: For FL, we consider both data IID and nonIID scenarios and experimented with them both. The training
loss function for both FL and SNet is cross-entropy loss,
with Adam and SGD as the respective optimizers. Additional
settings are provided in Table III.
5) Evaluation Metric: We utilize AS mentioned in
Section V-E as the validation metric.

5731

TABLE III
E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETER S ETTING

TABLE IV
T HE VALIDITY OF P ROTECTED FL M ODEL (WATERMARKED M ODEL ) AND
U NPROTECTED FL M ODEL (I NNOCENTS M ODEL ) IN T HREE S CENARIOS

B. Validity
In this section, we evaluate the validity of Fed-RWM,
focusing on two primary objectives: first, determine its ability
to verify the ownership of protected models; second, evaluate
its capability to distinguish between innocent and watermarked
models. We conduct experiments between protected model M
and unprotected model Mu (i.e., innocents). Mu is trained
with the same training settings as M. To comprehensively
evaluate the validity, we examine three distinct scenarios. 1
Scenario 1, FL dataset differs from Ds , and M extracts the
watermark at the same secret position with Mu . 2 Scenario
2, FL dataset (i.e., MNIST) is identical to Ds , and M extracts
the watermark at the same secret position with Mu . 3
Scenario 3, the FL dataset differs from Ds , and positions
are different. Specifically, Scenario 1 represents the general
case in reality. Scenario 2 shows that our approach is equally
effective even if the dataset is the same. Scenario 3 illustrates
that ownership can only be verified with correct position
information. In addition to that, both IID and non-IID cases
are considered. Regarding the design of hard thresholds in
ownership verification, employing the empirical results, it is
designed as β = 0.6. The comprehensive experimental results
are presented in Table IV.
In Scenarios 1 and 2, the AS scores for the watermarks
extracted from M exceed 95%, indicating that the models
retain over 95% of the watermark information. In contrast,
the experimental results for Mu show significant gaps, with

most Mu models achieving less than 20% in AS. This suggests
that Mu contains minimal watermark information, indicating
a lack of effective watermark protection. The reason for this
is that the watermark key is updated under the secret dataset
according to the watermark information in each round. The
data extracted by the unprotected model under the position
information does not match the watermark key and cannot
perform well on the secret dataset. Therefore, based on the
experimental data in Scenarios 1 and 2, our approach can
effectively distinguish between watermark-protected and nonwatermark-protected models (i.e., innocent or not), regardless
of whether the FL dataset is the same as the secret
dataset.
In Scenario 3, we generate the forged watermark position
sp
ˆ using the watermark generation algorithm. We then extract
the parameters of M at sp,
ˆ and the corresponding experimental
results are presented in Table IV. The results indicate that
the AS values remain around 10%, falling short of the
ownership verification threshold. This occurs because FedRWM cannot retrieve watermark information from an incorrect
location, and such information cannot be matched with the
corresponding secret key. The integrated secret network fails
to leverage its full potential on the confidential dataset. This
design prevents plagiarists from forging ownership by altering
the position.

5732

Fig. 3.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Scaling factor calculation.

C. Fidelity
In this section, we assess the negative impact on the FL
primary task. Fidelity demands that the watermark does not
significantly degrade the performance of the primary task
while verifying ownership. We compare the performance
of four models on test sets from three different datasets,
contrasting the outcomes of the Fed-RWM algorithm with
those of the FedAvg algorithm [38]. It is worth noting that the
FedAvg algorithm is the baseline federated learning approach
without watermarking.
As illustrated by the results in Fig. 3, the watermarked
model accuracies are 85.91%,88.24%,83.22%,99.65% and
85.45%, 88.43%, 83.16%, 99.85% without watermark. In nonIID, the watermarked ones were 84.74%, 86.05%, 83.06%,
99.84%, and the non-watermarked ones were 84.25%, 86.73%,
83.14%, 99.84%. The watermarked models are only reduced
by less than 1%. Our approach successfully embeds the watermark with negligible effect on the primary task of FL model.
This is mainly because watermark parameters account for
only a few model parameters. And, the watermark embedding
scheme, which performs embedding once followed by multiple
fine-tuning iterations, further mitigates adverse effects on the
original model.
Other SOTA white-box FL model watermarking methods,
FedTracker [8], FedIPR [10], and FedMCT [23], also perform
well in fidelity. FedTracker and FedIPR report less than 2%
impact on model performance, Fed-RWM incurs even less
loss. FedMCT demonstrates a loss of less than 1%, which is
comparable to our method. Unfortunately, it cannot adapt to
complex watermark removal attacks.
D. Robustness
In Fed-RWM, only the initiator has permission to access
the wm and sp, which are hidden from clients, the server, or
plagiarizers. Thus, it is highly improbable that they will obtain
the position and precisely eliminate the wm. Since the FL
model is collaboratively trained by multiple clients, obtaining
high-quality data from diverse sources to retrain the model
is challenging for plagiarists. Additionally, plagiarists want to
refrain from spending their computational and data resources
to retrain the model. They prefer to modify the trained model
through some attacks (e.g., fine-tuning, pruning and scaling),
destroying the watermark. In this section, we reproduce attacks

Fig. 4.
The fidelity of Fed-RWM. Watermark model: Training the
model using Fed-RWM. No watermark model: Training the model using
FedAvg [38].

TABLE V
T HE ROBUSTNESS TO F INE -T UNING ATTACK

described in Section IV to verify the robustness of our
approach.
1) Robustness Against Fine-Tuning Attack: We consider
the following two scenarios. Scenario 1, the fine-tuning dataset
is the same as the FL dataset, representing the standard finetuning attack. Scenario 2, the fine-tuning dataset differs from
the FL dataset, simulating a transfer learning-based fine-tuning
attack. We train four models on three FL datasets (CIFAR-10,
IMDB, and IIOT2021), and the experimental parameters are
shown in Table III. These models all embed watermarks based
on Fed-RWM.
In Scenario 1, following the setup of previous work [39], we
assume that the adversary has access only to the FL dataset’s
test set. Consequently, all fine-tuning datasets are derived
from the test sets of the three FL datasets. These datasets
are divided into train and test subsets in an 8:2 ratio. These
train subsets are used for model fine-tuning, while test subsets
evaluate the effectiveness of the fine-tuning. The training
settings are from [39], including epochs = 100, learning rates
ρf = 0.001 or 0.01, and the optimization method used is
stochastic gradient descent. We compare the performance of
the watermarked model before (i.e., epochs = 0) and after finetuning. The comparison shows that our approach experiences
a maximum AS loss of only 0.06% after 100 epochs of finetuning. In some cases, AS values were slightly higher than
before fine-tuning. These are due to the fine-tuning will cause
the watermark parameters to be retrained and may enhance
the performance of the SNet.

TONG et al.: Fed-RWM: A ROBUST WATERMARKING APPROACH FOR FL MODEL OWNERSHIP PROTECTION

TABLE VI
T HE ROBUSTNESS TO P RUNING ATTACK

5733

TABLE VII
T HE ROBUSTNESS TO PARAMETER S CALING ATTACK

TABLE VIII
T HE ROBUSTNESS TO H YBRID ATTACKS

In Scenario 2, unlike Scenario 1, we fine-tune the ResNet18
and DenseNet121 watermarked models using MNIST for
transfer learning. Post-fine-tuning, the watermark detection
performance scores AS for the two models are 0.9588 and
0.9687 in the non-IID setting, while they are 0.9573 and
0.9544 in IID, with a maximum performance loss of only
0.11% compared to pre-fine-tuning results.
All experimental results show that while fine-tuning slightly
decreases AS, it remains consistently high. Fed-RWM is
resilient to fine-tuning attacks.
2) Robustness Against Pruning Attack: We perform sparse
pruning on the four watermarked models. Since IID and nonIID settings do not affect the watermarking function, we focus
solely on non-IID scenarios. Following the method in [11],
redundant parameters in every layer are pruned based on their
absolute values. We evaluate the classification accuracy Acc of
the watermarked models on the main task and the watermark
verification performance AS across different pruning ratios.
Table VI presents the results for Acc, AS, and AS loss at
various pruning levels. As pruning increases, both Acc and AS
decline. When pruning rate is 70%, Acc significantly drops,
affecting the performance of the model. However, AS remains
above 90%, the maximum loss is 0.07%, and ownership can
still be verified based on validation conditions. Thus, FedRWM exhibits robustness against pruning attacks.
3) Robustness Against Parameter Scaling Attack: We also
evaluate the robustness of Fed-RWM against the parameter
scaling attack on ResNet18, DenseNet121, and CNN. Since
this attack targets deep models with the relu activation function, we are not experimenting with the LSTM model, which
uses sigmoid [32]. Parameter scaling on all convolutional layers may drastically affect the performance of complex models,
which the attacker does not desire. Thus, we selectively scale
the parameters of certain convolutional and BN layers in
model M by a factor of 2m (m ∈ Z), with random scaling
factors for different layers. We represent M after the attack
as the suspect model Ms . The left side of table VII refers
to the Acc and AS of Ms . Although the overall performance
of Ms remains comparable to the original, the watermark is
significantly compromised. AS drops below 60%, leading to
the failure of watermark verification.
To enhance the robustness of ownership verification, we
apply the watermark recovery method from Section V-E
to recover Ms , followed by ownership verification on the

recovered model. The right side of Table VII presents the
recovered Acc and AS. Acc recovers to 85.30%, 85.12%, and
99.84%, AS recovers to 95.87%, 96.89%, and 98.66%, which
can recover to the performance before the attack, and thereby
effectively verify the infringement of Ms . Hence, Fed-RWM
can resist the parameter scaling attack.
4) Robustness Against Hybrid Attacks: Sophisticated
adversaries could launch hybrid attacks that include finetuning (F), pruning (P), and parameter scaling (S) against the
watermarked FL model M. In this section, we experiment with
eight different sequences of hybrid attacks (i.e., PFS, SPF,
FSP, PSF, SFP, FPS, FP, PF). Since the parameter scaling
attack targets the relu activation function, PFS, SPF, FSP,
PSF, SFP and FPS attack experiments are conducted solely
on the ResNet18, DenseNet121, and CNN models, FP and PF
attack experiments are conducted on the LSTM. In order to
maximize the destruction of the model watermark, we chose
the pruning rate to be 0.5 and the fine-tuning learning rate to
be 0.001. As IID and non-IID distributions do not influence
the experimental outcomes, we only experiment non-IID.
To ensure that Fed-RWM can still verify watermarks under
hybrid attacks, we develop a recovery method to restore
watermarks before ownership verification, see Section V-E.
Previous experimental results indicate that in the absence
of attacks, ResNet18, DenseNet121, and CNN achieve accuracies of 0.8474, 0.8605, and 0.9985 for the main task,
and exhibit ownership verification capabilities of 0.9587,
0.9689, and 0.9866, respectively. As shown in Table VIII,
after hybrid attacks, the main task performance of the
three models remain within the range of 0.8340∼0.8680,
0.8480∼0.8975, and 0.9942∼0.9996, with no significant
degradation. Due to retraining during the fine-tuning attack,

5734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

Fig. 5. Watermark distribution before attack, after attack and after recovery. (a. Distribution of watermark before and after hybrid attacks, b. Watermark
statistics before and after hybrid attacks. c. Distribution of watermark after hybrid attacks and after recovery, d. Kernel density of watermark after hybrid
attacks and after recovery).

Acc slightly improves following some hybrid attacks. The
scaling attack severely damages the watermark, resulting in
AS values of approximately 0.33, 0.42, and 0.51, which are
insufficient for ownership verification. After recovery, the
AS values improve to 0.9589∼0.9592, 0.9668∼0.9689, and
0.9854∼0.9861. Compared to the pre-attack period, the maximum reduction is 1.31%. Although the AS values decrease
after recovery, they are still sufficient to verify ownership. The
performance of the recovered model may be degraded due
to miscalculation of scale factors and changes in the original
parameter distributions caused by the hybrid attack. However,
these issues do not hinder the effective identification of the
plagiarized model.
To illustrate the effectiveness of the recovery mechanism,
we extract watermark data before the attack, after the attack,
and after recovery for visual analysis (Fig. 5). The watermark
data subjected to the hybrid attack exhibits significant deviations from the original distribution (Fig. 5(a)). We compute
key statistics (i.e., minimum, maximum, median, mean, and
standard deviation) and visualize them using radar plots
(Fig. 5(b)), revealing significant discrepancies between the
post-attack and original watermark statistics. The merged
watermark data and key exhibit poor compatibility, resulting
in degraded performance on the secret dataset. As shown
in Table VIII, AS fails to verify ownership across all attack
scenarios. After recovery, the watermark data closely aligns
with the original distribution (Fig. 5(c)). To further illustrate
the similarity, we visualize the kernel density estimates of the
watermark data, which show substantial overlap and negligible
difference (Fig. 5(d)). The recovered watermark data integrates
well with the watermark key, achieving strong performance
on the secret dataset. As shown in Table VIII, AS successfully
verified ownership after recovery. Consequently, Fed-RWM
demonstrates robustness against diverse attack scenarios and
maintains reliable ownership verification.
For the LSTM model employing the sigmoid activation
function, the performance of the watermarked model exhibits
minimal fluctuation after the hybrid attack (Table IX). The
ownership verification accuracy slightly decreases from 0.9877
(pre-attack) to 0.9874 (post-attack), yet the ownership remains
verifiable.
Additionally, we perform five attack-verification experiments per attack type and define the verification success rate
as the proportion of successful verifications post-attack. As
shown in Table VIII, all models achieve a verification success

TABLE IX
T HE ROBUSTNESS TO H YBRID ATTACKS ON LSTM M ODEL

TABLE X
N UMBER OF M ODEL PARAMETERS AND P ERCENTAGE OF WATERMARKS

rate of 1.0, corresponding to 100% defense against all attacks.
Table IX illustrates that the LSTM model also achieves a
verification success rate 100% in all attack scenarios.
5) Robustness Against Overwrite Attack: For the overwrite
attack, the dishonest client may generate a new watermark
and embed it into M using the same method, intending to
overwrite the original. We conduct the overwrite attack on
four watermarked models under non-IID. The results show
that AS values of ResNet18, DesNet121, LSTM, and CNN,
are 0.9586, 0.9687, 0.9875, and 0.9867, respectively, which
do not decrease significantly and still verify the ownership.
The underlying cause is that the number of parameters in wm
is much smaller than M (The watermarking percentage in the
four models are 0.0850%, 0.0535%, 0.2254% and 0.7417%,
respectively, Table X). Thus, the likelihood of the watermark
being overwritten is low. Our approach can resist the overwrite
attack.
E. Local Model Protection
In Fed-RWM, we embed and train watermark for the global
model. During the FL, clients train to obtain local models
L, which must also be protected. In this section, we evaluate
the watermarks in L. Fig. 3 documents the AS during the
global model watermark training process (left) and a randomly
selected local model verification watermarking process (right).
The results indicate that the ownership verification capability
improves and stabilizes as training rounds increase. Both
global and local models can successfully embed watermarks
with similar watermarking performance. Their maximum difference is 0.06%, which is negligible in ownership verification

TONG et al.: Fed-RWM: A ROBUST WATERMARKING APPROACH FOR FL MODEL OWNERSHIP PROTECTION

5735

TABLE XII
A DDITIONAL C OMPUTING T IME AND C OMMUNICATION OVERHEAD

Fig. 6. Left: the global model watermark training process, Right: the local
model watermark verification process.
TABLE XI
C OMPARISON W ITH E XISTING W ORKS

capability. This is because local model training essentially finetunes the global model. So, we can easily protect the local
model as well.
F. Comparison With Existing Works
We compare Fed-RWM with SOTA white-box watermarking methods [8], [10], [23], [24] for FL models. Among
them, [24] is a watermarking scheme applied in IoT. Their
embedding processes are all based on enhancements of the
work by [11] and are relatively similar. Therefore, our comparison focuses on [10] without loss of generality. According
to the experimental evaluation in [10], it is robust to finetuning and pruning attacks. Additionally, it also performs
well in terms of fidelity and validity. Hence, we compare
it in other aspects (Table XI), including robustness against
parameter scaling attacks, hybrid attacks, and compatibility
with secure federated learning.
Specifically, we train ResNet18 utilizing Fed-RWM and the
feature-based approach in [10] to obtain two watermarked
models, M and Mc . Before the scaling attack, the accuracy
rates of the two models for the main task were 84.74% and
85.60%, with watermark detection rates of 95.87% and 100%,
respectively. During the attack, we multiplied some of the
convolution and BN layer parameters by the scaling factor and
took them negatively. After the attack, the accuracy rates of
the two models were 84.85% and 83.51%, respectively, which
did not decrease significantly. The watermark detection rate
of M was 95.87%, while Mc dropped to 45%. Consequently,
Mc can not withstand the scaling attack, which results in
severe watermark damage and ownership verification failure.
This occurs because the take-negative operation inverts the
parameter space w, affecting the bit vector B̂ , computed from
the saved secret matrix x and w. As a result, the stored
watermarks B and B̂ show significant distance differences,
leading to a reduced detection rate. In contrast, Fed-RWM

can still accurately verify the ownership. Since hybrid attacks
include parameter scaling, we conclude that Mc cannot defend
against them. References [8], [23], [24] embed local watermarks follows the same principle as [10]. Thus, models trained
using these methods cannot defend against parameter scaling
and hybrid attacks.
Our approach to embed and train watermarks is performed
in the initiator, and the server only acts as an aggregation computation, the client only trains the local model.
Hence, Fed-RWM avoids dishonest server-client behaviour
and adapts to SFL scenarios. References [8], [24] and [23]
embed watermarks on the server, which cannot avoid server
dishonesty and is not adaptable to SFL. Reference [10] embed
watermarks on clients, which cannot avoid dishonest clients
embedding malicious watermarks or eliminating watermarks.
About the universality of watermarking schemes, our experiments show that Fed-RWM is applicable in both CNN-based
and RNN-based models. Furthermore, Fed-RWM can handle
tasks involving three types of data: image, traffic, and text.
Nevertheless, [8], [24] and [23] do not validate RNN models
and only involve the image data-based task. Regarding the
watermark embedding position, they all embed the watermark
in the BN layer and do not account for models lacking
BN layers. However, in our approach, model ownership is
protected effectively, irrespective of the presence of BN layers.
Notably, the CNN and LSTM models do not contain BN layers
in our experiments, while ResNet18 and DesNet121 do.
G. Overhead
1) Overhead for Watermark Embedding and Verification:
We discusses the additional overhead introduced by our
method during watermark embedding training, and verification, as shown in Table XII. The results show that the
additional computation time required by our method is negligible during the federated learning process.
During the embedding training phase, the additional overhead primarily arises from training the secret model and
embedding the watermark. The secret model, designed as a
lightweight architecture with minimal parameters and training
data, incurs approximately 3s in training costs. The computational time cost of watermark embedding is predominantly
determined by the architectural structure and parameter count
of the protected model.
During the verification phase, additional overheads primarily include pruning both the original watermarked model
and the suspicious model, computing SVD diagonal matrices
for each layer, determining scaling factors, recovering the
watermark, and verifying ownership. This is necessary because

5736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2025

the protected model may be vulnerable to scaling attacks and
hybrid attacks. Verification time consumption is determined by
the model’s size and layer count. Although DenseNet121 has
fewer parameters than ResNet18, its greater number of layers
leads to higher computational times for SVD and scaling
factor calculations. Scaling and hybrid attacks are ineffective
against models employing sigmoid functions. For such models,
additional overhead is primarily associated with ownership
verification.
2) Overhead for Synchronization: Fed-RWM also affects
the synchronization of federated learning. Since our scheme
is synchronous federated learning, i.e., in each round of communication, the server side needs to wait until all clients have
sent their local models before aggregation. In the traditional
scheme, the synchronization time consumption in each round
is Tmax + 2Ts + Ta . Tmax is the maximum duration of
local training for all participating clients in this round, Ts
is the duration of the model transfer between the server
and clients, and Ta is the duration of aggregation. For FedRWM, the synchronization time consumption in the watermark
embedding round is Tmax +4Ts +Te +Ta . Te is the duration
of watermark embedding. In the watermark training round,
the initiator only updates the watermark key without updating
the watermark, i.e., max(Tmax , Ti + Tw ) + 2Ts + Ta . Ti
denotes the duration of the initiator local training for the FL
master task, while Tu represents the time required for updating
the watermarking task. When the initiator is not selected for
the FL master task training in a given round, Ti is 0. It
is worth noting that the synchronization time is defined as
the time between the start of sending the model to clients
in the current round and the start of preparing to send the
model in the next round. Compared to the time synchronization
overhead of traditional synchronous federated learning, the
effect of Fed-RWM on time synchronization is small and
tolerable.
3) Overhead for Federated Communication: Compared to
the baselines, our method introduces additional communication overhead. Specifically, the additional overhead in each
round mainly comes from is transferring the current global
model from the server to the initiator. This process is done
to synchronize the watermark and the corresponding key. We
quantify these additional overheads by measuring the size
of the model files transferred in each round, as shown in
Table XII. Although these overheads are incurred, they are
tolerable for the current network environment.
3) Overhead for Federated Communication: In summary,
Fed-RWM is a FL white-box watermarking approach designed
to prevent dishonest behaviors on both client and server
sides. It surpasses existing SOTA methods in robustness
and can be integrated into secure federated learning frameworks. Additionally, its watermark embedding method is
generic and independent of model structure, offering broader
applicability compared to other approaches. This study implements FL model watermarking in the IoT domain. Our
experiments show that Fed-RWM is able to be applied to
image, text, and IoT traffic tasks and protect the intellectual
property rights of AI models for enterprise or edge device
nodes.

VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposes Fed-RWM, an effective white-boxbased watermarking method, to protect the ownership of FL
models in IoT. This is the first new method that integrates
watermark recovery and simultaneously prevents edge and
cloud dishonest behavior. Fed-RWM employs parameter sharing for embedding and verifying the watermark, introduces a
new training paradigm to prevent cloud and edge access to
watermark information, and incorporates a recovery mechanism to enhance verification robustness. Evaluations of various
tasks and settings show that Fed-RWM is effective in terms
of ownership verification, fidelity and robustness, etc.
R EFERENCES
[1] V. Demertzi, S. Demertzis, and K. Demertzis, “An overview of privacy
dimensions on the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT),” Algorithms,
vol. 16, no. 8, p. 378, 2023.
[2] N. M. Hijazi, M. Aloqaily, M. Guizani, B. Ouni, and F. Karray,
“Secure federated learning with fully homomorphic encryption for
IoT communications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 4289–4300, Feb. 2023.
[3] G. Xu, Z. Zhou, J. Dong, L. Zhang, and X. Song, “A blockchainbased federated learning scheme for data sharing in Industrial Internet
of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 21467–21478,
Dec. 2023.
[4] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” 2016, arXiv:1602.05629.
[5] R. Yang, H. He, Y. Wang, Y. Qu, and W. Zhang, “Dependable federated
learning for IoT intrusion detection against poisoning attacks,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 132, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 103381.
[6] R. Myrzashova, S. H. Alsamhi, A. V. Shvetsov, A. Hawbani, and X. Wei,
“Blockchain meets federated learning in healthcare: A systematic review
with challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10,
no. 16, pp. 14418–14437, Aug. 2023.
[7] H. Liu, S. Li, W. Li, and W. Sun, “Efficient decentralized optimization
for edge-enabled smart manufacturing: A federated learning-based
framework,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 157, pp. 422–435,
Aug. 2024.
[8] S. Shao, W. Yang, H. Gu, Z. Qin, L. Fan, and Q. Yang, “Fedtracker:
Furnishing ownership verification and traceability for federated learning model,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 114–131, Jan./Feb. 2025.
[9] J. Chen, M. Li, Y. Cheng, and H. Zheng, “FedRight: An effective model
copyright protection for federated learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 135,
Dec. 2023, Art. no. 103504.
[10] B. Li, L. Fan, H. Gu, J. Li, and Q. Yang, “FedIPR: Ownership
verification for federated deep neural network models,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4521–4536, Apr. 2023.
[11] Y. Uchida, Y. Nagai, S. Sakazawa, and S. Satoh, “Embedding watermarks into deep neural networks,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia
Retrieval, 2017, pp. 269–277.
[12] S. Ben Jabra and M. Ben Farah, “Deep learning-based watermarking
techniques challenges: A review of current and future trends,” Circuits,
Syst., Signal Process., vol. 43, pp. 4339–4368, Jul. 2024.
[13] L. Fan, K. W. Ng, and C. S. Chan, “Rethinking deep neural
network ownership verification: Embedding passports to defeat ambiguity attacks,” in Proc. 33rd Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32,
2019, pp. 1–10.
[14] H. Chen, B. D. Rouhani, C. Fu, J. Zhao, and F. Koushanfar, “Deepmarks:
A secure fingerprinting framework for digital rights management of
deep learning models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Multimedia Retrieval, 2019,
pp. 105–113.
[15] P. Lv et al., “HufuNet: Embedding the left piece as watermark and
keeping the right piece for ownership verification in deep neural
networks,” 2021, arXiv:2103.13628.
[16] F. Boenisch, “A systematic review on model watermarking for neural
networks,” Front. Big Data, vol. 4, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 729663.
[17] A. Bansal et al., “Certified neural network watermarks with randomized
smoothing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 1450–1465.

TONG et al.: Fed-RWM: A ROBUST WATERMARKING APPROACH FOR FL MODEL OWNERSHIP PROTECTION

[18] Y. Lao, P. Yang, W. Zhao, and P. Li, “Identification for deep neural
network: Simply adjusting few weights!” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf.
Data Eng. (ICDE), 2022, pp. 1328–1341.
[19] X. Qi, T. Xie, R. Pan, J. Zhu, Y. Yang, and K. Bu, “Towards
practical deployment-stage backdoor attack on deep neural networks,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022,
pp. 13347–13357.
[20] Y. Li, Y. Jiang, Z. Li, and S.-T. Xia, “Backdoor learning: A survey,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 5–22,
Jan. 2022.
[21] W. Yang et al., “Watermarking in secure federated learning: A verification framework based on client-side backdooring,” ACM Trans. Intell.
Syst. Technol., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–25, 2023.
[22] B. G. Tekgul, Y. Xia, S. Marchal, and N. Asokan, “WAFFLE:
Watermarking in federated learning,” in Proc. 40th Int. Symp. Reliable
Distrib. Syst. (SRDS), 2021, pp. 310–320.
[23] Q. Chen, P. Zheng, Y. Du, W. Luo, and H. Liu, “FedMCT: A
federated framework for intellectual property protection and malicious
client tracking,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Comput., 2024,
pp. 80–86.
[24] Y. Wu, H. Cheng, L. Guan, P. Liu, F. Chen, and M. Wang, “VPFL:
A verifiable property federated learning framework against invisible
attacks in distributed IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. High Perform.
Comput. Commun., Data Sci. Syst., Smart City Dependabil. Sensor,
Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl. (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys), 2023,
pp. 671–678.
[25] Y. Xiao, H. Shao, J. Lin, Z. Huo, and B. Liu, “BCE-FL: A secure and
privacy-preserving federated learning system for device fault diagnosis
under non-IID condition in IIoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 8,
pp. 14241–14252, Apr. 2024.
[26] R. Yang, T. Zhao, F. R. Yu, M. Li, D. Zhang, and X. Zhao, “Blockchainbased federated learning with enhanced privacy and security using
homomorphic encryption and reputation,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 21674–21688, Jun. 2024.
[27] A. P. Kalapaaking, I. Khalil, and X. Yi, “Blockchain-based federated
learning with SMPC model verification against poisoning attack for
healthcare systems,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 269–280, Jan.–Mar. 2023.
[28] K. W. Church, Z. Chen, and Y. Ma, “Emerging trends: A gentle introduction to fine-tuning,” Natural Lang. Eng., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 763–778,
2021.
[29] Q. Wang, Z. Pang, W. Liang, J. Zhang, and K. Wang, “Transferable
physical layer authentication based on time-varying patterns toward
zero training deployment for mobile IIoT devices,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Informat., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 7675–7685, May 2024.
[30] P. Jain and P. Kar, “Non-convex optimization for machine learning,”
R Mach. Learn., vol. 10, nos. 3–4, pp. 142–363, 2017.
Found. Trends
[31] Y. Xu et al., “Enhancing decentralized federated learning with model
pruning and adaptive communication,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 70–84, Jan. 2025.
[32] N. Lukas, E. Jiang, X. Li, and F. Kerschbaum, “SoK: How robust is
image classification deep neural network watermarking?” in Proc. IEEE
Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2022, pp. 787–804.
[33] M. Zolanvari. “WUSTL-IIOT-2021.” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://
dx.doi.org/10.21227/yftq-n229
[34] A. Maas, R. E. Daly, P. T. Pham, D. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and
C. Potts, “Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis,” in Proc. 49th
Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguist., Human Lang. Technol., 2011,
pp. 142–150.
[35] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[36] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[37] S. Hochreiter, “Long short-term memory,” in Neural Computation.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT-Press, 1997.
[38] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[39] Y. Adi, C. Baum, M. Cisse, B. Pinkas, and J. Keshet, “Turning
your weakness into a strength: Watermarking deep neural networks by
backdooring,” in Proc. 27th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.),
2018, pp. 1615–1631.

5737

Xin Tong (Student Member, IEEE) received the
M.S. degree in computer science and technology
from North China Electric Power University,
Beijing, China, in 2023. She is currently pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in cyberspace security with the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing.
Her current research interests include distributed
computing, machine learning security, edge
computing, and the Internet of Things.

Shike Li (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received the Ph.D. degree in control science and
engineering from North China Electric Power
University, Beijing, China, in 2024.
She is currently a Lecturer with the School
of Computer and Information Technology,
Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China. She has
around ten papers in IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
I NTELLIGENT T RANSPORTATION S YSTEMS, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY,
and IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL. Her
research interests include Internet of Vehicles, information security, data
privacy, and blockchain systems.

Ni Jin received the M.S. degree in mathematics from the Civil Aviation University of
China, Tianjin, China, in 2023. She is currently
pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace security with the Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
Her current research interests include network
security, machine learning, and large language models.

Baojiang Cui received the B.S. degree from the
Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China, in
1994, the M.S. degree from the Harbin Institute of
Technology, Harbin, China, in 1998, and the Ph.D.
degree in control theory and control engineering
from Naikai University, Tianjin, in 2004.
He is currently a Professor with the School
of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. He has
around 50 papers in IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, and IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS. His main research interests
include detection of software, cloud computing, and the Internet of Things.