6340

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Federated-Boosting: A Distributed and Dynamic
Boosting-Powered Cyber-Attack Detection Scheme
for Security and Privacy of Consumer IoT
Izhar Ahmed Khan , Member, IEEE, Dechang Pi , Shaharyar Kamal , Mohammed Alsuhaibani ,
and Bandar Mzel Alshammari

Abstract—Consumer Internet of Things (CIoT) is an emerging
technology that took the traditional consumer electronics to next
level with smarter devices and higher connectivity. However, the
rapid boom of this technology has captured a great deal of
hacker’s attention in the past decade. Due to resource restricted
nature of CIoT devices and limited computational abilities,
security professionals are unable to strengthen the security
and privacy measures. Since the existing security methods
suffers from data imbalance and overfitting issues, this paper
proposes a distributed and dynamic weighted boosting method
named Federated-Boosting for the accurate and timely detection
of cyber-attacks in CIoT. Specifically, a weighting strategy is
designed to overcome the data imbalance issue by dynamically
adjusting the weights of weaker class samples. Additionally, a
regularized loss function is designed that helps in controlling
the overfitting of the model and provide enhance performance
and generalization. Finally, a time-based and performancebased dynamic aggregation scheme is designed using distributed
training model that keeps the privacy of the CIoT devices intact to
the local server. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets
validates the superior performance of Federated-Boosting model
against state-of-the-art detection models.
Index Terms—Security and privacy, cyber-attacks, consumer
IoT, intrusion detection.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Consumer Electronics
HE WORLD has witnessed significant advancements in
the Consumer Electronics (CEs) products by adopting
revolutionary technologies and tools, such as Internet-ofThings (IoT), cloud computing, Machine Learning (ML), etc.
With this emergence and adaption, the U.S. Consumer Tech
Industry reports that CEs revenues are expected to exceed

T

Received 2 July 2024; revised 15 August 2024 and 2 October 2024;
accepted 13 November 2024. Date of publication 14 November 2024;
date of current version 14 August 2025. This work was supported by
National Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021ZD0113103.
(Corresponding author: Izhar Ahmed Khan.)
Izhar Ahmed Khan and Dechang Pi are with the College of Computer
Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing 210016, China (e-mail: izhar@nuaa.edu.cn; dc.pi@nuaa.edu.cn).
Shaharyar Kamal is with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
University of Chile, Santiago 8330111, Chile (e-mail: skamal@ing.uchile.cl).
Mohammed Alsuhaibani is with the Department of Computer Science,
College of Computer, Qassim University, Buraydah 52571, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: m.suhibani@qu.edu.sa).
Bandar Mzel Alshammari is with the Department of Information
Systems, Jouf University, Sakakah 72388, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
bmalshammari@tcc-ict.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3499942

500 billion USD in the next few years [1]. Traditionally, CEs
products are standalone which rarely connect to other devices
or Internet. However, the next generation CEs market has been
based products that have higher connectivity and enhanced
intelligence as compared to traditional CE products. Hence,
Consumer IoT emerged as a next level technology in the CEs
field and studies [1] shows dramatic increase of IoT devices
usage in different fields of CE products such as smart homes,
healthcare, fintech, etc.
B. Consumer IoT in Healthcare
The urge to upgrade the conventional healthcare network
(HCN) in to smart one is inevitable. Even though the concept
of smart healthcare system has been talked about for decades,
the existing HCN is faced with significant challenges, such as
medical errors, lack of medical workers, and high cost [2].
Taking Europe and USA as example, where 10% and 20% of
GDP is devoted to healthcare domain, respectively [3], which,
yet, unable to avoid errors in medical decisions. In addition, it
is projected that by 2030, the shortage of healthcare workers
will reach to 18 million [3]. To overcome these challenges,
the traditional CEs-based HCN are augmented and equipped
with the IoT and Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)-based
devices to enable enhanced communication characteristics
and provide better healthcare services. This incorporation has
revolutionized the typical CEs into the next-generation devices
having sophisticated intelligence with enhanced connectivity
measures. Thereby improving the automatic control and availability of data in the CE system through the connectivity
of devices such as sensors, actuators, and other different
consumer devices [2]. Nonetheless, these next generation CE
devices are capable to be remotely accessed and controlled at
any time, and from anywhere in the world.
C. Threat Significance
The market of CEs devices has remarkably progressed
over the past decade. A study report shows that the user
domain of CEs sector will reach up to 2, 873.1 million by
2025 with average revenue up to 317.10 billion USD [4].
Nowadays, each equipment or appliance may generate and
communicate data online, leading to the expansion of CEs
devices. The typical complex architecture of Internet connectivity faces challenges to acclimate to these modern-day

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
1558-4127 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING

Consumer Internet of Things (CIoT) devices and networks due
to their dynamic nature. Thus, resulting in ineffective usage
of resources, and ultimately exposing the network to diverse
kinds of cyber-attacks [5]. Moreover, it is evident from the
literature (please see Table I for example cyber-attacks) that
CIoT-based smart systems are subject to numerous attacks,
such as DoS, brute force, and botnets etc. [4].
D. Contribution
Federated learning (FL) concepts has emerged and shown
advantageous provisions for delivering better security and
privacy of intelligent medical systems [10], [11]. FL overcome
the shortcomings of traditional centralized learning by offering
distributed training models without accessing data of participating clients. Consequently, mitigating the privacy risks of
sensitive user information and improves the learning process
through shared computational resources, which might not be
conceivable through centralized learning model. An intrusion
detection system (IDS) could serve as the security backbone for
the next-generation CIoT network, since it can easily detect the
presence of malicious activities and attacks [8]. However, due
to the specific requirements of CIoT networks (i.e., mobility,
limited power and memory, and low) for real-time threat
detection, the existing IDS faces significant design challenges.
Additionally, the attack surface of threats is increasing day-byday, which is why contemporary IDSs are incapable to identify
unseen or zero-day attacks. Hence, a dynamic and adaptable
security solution is needed for timely and accurate detection
against evolving cyber-attacks in CIoT systems.
Therefore, this research work proposes a distributed
boosting-based intrusion detection method for the security and
privacy of CIoT. In summary, the proposed method improve
the security domain in following ways:
• We design and develop an efficient Federated-Boosting
model for security and privacy of CIoT networks that is
capable of detecting zero-day attacks.
• We design an adaptive weighted boosting mechanism to
accurately identify complex attack vectors that assign
dynamic weights to overcome data imbalance issue.
• We design loss function regularization to eliminate the
issue of over-fitting.
• We design a distributed IDS model using dynamic aggregation strategy to preserve the privacy of participating
CIoT clients.
The remaining sections of this work are organized in
following manner. The related work and research gap is
presented in Section II. The details of proposed design is
outlined in III. The experimental evaluations and results are
presented in Section IV, while conclusion is presented in
Section V.
II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Literature Review
The literature has reported a plethora of research work
contributed towards the security of CIoT networks against
a disseminated range of insider and outsider threats [12],
[13], [14], [15]. For example, the authors of [16] developed a

6341

security model deep learning-based method to detect common
security threats like DoS1 and port-based attacks. The authors
reported high accuracy rates, however their proposed model
is computationally expensive to be applied in restricted IoT
networks. Similarly, the authors of [17] designed a Stacked
Deep learning model that uses bio-inspired Spider Monkey
optimization method. The model is capable of detecting
various kinds of attacks such as DoS, probe, R2L2 and
U2R3 attacks with high accuracy. However, they evaluate their
model with an outdated (NSL-KDD) dataset that does not
represent the complex attack vectors in the contemporary IoT
framework.
To detect DDoS4 attacks in IoT environments, the writers
of [18] developed a benchmarking of several ML classifiers.
Although they used both new and old datasets to evaluate
their model, but they neglected the applicability of their model
in real-world IoT networks. The authors of [19] developed a
blockchain-based deep model for the security and privacy of
IoMT networks. Specifically, they used autoencoder for the
privacy and LSTM for security purpose. However, the use of
blockchain technology makes it not feasible for CIoT-based
healthcare networks because of obvious drawbacks such as
high consumption and lack of clarity regarding the ownership
of data. Similarly, the authors of [20] also developed a threat
detection model using blockchain and deep learning for the
security of industrial IoT networks. However, they did not
consider the limitations of IoT devices in their developed
model.
In view of federated learning [21], the literature also
reported distributed learning methods for security of medical
networks. For example, the authors of [22] developed a method
named SecFedNIDS using federated learning to guard IoT
against poisoning attacks. However, their method required a
lot of human effort in the application stage. Similarly, the
authors of [23] also proposed federated learning-based model
for security enhancement of IoMT networks. In an effort to
enhance privacy of the IoMT systems, the authors of [24]
developed a model named FL-BETS to preserve the privacy
and detect data frauds at local fog level nodes and remote
cloud nodes. However, the detection of unknown attacks were
not considered during the development phase which makes it
inapplicable to detect zero-day attacks.
B. Research Gap and Motivation
It is evident from the literature review that most of the
existing methods focuses on security aspect and neglected the
privacy issue. Similarly, the performance and access control
are the key driven factors of existing methods; hence, they lack
deploy ability in CIoT environments. Additionally, the threat
of maleficent clients in the aggregation mechanism posed a
significant danger to the security and privacy of critical CIoT
networks. Also, a tailored security mechanism is required to
cope with the challenges raised by the heterogeneous devices
1 Denial-of-Service.
2 Remote-to-Local.
3 User-to-Root.
4 Distributed Denial-of-Service.

6342

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

TABLE I
C YBER -ATTACK I NCIDENTS R EPORTED IN D IFFERENT C OUNTRIES

Fig. 1.

General overview of proposed Federated-Boosting IDS model for CIoTs.

in the modern CIoT. To address these gaps, this paper put
forward an end-to-end security design that does not only
offer robust security and privacy scheme but also provide
a dynamic aggregation system for malicious clients in the
distributed architecture of CIoT environments. To the best of
our knowledge, there is no such study that offer cyber-attack
detection mechanism for security and privacy of CIoT using
federated architecture.
We applied federated learning because of its distinct benefits
such as: it allows the model training with multiple data sources
while protecting data privacy; it decreases the need for largescale data transfers between clients and servers, which is
essential in bandwidth-constrained environments for example
IoT/CIoT; it doesn’t incur a large computation overhead
compared to training a model in a conventional way which
increases performance factor; and It offers scalability by
handling large number of devices or entities.

III. P ROPOSED F EDERATED -B OOSTING D ESIGN

powerful detection/defensive system against evolving cyberattacks. On the other hand, federated architecture provides a
global perspective of the entire network with unified controlling abilities, making distributed network flow obtainability
easier. As shown in Figure 1, the proposed model has a combination of central global server having several local servers
where each local server represents a distinct CIoT network.
The global server manages the weight and parameter updates,
dynamic client list, aggregation mechanism and distribution
of global models. The proposed model is placed on the
global server for significant reasons such as: i) changing
functionality and improved adaptability. ii) flexibility between
the linked local servers and CIoT devices. and iii) governing
capability to control the entire network as a sole an intelligent
decision engine. This global view of entire distributed network
and devices provides a combination of security and privacy
and thus develop an efficient cyber-attack detection system
to defend against malicious actions. The Federated-Boosting
model is flexible to fit more devices by simply updating the
parameters to the global server.

A. Model Overview
In traditional or central networks, only the local state of
a network can be perceived through central learning. Thus,
it is challenging to create an overall design of a distributed
structure and even harder for an IDS method to design a

B. Preprocessing
Preprocessing is an important stage in Machine Learning
as the data quality and the extracted meaningful information
can directly affects the capability of a learning model; hence,

KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING

it is very important to preprocess the input data before it is
feed to the detection model. The Federated-Boosting model
comprises the following preprocessing techniques:
1) Feature Reduction: This step is applied since CIoT
devices generates high-dimensional and heterogeneous data.
The aim of this application is to remove noisy and less relevant
features from the input data as it can effectively helps in
reducing the size and computational cost of the detection
model. Since we intend to design a lightweight model for
restricted CIoT network, it is vital to reduce the feature set
to achieve several advantages like faster training time, low
memory consumption, and less computational requirements.
The Federated-Boosting model incorporates ICA5 technique
to reduce the feature set, which is defined below by:
id = N c + m

(1)

where the k-dimensional feature of the input data denoted by
id, the m-dimensional independent components are denoted
by c, the matrix for mixing constant k × m with k ≥ m and m
shows noise, is denoted by the N . Suppose the medical data
is generated and labeled in noise-free environment, then the
ICA method is shown below by:
id = N c

(2)

c = U id

(3)

and

where the matrix for un-mixing is represented by U , to project
id to c.
These independently shown components are reflected as the
best feature space as it can provide higher estimates N and c
having id with non-Gaussian data (which is standard practice
in existing CIoT networks) optimizing constraint. Ultimately,
the optimizing constraint of non-Gaussian data to decrease the
shared information (SI) between m variables (cj , where j =
1, 2, . . . , m), is represented below to solve Eq. (4).
  
SI(c1 , c2 , v3 , . . . , ck ) =
E cj − E(ce )
(4)
j

where E shows the differential entropy. We chose ICA over
other methods because it can support to isolate mixed signals
into their original independent components, making it easier
to comprehend the underlying dynamics of data. Additionally,
this method is selected because the CIoT devices generates
non-Gaussian structure data and the devices and networks are
assumed to be independent.
2) Feature Normalization: Since the proposed model is
dependent on trees and weights, the high range of feature values can induce a bias in the learning system which eventually
may cause some feature weights to update faster as compared
to other features. Hence, it is important to address this issue
by utilizing a statistical normalization method such as, the
Z-score technique, as given below:
ZS (j) =

id(j) − μ
σ

5 Independent Component Analysis.

(5)

6343

where σ denotes the denotes standard deviation, and the mean
values of m for a particular feature (id(j) (j ∈ 1, 2, . . . , m)) is
shown by μ.
C. Weighted Boosting Method
Boosting is an ensemble training strategy in which the
outcomes of several training models (aka base models) is
integrated to predict a cyber threat. In this work, two modified
functions are applied to the boosting strategy, i.e., weight function (WF) and regularized learning objective or regularized
loss function RLF). The WF helps in rectification of gradient
deviation problem while the RLF term assists in avoiding
the over-fitting issue by smoothing the final learnt weights
and assist in the process of detecting zero-day attacks. This
is done through the addition of penalty/regularization term
to the usual loss function that demoralizes complex training
methods having heavy weights. This is achieved through the
regularization parameter in the training process in order to
discourage the model for being too complex and therefore
avoiding over-fitting issue. Additionally, this method enhances
the generalization ability of the proposed model when executed
on test data.
This weighting strategy effectively treat the data imbalanced
problem by appropriately assigning large weights to minority
or weak labels to bring out the best of classification results.
Similarly, the over-fitting issue is addressed through the RLF
strategy that tries to reduce the complexity of the model unlike
other algorithms such as KNN,6 RF,7 NN,8 etc. However, to
strongly learn every feature the model comprises of a large
number of regression trees since the training data is skewed
in nature. Let N denotes the tree count, and M denotes the
records in training set, then the prediction outcome of pm and
N th tree for input data record is given by:
N−1
+ ntN (bm ) tn ∈ T
pN
m = pm

(6)

N−1 represents the outcome of previous tree, which is
where pm
added to tn (bm ) that represents the newly constructed tree and
produce the pN
m prediction result, m denotes the learning rate,
and T represents the collection of probable trees. Here we
can optimize the objective function to minimize the prediction
error as shown below:

OF N =

M



1
2
L xm , pN
m + γ trc + λwe
2

(7)

m=1

where OF N represents the objective function, the correct value
for mth sample class is denoted by xm , λ and γ represents
the parameters of regularization that are employed to control
the tree pruning and complexity, respectively, trc denotes the
number of terminal nodes, and we represents weight of each
leaf in tree. The boosting model utilized in this work try to
optimize OF N via second-order estimates for the gradients of
loss function to accurately learn about attack-related samples.
However, the proposed method could estimate wrong gradients
6 k-nearest neighbors.
7 Random forest.
8 Neural network.

6344

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

if the intrusions are inserted by hacker/invader at the rare nodes
resulting in imbalance issue. Therefore, a WF is designed that
allocates the CW class-weights to the corresponding classes,
as shown by:


Rtn
(8)
CW = 2 ×
Rc
where Rc denotes the total number of training records and
Rtn denotes each class records. In this was the training error
is minimized by assigning large weight to minority class and
less weight to majority class. Then the updated OF N with
CW is computed as:
OF N =

M 





N−1
CW m L xm , pm
+ tn (bm )

m=1

1
+γ trc + λcw2
2

(9)

Then, to further optimize the OF N the second-order Taylor
estimation is calculated as:

M 

1
N
2
CW m grm tn (bm ) + hm tn (bm )
OF =
2
m=1

1
+γ trc + λcw2
2
where h denotes the hessian (hm ) =

(10)
δ 2 L(xm ,pN−1
m )
,
δ 2 pm

and gr

δ L(xm ,pN−1
m )
. Using these equations
denotes the gradients grm =
δpm

an efficient and strong tree splitting strategy can be applied for
enhanced training of each feature and CW weights allocated
to each link. Initially, since every tree is a leaf, therefore T =
t(b) = CW s(b) denotes a leaf-node record. If the records of
this leaf-node is denoted as Ji = r | s (br ) = i via substituting
to Equation (10), we attain the following:
OF N ∼
=


tr 

1
CW m Gi cwi + (Hi + λ) cw2i
+ γ trc (11)
2
i=1

where Hi =
r∈Ji hm and Gi =
r∈Ji grm . Suppose a
fixed size tree structure, then the optimum weight value can
be calculated via OF N to 0, and the cw value denoted as
i
. To explore all appropriate splits, alternatively
cw = − HGi +λ
we employed greedy algorithm to pick the most valuable split
in each tree for the generation of weighted quantiles which
are most applied in multi-trees splitting. Initially for each
tree, the gain (G) is calculated, then a quantile is selected
based on maximum value of G since it represent the best split.
Ultimately, the value of G is calculated for every tree using
its right (Rb) and left (Lb) branch as below:
2
2
GRb
GLb
1
(GLb + GRb )2
+
−
G=
− γ (12)
2 HLb + λ HRb + λ HLb + HRb + λ

Throughout the training step this whole process is repeated
for all existing sub-trees until all the hyper parameters and
OF N are optimized to develop an effective IDS model that
precisely distinguish between normal and malicious labels.

D. Dynamic Federation and Aggregation Strategy
The distributed and collaborative client-based architecture
of federated learning design makes it perfect fit for use in
CIoT/IoMT networks since they contain private and sensitive
data. The learning process is done both at the local client side
and global server side. Each client then shares their model
updates with the server though an aggregation mechanism
(for example, federated averaging) after which the server
generates the global model and distribute it to the local clients.
This aggregation and updation process is repeated through
iterations/communication rounds until a threshold performance
is achieved. A brief explanation of this federated process is
summarized as follows:
• Initialize and distribute the global model (if exist) as
GM0I .
• If it does not exist, then initialize the training process at
the server and distribute the global model as GMcr
I .
cr
• The local server receives the global model GMI and
swap it with the local model (if exist) denoted as LMcr
n
where n represents local server/client and cr represents
the communication round. The local server trains its
own model using its local data and tries to optimize via
reducing the loss function represented as LL(LMcr
n ). The
optimized weights and parameters are sent as updates to
the global server for aggregation purposes. The loss is
calculated as:




cr
(13)
LL LMcr
n = arg mincr LL LMn
LMn

kn


1 
=
LL LMcr
(ti − f (ri ))2
n
kn

(14)

i=1

where the number of training records is represented by
kn , the specific training record is shown by ri and its label
is shown as ti , and the final output of LMcr
n model is
shown by f (ri ).
• The global server generates a list of dynamic participating
clients for aggregation procedure. This dynamic aggregation client list is dependent on two factors; accuracy and
time. The model results of only those local servers/clients
will be aggregated which meets the aggregation strategy
(such as achieved threshold accuracy performance and
reply with updated parameter weights in certain amount
of time). After receiving the updates, the global server
by training and
generates the global model as GMcr+1
I
loss minimization and optimization. This (global loss
GL(GMcr
I )) process is shown as:
K




1
=
LL LMcr
GL GMcr
I
n
K

(15)

j

•

The global server update the global model GMI(cr+1)
from the participating client lists as:
(cr+1)

GMI(m)

= GMcr
I(m)
+

1

s

|DS n |LMcr
n(m)

|DS n |
LMcr
n=1
n(m)  =0

(16)

KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING

6345

TABLE II
D ETAILS OF E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

TABLE III
N UMERICAL R ESULTS OF F EDERATED -B OOSTING M ETHOD
U SING B OTH DATASETS

where the total number of dataset records at client n is
represented by |DS n |, the total participating clients is
denoted by s, and the count of non zero gradients transferred by the clients is denoted by LMcr =0 |DS n |.
n(m)
All these above-mentioned steps are executed through communication rounds until the global model converge and attain
desirable accuracy.

2) ToN_IoT Dataset: This dataset was generated through
mimic testbed architecture of IoT and IIoT systems [26].
This dataset contains data from heterogeneous types of CIoT
devices (such as Fridge, GPS, Motion Light, Thermostat, etc.)
to collect telemetry data of IoT services, network traffic and
different attack scenarios were implemented such as DoS,
Ransomware, and Backdoor etc. This dataset consists of 22
features and 156, 119 abnormal records and 245, 000 normal
records.

IV. E VALUATION AND R ESULTS
A. Experimental Settings
The performance evaluation of Federated-Boosting model is
done through extensive experiments conducted on a workstation (details of which are specified in Table II). The booster
is set as gbtree, the importance_type is set as gain, the
learning rate is 1, with maximum depth is set as 10, with
max_delta_step as 0, subsample ratio of the training instances
is set as 0.5, refresh_leaf as 1, num_parallel_tree is 1, and
sampling_method is set as gradient_based.
B. Datasets
The proposed model is primarily evaluated using two
datasets from different CIoT domain to assess its performance
and generalizability. The basic motivation for applying these
datasets are: They are created from real-world CIoT-based
networks; and They realistically represent medical data and
the operations of consumer IoT (since there is a deficiency
of realistic CIoMT datasets to evaluate machine learning
algorithms for cyber security purposes).
1) EHMS-2020 Dataset: The EHMS9 dataset was generated through a real-time medical system testbed [25] by
collecting both patient’s biometrics and the network flow data.
The total number of features in this dataset are 44 out of
which 8 are related to biometrics of patients and 35 are
related to network flow. Data were collected for different CIoT
sensors such as Electrocardiogram, Blood Oxygen Saturation,
temperature, and blood pressure sensors. The total number
of records in this dataset are 16, 318 out of which 14, 272
(87.5%) are normal records and 2, 046 (12.5%) are abnormal
records and hence this ratio represents imbalance nature of this
dataset. The abnormal records were generated using various
attack vectors such as data injection, spoofing, and man-inthe-middle attacks.
9 Enhanced Healthcare Monitoring System.

C. Detection Results
This work employed well known metrics for the
performance evaluation of proposed model such as Precision,
F-Score, Recall, and Accuracy. The experiments were conducted by dividing the dataset into training and testing sets
where the training data contained 80% records and testing
set contained 20% records. The numerical results of the
experiments are presented in Table III, which shows that
the Federated-Boosting model achieved 99.749% Precision,
99.741% F-Score, 99.516% Recall, 99.742% AUC/ROC and
99.745% Accuracy for the EHMS dataset and 99.563%
Precision, 99.546% F-Score, 99.156% Recall, 99.549%
AUC/ROC and 99.554% Accuracy for the ToN_IoT dataset.
These results also indicates the learning ability and robustness
of the proposed model against zero-day attacks by proficiently
identifying numerous types of complex attack vectors in
an imbalanced datasets. Even though the ToN_IoT dataset
contain a large number of complex cyber-attacks, the proposed
boosting model is able to learn the underlying patterns in the
CIoT data by successfully distinguishing them.
Furthermore, we conducted additional experiments using
CIC-IDS-2018 [4] and WUSTL-IIOT-2021 [12] datasets to
assess the performance of proposed model via traditional
CEs data. It is worth mentioning that our model managed to
achieved 99.291% and 99.434% accuracy for CIC-IDS-2018
and WUSTL-IIOT-2021 datasets, respectively.
D. Comparative Analysis and Discussion
We conducted extensive experiments (in terms of accuracy
metric) to compare the performance of Federated-Boosting
model with the SOTA methods.10 The parameter settings of
these methods are taken from their respective papers and the
10 State-of-the-art.

6346

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Comparison of AUC performance on all four datasets.

TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF SOTA AND F EDERATED -B OOSTING M ETHOD U SING
ACCURACY M ETRIC ON B OTH DATASETS

The aggregation mechanism is designed by dynamically selecting contributing clients in the federation strategy to deal
with malicious clients. The proposed model is tested with
two publically available datasets and proved to have good
performance (accuracy = 99.74% for EHMS dataset, 99.54%
for ToN_IoT dataset) using imbalanced data. This security
design can serve as a starting point for security professionals
and critical organizations to secure their infrastructure against
cyber-attacks.
R EFERENCES

numerical outcomes are shown in Table IV. It is observed
from this comparison that the Federated-Boosting model outperformed all the other detection methods by achieving high
accuracy rate using both datasets. The proposed FederatedBoosting model shows an average improvement of 5.686% and
6.151% as compare to other methods on EHMS dataset and
ToN_IoT dataset, respectively. These results reflect the advantage of dynamic aggregation strategy design to adapt to the
dynamic behaviors of the contemporary CIoT networks. The
use of weighted boosting design also significantly improves
the detection performance as compare to other SOTA methods.
The reason for enhanced performance of proposed model is
that it is based on dynamic ensembles and boosting mechanism
which assists in dealing and smoothing with the “biasvariance” trade-off. The proposed model has the potential to fit
in small-scale platforms such as CIoT because of light-weight
architecture and less computational requirements.
To summarize, the Federated-Boosting model is a
lightweight and reliable security system for CIoT platforms.
However, it entails a high volume data to achieve desired
performance. In future, we plan to integrate few-shot training
mechanism in the proposed model with incremental learning
approach to overcome this limitation.
V. C ONCLUSION
Existing cyber-attacks detection and defensive methods are
proven to be ineffective against the complex and evolving
nature of threats. This paper proposes an effective intrusion
detection method for efficient detection of cyber-attacks in
CIoT networks. The proposed model is developed using
dynamic and adaptive boosting design in a privacy preserved
manner by keeping intact the local data on the client side.

[1] C. K. Wu, C.-T. Cheng, Y. Uwate, G. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and K. F. Tsang,
“State-of-the-art and research opportunities for next-generation consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4,
pp. 937–948, Nov. 2023.
[2] H. Zhu et al., “Smart healthcare in the era of Internet-of-Things,” IEEE
Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 26–30, Sep. 2019.
[3] H. R. Chi, M. de Fátima Domingues, H. Zhu, C. Li, K. Kojima, and
A. Radwan, “Healthcare 5.0: In the perspective of consumer Internetof-Things-based fog/cloud computing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 745–755, Nov. 2023.
[4] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir,
“An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics
network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 906–913,
Nov. 2023.
[5] M. Yamauchi, Y. Ohsita, M. Murata, K. Ueda, and Y. Kato, “Anomaly
detection in smart home operation from user behaviors and home
conditions,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 183–192,
May 2020.
[6] S. T. Argaw et al., “Cybersecurity of hospitals: Discussing the challenges
and working towards mitigating the risks,” BMC Med. Informat. Decis.
Mak., vol. 20, pp. 1–10, Dec. 2020.
[7] T. B. Slayton, “Ransomware: The virus attacking the healthcare industry,” J. Legal Med., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 287–311, 2018.
[8] S. Steffen, Hackers Hold German Hospital Data Hostage, Deutsche
Welle, Bonn, Germany, 2016.
[9] S. Aymé et al., “Benefits and risks of using health data for research,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Paris Brain Inst.-ICM, Paris, France, Sorbonne Univ.,
Paris, France, 2023.
[10] I. A. Khan, D. Pi, M. Z. Abbas, U. Zia, Y. Hussain, and H. Soliman,
“Federated-SRUs: A federated-simple-recurrent-units-based IDS for
accurate detection of cyber attacks against IoT-augmented industrial control systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 8467–8476,
May 2023.
[11] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, Y. Hussain, and N. A. Khan, “DFFSC4N: A deep federated defence framework for protecting supply chain
4.0 networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3300–3309,
Mar. 2023.
[12] S. I. Popoola, A. L. Imoize, M. Hammoudeh, B. Adebisi, O. Jogunola,
and A. M. Aibinu, “Federated deep learning for intrusion detection in
consumer-centric Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 1610–1622, Feb. 2024.
[13] M. Al-Hawawreh and M. S. Hossain, “Federated learning-assisted
distributed intrusion detection using mesh satellite nets for autonomous
vehicle protection,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 854–862, Feb. 2024.

KHAN et al.: FEDERATED-BOOSTING: A DISTRIBUTED AND DYNAMIC BOOSTING

[14] A. Alzahrani and M. Z. Asghar, “Maintaining user security in consumer
electronics-based online recommender systems using federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2657–2665,
Feb. 2024.
[15] M. Zubair Islam, Shahzad, R. Ali, A. Haider, and H. Kim,
“IoTactileSim: A virtual testbed for tactile Industrial Internet of Things
services,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 24, p. 8363, 2021.
[16] X.-H. Nguyen, X.-D. Nguyen, H.-H. Huynh, and K.-H. Le, “Realguard:
A lightweight network intrusion detection system for IoT gateways,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 432, 2022.
[17] Y. Otoum, D. Liu, and A. Nayak, “DL-IDS: A deep learning–based intrusion detection framework for securing IoT,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun.
Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, 2022, Art. no. e3803.
[18] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “A comprehensive deep learning benchmark for IoT IDS,” Comput. Secur., vol. 114,
Mar. 2022, Art. no. 102588.
[19] M. A. Almaiah, A. Ali, F. Hajjej, M. F. Pasha, and M. A. Alohali, “A
lightweight hybrid deep learning privacy preserving model for FC-based
Industrial Internet of Medical Things,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 6, p. 2112,
2022.
[20] P. Kumar, R. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, R. Tripathi, and G. Srivastava, “P2tif:
A blockchain and deep learning framework for privacy-preserved threat
intelligence in Industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 9,
pp. 6358–6367, Sep. 2022.
[21] R. Ali, Y. B. Zikria, S. Garg, A. K. Bashir, M. S. Obaidat, and H. S. Kim,
“A federated reinforcement learning framework for incumbent technologies in beyond 5G networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 152–159,
Jul./Aug. 2021.
[22] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, L. Yao, and Z. Li, “SecFedNIDS: Robust
defense for poisoning attack against federated learning-based network
intrusion detection system,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 134,
pp. 154–169, Sep. 2022.
[23] M. N. Hossen, V. Panneerselvam, D. Koundal, K. Ahmed, F. M. Bui,
and S. M. Ibrahim, “Federated machine learning for detection of
skin diseases and enhancement of Internet of Medical Things (IoMT)
security,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 835–841,
Feb. 2023.
[24] A. Lakhan et al., “Federated-learning based privacy preservation and
fraud-enabled blockchain IoMT system for healthcare,” IEEE J. Biomed.
Health Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 664–672, Feb. 2023.
[25] A. A. Hady, A. Ghubaish, T. Salman, D. Unal, and R. Jain, “Intrusion
detection system for healthcare systems using medical and network data:
A comparison study,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 106576–106584, 2020.
[26] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
“TON_IoT telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and
IIoT for data-driven intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 165130–165150, 2020.
[27] P. Radoglou-Grammatikis et al., “Modeling, detecting, and mitigating
threats against industrial healthcare systems: A combined software
defined networking and reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2041–2052, Mar. 2022.
[28] P. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, and R. Tripathi, “An ensemble learning and fogcloud architecture-driven cyber-attack detection framework for IoMT
networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 166, pp. 110–124, Jan. 2021.
[29] O. Samuel et al., “IoMT: A COVID-19 healthcare system driven by
federated learning and blockchain,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 823–834, Feb. 2023.
[30] S. Manimurugan, S. Al-Mutairi, M. M. Aborokbah, N. Chilamkurti,
S. Ganesan, and R. Patan, “Effective attack detection in Internet
of Medical Things smart environment using a deep belief neural
network,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 77396–77404, 2020.

Izhar Ahmed Khan (Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. degree from the University of Engineering
and Technology, Pakistan, the master’s degree in
computer science from Mid Sweden University,
Sweden, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics (NUAA), China. He was a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow with NUAA, where he is currently working as Faculty Member with the College
of Computer Science and Technology. His current
research interests include machine learning, cyber
security, IoT, and intrusion/anomaly detection systems.

6347

Dechang Pi received the B.Eng. and M.Eng. degrees
and the Ph.D. degree in mechatronic engineering
from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 1994, 1997, and
2002, respectively, where he is currently a Professor
and a Ph.D. Supervisor. He has authored over
100 journals and conference papers. His research
interests include data mining and privacy, intelligent optimization methods, and security issues
about moving objects. He presided over 30 research
projects of the National Natural Science Foundation
of China, the National 863 Program, the National Technical Foundation, the
Civil Aerospace Foundation, and the Aviation Science Foundation.

Shaharyar Kamal received the M.S. degree in
computer engineering from Mid Sweden University,
Sweden, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department
of Radio and Electronics Engineering, Kyung Hee
University, Republic of Korea. He is an Assistant
Professor with the Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Chile. His research
interests includes B5G, IoT, and mmWave radar for
human activity recognition. He has been rewarded
as a Pakistani Scientist ranked among the world’s
two percent according to the Stanford list published
in 2020.

Mohammed Alsuhaibani received the degree in
advance computer science and the Ph.D. degree in
computer science from The University of Liverpool,
U.K. He is currently an Associate Professor and
the Head of the Department of Computer Science,
College of Computer, Qassim University, Saudi
Arabia. His research interests include artificial intelligence, machine learning, computational linguistics,
and natural language processing fields.

Bandar Mzel Alshammari received the B.S.
degree from the School of Information Technology,
University of Canberra, Australia, and the master’s
degree in computer and communications engineering
and the Ph.D. degree in software security engineering from the Queensland University of Technology,
Australia, in 2012. He is an Associate Professor
of Software Engineering with the Department of
Information Systems, Jouf University, Saudi Arabia.
Before his current affiliations, he served in several
positions, including the Vice President for academic
affairs, the acting Vice President for graduate studies and research, and the
Dean of Admission and Registration with the University of Aljouf. He has
published several papers in the area of software security and AI security.