4574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Federated Edge Intelligence for Enhanced Security
in Consumer Intermittent Healthcare Devices Using
Adversarial Examples
Farhan Ullah , Leonardo Mostarda , Diletta Cacciagrano , Mohammed J. F. Alenazi , Senior Member, IEEE,
Chien-Ming Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, and Saru Kumari , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Modern consumer electronics that integrate the
concept of connected personal medical devices are known as
Smart Healthcare Systems (SHS). The SHS utilized healthcare
devices and edge computing for data capture, transmission via
smart devices, analysis, and the delivery of healthcare services.
Cyberattacks on consumer medical devices in the healthcare
sector are becoming increasingly common. Technological frameworks like edge computing can act as an intermediary layer
between the cloud and SHS, reducing the burden and enhancing
data security and privacy. In this study, we proposed a novel edge
intelligence approach for improving medical device security that
employs Federated Learning (FL) and network traffic adversarial
examples. First, we generated a distinctive dataset using imagebased features extracted from network traffic bytes. Secondly,
due to the intermittent behavior of clients, the dataset received
from each client may be imbalanced, which can negatively
affect performance. Third, adversarial examples are generated to
assess the robustness of datasets, utilizing four distinct types of
adversarial attack methods that introduce perturbations into the
input data. Finally, the cooperative FL architecture ensured data
security, privacy, and edge intelligence. The proposed method
is analyzed using two standard datasets, CICIoMT2024 and
Edge-IIoT, achieving 97.45% and 96.7% detection accuracy,
respectively.
Index Terms—Consumer healthcare devices, security and privacy, edge computing, federated learning, adversarial attacks,
network traffic.

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE HEALTHCARE industry is undergoing a paradigm
shift due to integrating modern consumer electronics
and technologies with medical devices to enhance patient

T

Received 26 June 2024; revised 23 August 2024, 8 October 2024, 16
October 2024, and 2 December 2024; accepted 2 December 2024. Date of publication 4 December 2024; date of current version 14 August 2025. This work
was supported by the Researcher Supporting Project, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Grant RSPD2024R582. (Corresponding author:
Saru Kumari.)
Farhan Ullah and Diletta Cacciagrano are with the Division of
Computer Science, University of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy (e-mail:
farhan.ullah@unicam.it; diletta.cacciagrano@unicam.it).
Leonardo Mostarda is with the Department of Mathematics and
Computer Science, University of Perugia, 06123 Perugia, Italy
(e-mail: leonardo.mostarda@unipg.it).
Mohammed J. F. Alenazi is with the Department of Computer Engineering,
College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh
11451, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: mjalenazi@ksu.edu.sa).
Chien-Ming Chen is with the School of Artificial Intelligence (School
of Future Technology), Nanjing University of Information Science and
Technology, Nanjing 211544, China (e-mail: chienmingchen@ieee.org).
Saru Kumari is with the Department of Mathematics, Chaudhary Charan
Singh University, Meerut 250004, India (e-mail: saryusiirohi@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3511615

care and outcomes. The Internet of Medical Things (IoMT),
which consists of a vast network of interconnected medical
devices, has substantially revolutionized healthcare delivery.
These devices have a variety of applications, including electronic health record management, medicine administration
systems, diagnostics, and patient monitoring. However, the
interconnection of these devices poses significant security
and privacy concerns. The potential implications of security
flaws in healthcare devices are severe, including unauthorized access to personal patient information and tampering
with life-threatening medical equipment. Furthermore, the
increasing sophistication of cyberattacks makes it harder to
maintain the integrity and confidentiality of healthcare data.
Medical devices can be vulnerable to various attacks, including
ransomware, which encrypts data and demands payment to
decrypt it. Unauthorized access occurs when hackers acquire
control, modify settings, or steal data. Data theft refers to
getting sensitive patient information. Additional risks include
exploiting software or firmware flaws and changing features
to cause harm or malfunction. Denial of service (DoS) attacks
interrupt device functionality. Furthermore, adversaries can
physically manipulate devices, access manufacturing processes
(also known as supply chain assaults), and monitor communication using man-in-the-middle attacks. Social engineering
tactics can be used to trick individuals into granting unauthorized access or distributing malware [1], [2], [3]. The need
to analyze enormous volumes of data collected daily to form
inferences has led to several advances in machine learning and
deep learning. Nonetheless, due to the immense value of this
information, it is vital to safeguard the privacy and security
of the examined data. In certain circumstances, regulatory
compliance demands adopting protections to protect sensitive
information, such as the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [1].
Figure 1 depicts the purpose of an adversarial attack, which
is to disrupt or destroy a system, obtain unauthorized access,
or defeat security measures by leveraging vulnerabilities. The
model training and prediction generation process requires
transmitting individual client data to a centralized server. The
resulting models are then distributed to each client. The fundamental risk associated with this technique is the insufficient
security of confidential data. The interception of data transfers
between consumers and the central server is a potential
vulnerability. Furthermore, keeping massive amounts of data
requires high-bandwidth, low-latency communication to make

c 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
1558-4127 
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY

Fig. 1.

Adversarial attacks on conventional model training process.

accurate forecasts. One possible solution to these concerns
would be to centrally train the machine learning model by
combining initial data from multiple clients. The trained model
is then replicated and disseminated to each client, removing the
need to transmit data for periodic updates. This methodology
has two significant advantages over the traditional approach.
First, minimizing network dependencies and latency enables
clients to make predictions locally. Furthermore, it lowers
communication overhead. This method requires initial data
transfer from clients to the central server during training,
which may jeopardize sensitive information. Furthermore, data
privacy concerns may deteriorate due to large data transfers in
scenarios such as IoT or Edge computing with low network
quality [4].
FL is gaining popularity because it stores data on each local
server, which is important for healthcare applications. It tackles privacy problems with distributed data analysis by storing
confidential patient data on local computers and only exchanging updated models, not raw data. This decentralized strategy
decreases the probability of adversarial attacks by removing
a central repository that attackers can target. FL improves
resilience by securely combining model weights from various
sources, reducing the impact of adverse changes [5], [6].
The use of iterative model updates with aggregated weights
improves predictive model dependability and accuracy while
maintaining data confidentiality. This makes FL an effective
strategy for dealing with hostile threats and protecting healthcare data and devices. The following are the main contributions
of this study.
1) Image-based features are particularly useful for capturing structural data types such as storage, processes, and
headers. We generated a dataset by crawling large-scale
network traffic bytes. Following this, we developed an
algorithm for converting network data into greyscale
images.
2) To address overfitting and misclassification, we applied
data augmentation techniques to balance images within
each class. To enhance our dataset against adversarial
attacks, we used strategies such as FGSM, IGSM, PGD,
and a hybrid strategy that combined IGSM and PGD.
This comprehensive approach increases the potential of
the dataset to detect and protect against such threats
while also improving data security.

4575

3) We present a cooperative FL framework for detecting
adversarial attacks on healthcare devices and demonstrate intelligent edge data processing. Through the
utilization of shared data, our approach enhances security by preventing sensitive information from being
disclosed.
4) Client numbers can vary dynamically, affecting classification accuracy. Despite the use of decentralized
data, intermittent clients, and adversarial examples, the
proposed strategy is more robust than centralized solutions.
The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II explains the related work, and Section III describes
the proposed method. Section IV presents the experimental
results, and Section V concludes the work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Intrusion detection in healthcare devices gradually shifts
from traditional machine learning-based methods to edgebased FL approaches [2], [7]. In this section, we discuss
several methods involving machines and FL that detect and
classify attacks on healthcare devices.
A. Machine Learning
Newaz et al. [8] demonstrated the susceptibility of personal
medical device communications to several cyber threats. An
adversary with malicious intent can intercept sensitive health
data and execute denial-of-service, man-in-the-middle, replay,
and fraudulent data injection attacks. Moreover, they introduced HEKA, which functions as an intrusion detection system
(IDS). HEKA uses an n-gram-based technique and machine
learning technologies to track and detect aberrant traffic trends
in portable medical device interactions. HEKA achieves an
F1-score of 98% and a detection accuracy of 98.4% when
examined on eight publicly available devices. Fan et al. [9]
explored the difficulty of constructing transferable adversarial
scenarios for closed mode assaults without relying on the
replacement model. This method used data-modal conversion
to combine image-to-graph conversion, graph perturbation,
and graph-to-image inversion. The solution outperforms the
three baseline approaches in experiments and applies to realworld scenarios because it does not require prior knowledge
of the victim model.
Zhang et al. [10] developed the DroidSIFT approach,
which identifies malicious Android apps using relationship
graphs and semantic information. The major goal of this
system is to detect and prevent evolution attacks, emerging
threats, and harmful variants. After evaluating 13,500 benign
samples and 2,200 hazardous samples, DroidSIFT detected
threats with an amazing 93% accuracy. Gao et al. [11]
designed apps that use APIs for triggering connections and
activities. These apps build a graph, which is then used in
a network to produce embeddings for app categorization.
GDroid employed graph neural networks to detect fraudulent
apps as a security solution. The system accurately identified
98.99% of Android malware instances with a false positive rate
below 1%. An efficient method for finding neural networks
designed for Multi-Target Classification (MTC) was proposed

4576

Fig. 2.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Federated-based edge intelligence for healthcare devices using adversarial network traffic patterns.

by Zhang et al. [12]. This method determined the optimal
model topologies by analyzing real-world Android network
traffic. This method takes a distinctive search space and
discrete design components into account to solve the problem
as a limited optimization problem. This approach found
appropriate MTC classification models by using the USTCTFC2016 dataset.
B. Federated Learning Analysis
Several research studies [13], [14] used FL approaches
in the healthcare domain. Schneble and Thamilarasu [15]
described a massively distributed, machine learning-based IDS
for Medical Cyber-Physical Systems (MCPS). It explored FL
to reduce communication and compute costs in machine learning. Real patient data and security risks like DoS are used to
test. The results showed a decrease in network communication
costs and a 99.0% accuracy. The system used mobile device
resources to achieve scalability and manage anomalous data
distribution. Rehman et al. [16] described an FL framework
for detecting side-channel threats on confidential medical data.
Data was acquired from ten Android smartphone soft keyboard

users. The architecture trained a Deep Neural Network (DNN)
model by training local models on two clients and then
combining their updates. The DNN model demonstrated an
accuracy of 80.09% following three validations conducted
by each client. This result suggested that the model can
detect side-channel attacks accurately. Wang et al. [17] used
certificate-less signatures in FL to hide where parameter
updates come from to protect medical devices from source
inference attacks (SIAs). The proposed strategy incorporated
an enhanced batch verification technique, which reduced the
server’s workload. Experimental results confirmed the efficacy
of the suggested approach in lowering SIA success rates
and accelerating signature verification. Mothukuri et al. [18]
used an FL-based anomaly detection approach that uses data
from individual devices to detect intrusions in IoT networks
proactively. It maintains local data, uses federated training
cycles with GRUs, and only communicates learned weights
to the central server. The empirical findings indicate that
decentralized systems exhibit better results in terms of privacy
preservation and accuracy.
The main challenges in developing an FL technique are
intermittent clients and imbalanced datasets. The primary

ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY

4577

Algorithm 1: Generating Images From Network Traffic
Input: FPCAP : Folder containing PCAP files
Output: Images representing byte streams

Fig. 3.

Image extraction from healthcare network traffic.

focus of this research is the intermittent connectivity of clients
to a variety of cybersecurity organizations. Furthermore, for
local training, each client may have access to imbalanced
malware datasets. We developed a deep CNN-based FL
approach to address the challenges of intermittent clients and
imbalanced datasets.
III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : F EDERATED E DGE
I NTELLIGENCE FOR H EALTHCARE S ECURITY
A. Visual Features Extraction From Network Patterns
Figure 2 shows the architectural framework of the proposed
approach.
PCAP files are critical to improving network security and
speed. They give detailed logs of network packets, which aid
in detecting irregularities and threats. These files are useful for
investigating events by tracing breaches or network difficulties.
They also support protocol analysis, which aids in the detection of errors and unauthorized use. Performance evaluation
is enhanced by analyzing packet data to discover bottlenecks
and latency concerns. Additionally, PCAP files provide an
audit record for regulatory compliance and security policy
enforcement. They help with threat detection by highlighting
unusual behaviors and significant security threats. Moreover,
PCAP is useful for debugging network issues because it provides specific data flows. Considering the continual upgrading
of network traffic to avoid static and dynamic classification,
we investigated the usefulness of visual features in detecting
malicious traffic. This method uses image processing to transform network traffic patterns into textural properties. It works
without involving reverse engineering or traffic signatures.
This solution successfully reduces the impact of anti-detection
strategies including signature modification and dynamic feature extraction evasion [19]. By examining the PCAP, a
byte stream about each malicious variation is obtained. We
designed a bytes-to-image translation technique for extracting
images from byte streams. Greyscale images are produced
by processing 8-bit vectors retrieved from network-based
byte streams. Following that, each image is set to 256x256
pixels. Figure 3 depicts an example of 256x256 network traffic
images for spoofing, Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS),
Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT), and DoS.
Smaller image sizes have been found to result in a significant
reduction in network traffic. For instance, the picture converts
megabytes of PCAP data into kilobytes. This has the potential
to reduce computational power.
B. Data Augmentation
Data augmentation improves model performance and
addresses data imbalance in real-world datasets, especially

Function GenerateImages(FPCAP ):
for each PCAP file pcap_file ∈ FPCAP do
Open pcap_file;
Initialize accumulated_bytes ← {};
Initialize total_bytes ← 65536;
Initialize packet_count ← 0;
for each packet pi in pcap_file do
byte stream: bytestreami ;
Accumulate
byte streams
n
|bytestream
j | ≥ total_bytes;
j=1
if
k
j=1 |accumulated_bytesj | + |bytestreami | ≥
total_bytes then
Append bytestreami to
accumulated_bytes;
remaining_bytes
←
total_bytes − kj=1 |accumulated_bytesj |;
Truncate bytestreami to fit remaining
space;
Create image accumulated_bytes;
Save image;
Increment packet_count;
Clear accumulated_bytes;
Append bytestreami to
accumulated_bytes;
Save images to corresponding directories;

when identifying adverse network traffic on healthcare equipment [20]. It involves transforming and modifying the training
dataset D to increase diversity and allow machine learning
models to learn from diverse network traffic patterns. To
illustrate how data transmission and packet structure can
vary, alternative orientations and sizes of network traffic
images can be simulated using random rotations (θ ), flips,
and scaling (resize(x, y)). The following mathematical expressions describe these transformations using equations (1)-(2). Rotating an image I by angle θ :
Irotated = rotate(I, θ ).

(1)

- Resizing an image I to dimensions x × y:
Iresized = resize(I, x, y).

(2)

Additionally, adding random noise () with mean μ and
standard deviation σ improves the model’s capacity to detect
fragile network traffic anomalies. This noise enhancement is
especially useful for medical devices since it mimics actual
changes and makes the model more resistant to chaotic
network conditions. Adding noise to an image I can be
mathematically expressed using equation (3).
Inoisy = I + ,

 ∼ N (μ, σ ).

(3)

4578

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

Overview of evasion attacks using abnormal network traffic flows.

Additionally, the dataset is made more diverse by methods
like color jittering and cropping (crop(x, y)), which help
the model acquire invariant properties across various spatial
layouts and color distributions. The following can be used to
crop an image I to dimensions x × y using equation (4).
Icropped = crop(I, x, y).

(4)

Color jittering, which alters brightness, contrast, saturation,
and hue, can be represented using equation (5).


Ijittered = jitter I, δbrightness , δcontrast , δsaturation , δhue . (5)
Data augmentation enhances machine learning models by
adding diverse transformations, helping them learn robust
features for better and more reliable detection of malicious
activity in healthcare devices [21]. To boost the performance
of our malware detection model, we applied data augmentation
techniques such as rotation, jitter, noise addition, cropping,
and resizing. These strategies are critical in increasing the
diversity and variability of the training dataset, improving
its robustness and generalization. By simulating numerous
real-world characteristics such as evolving image orientation,
position, and noise levels, these augmentations enabled our
model to handle a broader range of scenarios and reduce
overfitting. This method is particularly helpful given the
limited data available and the necessity for the model to work
effectively in changing scenarios.
C. Crafting Adversarial Examples
We used and evaluated four adversarial attack techniques:
PGD, FGSM, IGSM, and a novel hybrid strategy that combined PGD and IGSM [22], [23]. As shown in Figure 4, we
aim to assess how well these strategies generate adversarial
examples that mislead a target model with few perturbations.
1) Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM): The FGSM algorithm perturbs input data x in the direction of the gradient of
the loss function J(θ, x, y). It is simple and computationally
efficient. The strength of the threat is regulated by the variable
, which scales the perturbation. The following is the process
for generating the adversarial example, x using equation (6).
x = x +  · sign(∇x J(θ, x, y)).

(6)

The one-step simplicity of FGSM makes it excellent at
producing adversarial samples rapidly, but it is typically
ineffective against well-defended systems.
2) Iterative Gradient Sign Method (IGSM): IGSM, which
stands for Basic Iterative Method (BIM), is an extension of
FGSM that uses iterative applications to achieve a cumulative
effect with fewer perturbations at each stage. The following is
how the technique improves the adverse effects after several
iterations k using equations (7) and (8).
x

(0)

= x.

 (k+1)



 (k)

= clipx, x

x



 (k)

+ α · sign ∇x J(θ, x

(7)

, y) . (8)

The step size is denoted by α, and perturbations are
guaranteed to be kept within a -ball surrounding the initial
input x.
3) Projected Gradient Descent (PGD): PGD is an iterative
approach that functions as a resilient complement to IGSM.
PGD employs FGSM at each iteration, then performs an
estimating step to guarantee perturbations stay within a defined
p norm ball. Here is the sequence of iterations using
equations (9) and (10)
x

(0)

 (k+1)

x

= x.



(9)


 (k)
+ α · sign ∇x J(θ, x , y) . (10)

 (k)

= x+Bp () x

The projection onto the norm ball of radius  around x
is represented by x+Bp () . It confirms that the adversarial
instances work as expected and remain within a reasonable
perturbation bound.
4) Hybrid Approach of PGD and IGSM): The hybrid
methodology leverages the distinctive features of both PGD
and IGSM. We utilize IGSM to generate adversarial instances
and initiate the attack in this method. Then, it is imperative
to optimize these examples further using PGD to ensure that
they are within the intended perturbation limits and to enhance
their efficacy. The process can be described as follows using
equations (11), (12) and (13).
• IGSM Initialization:
x

(0)

 (k+1)

x

= x.



 (k)

= clipx, x



(k)
+ α · sign ∇x J(θ, x , y) .

(11)
(12)

ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY

•

PGD Refinement:



(k+1)
(k)
(k)
x
= x+Bp () x + α · sign ∇x J(θ, x , y) . (13)


This hybrid strategy combines the robust estimation of
PGD with the continuous refining of IGSM, leveraging the
strengths of both techniques [24], [25]. The adversarial attack
generation technique that combines PGD and IGSM surpasses
distinct methods such as FGSM, IGSM, and PGD. The ability
of PGD to undertake significant gradient-based optimization,
along with the iterative improvement of IGSM, improves
the precision and effectiveness of adversarial instances. PGD
provides a strong starting estimation, and IGSM refines these
estimates to improve robustness and accuracy. Performance is
greatly enhanced by this synergy, which guarantees that the
adversarial examples generated are both extremely effective
and resilient within the given limitations.
D. Federated-Based Edge Computing: Adversarial Attacks
Detection and Classification
FL provides edge intelligence by processing data locally on
each client device, reducing latency and enhancing privacy.
This is particularly helpful as it allows for real-time detection
and classification of adversarial attacks directly on healthcare
devices without sending sensitive data to a central server [26].
This research aims to leverage secure FL settings for detecting
and classifying adversarial attacks on healthcare devices
within the context of cybersecurity. McMahan et al. [27]
introduced the FL approach for data-driven system design using
distributed data without relying on a centralized data center.
This collaborative learning framework, which requires only the
sharing of model updates, can significantly enhance security
and privacy, particularly for healthcare devices more susceptible
to cyberattacks. A timely and comprehensive understanding of
cyberattacks, such as spoofing, intrusion, anomaly, and Denial
of Service (DoS), is crucial for developing and improving
cyber defense models and methods. Consequently, FL has
tremendous potential to secure cyberspace at device and network
levels.
1) Localized Training Process: In a FL scenario, a soft
federation of distinct entities or machines, referred to as
clients, is coordinated to train a model. In our case, these
clients could be various medical institutions or devices
using adversarial network images generated on medical
devices [28]. Each client maintains local training data,
known as Local Model Update (LMU), which updates
the current global model. Therefore, client data is never
transmitted to the global server; only the latest model
update is shared. Mathematically, the update process for
the global model w at time t can be expressed using
equation (14)
wt+1 = wt − η · ∇f (wt ).

(14)

where η is the learning rate, ∇f (wt ) is the gradient of
the loss function concerning the model parameters w,
computed based on the local data of each client. The
healthcare devices, acting as clients, conduct mini-batch
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) on locally collected
images using deep CNN. Our method employs sporadic

4579

clients, represented by healthcare devices, sharing the
same CNN framework and loss functions. Each device
retrieves global model weights and computes a gradient
update after multiple SGD iterations, ensuring data
confidentiality. CNN, widely used for detection tasks,
extracts information for deep training and potential gains
in model capacity. Our deep CNN framework processes
images on healthcare devices to produce LMU. It
includes three convolutional layers with filter sizes of
64, 128, 256, and 512, respectively, followed by pooling
layers, dropout layers, a fully connected layer, and
a softmax layer. Batch normalization ensures training
stability, reducing overfitting risk [29], [30].
2) Global Training Process: Several causes can contribute
to intermittent behavior among remote customers in FL,
including dropped connections, delayed data delivery,
and system failures. Existing methods often fail to
account for this intermittency, resulting in a loss in
model accuracy. To solve this issue, we present a FL
system capable of detecting adversarial attacks on a
variety of healthcare devices. It is critical to properly
manage clients’ inconsistent behavior, including their
decision to engage in or withdraw from training. The
inclusion of a new client and the removal of an existing
one may have an impact on the dataset balance. To
accommodate irregular clients and unbalanced datasets,
we suggest storing and using weights from paused
clients for further aggregations, or ignoring weights from
departed clients in subsequent iterations. The best course
of action is context-dependent; variables such as dataset
imbalance and client engagement influence the relative
advantages of the two strategies.
In FL, the global server handles dynamic client behavior
caused by network issues and delays by employing asynchronous aggregation, which allows it to incorporate updates
from clients at various times. It properly schedules clients,
uses robust aggregation methods to handle delays and lost
updates, and adjusts learning rates based on client behavior. Furthermore, despite fluctuations in client connectivity
and availability, the training process is made durable and
successful by employing appropriate communication protocols and fault recovery methods. To assess our method, we
conducted extensive experiments with intermittent clients and
varied adversarial attack image sizes. These studies give
information on the efficacy of various ways for minimizing
the effects of intermittent client behavior on FL systems.
The heterogeneity in network data samples often leads to
a lack of generalization. Consequently, a model with high
performance in one network may be inefficient at detecting
attacks in another. This is due to each organizational network
having its own Standard Operating Environments (SOEs) [31]
and various potential attacks. The conditional distribution
of the used data reflects these threats. Machine learning
models heavily rely on mining useful features to differentiate
between benign and malicious samples. Therefore, training
a threat detection model necessitates a broad range of data
samples. In ML-based attack detection, data scarcity and
heterogeneity are critical considerations in each ML scenario
[32], [33].

4580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
A. Dataset Preparation
We evaluated the proposed approach with two standard and realistic datasets, such as CICIoMT20241 [34],
and Edge-IIoT2 [35]. The CICIoMT2024 dataset includes
healthcare equipment attack vectors. The dataset evaluates
IoMT security by analyzing attacks on 40 devices (25 real
and 15 simulated) using healthcare protocols such as WiFi, Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT), and Bluetooth.
There have been five identified attacks: DDoS, DoS, recon,
MQTT, and spoofing. A network tap created a security
and profiling dataset by replaying real-time packets between
the switch and Wi-Fi/MQTT-capable IoMT devices. EdgeIIoT, the second dataset, was developed using an IoT/IIoT
testbed, which included devices, sensors, protocols, and
edge configurations. This compilation comprises data from
over 10 IoT devices, including low-cost digital temperature and humidity sensors. There are 14 attacks on IoT
and IIoT communication protocols, including DoS/DDoS,
information gathering, man-in-the-middle, Injection, and
Malware. Alarms, system resources, logs, and network traffic datasets have 61 significantly related features from
1176.
B. Performance Indicators
We selected various network traffic-based images and several clients to evaluate the proposed method comprehensively.
The proposed method is evaluated using two publicly available
standard datasets, CICIoMT2024 and Edge-IIoT. We measured
performance using precision, recall, F-measure, Kappa, and
accuracy. These metrics are calculated from True Positives
(TP), False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN), and False
Negatives (FN) counts. The performance measures are provided by Equations (15)-(19).
TP
.
(TP + FP)
FP
Recall =
.
(FP + TN)
(2 ∗ TP)
F-measure =
.
(2TP + FP + FN)
(TP + TN)
Accuracy =
.
(TP + TN + FP + FN)
(observedacc − expectedacc
Kappa =
.
(1 − expectedacc )
Precision =

(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)

where, total = TP + TN + FP + FN, observedacc = (TP +
TN)/total, a = (TP + FN) ∗ (TP + FP)/total, b = (FP + TN) ∗
(FN + TN)/total, and expectedacc = (a + b)/total.
C. Performance Analysis and Comparisons
The proposed method is tested on various clients to examine intermittent behavior. Figures 5-8 illustrate the local and
global accuracy curves used to study the dynamic behavior
1 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iomt-dataset-2024.html
2 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mohamedamineferrag/edgeiiotset-cybersecurity-dataset-of-iot-iiot/code

Fig. 5.

Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 2 clients.

of the proposed system. The proposed method is tested with
clients numbered 2, 3, 10, and 15. It is determined that
expanding the number of clients yields the best improvements.
Having more FL clients boosts performance due to the diversity of datasets, parallel processing, integrated knowledge,
confidentiality, and reliability. Figure 5 illustrates the two
clients’ local and global accuracy curves. The green and
orange colors represent the clients, while the blue represents
the global averaged accuracy values. Both clients start at
around 63% accuracy, but the global server starts at 58%.
After a few epochs, client 1 has worse performance than client
2. Client 1 has 70% accuracy, whereas client 2 has 92%
on the 22nd epoch. Furthermore, the global accuracy curve
performs similarly depending on client 2. Overall, client 1
performs poorly because it frequently loses precision. Figure 6
illustrates three clients’ local and global accuracy values.
When compared to each other, their dynamic values vary
greatly. Client 1 has the lowest performance, client 3 has
the highest, and client 2 is somewhat in the middle. The
global accuracy curve also performs roughly in the middle.
For instance, on epoch 20, client 1 has 65% accuracy, client 3
has 99%, client 2 has 87%, and global accuracy is 77%.
After the 30th epoch, the three clients and the global server
are behaving similarly. Figure 7 depicts the local and global
accuracy curves for ten clients. It demonstrates significant
variances in client performance, although the global server
performs better after the 23rd epoch. Our key goal is for the
global server to perform better by averaging client weights and
leveraging varied datasets. Similarly, 8 illustrates the dynamic
local and global accuracy curves with 15 clients. Overall, the
global server improves after the 28th epoch.
Figures 9-12 depict the dynamic local and global loss
values. Figure 9 analyzes two clients with a global server. The
major purpose is to obtain the declining trend for each epoch.
For instance, client 1, client 2, and the global server begin
with a 70% loss and steadily reduce. Client 1 displays slightly
larger loss values than client 2 and the global server. At the
38th epoch, client 1 has a 10% loss, whereas client 2 has
2%. Figure 10 illustrates three clients’ local and global loss
values. Client 1 has the biggest loss of over 100% on the 24th
epoch, while client 3 has the lowest loss of 2%. Client 2 and
the global server both show slightly higher second-best losses.
Figures 11 and 12 demonstrate loss values for ten and fifteen
clients, respectively. It can be observed that the global server

ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY

4581

Fig. 6.

Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 3 clients.

Fig. 9.

Dynamic local and global loss curves using 2 clients.

Fig. 7.

Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 10 clients.

Fig. 10.

Dynamic local and global loss curves using 3 clients.

Fig. 8.

Dynamic local and global accuracy curves using 15 clients.

Fig. 11.

Dynamic local and global loss curves using 10 clients.

always performs better with a larger number of clients after
a few epochs, which is the primary purpose of the proposed
approach. Table I compares the performance of several forms
of adversarial attack detection on the CICIOMT2024 dataset.
The FGSM attack is identified with reduced performance,
whereas the hybrid is detected with maximum performance.
Although the hybrid attack is the most powerful feature attack
due to the combination of IGSM and PGD. The proposed
method remains the most effective. For instance, the FGSM
attack has precision, recall, and f1-score, with accuracy of
93.2%, 97.2%, 95.6%, and 95.2%. The performance measures
for hybrid attacks are 98.3%, 100%, 99%, and 99.34%. The
PGD attack is detected more than the other two approaches
(FGSM and IGSM), but less than the hybrid strategy. For

TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS
D ETECTION U SING CICI O MT2024

instance, the PGD has precision, recall, f1-score, and accuracy
of 98.3%, 100%, 99%, and 99.34%, respectively.
Table II compares the performance of several attack detection methods using the Edge-IIoT dataset. Similar to Table I,

4582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS
C LASSIFICATION U SING CICI O MT2024

Fig. 12.

Dynamic local and global loss curves using 15 clients.

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS D ETECTION
U SING E DGE -II OT SET

hybrid attacks are identified more effectively than other methods. For the hybrid attack, the precision, recall, f1 score,
and accuracy are 98.9%, 100%, 98.8%, and 99.2%. Similarly,
the same performance measurements are lowest for FGSM,
but PGD is superior. Table III presents performance metrics,
including precision, recall, and f1 score for classifying adversarial attacks on the CICIOMT2024 dataset. There are five
classes: DDoS, DoS, MQTT, Recon, and Spoofing. As can
be observed, hybrid adversarial attacks are accurately divided
into five distinct attacks. For instance, DDoS (94.7%, 96%,
96.1%), DoS (97.6%, 98.1%, 97.6%), MQTT (95.8%, 98.7%,
98.3%), Recon (98.2%, 94%, 95.9%), and Spoofing (100%,
100%, 100%). Table IV shows the performance classification
of several adversarial attacks on the Edge-IIoT dataset. We
presented adversarial examples for FGSM and hybrid to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. The
Edge-IIoT dataset has 14 categories, and the suggested strategy is more accurate in classifying hybrid-based adversarial
attacks. Table V presents classification accuracy utilizing four
adversarial attacks for the suggested technique. The hybrid
technique achieves the greatest classification rate of 97.45%
utilizing the CICIoMT2024 dataset and 96.7% with the EdgeIIoTset dataset.
To provide deeper analysis, the confusion matrix can
show the correct and incorrect classification rates for each
class in the dataset. Figure 13 presents the confusion
matrix for FGSM-based adversarial attack detection with the
CICIoMT2024 dataset. The benign and attack are successfully
identified at 92% and 97%, respectively. Figure 14 depicts the
confusion matrix for hybrid-based adversarial attack detection
using the CICIoMT2024 dataset. The benign and attack
are appropriately identified at 98% and 100% respectively.
Figure 15 depicts the confusion matrix for the hybrid adversarial approach with the Edge-IIoTset dataset. Figure 16 shows

Fig. 13.
dataset.

FGSM-based Adversarial attacks detection using CICIoMT2024

the confusion matrix for FGSM-based adversarial attack classification on the CICIoMT2024 dataset. DDoS, DoS, MQTT,
Recon, and Spoofing are correctly characterized at 92%. 83%,
91%, 92%, and 100%. Figure 17 illustrates the confusion
matrix for hybrid adversarial attack classification. DDoS, DoS,
MQTT, Recon, and Spoofing are accurately identified at 96%.
98%, 99%, 94%, and 100%. Figure 18 presents the confusion
matrix for adversarial attack classification using the EdgeIIoTset dataset.
Table VI presents a performance comparison with related
studies. Fan et al. [9] introduced a method for generating
adaptable adversarial instances without a replacement model,
achieving a 95.16% success rate. Their approach involves
image-to-graph transformation, perturbation on the graph, and
graph-to-image inversion. Guduri et al. [14] developed FedKC,
a personalized FL algorithm for resisting model poisoning
in the consumer health metaverse. FedKC provides tailored
medical treatments for new users and demonstrated 91.1%
accuracy in mitigating attacks and enhancing client customization in experimental tests. Mothukuri et al. [18] developed
a method for detecting FL anomalies in IoT networks using
GRUs and decentralized on-device data, sending only learned

ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY

4583

TABLE IV
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS FOR A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS C LASSIFICATION U SING E DGE -II OT SET

Fig. 14.
dataset.

Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks detection using CICIoMT2024

Fig. 15.
dataset.

Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks detection using Edge-IIoTset

weights to the FL server. This approach improves global ML
model accuracy and offers superior privacy protection and
attack detection, achieving 95.6% accuracy. Zhang et al. [36]
used GANs to study poisoning threats in FL, where attackers
simulate participants to generate poisoned updates from copied
samples. Their method can produce samples with over 80%
accuracy for both poisoning and main activities. The proposed
approach provides better performance, i.e., 97.45% as compared to the related works.

TABLE V
C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY U SING CICI O MT2024 AND E DGE -II OT SET

V. C ONCLUSION

computing and medical equipment. However, the possibility of
cyberattacks increased as a result of this interconnectedness,
especially in vital industries like healthcare, where attacks
on consumer medical equipment were common. Massive
volumes of data from medical devices also offered significant

SHS is a contemporary consumer electronics concept that
emerged from the integration of networked personal medical
devices. These systems collected data, sent it to smart devices
for analysis, and delivered healthcare services using edge

4584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 71, NO. 2, MAY 2025

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH R ECENT AND R ELATED W ORKS

Fig. 16. FGSM-based Adversarial attacks classification using CICIoMT2024
dataset.

solve these issues and enhance the security of medical devices
in SHS. On standard datasets, CICIoMT2024 and EdgeIIoT detect and mitigate adversarial attacks with 97.45% and
96.7% accuracy, respectively. This emphasizes the crucial need
for creative solutions that improve healthcare data security
while assuring the continued delivery of essential healthcare
services. Our work protects sensitive healthcare data and
strengthens SHSs against cyber-attacks, hence improving the
security of existing healthcare technology. FL protects medical
data by storing it on local devices and delivering only model
updates instead of raw data. Security and privacy can be
enhanced by the use of blockchain technology, homomorphic
encryption, safe aggregation, and differential privacy. While
homomorphic encryption allows computations on encrypted
data, secure aggregation uses cryptographic algorithms to
protect updates, and blockchain ensures apparent process
recording, differential privacy adds noise to model updates.
Data privacy is further enhanced by regular security audits and
regulatory compliance.
R EFERENCES

Fig. 17. Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks classification using CICIoMT2024
dataset.

Fig. 18.
dataset.

Hybrid-based Adversarial attacks classification using Edge-IIoTset

challenges in terms of storage and security. Utilizing edge
computing as a layer between the cloud and SHS is crucial to
overcoming these challenges. The proposed method enhanced
security and privacy while simplifying the processing of large
volumes of data. We used an edge intelligence approach that
included suspicious examples of network traffic and FL to

[1] A. Rahman, M. S. Hossain, N. A. Alrajeh, and F. Alsolami, “Adversarial
examples—Security threats to COVID-19 deep learning systems in medical IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 9603–9610,
Jun. 2021.
[2] H. R. Chi, M. de Fátima Domingues, H. Zhu, C. Li, K. Kojima, and
A. Radwan, “Healthcare 5.0: In the perspective of consumer Internetof-Things-based fog/cloud computing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 745–755, Nov. 2023.
[3] T. Yaqoob, H. Abbas, and M. Atiquzzaman, “Security vulnerabilities, attacks, countermeasures, and regulations of networked medical
devices—A review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 3723–3768, 4th Quart., 2019.
[4] D. Li, Q. Li, Y. Ye, and S. Xu, “A framework for enhancing deep neural
networks against adversarial malware,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 736–750, Jan.–Mar. 2021.
[5] L. Lyu et al., “Privacy and robustness in federated learning: Attacks
and defenses,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 7,
pp. 8726–8746, Jul. 2024.
[6] F. Ullah, G. Srivastava, S. Ullah, and L. Mostarda, “Privacy-preserving
federated learning approach for distributed Malware attacks with
intermittent clients and image representation,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4585–4596, Feb. 2024.
[7] A. I. Newaz, A. K. Sikder, M. A. Rahman, and A. S. Uluagac, “A survey
on security and privacy issues in modern healthcare systems: Attacks
and defenses,” ACM Trans. Comput. Healthc., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–44,
2021.
[8] A. I. Newaz, A. K. Sikder, L. Babun, and A. S. Uluagac, “HEKA:
A novel intrusion detection system for attacks to personal medical
devices,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), 2020,
pp. 1–9.
[9] X. Fan et al., “GCSA: A new adversarial example-generating scheme
toward black-box adversarial attacks,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2038–2048, Feb. 2024.
[10] M. Zhang, Y. Duan, H. Yin, and Z. Zhao, “Semantics-aware android
malware classification using weighted contextual API dependency
graphs,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014,
pp. 1105–1116.

ULLAH et al.: FEDERATED EDGE INTELLIGENCE FOR ENHANCED SECURITY

4585

[11] H. Gao, S. Cheng, and W. J. C. Zhang, “GDroid: Android malware
detection and classification with graph convolutional network,” Comput.
Secur., vol. 106, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 102264.
[12] X. Zhang, L. Hao, G. Gui, Y. Wang, B. Adebisi, and H. Sari,
“An automatic and efficient malware traffic classification method for
secure Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5,
pp. 8448–8458, Mar. 2024.
[13] R. Kumari, D. K. Sah, S. Gupta, K. Cengiz, and N. Ivković, “Advancing
medical recommendations with federated learning on Decentralized
data: A roadmap for implementation,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2666–2674, Feb. 2024.
[14] M. Guduri, C. Chakraborty, U. Maheswari, and M. Margala,
“Blockchain-based federated learning technique for privacy preservation
and security of smart electronic health records,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2608–2617, Feb. 2024.
[15] W. Schneble and G. Thamilarasu, “Attack detection using federated
learning in medical cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf.
Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), vol. 29, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[16] A. Rehman, I. Razzak, and G. Xu, “Federated learning for privacy
preservation of healthcare data from smartphone-based side-channel
attacks,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 684–690,
Feb. 2023.
[17] W. Wang, X. Li, X. Qiu, X. Zhang, V. Brusic, and J. Zhao,
“A privacy preserving framework for federated learning in smart
healthcare systems,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 60, no. 1, 2023,
Art. no. 103167.
[18] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT
security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
Feb. 2022.
[19] S. Ni, Q. Qian, and R. Zhang, “Malware identification using visualization images and deep learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 77, pp. 871–885,
Aug. 2018.
[20] P. Chlap, H. Min, N. Vandenberg, J. Dowling, L. Holloway, and
A. Haworth, “A review of medical image data augmentation techniques
for deep learning applications,” J. Med. Imag. Radiat. Oncol., vol. 65,
no. 5, pp. 545–563, 2021.
[21] E. Lashgari, D. Liang, and U. Maoz, “Data augmentation for deeplearning-based electroencephalography,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 346,
Dec. 2020, Art. no. 108885.
[22] A. Mustafa, S. Khan, M. Hayat, R. Goecke, J. Shen, and L. Shao,
“Adversarial defense by restricting the hidden space of deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019,
pp. 3385–3394.

[23] Y. Shi, Y. Han, Q. Hu, Y. Yang, and Q. Tian, “Query-efficient black-box
adversarial attack with customized iteration and sampling,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2226–2245, Feb. 2023.
[24] Y. Zhao, K. Xu, H. Wang, B. Li, M. Qiao, and H. Shi, “MEC-enabled
hierarchical emotion recognition and perturbation-aware defense in
smart cities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 23, pp. 16933–16945,
Dec. 2021.
[25] F. Chen et al., “Frequency constraint-based adversarial attack on deep
neural networks for medical image classification,” Comput. Biol. Med.,
vol. 164, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 107248.
[26] E. Rabieinejad, A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava,
“Two-level privacy-preserving framework: Federated learning for attack
detection in the consumer Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4258–4265, Feb. 2024.
[27] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[28] N. Rieke et al., “The future of digital health with federated learning,” NPJ Digit. Med., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[29] A. Y. A. Amer, J.-M. Aerts, B. Vanrumste, and S. Luca, “A localized
learning approach applied to human activity recognition,” IEEE Intell.
Syst., vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 58–71, May/Jun. 2020.
[30] R. Zuech, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and R. Wald, “Intrusion detection and big
heterogeneous data: A survey,” J. Big Data, vol. 2, pp. 1–41, Feb. 2015.
[31] T. R. Peltier, Information Security Policies, Procedures, and Standards:
Guidelines for Effective Information Security Management. Boca Raton,
FL, USA: CRC Press, 2016.
[32] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How
to backdoor federated learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist.,
2020, pp. 2938–2948.
[33] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 115, pp. 619–640, Feb. 2021.
[34] S. E. A. Dadkhah, “CICIoMT2024: Attack vectors in healthcare devicesa multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device security,” Internet
Things, vol. 28, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 101351.
[35] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
“Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
[36] J. Zhang, J. Chen, D. Wu, B. Chen, and S. Yu, “Poisoning attack in
federated learning using generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. 18th IEEE
Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput. Commun., 13th IEEE Int.
Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng. (TrustCom/BigDataSE), 2019, pp. 374–380.