IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

7931

Federated Graph Anomaly Detection via Contrastive
Self-Supervised Learning
Xiangjie Kong , Senior Member, IEEE, Wenyi Zhang , Hui Wang , Mingliang Hou , Xin Chen ,
Xiaoran Yan , Member, IEEE, and Sajal K. Das , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Attribute graph anomaly detection aims to identify
nodes that significantly deviate from the majority of normal nodes, and has received increasing attention due to the
ubiquity and complexity of graph-structured data in various realworld scenarios. However, current mainstream anomaly detection
methods are primarily designed for centralized settings, which
may pose privacy leakage risks in certain sensitive situations.
Although federated graph learning offers a promising solution
by enabling collaborative model training in distributed systems
while preserving data privacy, a practical challenge arises as
each client typically possesses a limited amount of graph data.
Consequently, naively applying federated graph learning directly
to anomaly detection tasks in distributed environments may lead
to suboptimal performance results. We propose a federated graph
anomaly detection framework via contrastive self-supervised
learning (CSSL) [federated CSSL anomaly detection framework (FedCAD)] to address these challenges. FedCAD updates
anomaly node information between clients via federated learning
(FL) interactions. First, FedCAD uses pseudo-label discovery
to determine the anomaly node of the client preliminarily.
Second, FedCAD employs a local anomaly neighbor embedding
aggregation strategy. This strategy enables the current client
to aggregate the neighbor embeddings of anomaly nodes from
other clients, thereby amplifying the distinction between anomaly
nodes and their neighbor nodes. Doing so effectively sharpens
the contrast between positive and negative instance pairs within
contrastive learning, thus enhancing the efficacy and precision of
anomaly detection through such a learning paradigm. Finally, the
efficiency of FedCAD is demonstrated by experimental results on
four real graph datasets.
Index Terms— Anomaly detection, attributed networks, contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL), federated learning (FL).
Manuscript received 14 September 2022; revised 2 April 2023 and 9 April
2024; accepted 10 June 2024. Date of publication 20 June 2024; date of
current version 5 May 2025. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62072409, in part by the
Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant LR21F020003,
and in part by the Zhejiang Lab under Grant 2022NF0AC01. The work of
Sajal K. Das was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF)
under Award CNS-2008878, Award SaTC-2030624, Award OAC-2104078,
and Award EPCN-2319995. (Corresponding author: Xiaoran Yan.)
Xiangjie Kong and Wenyi Zhang are with the College of Computer Science
and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China
(e-mail: xjkong@ieee.org; wyzhang98@outlook.com).
Hui Wang, Mingliang Hou, and Xin Chen are with the School
of Software, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China
(e-mail: wanghui.sd@outlook.com; teemohold@outlook.com; xin.chen.jx@
outlook.com).
Xiaoran Yan is with the Research Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Zhejiang
Lab, Hangzhou 311100, China (e-mail: yanxr@zhejianglab.com).
Sajal K. Das is with the Department of Computer Science, Missouri
University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO 65409 USA (e-mail:
sdas@mst.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2024.3414326

N OMENCLATURE
Attribute network.
Node set.
Edge set.
Attribute matrix.
Adjacency matrix.
Attribute vector of the ith node.
Contrastive instance pair.
Target node of Pi .
Local subgraph of Pi .
Label of Pi .
Adjacency matrix of Gi .
Number of training epochs of
FedAD.
Ei ∈ Rc×d
Embedding matrix of Gi .
lg
d
ei ∈ R
Embedding vector of Gi .
eitn ∈ Rd
Embedding vector of vi .
si
Predicted score of Pi .
W(ℓ) ∈ R(ℓ−1) × d (ℓ)
Learnable parameter of the ℓth
layer of GCN module.
W(d) ∈ Rd×d
Learnable parameter of discriminator module.
M
Number of clients.
Tfc
Rounds of communication between
the client and the server.
Tfcd
Number of training epochs of local
discriminator module in federated
contrastive self-supervised learning
anomaly detection framework (FedCAD).
GCi = (VCi , ECi , XCi ) Subgraph owned by client Ci .
Ȳ
Pseudo labels.
UCi
Neighbor embedding matrix of
client Ci .
G = (V, E, X)
V
E
X ∈ Rn× f
A ∈ Rn×n
xi ∈ R f
Pi = (vi , Gi , yi )
vi
Gi
yi ∈ {0, 1}
Ai ∈ Rc×c
Tc

I. I NTRODUCTION

A

NOMALY, a fundamental research problem in machine
learning, has been extensively explored across various
domains, such as image and time series analysis [1]. Its
primary goal is to identify data points or entities that exhibit
unexpected behavior or do not conform to typical patterns. Traditional anomaly detection methods have mainly focused on
single-dimensional data or simple relationships. However, the
importance of attribute graph anomaly detection has become

2162-237X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

7932

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

increasingly evident with the advent of complex relational data
in areas such as social networks, IoT, and biological networks.
Attribute graphs represent complex data structures that
include nodes, edges, and various attribute information
attached to each node and edge. In contrast to conventional
graphs that only represent interactions between nodes, attribute
graphs incorporate rich feature information for each node,
allowing for the modeling of more intricate interaction systems [2]. Anomaly detection on attribute graphs involves
identifying abnormal nodes, edges, or substructures within
this more complex context. Unlike single-dimensional or
tabular data, anomaly detection on attribute graphs poses
more significant challenges. The detection of abnormal nodes
in attribute graphs holds significant implications for various security-related applications and has become an urgent
research topic in recent years. Examples include social
network analysis, financial fraud detection, and cybersecurity. With the advancements in graph neural networks
(GNNs), attribute graph anomaly detection has made significant progress and has demonstrated promising performance in
many real-world complex scenarios [2], [3].
Despite the progress made by conventional centralized
anomaly detection methods, they often require direct access
to potentially sensitive user data, raising serious privacy
concerns [3]. The following is an example of a common
scenario. Considering the practical problems of the financial
industry, for a variety of reasons, urban residents visit different banks. Therefore, their customer information, transaction
network, and default history are only stored in the banks they
visit. A robust anomaly detection model to perform efficient
inference across the customer network, which contains all
subgraphs from different banks, is a key requirement for
banks wishing to collaborate to conduct comprehensive credit
assessments of their customers and identify a common industry
blacklist. Concerns about user privacy and conflicts of interest,
it is difficult for all banks to share the customer network for
training anomaly detection models. Two challenges arise in the
above situation. The first challenge is data privacy protection.
How do we train anomaly detection models in a distributed
system while protecting data privacy? The second challenge
is the small client subgraph. In a distributed system, the data
scale of each client is small, and the data between clients may
overlap. How do we increase the data scale of each client to
improve the effect of anomaly detection?
Federated graph learning emerges as a compelling alternative to this issue by facilitating collaborative model training
across distributed systems without compromising the privacy
of individual data owners [4]. It does so by allowing clients to
maintain their data locally and only share model parameters
or encrypted gradients. However, when directly applied to
anomaly detection tasks in distributed environments where
each client holds a relatively small portion of the overall graph
data, federated graph learning may suffer from performance
degradation due to the lack of comprehensive data exposure
during the learning process [5].
In this article, we propose FedCAD, a federated graph
anomaly detection framework that integrates the ideas of
federated graph learning and anomaly detection. For the
first challenge of data privacy protection, a standard solution is to support computation over encrypted data using
cryptography-based techniques, such as homomorphic encryption. While providing a solid security guarantee, these
techniques have a substantial computational overhead, making
them an inappropriate choice. FedCAD solves this challenge
by designing federated parameter aggregation and anomaly
information updates between clients based on federated
learning (FL) without heavy cryptographic operations. First,
FedCAD indirectly obtains the graph structure of other clients
through federated parameter aggregation and integrates it into
its client graph structure. Second, FedCAD does not directly
share node features but obtains the neighbor subgraph of
the target node through contrastive learning sampling and
embeds the subgraph into the low-dimensional embedding
vector before sharing. Meanwhile, the server only uploads the
abnormal node neighborhood subgraph embeddings, but not
the normal node neighborhood subgraph embeddings. These
two points ensure data privacy security.
For the second challenge, that the client-side subgraphs are
small in size, an evident approach is to scale-up the data per
client, with the company or organization augmenting the scale
of the dataset through other channels. However, expanding the
scale of the dataset is costly. Another method is to perform
data enhancement. However, most current data enhancement
methods are suitable for computer vision (CV) and natural
language processing (NLP) fields. Because graphs are complicated and non-Euclidean, few data enhancement techniques
are available for graph data. In addition, the data generated by
data augmentation are mostly negative examples, degrading
the model performance in anomaly detection tasks. FedCAD
solves this challenge by using a local anomaly neighbor
embedding aggregate mechanism, which enables the current
client to aggregate the anomaly node neighbor embeddings
of other clients, expands the difference between the anomaly
node and its neighbor nodes, and makes the difference between
positive instances pairs and negative instances pairs in contrastive learning obvious, to improve the effectiveness of
subsequent contrastive learning anomaly detection.
In this article, we propose FedCAD. The following is a
summary of our major contributions.
1) We propose FedCAD, a federated graph anomaly detection framework. FedCAD can collaborate on distributed
graph data to train high-quality graph anomaly detection
models while protecting data privacy.
2) We propose an anomaly information update strategy that
enables each client to aggregate anomaly node neighbor
embeddings from other clients during federated processing. By doing so, it expands the difference between
the anomaly node and its neighbor nodes, and makes
the difference between positive instances pairs and negative instances pairs in contrastive learning obvious,
to improve the effectiveness of subsequent contrastive
learning anomaly detection.
3) We evaluate the proposed FedCAD on four datasets. The
results verify the performance of the algorithm and its
superiority over baseline methods.
The structure of the remainder of this article is as follows.
We analyze the related work in Section II. The preliminary
definitions, notations, and problem statements are explained

KONG et al.: FEDERATED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

in Section III. We illustrate the technical details of FedCAD
in Section IV. We show and analyze the experimental results in
Section V. We make a conclusion of this article in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we outline the most related work: anomaly
detection on attributed networks, contrastive self-supervised
learning (CSSL), and federated graph learning.
A. Anomaly Detection on Attributed Networks
Due to the wide application of attribute networks in complex
system modeling, attribute network anomaly detection has
gradually emerged in recent years. Some shallow methods
are used for attribute network anomaly detection. Perozzi
and Akoglu [6] detect anomalies on the attribute network
by extracting the self-network information of each node.
Peng et al. [7] add CUR decomposition to the residual analysis
to perform anomaly detection on the attribute network to
alleviate the adverse effect of noise features on anomaly
detection. Unfortunately, because of the limitations of shallow
mechanisms, these models cannot capture complex interactions between different information patterns, especially when
the dimensionality of the features is high [8].
GNNs are a class of deep neural networks [9] specifically designed to model relational patterns inherent in
non-Euclidean graph-structured data. Subsequently, a succession of spectral-based GNN variants emerged, harnessing filter
from graph signal processing viewpoint [10]. Among these,
graph convolutional network (GCN) stands out by implementing a localized first-order approximation of the spectral graph
convolution operations [11]. This strategic approach enables
the efficient extraction of meaningful node representations.
Due to the rapid development of deep learning-based anomaly
detection, researchers have also proposed anomaly detection
methods on attribute networks. Ding et al. [8] calculated
anomalies based on the reconstruction error of the adjacency
matrix and attribute matrix by an autoencoder with a GCN
layer. Fan et al. [12] propose a framework that learns the
cross-modal interaction between the network structure and
node attributes. Li et al. [13] employ a spectrogram autoencoder to extract each node’s latent embedding and a Gaussian
mixture model (GMM) to detect each node. Yu et al. [14]
employ random walk sampling and an autoencoder model to
dynamically learn network embedding and use a cluster-based
detector to detect anomalies. Liu et al. [15] overcome the
shortcomings of autoencoders that cannot fully utilize data
and cannot operate on large-scale network data. It uses a
CSSL-based anomaly detection framework to capture the connection between the target node and its adjacent substructures.
The anomaly node is detected statistically by measuring the
consistency of each instance pair with its output score through
contrastive learning.
B. Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning
CSSL is a pivotal branch of self-supervised learning in
which models are trained to discern similarities and dissimilarities among nodes without explicit labels [16]. The
remarkable achievements of CSSL in CV have spurred its
progressive adoption within graph-based learning paradigms.

7933

DGI constructs contrastive instance pairs by pairing a node’s
representation with a graph-level summary vector, exploiting
graph corruption to generate negative samples and thereby
enabling the node representation learning in an unsupervised
setting [17]. Graph contrastive coding (GCC) initializes GNNs
by pretraining on universal graph datasets, using a strategy
that involves sampling two subgraphs per node as a positive
instance pair and utilizing the information noise contrastive
estimation (InfoNCE) loss function for representation learning [18]. Graphical mutual information (GMI) focuses on
optimizing the agreement between a node’s embeddings and
the raw attributes of its neighbors and between the embeddings
of connected nodes [19]. However, most CSSL approaches
do not directly target anomaly detection despite their efficacy
in learning data representations. To adapt to anomaly detection, CSSL framework for anomaly detection on attributed
network (CoLA) adapts the entire contrastive learning framework to calculate anomaly scores for individual nodes [15].
Recognizing that conventional instance pair definitions might
inadequately capture node anomalies, CoLA proposes a new
form of contrastive instance pair tailored for graph contrastive
learning. This novel design emphasizes local information of
each node over global properties. While extensive research
has demonstrated the broad applicability of graph contrastive
learning, the challenge of applying it to anomaly detection
in attributed networks in distributed environments remains a
novel and complex research problem.
C. Federated Graph Learning
Federated learning is a novel distributed learning paradigm
that can jointly model with multiple clients [20], [21]. Federated learning has been extensively studied in many fields,
for instance, image recognition [22], vehicle localization [23],
machinery fault diagnosis [24], wireless communication [25],
and edge computing [26]. Federated graph learning is a direction of federated learning and has received extensive attention.
Federated graph learning is an emerging technology that
can jointly train machine learning models on graph datasets
distributed to multiple clients to ensure user privacy [27].
Caldarola et al. [28] use GCN to model interdomain interactions and study cross-domain heterogeneity in FL. He et al.
[29] propose a general federation framework suitable for graph
embedding algorithms. Jiang et al. [30], Chen et al. [31],
and Wu et al. [32] study the privacy issue of federated
GNNs. Wang et al. [33] introduce model-agnostic metalearning (MAML) into graph FL to maintain model generality
while dealing with non-independent and identically distributed
(IID) graph data. Zhang et al. [34] study the missing neighbor
synthesis issue in the subgraph FL context. Xie et al. [35] study
graph classification to reduce heterogeneity in the structure and
features of graphs owned by local systems. Peng et al. [36]
focus on research to strengthen the privacy protection of
federated learning and study the use of differential privacy
for federated knowledge graph embedding.
III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Notations and Definitions
The notations are summarized in Nomenclature. For notation, we use bold lowercase representing a vector (e.g., x),

7934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Fig. 1. Overall framework of FedCAD. First, the node anomaly score was calculated by the local anomaly detection model, and the client uploaded the
local anomaly detection model parameters W to the server. Second, the server performs global model parameter aggregation and sends W to each client to
complete the local anomaly detection model parameter update and repeat Tfc times. Finally, the pseudo label Ȳ was discovered according to the confidence
threshold λ. Each client uploads the pseudo label Ȳ and the neighbor embedding matrix of the abnormal node U to the server. The server updates the neighbor
embedding of the abnormal node and sends the updated neighbor embedding matrix set U of the abnormal node to each client. The client obtains the final
node anomaly score through the local discriminator model.

bold uppercase representing a matrix (e.g., X), and calligraphy
letter denoting a set (e.g., V).
Definition 1 (Attributed Networks): G = (V, E, X) is
denoted as an attributed network, where V is the node set, E is
the edge set, and X ∈ Rn× f is the attribute matrix. The ith row
vector xi ∈ R f of the attribute matrix represents the attribute
vector of the ith node. The structure of the attribute network
is represented as a binary adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n , where
the existence of a link between nodes vi and v j is represented
by Ai, j = 1, otherwise Ai, j = 0. An attributed network can
also be denoted as G = (A, X).
Definition 2 (Federated Learning Client Subgraph): We
have a server and M clients in the FL system. GCi =
(VCi , ECi , XCi ) is a subgraph of client Ci , for Ci ∈ [M].
Note that there are certain differences in the number of nodes
and graph structure of each client, but there are also some
overlapping nodes between the clients. That is, for any graph
GCk , there exits k ̸ = t, so that VCk ∩ VCt ̸ = ∅. This setup
conforms to the distribution of graph data in the real world.
B. Problem Statement
1) Node Anomaly Detection in Distributed Systems: Suppose there are M clients, GCk denotes the data owned by the

client Ck , the goal is to train an anomaly score function f
in distributed systems. The anomaly nodes can be detected by
ranking each node according to its anomaly score. We employ
an unsupervised anomaly detection method. In the training
phase, we only give the attribute network G containing abnormal nodes and do not give the abnormal labels of the nodes.
In this work, we aim to propose a federated anomaly
detection framework on attributed networks, which can collaboratively learn on isolated subgraphs in different clients to
train a high-quality anomaly detection model while protecting
data privacy.
IV. D ESIGN OF F ED CAD
A. Overall Architecture
We propose FedCAD, a novel federated CSSL anomaly
detection framework on attributed networks, as shown in
Fig. 1.
First, we adopt an anomaly detection framework on
attributed networks, which can model the relationship between
the target node and its partial neighboring substructure by
training a contrastive learning model, revealing various anomalies in the graph. Second, we integrate the anomaly detection
algorithm into the federated learning framework to implement

KONG et al.: FEDERATED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

7935

Fig. 2. Framework of the local anomaly detection. Here we assume that node v1 is an abnormal node and the others are normal nodes. Node v3 is the
anomaly evaluation target node. First, taking v3 as the target node, positive instance pairs and negative instance pairs are obtained by multiple sampling. The
GCN-based contrastive learning model then computes the prediction score for each instance pair. Finally, the anomaly score of node v3 was calculated through
the anomaly score calculation module.

a common federated graph anomaly detection framework,
called FedAD. It simply combines the local anomaly detection model with the classic federated learning algorithm
Fedavg [37], allows the local client to upload the parameters of the anomaly detection model, performs the average
aggregation of the parameters in the server to update the
parameters, and finally sends the updated parameters to each
client. Third, based on FedAD, we propose FedCAD. FedCAD
employs federated learning to upload the vector embedding
of the neighbor subgraph of the target node sampled by
contrastive learning in the client to the server. The server
aggregates abnormal information between clients and sends
the aggregated vector embedding set to each client. The
client performs average aggregation, thereby improving the
difference in the relationship between the target node and
the neighbor subgraph in contrastive learning and improving
the effectiveness of local anomaly detection.
B. Local Anomaly Detection Module
Inspired by CoLA [15], we adopt an anomaly detection
module, which is shown in Fig. 2. The overall procedure is
depicted in Algorithm 1.
1) Instance Pair Sampling: We adopt a contrastive instance
pair. The first element is a single node called the
“target node.” The target node randomly traverses every
node on the graph in an epoch. The second element
is a subgraph sampled from the “target node.” Node
anomalies in attribute networks are usually reflected as
inconsistencies between the target node and its local
neighbors.
2) GCN-Based Contrastive Learning Model: The instance
pair Pi can be denoted as follows:
Pi = (vi , Gi , yi )

(1)

where vi is the target node, and Gi is the subgraph
sampled from vi . Gi can be denoted as
Gi = (Ai , Xi )

(2)

and yi is the label of Pi . yi can be denoted as follows:
(
1, Pi is a positive instance pair
yi =
(3)
0, Pi is a negative instance pair.

Algorithm 1 Overall Procedure of the Local Anomaly Detection Module
Input: The attributed network: G, The training epochs: Tc ,
The batch size: B, The sampling rounds: R.
Output: Anomaly score function: f (·).
1:
Initialize the contrastive learning model parameters
(W(0) , . . . , W(d) ).
2: // The train stage.
3: for t = 1, 2, . . . , Tc do
4:
Initialize the batches B.
5:
Sample positive instance pairs (P1(+) , . . . , PB(+) ).
6:
Sample negative instance pairs (P1(−) , . . . , PB(−) ).
7:
Calculate the scores (s1(+) , . . . , s B(+) , s1(−) , . . . , s B(−) ) by
Eq. 7.
8:
Calculate Lcml by Eq. 8.
9:
Update the parameters (W(0) , . . . , W(d) ) of contrastive learning model via back propagation.
10: end for
11: // The inference stage.
12: for vi ∈ V do
(+)
(+)
13:
Sample positive instance pairs (Pi,1
, . . . , Pi,R
).
(−)
(−)
14:
Sample negative instance pairs (Pi,1 , . . . , Pi,R
).
(+)
(+) (−)
(−)
15:
Calculate the scores (si,1 , . . . , si,R , si,1 , . . . , si,R ) by
Eq. 7.
16:
Calculate the anomaly score f (vi ) by Eq. 10.
17: end for

In positive instance pair, the target node and the subgraph are connected. In negative instance pair, the target
node and the subgraph are not connected.
First, the local subgraph is fed into GCN to obtain
the local subgraph embedding. The GCN model can be
written as follows:

 −1
−1
Ai e
Di 2 Xi W(0)
(4)
Ei = φ e
Di 2 e
where D̃ i is the degree matrix of the local subgraph,
Xi is the attribute matrix, and Ei is the embeddings of
subgraph nodes.
Then, the embeddings of subgraph nodes Ei are translg
formed into a local subgraph embedding vector ei by

7936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

the average pooling method. Specifically, the method is
written as follows:
nX
i −1
(Ei )k
lg
(5)
ei =
ni
k=0
where n i is the number of nodes in the subgraph Gi .
We also map the target node to the same embedding
space to compare them

eitn = φ xvi W(0)
(6)
where W(0) is the mapping weight matrix of GCN. xvi
is the attribute vector of target node, and eitn is the target
node embedding.
lg
We evaluate the final prediction score by comparing ei
tn
and ei


lg
(7)
si = σ ei W(d) eitn⊤
where W(d) is the discriminator weight matrix, and σ (·)
is the logistic sigmoid function.
As the objective function, we use standard binary cross
entropy (BCE) loss. Concretely, the objective function
is denoted as follows:
B
X
Lcml = −
yi log(si ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − si ). (8)
i=1

3) Anomaly Score Computation: Typically, well-trained
GNN models tend to capture the matching patterns of
normal samples more effectively, as they make up a
large proportion of the training data and have distinct
regularities and features. Conversely, abnormal samples
present a greater challenge due to their variety and
irregularity, making it harder for the model to fit their
patterns. Ideally, for a normal node, the predicted score
of its positive pair si(+) should approximate 1, while the
negative one si(−) approaches 0. For an abnormal node,
the discrimination between the predicted scores of its
positive and negative pairs would be lower since the
model is not able to distinguish its matching pattern well.
With the properties mentioned above, we can define the
anomaly score for each node as simply the difference
between its negative and positive scores. This score is
negative for normal nodes, whereas it is close to 0 for
abnormal nodes. Hence, the higher the anomaly score,
the greater the probability of the node being anomalous.
The anomaly score for each node vi is written as follows:
f (vi ) = si(−) − si(+)

(9)

where si(+) is the predicted score of the positive pair,
and si(−) is the predicted score of the negative pair.
However, a single-sampled local subgraph of the target
node cannot describe the entire neighborhood distribution, which causes the performance to decrease. To solve
this problem, we repeatedly run multiple rounds to calculate the average prediction scores. The final anomaly
score for each node is written
as follows:

P R  (−)
(+)
s
−
s
r =1 i,r
i,r
(10)
f (vi ) =
R
where R is the sampling round.

Fig. 3. Overall framework of FedAD. In the communication between the
client and server in round t, each client uploads local anomaly detection model
parameters W0t to the server, and the server performs global model parameter
aggregation and sends WGt+1 to each client to complete the local anomaly
detection model parameter update.

Algorithm 2 Algorithm of FedAD
Input: Attributed network: {GCk = (VCk , ECk , XCk )}CM−1
, The
k =0
rounds of communication between the client and the
server: T f c .
Output: Anomaly score function: f (·).
1: The server initializes global model parameters WG0 , distributing them to each client.
2: while not converge and t f c <= T f c do
3:
// Client: local model training.
4:
Run the train stage of Algorithm 1.
t
5:
Upload WCfkc to the server.
6:
// Server: global model aggregation.
t +1
7:
Update global model WGf c by Eq. 12.
t f c +1
8:
Distribute WG
to each client.
9:
t f c ← t f c + 1.
10: end while

C. FedAD Algorithm
McMahan et al. [37] proposed FedAvg. The FedAvg is the
first basic FL algorithm. We integrate the anomaly detection
algorithm into the federated learning framework to implement
a simple federated graph anomaly detection framework, called
FedAD, as shown in Fig. 3. Specifically, suppose there are M
clients, GCk denotes the data owned by the client Ck , and WCk
denotes the local anomaly detection module trained on the
client Ck . WG denotes the global model on the server. A total
of Tc rounds of communication between the client and the
server. The overall procedure is depicted in Algorithm 2. The
FedAD algorithm process is the following steps.
1) Initialization: The server initializes hyperparameters and
the local anomaly detection module parameters WG0 , and
so on, and distributes them to each client.
2) Local Anomaly Detection Module Training: After
receiving the local anomaly detection parameters from
the server, each client trains the local anomaly detection model and updates the local anomaly detection
parameters using local data. For the client Ck , the tth
communication is

WCt k = WCt k − α∇ L GCk WCt k
(11)

KONG et al.: FEDERATED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

where α is the learning rate, and the updated local model
parameters WCt k are uploaded to the server.
3) Global Model Parameters Update: The server aggregates the parameters of the updated local model
uploaded by each client to generate the updated global
model parameters WGt+1 . The formula is
WGt+1 =

M−1
X
Ck =0

GCk
P M−1

Ck =0 GCk

WCt k

(12)

where |GCk | represents the number of samples of the
client Ck . The updated global model parameters WGt+1
are distributed to each client to continue the next round
of training.
The whole process will repeat steps 2) and 3) until the
global model converges or reaches the maximum number of
communications.
FedAD combines the local anomaly detection model with
the classic federated learning algorithm FedAvg. First, FedAD
is an integral part of our proposed federated anomaly detection
FedCAD, providing FedCAD with the anomaly node score,
the target node embedding vector, and the neighbor node
embedding matrix. Second, FedAD is an ablation version of
FedCAD, which is used to verify the effectiveness of pseudolabel discovery, local anomaly neighbor embedding aggregate,
and local discriminator module.
D. Anomaly Information Update Between Clients
Based on FL
In graphs, connections may generally exist between nodes
and their neighbors. Conversely, an anomaly usually occurs
when there is a mismatch between the target node and its
neighbors, violating the network’s original matching pattern.
Contrastive learning, with its intrinsic discriminative mechanism, is adept at capturing abnormal mismatch patterns.
However, the limited scale of data within each client presents
practical challenges for our study. In the context of banking
operations, for example, bank branches are typically distributed throughout the country, with some branches located
in sparsely populated areas possessing relatively small user
data. This scarcity of graph data leads to an overabundance of
duplicate nodes when forming positive and negative instance
pairs. Consequently, when contrastive learning samples negative instance pairs from such limited data, the neighboring
nodes in these pairs are highly likely to overlap with those
in the positive instance pairs. As a result, this leads to inconspicuous distinctions between positive and negative instance
pairs, ultimately diminishing the effectiveness of contrastive
learning. Despite our attempts to mitigate this issue through
repeated execution of R rounds of contrast instance pair
sampling in the local anomaly detection module, this approach
fails to address the problem comprehensively.
To solve the problem, we propose FedCAD. FedCAD
extra aggregates the neighbor node embeddings of anomalous
nodes from other clients during the federated learning process.
This strategy enlarges the difference between abnormal nodes
and their neighboring counterparts, rendering the contrast
between positive and negative instance pairs more apparent,

7937

Algorithm 3 Algorithm of FedCAD
Input: Attributed network: {GCk = (VCk , ECk , XCk )}CM−1
, The
k =0
rounds of communication between the client and the server:
T f c , The number of training epochs of Local Discriminator
Module: T f cd , The confidence threshold for determining the
pseudo label: λ.
Output: Anomaly score function: f (·).
Server initialize global model parameters WG0 , distributing
them to each client.
Run the Algorithm 2.
while not converge and t f c ∈ 1, 2, . . . , T f c do
// Client: Calculate the pseudo labels and extract the
neighbor embedding matrix.
Run the inference stage of Algorithm 1.
Calculate the pseudo labels Ȳ Ck by Eq. 13.
Extract the neighbor embedding matrix UCk .
Upload Ȳ Ck and UCk to the server.
// Server: local anomaly neighbor embedding aggregate.
Aggregate the local anomaly neighbor embedding
matrix by Eq. 14.
C
Distribute UCk = {UCC0k , UCC1k , . . . , UCCkk , . . . , UCkM−1 } to
client Ck .
// Client: local discriminator module training.
// Training phase.
Average the aggregated neighbor embedding matrices
by Eq. 15.
for not converge and t f cd ∈ 1, 2, . . . , T f cd do
Calculate the predicted scores si of vi by Eq. 16.
Calculate L f in by Eq. 17.
Update the local discriminator module parameters
t
WCfkc via back propagation.
end for
// Inference phase.
Calculate the predicted scores si of vi by Eq. 16.
Calculate the anomaly score f (vi ) by Eq. 9.
end while

thus improving the effectiveness of contrastive anomaly detection. We first design a pseudo-label discovery on clients and
local anomaly node embedding update on the server. Then,
we feed the obtained results into the discriminator to get the
final abnormal node score S. The algorithm of the FedCAD
framework is depicted in Algorithm 3.
E. Pseudo-Label Discovery
Based on the anomaly node score of FedAD, we try to
discover pseudo labels of the anomaly node. To get the pseudo
labels, we specifically extract these prediction scores from the
final anomalous node score S. For the prediction results from
Sk of the ith node in S, if the predicted score is higher than
the threshold, then it is a pseudo label
(
1, if (Sk > λ)
k
Ȳ Ci =
(13)
0, otherwise
where Ȳ Ck i is the pseudo label of the kth target node of the
client Ci , and λ ∈ (−1, 0) is the confidence threshold for

7938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

of coincident abnormal node pseudo labels YCi =
{Ȳ Ci ∩ Ȳ C0 , . . . , Ȳ Ci ∩ Ȳ C j , . . . , Ȳ Ci ∩ Ȳ C M−1 } =
C
C
{Ȳ CCi0 , . . . , Ȳ Cij , . . . , Ȳ CiM−1 }.
2) We copy M copies of the neighbor embedding matrix
UCi of the target node, and then replace the neighbor
embedding matrix UCi with the neighbor embedding
matrix UC j of other clients according to the obtained
C
coincident abnormal node pseudo label set Ȳ Cij , which
is written as follows:


C
C
C
UCij = I − Ȳ Cij ⊙ UCi + Ȳ Cij ⊙ UC j
(14)

Fig. 4. Illustrative process of local anomaly neighbor embedding aggregate.
Ȳ Ci and Ȳ C j are the pseudo labels of client Ci and client C j , and UCi and UC j
are the abnormal node neighbor embedding matrices of client Ci and client C j .
In the local abnormal neighbor embedding aggregation, when Ȳ Ck i = Ȳ Ck j = 1,
let the neighbor embedding vector UCk 0 = UCk j of the corresponding abnormal
C

node to obtain UCij .

determining the pseudo label. Then, we extract the neighbor
node embedding matrix UCi of all target nodes, which consists
lg
lg
of the local subgraph embedding vector ei . ei is converted
from the readout module in FedAD, which is shown in (5).
We set the vector in UCk i with Ȳ Ck i = 0 as the 0 vectors.
There are two main reasons. First, it can effectively protect
data privacy. Only uploading the abnormal node neighbor
embedding vector can effectively protect data privacy from
being leaked. Second, it greatly reduces the communication
overhead of federated learning. The proportion of abnormal
nodes is small, and only uploading the neighbor embedding
vector of abnormal nodes can save a lot of communication
overhead. In the final step, each client uploads U and Ȳ to the
server.
1) Local Anomaly Neighbor Embedding Aggregate: After
the server receives U and Ȳ from each client update, the
server obtains the pseudo label of the abnormal node that
coincides with each client and other clients. After that, the
server aggregates the abnormality neighbor embeddings of all
clients according to the pseudo label of the coincident node.
The process of local anomaly neighbor embedding aggregate
is shown in Fig. 4. For the sake of illustration, consider an
arbitrary client Ci among a total of M clients. Here, C j , where
i ̸ = j, represents any other distinct client from the set of all
clients.
1) The pseudo label Ȳ Ci takes the intersection with the
pseudo label Ȳ C j of other clients to obtain the set

where I is the identity matrix and ⊙ is the Hadamard
product, i.e., the multiplication of the corresponding
positions of the two matrices. We then obtain the
aggregated neighbor embedding matrix set UCi =
C
C
{UCCi0 , . . . , UCij , . . . , UCiM−1 }.
3) The server repeatedly executes the above process for
each neighbor embedding uploaded by each client.
2) Local Discriminator Module: Fig. 5 shows the process
of the local discriminator module. We send the aggregated
neighbor embedding matrix set to their respective clients.
Each client averages the set of aggregated neighbor embedding
matrices, which enlarges the difference between the anomalous
target node and its neighbors
M−1

UCi =

1 X Cj
U
M C =0 Ci

(15)

j

lg

where UCi is the averaged neighbor embedding matrix. ui
denotes the averaged neighbor embedding vector of the ith
node. Then, we obtain the target node embedding vector
lg
eitn , which is generated by (6). Next, we feed ui and eitn
into the local discriminator module for training. The local
discriminator module also uses a sample bilinear scoring
function, which is written as follows:




lg
lg
si = Discriminator ui , eitn = σ ui W(d) eitn⊤ .
(16)
Here, we attempt to maximize similarities between the
ground-truth label yi and the prediction result si . Therefore,
we adopt the standard BCE loss as our objective function
Lfin = −

B
X

yi log(si ) + (1 − yi ) log(1 − si ).

(17)

i=1

Finally, we compute the local anomaly score using the
anomaly score calculation formula, as shown in (9).
F. Complexity Analysis
In FedCAD, we analyze the time complexity of this framework considering two main components: FedAD and the
anomaly information update between clients based on FL.
In FedAD, we consider two main components: the local
anomaly detection module and FedAvg. For the local anomaly
detection module, the time complexity of each RWR subgraph
sampling is O(cδ), where c is the number of sampled neighbor
nodes and δ is the mean degree of the network. We run
R rounds of sampling for each node, then the total time

KONG et al.: FEDERATED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

7939

Fig. 5. Illustrative process of local discriminator module. The client aggregates the abnormal node neighbor embedding matrix set sent by the server on
lg
average, and then feeds the embedding vector ui of the neighbor nodes and the embedding vector eitn of the target node into the discriminator, and obtains
the prediction score of the node through contrastive learning, and finally obtains the abnormal score of the node.
TABLE I
S TATISTICS OF THE DATASETS

complexity becomes O(cnδ R), where n is the number of
graph nodes in the client. The time complexity of the GCN
module is O(c2 n R). The time complexity of the local anomaly
detection module is O(cn R(c + δ)). For FedAvg, it consists
of two components: client and server. For the client, all
clients run in parallel for each epoch, with the same time
complexity as the local anomaly detection module. For the
server, only the average aggregation operation of local parameters is performed, and the time complexity is O(M). The
rounds of communication between the client and the server
are Tfc . Therefore, the overall time complexity of FedAD
is O(Tfc (cn R(c + δ) + M)). For the anomaly information
updates between clients based on FL, the time complexity
is mainly generated by the local anomaly node embedding
update, which is O(M 2 ). The overall time complexity of
FedCAD is O(Tfc (cn R(c + δ) + M 2 )).
To reduce the communication complexity, when the client
uploads the neighbor node embedding matrix, FedCAD only
uploads the abnormal node neighbor embedding vector, and
the normal node neighbor embedding vector is not uploaded.
Since the proportion of abnormal nodes is small, it can save
a lot of communication overhead.
V. E XPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
We employ four datasets that are commonly used to detect
anomalies in attributed networks, with the basic information
shown in Table I.
1) Cora: Cora is an academic citation network. The
node represents the published paper, and the edge

represents the citation relationship between the papers.
The attribute vector is represented by bag-of-words.
2) Wiki: Wiki is a web page link network derived from
the English Wikipedia website. Each node is a web
page explaining the term. The edge is as hyperlink
reference between web pages. The content of web pages
is transformed into bag-of-words representations of the
initial node features.
3) BlogCatalog: BlogCatalog is a blog sharing website.
Each node represents the users of websites. The edge
represents the following relationships between users.
Node attributes consist of a list of user tags.
4) Flickr: Flickr is an image hosting and sharing website.
Each node represents the users of websites. The edge
represents the following relationships between users.
Node attributes consist of a list of user tags and photo
tags.
The aforementioned datasets lack ground-truth anomalies,
hence to evaluate them, artificial anomalies must be injected
into the attribute network. We refer to the node attribute
anomalies injection method that has been used in the previous
research [15] to generate node attribute anomalies for each
dataset. We randomly pick a node vi as the target node. Then,
we select another n nodes V = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) as a candidate
set. Here, we set n = 50. For each v j ∈ V , between the
attribute vectors of xi and x j we compute their Euclidean
distance. Then, we pick the node v j with the largest Euclidean
distance from the node vi as the anomaly node. We change xi
to x j .
We ultimately obtain the perturbed network using the abovementioned injection technique, the number of abnormal nodes
is shown in Table I. In our experiments, all class labels are
removed and the anomaly labels yi are only visible in the
inference stage.
B. Experimental Settings
In this section, we outline the critical aspects of our
experimental setup. This includes presenting the comparative

7940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

baselines, discussing the evaluation metrics used, and detailing
the parameter setting in our framework.
1) Baselines: We compare our proposed FedCAD framework with the following commonly used methods for anomaly
detection.
1) DOMINANT [8]: In DOMINANT, the adjacency matrix
and the attribute matrix are concurrently reconstructed
using an autoencoder. By calculating the reconstruction
error, it evaluates the abnormality of each node.
2) AnomalyDAE [12]: AnomalyDAE is an anomaly detection framework via dual autoencoders, which learns the
cross-modal interactions during node attribute reconstruction by taking attribute embeddings as inputs to
attribute decoders. It detects anomalies by measuring the
reconstruction error.
3) CoLA [15]: CoLA is an anomaly detection framework to catch the connections between the target node
and its adjacent substructures based on CSSL in an
unsupervised manner. The anomaly of each node is estimated statistically by measuring the consistency of each
instance pair with its output score through contrastive
learning.
4) FedAD: FedAD combines the localized model utilizing
the weighted-average approach to obtain the global
model. This method is an ablation version of FedCAD,
which is used to verify the effectiveness of pseudo-label
discovery, local anomaly neighbor embedding aggregate,
and local discriminator module.
2) Evaluation Metrics: We adopt receiver operating
characteristic-area under the curve (ROC-AUC) as an evaluation metric to evaluate the performance of our proposed
framework. ROC-AUC is commonly used as an evaluation
metric for anomaly detection frameworks [7], [8]. The ROC
curve consists of a false positive rate (FPR) and a true
positive rate (TPR). The ground-truth labels and the results
of the anomaly detection are used to calculate TPR and FPR.
The closer the AUC is to 1, the better the performance of
the method.
3) Parameter Settings: We set the number of nodes in the
sampling graph as 4. We fixed the embedding dimension as 64.
We fixed the batch size B = 256. We use the Adam to train
the model. We set train epochs as 400 on the BlogCatalog and
Flickr. We set train epochs as 100 on the Cora and Wiki. We set
the learning rate as 0.001 on Cora, Wiki, and Flickr. We set the
learning rate as 0.003 on the BlogCatalog. The learning rate for
the local discriminator module in FedCAD is 0.05. For Cora,
Wiki, BlogCatalog, and Flickr, the confidence threshold for
determining the pseudo label is −0.3, −0.5, −0.5, and −0.4,
respectively. For each dataset, we sample 256 rounds during
the inference phase to obtain accurate detection results.
C. Anomaly Detection Results
The graph data of each client is obtained using random
sampling results of experimental datasets with various scales to
imitate the graph data distribution in the actual world. We set
up four clients whose data proportions are [50%, 60%, 70%,
80%], respectively. We repeated the experiment five times to
ensure that the framework is authentic and reliable.

The ROC curves of the client containing 50%, 60%, 70%,
and 80% of the data size are shown in Figs. 6–9, respectively.
Table II displays the AUC results for the four benchmark
datasets for comparison by computing the area under the
ROC curves. FedCAD significantly outperformed FedAD and
also extremely surpassed other baselines. For the experimental
results, we conducted the following analysis.
FedCAD performs better than other baselines. There are two
main reasons.
1) Federated learning cooperates with multiple clients to
learn together, potentially increasing data size for model
training. An anomaly detection model learned from
cooperative learning has better performance than a
model trained using only the data of each client alone.
2) The proposed local anomaly node embedding update can
expand the difference between abnormal nodes and their
neighbors. It improves the contrastive learning performance and further improves the FedCAD performance.
Compared with FedAD, FedCAD first uses pseudo-label
discovery to infer abnormal nodes. Then use pseudo labels
to perform local anomaly node embedding updates to expand
the difference between abnormal nodes and their neighbors,
improve the quality of the instance pairs, and obtain a
high-quality anomaly detection model.
D. Parameter Study
In this section, we explore the effect of three critical
parameters on the performance of the proposed framework: the
data size of clients, the number of clients, and the confidence
threshold. We perform these experiments on the four datasets.
1) Data Size of Client: In this experiment, our goal is to
explore the effect of data sizes on FedCAD. While keeping all
other experimental parameters constant, we investigated two
different scales of client configurations. Initially, we explored a
setup involving three clients. Within this scenario, we designed
three sets of experimental schemes. In these experiments, the
proportion of data nodes held by each client (referred to as
the sampling ratio) was specifically set as follows: the first
group utilized [20%, 30%, 40%], the second group employed
[20%, 40%, 60%], and the third group used [30%, 50%, 70%].
Subsequently, we increased the number of clients to five,
ensuring that all other conditions unrelated to the sampling rate
remained unchanged. We assigned a different sampling ratio
for these five clients as [20%, 40%, 50%, 70%, 90%]. The
purpose of these adjustments was to systematically observe
and analyze the impact on the overall performance of changes
in the number of clients and their respective proportions of data
nodes. The experimental results are shown in Table III. For the
experimental results, we conducted the following analysis.
1) It can be observed from [20%, 30%, 40%] that FedCAD
can still achieve the best results even if the data size
of each client is small. This is mainly attributed to
that the local anomaly neighbor embedding aggregate
module in FedCAD can enlarge the difference between
the anomalous target node and its neighbors.
2) FedCAD still performs better than FedAD in most cases,
especially below [20%, 40%, 50%, 70%, 90%], which

KONG et al.: FEDERATED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

Fig. 6.

ROC curves comparison for clients with 50% data volume on four benchmark datasets. (a) Cora. (b) Wiki. (c) BlogCatalog. (d) Flickr.

Fig. 7.

ROC curves comparison for clients with 60% data volume on four benchmark datasets. (a) Cora. (b) Wiki. (c) BlogCatalog. (d) Flickr.

Fig. 8.

ROC curves comparison for clients with 70% data volume on four benchmark datasets. (a) Cora. (b) Wiki. (c) BlogCatalog. (d) Flickr.

Fig. 9.

ROC curves comparison for clients with 80% data volume on four benchmark datasets. (a) Cora. (b) Wiki. (c) BlogCatalog. (d) Flickr.

indicates that the proposed local anomaly neighbor
embedding aggregate effectively enlarges the difference
between anomaly nodes and their neighbors, and learns
a high-quality FedCAD model.
3) Compared with Table II, FedCAD can still achieve good
results and maintain its advantages despite the different
number of clients and data size.
2) Confidence Threshold: Next, we study the impact of confidence threshold λ on our proposed FedCAD framework. The
confidence threshold λ in (13) is used to control the number
of pseudo labels. To study how λ affects the performance of
FedCAD, we tune λ ∈ [−0.1, −0.9] with step size 0.1. The
results are shown in Fig. 10. As can be seen from the result,

7941

choosing a suitable λ value can continuously improve the
final AUC value. From the results, [−0.3, −0.5] is a desirable
interval.
3) Number of Clients: In the FedCAD framework, the
number of clients is a crucial parameter significantly affecting
performance and scalability. In this experiment, we aim to
investigate the impact of the number of clients on FedCAD.
We evaluate the performance of FedCAD on four datasets,
keeping other parameters constant while varying the number
of clients from 4 to 20. Notably, we also include FedAD as
a baseline method for comparative analysis. As illustrated in
Fig. 11, the results show that FedCAD consistently demonstrates substantial performance improvements over FedAD

7942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

TABLE II
AUC VALUES C OMPARISON ON F OUR B ENCHMARK DATASETS AT F OUR C LIENTS

TABLE III
AUC VALUES C OMPARISON ON F OUR B ENCHMARK DATASETS U NDER THE D IFFERENT N UMBERS OF C LIENTS AND DATA S IZE

Fig. 10.
AUC value under different confidence threshold λ. (a) Cora.
(b) Wiki. (c) BlogCatalog. (d) Flickr.

on all datasets, demonstrating robustness to variations in the
number of clients. However, as the number of clients reaches
higher values, there is some degradation in the average performance between different clients, observed in both FedCAD
and FedAD. This trend primarily arises due to the growing
disparity in graph data distribution across clients, leading to
more pronounced non-IID challenges. Nevertheless, FedCAD
continues to exhibit relatively more minor performance
fluctuations than FedAD, effectively demonstrating the scalability of the proposed FedCAD method.

Fig. 11.
AUC value under different client number. (a) Cora. (b) Wiki.
(c) BlogCatalog. (d) Flickr.

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we design FedCAD for the task of distributed graph anomaly detection. First, FedCAD utilizes
federated learning and does not require centralized client
data for training. Furthermore, the sampling neighbor subgraph of the target node obtained by contrastive learning is
embedded in the low-dimensional embedding vector before

KONG et al.: FEDERATED GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CONTRASTIVE SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING

7943

TABLE IV
AUC VALUES C OMPARISON FOR G LOBAL G RAPH A NOMALY D ETECTION ON F OUR B ENCHMARK DATASETS

being uploaded to the server. Second, FedCAD proposes a
client-side abnormal neighbor aggregation mechanism based
on contrastive learning. Specifically, each client aggregates the
sampled neighbor subgraph embedding vectors of the other
clients’ abnormal nodes on average, improving local anomaly
detection performance. This mechanism achieves the effect of
data enhancement and solves the challenge of the data scale
of each client being small. Experimental results demonstrate
that FedCAD outperforms a range of baseline methods.
Despite FedCAD exhibiting superior performance, many
areas can still be improved. The first area that can be improved
is additional communication costs. The communication costs
are high due to frequent parameter transfers between the
federated learning client and server. In FedCAD, the transfer
of vector embedding also increases communication costs. The
second area that can be improved is to apply FedCAD to
heterogeneous graphs. FedCAD can only be applied to the
homogeneous graph. Due to the different types of nodes and
links in the heterogeneous graph, the relationships between the
nodes have various meanings. Therefore, FedCAD cannot be
directly applied to heterogeneous graph. Future work can focus
on appropriately reducing communication costs and applying
it to the heterogeneous graph.
A PPENDIX
G LOBAL G RAPH A NOMALY D ETECTION W ITH
F EDERATED L EARNING
We performed the global graph anomaly detection with
federated learning on the server and obtained the results of the
model trained on the global graph. Note that it is often very
difficult to gather data together in the real world due to privacy
security and industry competition. It is designed specifically
for the academic experiment to test the performance of global
graph anomaly detection with federated learning. The global
graph data is collected from each client. Global graph anomaly
detection with federated learning can approach or even exceed
the performance of centralized training models by collecting
data from clients.
Table IV displays the AUC results for the four benchmark
datasets for comparison by computing the area under the
ROC curve. Our proposed FedAD achieves the best anomaly
detection performance in all four datasets. The main reason is
that due to the particularity of graph data, each client’s graph
data can be regarded as a sample of the larger graph data,
so there are overlapping nodes between clients. Each client
uses the sampled graph data to train a local model, which
amounts to data augmentation during training and therefore
outperforms the baseline using a single graph data.

R EFERENCES
[1] G. Li and J. J. Jung, “Deep learning for anomaly detection in multivariate
time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges,” Inf. Fusion,
vol. 91, pp. 93–102, Mar. 2023.
[2] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual
graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023.
[3] A. D. Pazho, G. A. Noghre, A. A. Purkayastha, J. Vempati, O. Martin,
and H. Tabkhi, “A survey of graph-based deep learning for anomaly
detection in distributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1–20, Jan. 2023.
[4] R. Liu, P. Xing, Z. Deng, A. Li, C. Guan, and H. Yu, “Federated graph
neural networks: Overview, techniques, and challenges,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, pp. 1–17, Feb. 2024.
[5] B. Dong, D. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Tang, and Y. Zhuang, “FADngs: Federated
learning for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
early access, pp. 1–15, Jan. 2024.
[6] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2016, pp. 207–215.
[7] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “Anomalous: A joint
modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
Proc. IJCAI, 2018, pp. 3513–3519.
[8] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019,
pp. 594–602.
[9] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[10] N. M. Foumani, L. Miller, C. W. Tan, G. I. Webb, G. Forestier, and
M. Salehi, “Deep learning for time series classification and extrinsic
regression: A current survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 9,
pp. 1–45, Oct. 2024.
[11] H. T. Phan, N. T. Nguyen, and D. Hwang, “Aspect-level sentiment
analysis: A survey of graph convolutional network methods,” Inf. Fusion,
vol. 91, pp. 149–172, Mar. 2023.
[12] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for
anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
[13] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “SpecAE: Spectral
autoencoder for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. 28th
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2019, pp. 2233–2236.
[14] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang,
“NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection
in dynamic networks,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 2672–2681.
[15] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
[16] B. Xu, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, H. Lin, and F. Xia, “Unsupervised anomaly
detection on attributed networks with graph contrastive learning for
consumer electronics security,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 4062–4072, Feb. 2024.
[17] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv:1809.10341.
[18] J. Qiu et al., “GCC: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network
pre-training,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1150–1160.
[19] Z. Peng et al., “Graph representation learning via graphical mutual
information maximization,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 259–270.
[20] X. Kong, W. Zhang, Y. Qu, X. Yao, and G. Shen, “FedAWR: An interactive federated active learning framework for air writing recognition,”
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 6423–6436, May 2024.

7944

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 36, NO. 5, MAY 2025

[21] L. Wang, H. Zhou, Y. Bao, X. Yan, G. Shen, and X. Kong, “Horizontal
federated recommender system: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56,
no. 9, pp. 1–42, Oct. 2024.
[22] X. Kong et al., “A federated learning-based license plate recognition
scheme for 5G-enabled Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 8523–8530, Dec. 2021.
[23] X. Kong, H. Gao, G. Shen, G. Duan, and S. K. Das, “FedVCP:
A federated-learning-based cooperative positioning scheme for social
Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 197–206, Feb. 2022.
[24] J. Du, N. Qin, D. Huang, Y. Zhang, and X. Jia, “An efficient federated
learning framework for machinery fault diagnosis with improved model
aggregation and local model training,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., early access, pp. 1–24, Feb. 2023.
[25] X. Wu, X. Yao, and C.-L. Wang, “FedSCR: Structure-based communication reduction for federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst., vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1565–1577, Jul. 2021.
[26] Z. Wu et al., “FedICT: Federated multi-task distillation for multi-access
edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6,
pp. 1107–1121, Jun. 2023.
[27] H. Jamali-Rad, M. Abdizadeh, and A. Singh, “Federated learning with
taskonomy for non-IID data,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8719–8730, Nov. 2022.
[28] D. Caldarola, M. Mancini, F. Galasso, M. Ciccone, E. Rodola, and
B. Caputo, “Cluster-driven graph federated learning over multiple
domains,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2021, pp. 2749–2758.
[29] C. He et al., “FedGraphNN: A federated learning system and benchmark
for graph neural networks,” 2021, arXiv:2104.07145.
[30] M. Jiang, T. Jung, R. Karl, and T. Zhao, “Federated dynamic GNN with
secure aggregation,” 2020, arXiv:2009.07351.
[31] C. Chen et al., “Vertically federated graph neural network for privacypreserving node classification,” 2020, arXiv:2005.11903.
[32] C. Wu, F. Wu, Y. Cao, Y. Huang, and X. Xie, “FedGNN: Federated
graph neural network for privacy-preserving recommendation,” 2021,
arXiv:2102.04925.
[33] B. Wang, A. Li, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “GraphFL: A federated learning
framework for semi-supervised node classification on graphs,” 2020,
arXiv:2012.04187.
[34] K. Zhang, C. Yang, X. Li, L. Sun, and S. M. Yiu, “Subgraph federated
learning with missing neighbor generation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 6671–6682.
[35] H. Xie, J. Ma, L. Xiong, and C. Yang, “Federated graph classification
over non-IID graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34,
2021, pp. 18839–18852.
[36] H. Peng, H. Li, Y. Song, V. Zheng, and J. Li, “Differentially private
federated knowledge graphs embedding,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf.
Inf. Knowl. Manag., Oct. 2021, pp. 1416–1425.
[37] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, 2017,
pp. 1273–1282.
Xiangjie Kong (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2004 and 2009, respectively.
He was an Associate Professor with the School of
Software, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian,
China. He is currently a Professor with the College
of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou. He has authored
over 160 scientific papers in international journals and conferences. His research interests include
mobile computing, network science, and data
science.
Wenyi Zhang received the B.S. degree from the
College of Science, Jiangxi University of Science
and Technology, Ganzhou, China, in 2020. He is
currently pursuing the M.E. degree in computer
science and technology with the School of Computer Science, Zhejiang University of Technology,
Hangzhou, China.
His research interests include gesture recognition,
mobile edge computing, and federated learning.

Hui Wang received the B.Sc. degree in cyber
engineering from the Shandong Jianzhu University,
Jinan, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing the
master’s degree with the School of Software, Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian, China.
His current research interests include federated learning, graph neural networks, and edge
computing.

Mingliang Hou received the B.Sc. degree from
Dezhou University, Dezhou, China, in 2012, and
the M.Sc. degree from Shandong University, Jinan,
China, in 2016. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China.
His research interests include graph learning, city
science, and social computing.

Xin Chen received the B.Sc. degree in information security from Harbin Engineering University,
Harbin, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing the
master’s degree with the School of Software, Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian, China.
His research interests include spatiotemporal graph
learning, urban science, and social computing.

Xiaoran Yan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in computer science from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from The University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA, in 2013.
From 2013 to 2015, he was a Postdoctoral
Research Associate at the University of Southern
California Information Sciences Institute, Marina del
Rey, CA, USA. He was an Assistant Research Scientist at Indiana University Network Science Institute,
Bloomington, IN, USA, from 2015 to 2021. Since
2021, he has been with the Research Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, as a Research Expert (PI). He has authored
multiple journal and conference papers, and codirected NIH and IMLS
grants. His research interests include network science, swarm intelligence,
statistical machine learning, and their transdisciplinary applications in social,
communications, and biomedical networks.
Dr. Yan served as a Program Committee Member for major organizations
such as IEEE and Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI).
Sajal K. Das (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor
of computer science and the Daniel St. Clair
Endowed Chair at Missouri University of Science
and Technology, Rolla, MO, USA. He has coauthored four books and holds five U.S. patents.
His research interests include wireless sensor networks, mobile and pervasive computing, UAVs,
cyber-physical systems, the IoT, smart environments,
distributed and cloud computing, cyber security, and
social networks. He has made fundamental contributions to these areas and published extensively in
these areas.
Dr. Das was a recipient of 12 best paper awards at prestigious conferences,
IEEE Computer Society’s Technical Achievement Award for pioneering contributions to sensor networks, and University of Missouri System President’s
Award for Sustained Career Excellence. His H-index is 96 with more than
37 100 citations according to Google Scholar. He is the Founding Editor-inChief of Pervasive and Mobile Computing journal, and an Associate Editor of
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING, IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING, ACM/IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORKING, and ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks.