632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Few-Shot Website Fingerprinting With
Distribution Calibration
Chenxiang Luo , Wenyi Tang , Qixu Wang , and Danyang Zheng , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Website Fingerprinting (WF) aims to identify users’
visited websites from encrypted traffic traces, disabling the
anonymity of encrypted communication like the Tor network. It
is practical to use historically labeled (source) data, e.g., public
datasets, to pre-train a WF model, and then collect few incoming
(target) data to re-train this model within a low cost. Unfortunately,
there is always a considerable difference of latent feature distributions between the source and target data (i.e., the cross-domain
problem) and an inevitable bias of feature distribution caused by a
limited volume of target data (i.e., the biased distribution problem).
Although current Few-Shot Learning-based WF (FSWF) methods
achieve satisfactory performance on the efficient establishment,
they lack cross-domain transferability, and meanwhile, are unable
to alleviate the distribution bias. In this paper, we first systematically analyze the cross-domain problem among different domains
of traffics, revealing the ubiquity and dominant factors of it. To
mitigate the cross-domain and biased distribution problems, we
propose a Distribution Calibrated Website Fingerprinting (DCWF)
method that incorporates a two-stage distribution calibration process and a tailored circle network. In the two-stage calibration
process, we first devise a re-modeling mechanism capturing the
information distribution of the target domain to extract representative features, and then design a calibration process to adjust the
biased distribution of the target domain. Subsequently, a tailored
circle network is proposed to reduce the noise caused by the calibration process. Finally, extensive experiments are conducted and the
results demonstrate the superiority of our DCWF over comparisons
under both close-world and open-world settings.
Index Terms—Network privacy, traffic analysis, website fingerprinting, cross-domain transfer, biased distribution.

I. INTRODUCTION
OWADAYS, the protection of network individual privacy
is increasingly brought into focus. The Onion Router
(Tor) [1], the primary tool of anonymous communication, has
exhibited a way to safeguard online privacy. Tor browser routes a
packet through a series of random-selected relays, each layer of
which can encrypt or decrypt traffic, much like the layers of an

N

Manuscript received 10 August 2023; revised 3 June 2024; accepted 4 June
2024. Date of publication 7 June 2024; date of current version 16 January
2025. This work was supported in part by the Young Scientists Fund of the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62302322 and
Grant 62302404, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities under Grant 2022SCU12116 and Grant 2023SCU12129.
(Corresponding author: Wenyi Tang.)
Chenxiang Luo, Wenyi Tang, and Qixu Wang are with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610207, China (e-mail:
iridescense@std.scu.edu.cn; wtang@scu.edu.cn; qixuwang@scu.edu.cn).
Danyang Zheng is with the School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence,
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 611756, China (e-mail: dzheng5@
swjtu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2024.3411014

Fig. 1. The example of WF practical application scenario. Attackers use
already-made historical datasets to pre-train a WF model, and then collect and
label a few data from the target users’ network to finetune this WF model, i.e.,
transfer the model from the source domain to target domain.

onion. Nevertheless, the encrypted network traffic transmitted
through such safeguards still discloses sensitive information. A
passive attacker could eavesdrop on the Tor traffic in the user’s
Local Area Network (LAN) or wireless network, such as the
user’s Internet Service Provider (ISP), the network administrator, and the sniffer. Then, the visited websites of the user could
be inferred from the captured traffic data, forming a general
WF attack [2]. The investigation of the WF attack exhibits the
insight of anonymous tools’ vulnerability, meanwhile, supports
the further development of the corresponding defense.
In the consistent studies of WF, Artificial Intelligence exhibits
its spectacular potential. Deep learning based WF (DWF) methods automatically extract features and learn latent patterns from
website traces [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], eliminating the reliance
on hand-crafting features of earlier methods [9], [10], [11], [12],
[13], [14], [15], [16]. However, DWF methods need a significant
amount of training data collected from the network of target
users, which is both resource-consuming and time-consuming.
The practical application of WF requires a low labor of data
collection and labeling. Therefore, as the example shown in
Fig. 1, attackers naturally prefer to use a ready-made (source)
dataset to pre-train a WF model, and then collect and label a
few (target) data from the target users’ network to finetune this
WF model. The ready-made dataset could be existing public
WF datasets or historically collected from the own network of

1545-5971 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

attackers. Moreover, if attackers already have a well-trained WF
model, it is more efficient to collect a few data from the target
network to transfer (finetune) the model, instead of collecting
abundant new data to train a new model. As a result, the few-shot
and cross-domain transferability of a WF method is necessary
for the practical application.
Although current FSWF methods are capable of learning
traffic patterns from a small number of target data [17], [18], [19],
[20], [21], the majority of current studies are still far away from
the practical application because of the unsolved cross-domain
and biased distribution problems. The cross-domain problem
indicates that feature distributions of the source domain and
target domain are different, which is widely existing because
of the changing Tor Browser Bundle (TBB) versions, visited
websites, network conditions, etc. Since the feature extractor is
pre-trained by the data from the source domain and applied for
WF attack using the data from the target domain, the prevalent
cross-domain problem significantly jeopardizes the effectiveness of the feature extractor. Most current works ignore the crossdomain problem, thus failing to extract representative features
from the target domain to adjust the difference between the two
domains. Although [22] applies adversarial domain adaption to
WF mitigating the cross-domain problem, it needs extra source
datasets and retraining the feature extractor every time meeting
a new target domain. Besides, the biased distribution problem
means that the feature distribution of the limited (few) data from
the target domain is biased, i.e., different with the ground-truth
distribution of all target data. Since current studies overlook the
biased distribution problem, it has a fairly high probability that
the WF classifier could easily become overfitted due to such a
problem. As a result, there are two non-trivial challenges we
must tackle for further improvements. The one is How to extract
representative features under the cross-domain scenario? and
the other one is How to alleviate the biased distribution caused
by limited target?
In this paper, the empirical evidence that the cross-domain
problem is widely existing under the WF scenario is first exhibited through systematic analysis. We comprehensively analyze such a problem with datasets collected under different
network conditions and identify several factors that dominantly
induce the cross-domain problem, including time gaps, and
non-overlapping website categories. In addition, the similarity
results of the above analysis inspire us to design the countermeasure of the biased distribution problem. To tackle the
two non-trivial challenges, we propose our DCWF method that
incorporates a two-stage distribution calibration process and a
tailored circle network. In the first stage which addresses the
cross-domain problem, we capture the information distribution
of the target domain by re-modeling the channel relationships of
the feature extractor with channel weights which highlight the
channel features that carry more informative content, to extract
representative features on the target domain. In the second stage
which tackles the biased distribution problem, we select a subset
from the source domain to calibrate the feature distribution of the
target data based on the analyzed similarity results. Specifically,
we adopt the assumption that distributions of extracted features

633

are following a Gaussian distribution and features of the same
type of websites (e.g., shopping websites or video platforms)
have similar covariance. Therefore, the biased distribution of
the target data is calibrated according to the covariance of the
previously selected subset from the source domain. Furthermore,
a tailored circle network is proposed to increase the separability
of the feature space and mitigate the inevitable noise caused
by calibrating the distribution of features. Subsequently, we
conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach to the cross-domain problem.
We summarize our key contributions as follows:
r To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
analyzes and addresses the cross-domain problem under
the scenario of WF.
r We motivate why an attacker might be interested in the
cross-domain problem and four substantial factors that
FSWF attacks induce the cross-domain problem are disclosed, including the time gap, diverse TBB versions, and
websites overlap and network locations.
r We propose a two-stage distribution calibration where the
first stage extracts more representative features and the second stage mitigates the bias of the feature distribution due
to insufficient samples. We find that our DCWF achieves
nearly 85% accuracy when using only one sample per class.
r We propose a tailored circle network to mitigate the extra
errors and noise caused by the calibration of features distribution, which makes the model more robust and effective
in open-world settings.
r Extensive experiments are conducted to validate the performance comparisons. Evaluation results show that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art method in both
closed-world and open-world settings, with and without
WF defense.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the background of Website Fingerprinting
and related works. Then, Section III analyzes the cross-domain
problem and corresponding factors. Further, we go into detail
about our method in Section IV. In Section V, we evaluate
our DCWF and other FSWF attacks under diverse experimental
settings. Finally, in Section VI, we summarize our work, and
point out the limitations of this work and potential future works.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Background
1) Threat Model: Tor is a free and open-source software
providing anonymous communication for users [23]. The goal
of Tor is to safeguard users’ privacy by hiding the real IP address
and identity of users by randomly routing their communication
traffic through multiple nodes [24]. In this paper, we assume
a local and passive adversary, which is a common assumption
in other literature [11], [17]. Specifically, local means that the
attacker is located on the user’s local network, while passive
means that the attacker can monitor the user’s network traffic,
but cannot modify or decrypt it. Potential adversaries could be
campus network administrators, residential ISPs, etc. When a

634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

user initiates a request to access a website, the adversary captures
the user’s traffic traces. Then the attacker analyzes the traffic
traces and determines whether the user has visited a monitored
website. Moreover, we assume that there are strong attackers
and weak attackers, where strong attackers could collect vast
amounts of data under specific network conditions when they
want to train a feature extractor while weak attackers could only
rely on the data provided by other attacks e.g., public datasets
from the Internet, which is more common in cross-domain
scenarios.
2) Closed-World Versus Open-World: WF attacks are typically evaluated in closed-world and open-world scenarios. In
the closed-world scenario, users are limited to accessing a small
subset of the Internet (monitored websites), typically denoted as
k websites. The goal of the adversary is to determine which of
the k websites the user has visited. Although this assumption has
faced criticism for being impractical [25], [26], the evaluation
under such scenarios still is used as a metric for evaluating the
quality of attacks. We also consider the open-world scenario
which represents a more realistic setting. In this scenario, as
shown in Fig. 1, users could visit other websites (unmonitored
websites) except the monitored websites. The Standard model
and AWF model discussed in [17] are employed to evaluate the
performance of WF classifiers. For the Standard model that is
used extensively in previous works [3], [4], [5], [11], traces from
the unmonitored set are incorporated into the training data with
an additional label. This model is based on the assumption that
including such samples could enhance the classifier’s ability
to distinguish between monitored and unmonitored websites.
For the AWF model, in contrast, training data does not include any unmonitored website traces which are classified as
monitored or unmonitored websites by a threshold based on
cross-entropy loss. [6] argues that the provision of any traces
from the open world to the classifiers can lead to a distortion
of the actual performance of WF attacks. Thus, we choose
the AWF model as our evaluation criteria in an open-world
setting.
3) Concept Drift: Concept drift occurs when recognizing
traffic traces collected over time since the distribution of traffic
traces changes [6]. Mathematically, assuming we have training
data xtrain and testing data xtest , the distributions of xtrain
and xtest are different and the class labels of xtrain and xtest
are same. In [25], the classification accuracy drops drastically
in the first ten days, and then drops to zero as the time gap
widens. A model that remains robust against concept drift effectively captures the representative features highly correlated
with the website fingerprint, ensuring consistent performance
over time [6]. In [6], they use DL-based WF to capture more
representative features utilizing the advantages of deep learning.
Meanwhile, [8] leverages the snapshot ensemble technique to
make the model more robust to concept drift. Another solution
to concept drift is to continuously re-fetch the latest pages and
retrain the classifier [17], [27]. For instance, [27] operates exit
relays and possesses continuous access to labeled traffic traces,
facilitating the training of a WF classification model while mitigating the adverse impacts of concept drift. [17] introduces FewShot Learning based WF to mitigate the concept drift by rapidly

updating the classifier. [28] augment traffic traces through semisupervised and self-supervised learning techniques to cover
comprehensive network conditions mitigating the concept drift
problem.
4) Cross-Domain: Deep learning achieves great success in
the area of Computer Vision (CV) for tasks such as image
classification [29], object detection [30], and face recognition [31]. However, in practical applications, we face an important challenge, namely the cross-domain problem that data
distributions are different in source and target domains. Mathematically, assuming we have training data xtrain and testing
data xtest , the distributions of xtrain and xtest are different,
while the class labels of xtrain and xtest may be different,
indicating a variation distinct from the concept drift. Therefore, the concept drift can be considered as a factor causing
the cross-domain problem. When we apply a feature extractor
trained on one domain and extract features on another domain, the performance of the feature extractor will degrade due
to the inability of the feature extractor to adequately adapt to
the data distributions and feature representations in the target
domain.
As we mentioned in Section I, the few-shot and cross-domain
transferability of a WF method is necessary for practical application. Therefore, the cross-domain problem and the biased distribution problem become intractable but fundamental challenges.
Current approaches can be categorized into two groups: feature
alignment and data augmentation methods. In feature alignment
methods, [22] utilizes Adversarial Domain Adaptation [32] to
learn domain-invariant features, mitigating the cross-domain
problem. Parameter fine-tuning [33] involves modifying the
parameters of a pre-trained model to adapt it to a new dataset
while focusing on a specific task. [34] re-initializes the final
residual block of the feature extractor before fine-tuning on
the target domain. However, these methods merely mitigate the
cross-domain problem but suffer from the biased distribution
problem. In data augmentation methods, [35] constructs auxiliary datasets using Mixup [36] and employs encoders to learn
domain-irrelevant features, guiding network generalization to
other tasks. Meanwhile, [37] and [38] apply rotation transformations to images and predict the rotation angle in the pre-training
phase. These data augmentation-based methods essentially increase the diversity of samples by enlarging the sample space.
However, these methods primarily target three-dimensional images, which have strong spatial dependencies. Concerning the
network traffic, the data has strong temporal dependencies,
making it unsuitable to use techniques like Mixup and RandomCrop for data augmentation. To simultaneously address
both problems in WF, we propose our two-stage distribution
calibration, which tackles the cross-domain and biased distribution problems separately. Specifically, the first stage fine-tunes
the parameters of the SE Block to mitigate the cross-domain
problem, and then the second stage augments labeled samples in
the feature space without the constraint of input data. Moreover,
the cross-domain problem is still not systematically studied
in WF. Therefore, we use domain similarity to analyze the
cross-domain problem in WF scenarios with prevailing public
datasets.

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

B. Related Work
[15] makes the first attempt to apply WF to Tor in 2009. In the
following decade, WF attacks typically train classifiers based on
a set of hand-crafted features. These attacks have been shown to
be effective including k-NN [14], CUMUL [9], and k-FP [11],
etc. However, the hand-crafted features are highly susceptible to
variations in traffic, which restricts the usability of such attacks.
As the potential benefits of deep learning are further explored, researchers actively apply deep learning techniques to
deep website fingerprinting (DWF). [3] explores the Stacked
Denoising Autoencoder (SDAE) in WF for detecting whether a
user has visited illegal websites. Following this, [6] compares
the performance of several deep-learning models on WF. The
results exhibit that DWF methods benefit from the increase in the
amount of training data and SDAE obtains the best results, with
96.3% accuracy. Subsequently, [4] proposes an attack named
Deep Fingerprinting (DF), which incorporates the sophisticated
features extracted from traffic traces with Convolutional Neural
Networks. The DF attack achieves 98.3% accuracy in the closed
world and 99% accuracy and 94% recall in the open world.
Moreover, the DF attack demonstrates a remarkable closedworld 90.7% accuracy under the WF defense scenario, undermining the effectiveness of the WTF-PAD defense [39] which
is widely regarded as the primary candidate for deployment in
Tor. Subsequently, [5] proposes Var-CNN, specifically designed
for the WF problem leveraging techniques tailored to address
the challenges of small training data. Remarkably, Var-CNN
achieves an impressive closed-world accuracy of approximately
92.4% with just 40 traces per site. Moreover, [40] explores
unsupervised deep learning and highlights the utility of their
model for feature extraction separately from the classification
task. Based on this, [8] proposes the snWF leveraging snapshots
ensemble technique and reaches the best performance in deep
WF attacks.
However, these deep WF attacks suffer from substantial gathering time of training data where network conditions will change
in such a big bootstrap time which are assumed to be the same in
their works [3], [4], [5]. To address such problems, [17] proposes
TF using triplet networks and evaluate it in a more challenging
scenario where the training and testing data are collected years
apart on different network conditions. Furthermore, Chen et al.
improve the performance of FSWF attacks by employing transfer learning, meta-learning [20], and data augmentation [19]
techniques respectively. Meanwhile, [21] proposes WFBDC to
mitigate domain deviation by leveraging the Brownian Distance
Covariance (BDC) and achieving the best performance. Nevertheless, these works do not explicitly consider the cross-domain
problem where the feature extractor could not extract representative features on the target domain without transferability. [22]
utilizes Adversarial Domain Adaption [32] to learn domaininvariant features with a Source Classifier and a Domain Discriminator mitigating the cross-domain problem. However their
method either requires data from multiple source domains, or the
feature extractor needs to be pre-trained with the source domain
each time they encounter a new target domain. In contrast, our
method only needs to pre-train the feature extractor once with

635

a single source domain, and the feature extractor can be used
for multiple target domains. There are also some other related
works. [41] proposes a defense mechanism against cache-based
Website Fingerprinting attacks. This approach involves generating spurious network activity to introduce noise into the
cache, effectively concealing the website rendering activity. [42]
proposes an obfuscation defense technique based on eXplainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI) to counter microarchitecture-based
Website Fingerprinting attacks. [43] constructs a WF classifier
using the XGBoost algorithm, supplanting the initial random
forest classifier from previous work [44]. Since our work focuses
on the cross-domain in FSWF, these work are not considered in
this paper.
III. CROSS-DOMAIN ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the cross-domain problem in WF
by measuring the similarity between two domains and show what
factors contribute such a problem. In [25], they point out that
WF methods should be evaluated in practical settings including
user’s browsing habits, differences in location and version of
TBB, etc. In particular, they discuss the impact of the time
gap between training data and testing data, which is known as
concept drift. In this section, we consider these assumptions as
factors causing the cross-domain problem, and we propose our
solution in the next section.
A. Datasets
We carry out our experiment on several datasets collected
in different conditions, with which we simulate different crossdomain scenarios and analyze the contributing factors. We label
these datasets as follows:
AWF dataset [6]: Rimmer et al. collected traffic traces of monitored websites from the 1,200 Alexa Top sites, and unmonitored
websites from the 400,000 Alexa Top sites in 2017 using TBB
version 6.5. Among the monitored websites, they revisit the top
200 websites and collected 100 test traces per website 3 days, 10
days, 2 weeks, 4 weeks, and 6 weeks after the end of the initial
data collection for these 200 websites. We categorize the AWF
dataset into several different sets:
r AWFk: The set of the first k monitored websites, where
each website has 2,500 examples. Especially AW F 775 is
the set of remaining 775 excluding the Top 100 monitored
websites same as [17].
r AWFλ K: A subset with λ× 1000 of the 400,000 unmonitored websites, where each website has one example.
r AWF200δ : A subset with δ time after the end of the
initial data collection for these 200 websites. Since the
AW F 2006w is contaminated, we do not consider it in the
next analysis.
DF-95 dataset [4]: Sirinam et al. collected traffic traces of
monitored websites from the 100 Alexa Top sites, and unmonitored websites from the 9000 Alexa Top sites in 2016 using TBB
version 6.X.
DS-14 dataset [14]: Wang et al. collected traffic traces of
monitored websites from a list of sites blocked in China, the

636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

U.K., and Saudi Arabia, and unmonitored websites from the
9000 Alexa Top sites in 2014 using TBB version 3.5.1.
DF-19 dataset [45]: Wang et al. collected traffic traces of
monitored websites from the 100 Alexa Top sites, and unmonitored websites from the 9000 Alexa Top sites in 2019 using TBB
version 8.5a7.
Data Representation: We follow the data representation used
by recent FSWF works [17], [18], [19], [20]. Each trace is
transformed into a sequence where we disregard packet size and
timestamps, retaining only the traffic direction of each packet.
Outgoing and target packets are represented as +1 and −1,
respectively. To ensure consistency, the sequences are trimmed
or padded with 0’s to reach a fixed length of 5,000 packets. As a
result, the input data is organized as a 1-D array of [n × 5000],
where n denotes the total number of examples provided to the
model.
B. Domain Similarity
Suppose there is a source domain S and a target domain
T projected into the feature space. In the context of transfer
learning, the distance between two domains can be quantified
as the minimum amount of work required to move the features
of one domain to the other. Therefore we use Earth Mover’s
Distance (EMD), which searches for the minimum amount of
work, to measure domain similarities between available datasets
[46], [47].
First we define the prototype vector pc of class c on a domain:
c
1 
g(tck ),
nc

n

pc =

(1)

k=1

where nc is the total number of traces in class c, tck is the k-th trace
in class c and g(·) denotes a feature extractor for a trace. The
feature extractor is required to extract high-level information
from traffic traces [46]. Therefore we use the Var-CNN as
the trained extractor on the large scale AWF dataset where
Var-CNN is considered the best deep WF model and we use
outputs of Global Average Pooling [48] as features, and AWF
dataset contains the largest websites categories and traffic traces.
|S|
Suppose we have a source domain S = {(pi , wpi )}i=1 and a
|T |
target domain T = {(pj , wpj )}j=1 , where pi is the prototype
vector of category i in S and wpi is the normalized number of
traces in that category; similarly for pj and wpj in T . Since we
normalize the number of traces, we have
n

i=1

wi =

m


wj = 1.

(2)

j=1

Then the distance between the two domains can be considered
as the cost of moving prototype vectors from one domain to
the other in the transfer learning context [46], [47]. We define
the distance between two prototypes pi ∈ S and pj ∈ T as the
euclidean distance:
di,j = pi − pj .

(3)

Then we have the distance between S and T is defined as their
Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD):
m,n
i=1,j=1 fi,j di,j
,
(4)
d(S, T ) = EM D(S, T ) = m,n
i=1,j=1 fi,j
where the optimal flow fi,j corresponds to the least amount of
total work by solving the EMD optimization problem. Finally,
the domain similarity is defined as
sim(S, T ) = e−γd(S,T ) ,

(5)

where γ is set to 0.1 which is different from previous works [46],
[47] due to that we think prototypes of domains of network traffic
are more difficult to distinguish.
C. Analysis
We use AW F k as the source domain which is commonly
given as an auxiliary dataset to train the feature extractor.
Concerning the target domain, we use AW F 100, AW F 200δ ,
DS-14, DS-19, and DF -95 which are commonly given as
target datasets to train the classifier in FSWF [17]. Table I
shows the similarities between source domains and target
domains. We observe a similar trend, that the order of
domain similarities to source domains is AW F 2003d >
AW F 20010d > AW F 2002w > AW F 2004w > AW F 100 >
DS-14 > DS-19 > DF -95. For instance, with δ increasing,
the similarities between AW F 200δ and AW F k become
smaller and DF -95 has the smallest similarities to source
domains. Then we synthesize previous research and motivate
the factors that we meet in the real world and cause cross-domain
problems. We classify them into the following categories.
Time Gap: In the scenario where both training and testing
datasets are collected in the same domain, WF attacks exhibit
their best performance [25]. However, maintaining this advantageous situation requires the attacker to constantly collect the
latest data, which is a resource-intensive operation and poses
limitations on weak attackers. The advent of FSWF reduces
such awkward conditions to some extent by leveraging a historically collected dataset. However, such methods give rise to
the cross-domain problem, as the feature extractor and classifier
are trained on two different domains separated by a significant
time gap. To further study such cross-domain problems, we
analyze the effect of the time gap on cross-domain problems
using AW F 200δ datasets where these datasets are designed
to gradually increase the time gap between the target domains
and the source domain. In our analysis of domain similarities,
we find that, as the time gap increases, the similarities between
the source and target domains become smaller, decreasing from
0.800 to 0.633. This is because the content of websites changes
over time leading to changes in traffic patterns. For example,
Google’s homepage has different doodles for different holidays
as Fig. 2, which results in a very noticeable change in traffic
payload.
TBB Version&Setting: To perform FSWF attacks, an attacker
is required to collect the auxiliary data on a TBB with a certain
version (source domain) where the attacker could not collect

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

637

TABLE I
SIMILARITIES BETWEEN THE SOURCE DOMAINS AND TARGET DOMAINS

Fig. 2.

Standard (Left) and doodle (Right) versions of google.com.

datasets of multiple versions due to resource constraints. However, an attacker, such as network administrators, would like to
monitor all users in the Intranet who visit websites with different
TBB versions. In this case, the attacker needs to train classifiers
on target data with different versions of TBB (target domain),
which causes cross-domain problems, otherwise, the accuracy of
FSWF attacks drops dramatically [25]. Therefore we study the
cross-domain problem induced by the factor that the auxiliary
data and target data are collected in different versions of TBB.
The similarity between AW F 200 and DS-14 is 0.326 with
the versions 6.5 and 3.5.1. Moreover, the similarity between
AW F 200 and DS-19 is 0.338 with the versions 6.5 and 8.5a7. In
fact, Tor’s security policy and browser optimization policies are
subject to change with each version update. With each update, it
leads to a change in traffic patterns. For instance, they consider
disabling TLS cipher suites containing SHA-1 and enabling
HTTP/2 push in version 12.0.1 In addition, [26] evaluates the
performance of WF with a random forest model when training
data and testing data are collected from different TBB versions,
e.g., [7,8,9,10]. For example, the accuracy drops from 77% to
3% when the training data and testing data are collected from
TBB versions 9 and 10 respectively. Moreover, Tor undergoes
rapid updates,2 and thus the TBB versions among users can be
different. Therefore, the TBB version&setting is a possible cause
of cross-domain problems.
Websites Overlap: In general, weak attackers tend to rely on
historically collected datasets to train their feature extractors.
However, it is important to note that the websites monitored by
the attacker may differ from the websites present in the source
dataset. In the area of CV, domains of two different class sets
are considered to cause cross-domain problems [47]. Inspired by
it, we conduct an analysis to investigate the impact of website
overlap on the cross-domain problem. Our results show that the
similarity between AW F 200 and AW F 100 is 0.556 while that
between AW F 500 and AW F 100 is decreasing similarity by
0.400. In addition, the result in the website overlap experiment
1 [Online]. Available: https://blog.torproject.org/new-release-tor-browser120/
2 [Online]. Available: https://blog.torproject.org/

Fig. 3.

Various backbone network and main languages in the world.

of Section V-B also suggests that the more identical websites in
the source and target domains, the better the performance of the
FSWF attacks.
Network locations: When utilizing a historically collected
dataset, it is essential to consider the location where the dataset
was collected. In [25], the authors found that traces collected in
different locations close to the backbone exhibit high similarity, while the similarity is significantly lower when comparing
traces from distant locations. When we analyze the factors, we
observed a counter-intuitive result that, the similarity between
AW F 200 and DF -95 is 0.249 with the same TBB version
6.X, while that between AW F 200 and DS-19 is 0.338 with
TBB versions 6.5 and 8.5a7. We consider the reason to be
related to network locations and it is the different network
conditions that cause packets to arrive in a different order and
thus the overall traffic patterns to change. Additionally, websites
in different regions often employ different languages, which can
lead to significant variations in traffic payload sizes as shown in
Fig. 3.
In conclusion, many factors could cause cross-domain problems which are common in the real world. Inspired by the
measure of the similarity between domains, we propose to select
some websites of the source domain that are similar to websites
of the target domain, and the characteristics of selected websites
are borrowed to calibrate the biased distribution of the target
data, which can be found in Section IV-C2.

IV. SYSTEM DESIGN
This section provides a detailed introduction to the proposed
DCWF attack. We first give an overview of the architecture.
And then describe how DCWF learns representative features
on the target domain, calibrates the distribution of features,

638

Fig. 4.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Schematic overview of the proposed DCWF. Note: GT is Ground Truth and the snowflake means freezing the weights of the neural network.

and mitigates the extra errors and noise caused by the feature
calibration.
A. Overview
The overview of DCWF is presented in Fig. 4. Our method
consists of domain-agnostic pre-training and domain-specific
distribution calibrating. During the domain-agnostic learning
process, a tailored extractor fθ is trained to learn the knowledge
on the source domain. In the domain-specific distribution calibrating process, we capture the information distribution with
channel weights to approximate the data distribution on the
target domain. Finally, we calibrate the distribution of features
based on similar classes from the source domain with adequate
traces.
B. Domain-Agnostic Pre-Training
In this process, we aim to not only train a powerful feature
extractor to obtain robust features but also promote the separability in the feature space which mitigates the inevitable errors
and noise caused by the distribution learning process in Section
IV-C. The subsequent subsections provide a detailed explanation
of the network structure and the role played by each component.
1) Squeeze and Excitation Block: To extract representative
features on a specific domain, it is important to learn the
distribution of data on the specific domain which is difficult.
Therefore, we use the information distribution of target data
which is obtained by the SE block and can be substituted to some
extent for the data distribution. The SE block models the interdependence between feature channels, and obtains the weights
of each feature channel [49]. With these weights, the extractor
selectively emphasises informative channels and suppresses less
useful ones. We first add SE blocks after each basic block and
find that the channel weights across different classes are nearly
identical in lower layers and at greater layers, the weight of
each channel becomes much more class-specific which is similar

in [49]. Therefore we consider channel weights of lower layers
to be external representations of the information distribution of
a particular domain. Then we keep the SE block after the second
layer of the feature extractor and remove other SE blocks. We
randomly select four websites from AW F 100, and the channel
weights of feature extractors trained in two domains DS-14 and
DS-19 are illustrated in Fig. 5. The SE block is implemented
by two operations.
Squeeze: To capture the global perceptual field of a feature
map and understand the interrelationship between channels, we
utilize global average pooling to encode the entire spatial feature
vector of a channel into a global feature representation. Suppose
we have a feature map X ∈ RW ×C where X = [x1 , x2 , . . ., xC ]
and C is the numbers of channels. Since the input data is 1dimensional, the length of the feature is W . A global feature Gc
can be calculated using the following equation:
1 
xc (i),
W i=1
W

Gc = sq(Xc ) =

(6)

where c is the c-th channel.
Excitation: To make use of the information aggregated in
the squeeze operation, the excitation function must capture the
nonlinear relationship between channels. We employ a bottleneck structure consisting of two fully connected layers to
control the channel weights. The first fully connected layer, with
parameters W1 , reduces the input dimension to 1/r, followed
by ReLU activation. Then, the second fully connected layer,
with parameters W2 , restores the activation vector to its original
dimension. Finally, a Sigmoid gating function σ is applied to
obtain normalized weights ranging between 0 and 1. The formula
for Excitation is as
S = ex(G, W ) = σ(g(G, W )) = σ(W2 ReLU(W1 , G)). (7)

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

639

Fig. 5. The channel weights of feature extractors trained separately in two domains DS-14 (a) and DS-19 (b). We randomly select four websites from AW F 100
to illustrate the channel weights.

The final output of the block is obtained by rescaling the feature
map X with the scalar S,
x̃c = Fscale (xc , sc ) = sc · xc ,

(8)

where X = [x̃1 , x̃2 , . . ., x̃C ] and Fscale (xc , sc ) refers to
channel-wise multiplication between the feature map xc and
the scalar sc . In this paper, we set r equal to 2.
2) Big Kernel Size and Bottleneck: We sort to convolutional
layers with big kernel sizes to solve the background noise while
previous WF attacks mainly use convolutional layers with a
kernel size of 8 or smaller. Traditional convolutional layers with
small kernel sizes focus more on the local details in which
the background noise leads to greater adverse effects while
convolutional layers with big kernel sizes capture more global
information of traffic traces [50]. Considering the efficiency,
we use depth-wise convolution layers with big kernel sizes in
bottleneck blocks as illustrated in Fig. 4. In fact, the time of
training our feature extractor is less than that of TF and WFBDC.
3) Circle Loss: Note that the feature calibration of the second
stage induces inevitable errors. In this case, our features extractor
must improve the separability of feature space to mitigate such
errors and we sort to Circle loss [51]. Loss functions like triplet
loss and softmax cross-entropy loss are designed to incorporate
both within-class similarity (sn ) and between-class similarity
(sp ) into similarity pairs and aim to minimize the difference
(sn − sp ) where we use cosine similarity as similarity measurement. However, this optimization approach can be inflexible as it
imposes an equal penalty strength on every individual similarity
score. In contrast, Circle loss dynamically adjusts its gradients
on sp and sn , and thus benefits from a flexible optimization
process. It is defined by
Lcircle = log
⎡
⎤
K
L 

⎣1 +
exp(γ(αnj (sjn − Δn ) − αpi (sip − Δp )))⎦ , (9)
j=1 i=1

in which αnj and αpi are non-negative weighting factors, γ is a
scale factor, Δn and Δp are the between-class and within-class
margins.
When a similarity score deviates far from its optimum (i.e.,
On for sjn and Op for sip ), it should be assigned a large weighting
factor. This ensures that these deviations receive a stronger
emphasis during the update process, allowing for more effective
updates with larger gradients. The authors define the αnj and
αpi as
 i
αp = [Op − sip ]+ ,
(10)
αnj = [sjn − On ]+ ,
in which [·]+ is the “cut-off at zero” operation to ensure αpi
and αnj are non-negative. Considering the case of binary classification, the decision boundary is achieved at αnj (sjn − Δn ) −
αpi (sip − Δp ) = 0. Setting Op = 1 + m, On = −m, Δp = 1 −
m,and Δn = m. Consequently, the decision boundary is reduced to
(sn − 0)2 + (sp − 1)2 = 2m2 .

(11)

The decision boundary is the arc of a circle. In this paper, we set
m = 0.25 and γ = 64.
C. Domain-Specific Distribution Calibrating
Here we propose our two-stage distribution calibration process. In the first stage, we fine-tune the channel weights to extract
more representative features on the target domain. Then, we
select a subset from the source domain to calibrate the feature
distribution of the target data based on the analyzed similarity
results. Because the dimension of the traffic feature is large and
the variables are not independent, it is difficult to directly test
which distribution the feature satisfies. Therefore, we assume
that the distribution of features follows the Gaussian distribution
(BN) due to the Batch Normalization in the feature extractor
where BN can produce feature maps with a stable and “more

640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

Algorithm 1: Domain-Specific Distribution Learning.
1: Input: source domainDS , target domain DT , feature
extractor θ, SE block θC , linear classifier θclf , number
of samples k, T iterations.
2: Output: output
3: a = 0
4: for each iteration t =, . . ., T do
5: xd ← a batch from DS with size m
1
∇LCE (fφ (θ, θclf ; xd ))
6: θC (t + 1) ← θC (t) − α m
7: end for
8: for each class c = 1, . . ., C do
9: xc ← {x|x ∈ DS , y = c}
10: uc ← |x1c | fθ (xc )
 c
(xi − µc )(xi − µc )T
11: Σc ← nc1−1 ni=1
12: end for
13: for each sample xs ∈ DS do
14: x˜s ← fθ (xs )
15: Ks ← k nearest base classes from (14)
16: DS ← Gaussian distribution from (16)
17: Fs ← sample k features from DS
18: end for
19: for each iteration t =, . . ., T do
20: xs ← a batch from Fs and DS with batch size n
21: θclf (t + 1) ← θclf (t) − α n1 ∇L(fφ (θ, θclf ; x˜s ))
22: end for

Gaussian” distribution [52]. Moreover, assuming a Gaussian
distribution for features is common in various fields due to its
practical effectiveness [53], [54], [55].
1) Stage 1 Domain Distribution Learning: The SE block is
trained to capture the information distribution of a domain. To
learn the information distribution of the target domain, we finetune the SE block of the feature extractor fθ with batch size 32
on the target domain. Suppose θC is the parameters of SE block,
θ is the parameters of the whole feature extractor, and (x, y) is a
trace from the target domain with its label. We select the linear
classifier with parameters θclf to adopt the stochastic gradient
descent algorithm for update at every iteration t as
1 
∇LCE (f (θ, θclf ; x), y), (12)
m i=1
m

θC (t + 1) = θC (t) − α

where α denote the learning rate and m is the batch size. LCE
is the cross-entropy loss function.
2) Stage 2 Feature Distribution Calibration: The biased distribution problem is that the number of samples in the target
domain is too small to accurately represent the distribution
of the whole target domain, resulting in the classifier learning
inaccurate distribution and overfitting. However, addressing this
problem is not trivial. Due to the presence of high-dimensional
feature vectors, utilizing standard Gaussian distribution random
sampling encounters the challenge known as the curse of dimensionality. Additionally, a few training data within the target
domain is insufficient to adequately represent the holistic feature
distribution. Therefore, we need distributions of source domain
features that are similar to training data to calibrate the biased

distribution of the target domain. We first compute centroid
vectors for each class within the source domain, followed by
Cosine Distance computation between these centroids and target
domain features. Subsequently, a top-k class subset which is
similar to the training data of the target domain is selected to
approximate its distribution according to the Cosine Similarity.
For instance, the covariance matrix of target features is derived
by averaging the covariance matrices of the chosen subset.
Consequently, features are sampled from the calibrated Gaussian
distribution and fed into a new classifier. The general pseudocode
is shown in Algorithm 1.
Specifically, with the definition of domain similarity in (4), a
subset of the source domain that is similar to the target domain
is selected to calibrate the distribution of the target domain.
Suppose we have source domain S = {pi }m
i=1 same as Section
III-B. We suppose there are only a few available labeled samples
for the target domain. The most common way to test FSWF
attacks is to build a task called N -way-K-shot task [56]. N is
the number of categories in the target domain and K-labeled
samples are provided for each class. The few available labeled
data are called support set and the attack is evaluated on another
query set.
Using a feature extractor, we obtain the features of samples
from both the source domain and the target domain. We assume
that the feature distribution follows a Gaussian distribution. The
mean of the feature vector belonging to class c is denoted as
μc . Since variables on each dimension are not independent, we
utilize the covariance matrix to represent the variance of feature
vectors. The covariance matrix Σc for the features belonging to
class c is calculated as
nc
1 
Σc =
(xi − µc ) (xi − µc )T ,
nc − 1 i=1

(13)

where xi is the i-th feature vector in class c.
Utilizing these statistics, we perform a transfer of these statistics from the source domain to the target domain. This transfer
leverages the more accurate estimation of statistics in the source
domain, which is based on sufficient data, and applies them to
the target domain. We use the Cosine Distance as the distance
between the feature of a sample x̃ from the support set and
features of the source domain, instead of [57] using the euclidean
distance. We define
Sd = {−cos < µc , x̃ >| i ∈ Cb } ,
SN = {i | −cos < µc , x̃ >∈ topk (Sd )} ,

(14)

where cos <, > is Cosine Distance, topk(·) is an operator to
select the top elements from the input distance set Sd . SN stores
the k nearest base classes with respect to a feature vector x̃.
Then, the covariance of the distribution is calibrated as

Σc

+ α, µ = x̃,
(15)
Σ = i∈SN
k
where α is a hyper-parameter that determines the degree of
dispersion of features sampled from the calibrated distribution.
Given a set of calibrated statistics Sy for a class on the target
domain, we generate a set of feature vectors with label y. This is

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

641

r TLFA [20] trains a feature extractor on a large auxiliary
data with Cross-entropy loss leveraging classical machine
learning models (e.g., SVM).
r MBL [18] introduces parameter factorization idea for facilitating meta-training with Cross-entropy loss.
B. Closed-World Evaluations on Disjointed Websites
Fig. 6. The illustrations of the distribution of data. The calibration and sampling would induce some noisy to the class boundary (Left). Our circle network
makes distributions more aggregated (Right).

achieved by sampling from the calibrated Gaussian distributions,
which allows us to create feature vectors that align with the
desired distribution of target data:
Dy = {(x, y)|x ∼ N (µ, Σ), ∀(µ, Σ) ∈ Sy }.

(16)

We set the total number of generated features per class as
512. The generated features, along with the original support set
features, for the target domain are combined to form the training
data for a classifier. The classifier is trained specifically for the
target domain by minimizing the cross-entropy loss over both
the features of its support set and the generated features Dy .

L=
−logP r(y|x; θclf ).
(17)
(x,y) S̃∪Dy,y∈Y T

The feature sampling methods inevitably induce errors and
noise. However, in conjunction with our tailored model, these
adverse effects are effectively attenuated which is illustrated in
Fig. 6.
V. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATIONS
A. Experimental Setting
In this section, we design a series of experiments that may
be encountered in real-world scenarios where different target
domains represent various cross-domain problems with different numbers of shots. We evaluate the performance of the
DCWF attack with the baseline attacks: TF [17], WFBDC [21],
TLFA [20], MBL [18]. We implement our DCWF based on
Pytorch 1.12. For TF we download their code and migrate
them to Pytorch 1.12 without any structural or hyperparameter
changes. For WFBDC, TLFA, and MBL, we implement them
according to the author’s description. All experiments are performed with an NVIDIA Geforce RTX 4090 GPU. The other
hyperparameters of DCWF can be found in our experiment code
at https://github.com/chenxiang3luo/DCWF/.
We compare our proposed DCWF with three baselines [17],
[18], [20] and the state-of-art WFBDC [21] model.
r TF [17] selects Triplet as the loss function using DF [4]
backbone as the feature extractor. For the classifier, the
K-Nearest Neighbors classifier is selected.
r WFBDC [21] computes the BDC of the output from the
feature extractor as the feature of a sample and uses Multisimilarity [58] as the loss function to train the feature
extractor. For the classifier, the Linear classifier is selected.

The websites that the attacker monitors and the websites used
to train the feature extractor may not be the same, which causes
the cross-domain problem. In this experiment, we evaluate attacks in the scenario where the cross-domain problem is caused
by disjointed websites. The two datasets are both collected
from the same period of time (2016) using the same version
of TBB (6.X) where the website categories do not overlap. For
the close-world setting, we use Accuracy [%], True positive rate
(TPR [%]), and False positive rate (FPR [1e-4]) to evaluate the
performance of WF attacks. For the open-world setting, due to
the base rate fallacy [59], we use the Area under the PrecisionRecall Curve (AUC) metric to evaluate the performance of WF
attacks. We repeat 5 times with different seeds and report the
results in the form of mean ± standard deviation compared with
other methods.
Experimental setting: We follow the same experimental setup
as [17]. The feature extractor is pre-trained on source domain AW F 775 with randomly sampled 25 examples for each
website. When testing classification performance. We select
AW F 100 as our target domain where we use the first 90 traces
for each website for a fair comparison to all attacks. We divide
the traces of each website into two groups, with the first group
consisting of 20 traces and the second group consisting of 70
traces. The traces in the first group are reserved for evaluating
the classification performance on N = 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20
traces, and the remaining 70 traces are utilized as testing data
to evaluate the performance of attacks. Please note that these
fundamental experimental settings will be consistently applied
in the subsequent experiments presented in this paper.
Results: Fig. 7 shows the performance of DCWF and other
attacks on disjointed websites. As we can see, WBDC is the
best baseline attack and DCWF achieves better performance
than other attacks. In the case of the 1-shot setting, DCWF
achieves 86.2% accuracy which is more 15% than the best
baseline WFBDC 71% accuracy. The performance of the attacks
improves as the training trace increases and DCWF achieves
97.9% in the 20-shot setting. An interesting result is that the
TLFA and MBL perform poorly with no more than 50% accuracy
in the 1-shot setting, and even in the 20-shot setting they only
achieve 85.4% and 77.8% respectively. The reason is related
to the fact that, in their works, they use softmax entropy-cross
loss and not fully exploit the data. Also, they pre-train the
feature extractor on a huge dataset that has 576×2500 traces,
and in our experimental setting, there are only 775×25 traces.
Therefore we do not evaluate the two attacks in the next several
experiments.
We also evaluate the performance of attacks when traces of
the same class are included between both source domain pretraining and target domain adapting. For example, if an attacker

642

Fig. 7.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

The performance of FSWF attacks under the cross-domain scenario caused by disjointed websites on AW F 100.

TABLE II
THE IMPACT OF INCLUDING DIFFERENT PORTIONS OF THE DATASETS DURING
TRAINING (ACCURACY)

circle loss to differentiate the given pair of inputs (similar or
dissimilar) without locally mapping to the particularly assigned
website’s label. Although the relationship between accuracy
and inclusion rate is not simply linear. This work focuses on
the cross-domain scenario where the inclusion rate is 0%, and
our method generally outperforms the comparisons under such
scenario.
C. Closed-World Evaluations on Time Gaps

selected propub3r6espa33w.onion as a monitored website which
is commonly selected by other attackers who use his feature extractor, he could collect the traffic traces of propub3r6espa33w.
onion and include them during the pre-training phase. It is
interesting to explore the performance of the attack in this case.
Therefore, we perform experimental evaluations to compare
the case of disjointed datasets with different percentages of
inclusion. The inclusion rates are ranged from 25% to 100%.
When the inclusion rate reaches 100%, there is no cross-domain
problem. The results of these experiments are shown in Table II.
We discover some contrary conclusions compared to [17]. To
DCWF and WFBDC, allowing inclusion between the source and
target domain does not improve attack performance. In fact, the
performance tends to degrade as the inclusion rate increases,
showing better results only at 100% inclusion. One possible
explanation for this observation is that both attacks employ linear
classifiers with cross-entropy loss functions. Consequently, due
to the inherent differences between the two domains, website
overlaps induce noise to the linear classifier, degrading the
performance of our method. TF adopts a KNN classifier that
relies on local neighborhood decision boundaries. It is more
sensitive to minority samples and benefits from website overlaps
between the source and target domains. Our method uses the

A strong attacker collecting the latest auxiliary data faces a
substantial time investment in gathering enough data to train
a feature extractor. This process generates a time gap between
the source domain and the target domain. In contrast, a weak
attacker relying on historically collected data as auxiliary data
naturally encounters a time gap between the two domains. As
a result, we evaluate the performance of WF (watermarking
and fingerprinting) attacks in scenarios where a time gap exists
between the source domain and the target domain, leading to
cross-domain challenges.
Experimental setting: We use the same extractor from the
first experiment trained with the AW F 775 dataset for feature
extraction. The data of the target domain were collected from
100 test traces per website 3 days, 10 days, 2 weeks, 4 weeks,
and 6 weeks after the end of the initial data collection for these
200 websites. The data of two domains were collected in 2016
and the same TBB 6.X. This setting closely resembles real-world
scenarios.
Results: Fig. 8 illustrates the performance of WF attacks on
target domains with different time gaps. Across all time gaps,
as the number of shots increases, the accuracy of all attacks
tends to improve. Furthermore, as the time gap lengthens, the
performance of attacks decreases, aligning with our intuition
that a longer time gap exacerbates the cross-domain problem.
This observation reinforces the findings from our analysis of
domain similarity. Notably, DCWF consistently maintains high
accuracy compared to other attacks across various n-shot settings
and time gaps. For instance, even in the 1-shot and 6-week time
gap scenario, DCWF achieves an accuracy of 72%, while the
best baseline only reaches 63% and achieves almost 95% with
20 shots. Therefore, we can conclude that DCWF is an effective

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

Fig. 8.

643

The performance of FSWF attacks under the cross-domain scenario caused by time gaps (a) 3 days, (b) 10 days, (c) 2 weeks, (d) 4 weeks, and (e) 6 weeks.

approach for mitigating cross-domain problems caused by time
gaps.
D. Closed-World Evaluations Under Complete Cross-Domain
Scenarios
A weak attacker prefers to use the traffic trace data available
on the network to train a feature extractor and collect a few
traffic traces of monitored websites in the subsets the attacker is
interested in. In this case, the complete cross-domain problem
is caused by factors such as time gap, browser versions, and
network locations. Therefore, in this experiment, we evaluate the
performance of WF attacks in the scenario where the traces of
the source domain and target domain were collected at different
times with different versions of TBB, time gap, etc, leading to
more challenging cross-domain problems.
Experimental setting: We still use the AW F 775 dataset for
feature extraction. To fully evaluate the performance of attacks
on cross-domain problems, we select DS-14, DS-19, DF -95
three datasets as the target domain. AW F 775 was collected in
2016 with TBB 6.5, while DS-14 was collected in 2014 with
TBB 3.5.1, DS-19 was collected in 2019 with TBB 8.5a7 and
DF -95 was collected in 2016 with TBB 6.X.
results: We find the following observations as show the results
of the experiments in Table III. First, with the shot increasing,
the accuracy of all attacks tends to increase. For instance, our
DCWF increases from 71% accuracy with 1-shot to 94% with
20 shots on DS-19. Second, A similar trend was observed in
the accuracy of attacks on different target domains and our

analysis of domain-similarity that DF -95 < DS-14 < DS-19.
Third, all attacks perform worse on DF -95 compared to other
target domains. The reason may be related to network locations
which we discussed in Section 3.B. Finally, even in such a
difficult setting, our DCWF remains fairly effective and achieves
more than 70% with 1-shot learning on DS-14 and DS-19. On
DF -95, it increases up to 92% with 20-shot learning.
E. Open-World Evaluations Under Complete Cross-Domain
Scenarios
In the previous experiments, we examined the effectiveness of
WF attacks in the closed-world scenario. However, this scenario
is not representative of real-world conditions, as it assumes that
users will only interact with websites within the monitored set.
Therefore, we conduct further experiments to evaluate the performance of WF attacks in a more realistic open-world setting. In
the open-world scenario, the classifier is required to differentiate
between monitored sites and unmonitored sites.
Experimental setting: We evaluate attacks on the open-world
setting under the AWF model in which the unmonitored traces are
not in the pre-training phase. We use a threshold based on crossentropy loss as a classification criterion which is considered as a
binary classification problem. To evaluate We use the AW F 100,
DS-14, DS-19 and DF -95 for the monitored websites respectively and AW F 9k for the unmonitored websites. We use AUC
as our metric. Due to TF is not available in 1-shot setting under
the open-world scenario, here we only show experiments on
shots of [5,10,15,20].

644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE III
THE PERFORMANCE OF FSWF ATTACKS ON DIFFERENT TARGET DOMAINS

Fig. 9.

The performance of FSWF attacks under the open-world scenario with different target domains (a) AW F 100, (b) DS-14, and (c) DS-19, (d) DF -95.

Results: Fig. 9 shows the experimental results on different
target domains. With the shot increasing, the accuracy of all
attacks tends to increase on different target domains which
means that, the more traces you provide, the more confidence
the model has. For example, with 5 shots, DCWF reaches almost
0.90 AUC and 0.946 AUC with 20-shot on DF -95. However,
the models’ performance degrades with 20-shot on certain target

domains like AW F 100 and DS-14. We attribute this to the
presence of some noise traces under the target domain.
Two interesting observations are found. First, the open-world
results of TF DS-14 are better than those on AW F 100. The authors believed that the monitored sites in the DS-14, originating
from a list of websites blocked in China, the U.K., and Saudi
Arabia, exhibit unique content, making them more susceptible

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

645

Fig. 10. The performance of FSWF attacks under the larger open-world scenario with different target domains (a) AW F 100, (b) DS-14, (c) DS-19,
and (d) DF -95.
TABLE IV
THE PERFORMANCE OF THE FSWF ATTACKS AGAINST WTFPAD DEFENSE (ACCURACY).

TABLE V
THE PERFORMANCE OF THE FSWF ATTACKS AGAINST FRONT DEFENSE (ACCURACY).

TABLE VI
ABLATION EXPERIMENTS OF OUR METHOD.

to that traces of DS-19 were collected over a shorter period of
time with powerful and stable bandwidth in 2019 leading to the
features of these traces being more aggregated in feature space.
The traces of other target domains were collected in 2016 or
before which have large variations in feature space.
F. Larger Open-World Evaluations Under Complete
Cross-Domain Scenario

to fingerprinting, while the unmonitored websites are in the
Alexa Top list, which accounts for the inconsistency between
the closed-world and open-world scenarios [17]. However, the
results of DCWF are consistent between the closed-world and
open-world conditions. We believe this is because our model
improves the separability of feature space making it more robust
on different target domains. Second, the open-world results on
DS-19 are better than those on AW F 100. The reason is related

In the real world, it’s estimated that over 1.7 billion websites
exist.3 It is interesting to investigate the performance of WF
attacks against different open-world sizes.
Experimental setting: Obtaining a dataset of all unmonitored
websites is not feasible. The largest available unmonitored set, to
the best of our knowledge, is the AW F 400K dataset consisting
of 400,000 websites collected by [6]. Therefore, we utilize
a set of unmonitored classification datasets of various sizes,
including AW F 9K, AW F 50K, AW F 100K, AW F 200K,
and AW F 400K, and we still use the AW F 100, DS-14, DS-19
and DF -95 for the monitored websites respectively to evaluate
the performance of WF attacks in a larger open-world scenario.
We adopt the evaluation approach used by TF where they assess
the attacks with 10-shot learning on datasets of increasing size.
3 https://websitesetup.org/news/how-many-websites-are-there/

646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

TABLE VII
THE PERFORMANCE OF THE DIFFERENT LOSS FUNCTIONS (ACCURACY).

Results: Fig. 10 shows the performance of the FSWF attacks
with respect to the increased size of the unmonitored set. Surprisingly, we observed that the increase in unmonitored websites
had minimal impact on the model’s AUC scores for the attacks.
Additionally, in the Open-world setting, we found that TF outperformed WFBDC, which contradicts previous experimental
results. We hypothesize that TF’s superior performance can
be attributed to their use of a Triplet loss function and semihard negative mining strategy, which leads to more aggregated
features in the extracted feature space compared to WFBDC.
However, regardless of the number of unmonitored websites or
the target domain, the AUC scores of DCWF remain consistently
the best. For instance, WFBDC achieved a 96 AUC score while
TF reached 88 on the AW F 100 dataset.
G. Evaluations on WF Defenses
As research on WF attacks continues, various countermeasures, known as WF defenses, are proposed by researchers.
Therefore, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of WF attacks against two prominent WF defense mechanisms. The first
defense mechanism we examine is WTF-PAD [39], which stands
as a primary candidate for deployment in Tor. The second one
is FRONT [45], a zero-delay lightweight defense that has been
shown to be more effective than WF-PAD.
Experimental setting: Due to the AW F dataset containing
only packet direction, we simulate defended traces using WTFPAD and FRONT on the DS-14 and DS-19 datasets. Specifically, we pre-train the feature extractor on DS-14 and evaluate
on DS-19 to evaluate the performance of the DCWF attack with
different data distributions.
Results: Tables IV and V show the performance of the WF
attacks against the WTF-PAD defense and FRONT defense.
The results show that the accuracy of the attacks in both cases
significantly decrease compared to the non-defended dataset.
As we see, FRONT has a stronger resistance effect to attacks
than WTF-PAD. Nevertheless, compared to the best baseline
WFBDC which reaches 46% accuracy with 10 shots and 56%
accuracy with 20 shots, our DCWF reaches almost 60% accuracy
with 10 shots and 67% accuracy with 20 shots on FRONT
defense.
H. Ablation Study
We conduct an ablation study to analyze the effectiveness
of different components in DCWF. Since our DCWF adapts
two modules including a domain-agnostic feature extractor
and a domain-specific distribution calibrator, it is interesting

to evaluate the performance of the distribution calibrator. The
performance of DCWF without the distribution calibrator is
denoted as w/o all and the performance of DCWF without stage
2 in the distribution calibrator is denoted as w/o calibration
Experimental setting: The feature extractor is pre-trained on
the source domain AW F 775. For simplicty, we select AW F 100
as our target domain.
Results: Corresponding results are shown in Table VI. Comparing DCWF without all and DCWF without calibration, the
performance of the latter is better than the former, which proves
that recognition of information distribution makes feature extractor extract more representative features. DCWF achieves
2.7% TPR more than the one without calibration in the 1-shot
setting, meanwhile, DCWF achieves 0.2% TPR more than that
in the 20-shot setting. As the number of samples increases, the
performance gap between each variant decreases. This demonstrates that when the sample size is small, like one sample, the
classifier is more likely to overfit and our correction process
is effective. When the sample size gradually increases and the
distribution becomes unbiased, our correction process produces
only a small improvement. Each component of our method
is important and contributes to the better performance of our
method.
Moreover, in the pre-training stage, we adopt circle loss [51]
as our loss function. To show that circle loss can outperform other
loss functions, we evaluate the performance of other losses e.g.,
triplet loss [17] and multi-similarity loss with BDC [21] with our
feature extractor architecture. Specifically, we directly replace
the model architecture of [17], [21] in the pre-training stage,
and get trained models with different losses. Then we put these
models into our two-stage Distribution Calibration Process and
evaluate their performance. The results are shown in Table VII.
We can find that the performance of circle loss outperforms other
loss functions since it is selected to increase the separability
of feature space, which can alleviate the noise caused by the
calibration process, while other loss functions cannot handle
such a problem.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we comprehensively analyze the cross-domain
problem and biased distribution problem in exiting FSWF attacks. We find that the two problems are common in the real
world in the form of the difference between the network conditions of the source domain and target domain and limited
target data. We further propose the DCWF attack leveraging
our tailored circle network and two-stage distribution calibration process, which mitigates the cross-domain problem and

LUO et al.: FEW-SHOT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING WITH DISTRIBUTION CALIBRATION

addresses the bias of feature distribution. We evaluate the DCWF
attack under such challenging cross-domain scenarios with different levels of biased distribution problems. The results show
that our DCWF attack effectively tackles the two problems. In
terms of the limitation of this work, we do not have control
over every variable due to the limitations of public datasets.
To evaluate the effects of four factors, we would change one
factor while keeping the others constant. Using public datasets,
we can control the website overlap and time gap. However, we
cannot independently assess TBB version&setting and network
locations. Also, we adopt an assumption that users browse
websites sequentially using Tor and utilize only a single tab
at a time, which is rare in the real world. Future works will
collect data where only one-factor changes and the remaining
stays the same and consider the multiple-tab scenario and other
human-related behavior. We also plan to leverage other effective
techniques like domain adaptation and GANs to further solve the
cross-domain problem.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Dingledine et al., “Tor: The second-generation onion router,” in Proc.
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2004, pp. 303–320.
[2] A. Hintz, “Fingerprinting websites using traffic analysis,” in Proc. Int.
Workshop Privacy Enhancing Technol., Springer, 2002, pp. 171–178.
[3] K. Abe and S. Goto, “Fingerprinting attack on tor anonymity using deep
learning,” in Proc. Asia-Pacific Adv. Netw., vol. 42, pp. 15–20, 2016.
[4] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in Proc.
ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[5] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data-efficient
website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” Proc. Privacy
Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, 2019.
[6] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. Van Goethem, and W. Joosen,
“Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc. 25th
Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018.
[7] M. S. Rahman, P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, K. G. Gangadhara, and M. Wright,
“Tik-Tok: The utility of packet timing in website fingerprinting attacks,”
Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technol., vol. 2020, no. 3, pp. 5–24, 2020.
[8] Y. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “snWF: Website fingerprinting
attack by ensembling the snapshot of deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 1214–1226, 2022.
[9] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc.
Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016.
[10] X. Cai, X. C. Zhang, B. Joshi, and R. Johnson, “Touching from a distance:
Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., 2012, pp. 605–616.
[11] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, ”k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website
fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2016,
pp. 1187–1203.
[12] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on tor,” in
Proc. 12th ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2013, pp. 201–212.
[13] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. 10th Annu.
ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2011, pp. 103–114.
[14] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective
attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. 23rd
USENIX Secur. Symp., 2014, pp. 143–157.
[15] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial
naïve-bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Secur.,
2009, pp. 31–42.
[16] M. Liberatore and B. N. Levine, “Inferring the source of encrypted HTTP
connections,” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2006,
pp. 255–263.
[17] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with n-shot
learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2019,
pp. 1131–1148.

647

[18] M. Chen, Y. Wang, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting
attack with meta-bias learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 130, 2022,
Art. no. 108739.
[19] M. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Qin, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting attack with data augmentation,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021,
pp. 1–13, 2021.
[20] M. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Xu, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting
attack,” Comput. Netw., vol. 198, 2021, Art. no. 108298.
[21] H. Zou, J. Su, Z. Wei, S. Chen, and B. Zhao, “An efficient cross-domain
few-shot website fingerprinting attack with brownian distance covariance,”
Comput. Netw., vol. 219, 2022, Art. no. 109461.
[22] C. Wang, J. Dani, X. Li, X. Jia, and B. Wang, “Adaptive fingerprinting:
Website fingerprinting over few encrypted traffic,” in Proc. 11th ACM
Conf. Data Appl. Secur. Privacy, 2021, pp. 149–160.
[23] N. Schmucker, “Web tracking,” in SNET2 Seminar Paper-Summer Term,
vol. 2011. Princeton, NJ, USA: Citeseer, 2011.
[24] D. McCoy, K. Bauer, D. Grunwald, T. Kohno, and D. Sicker, “Shining light in dark places: Understanding the tor network,” in Proc.
Privacy Enhancing Technol.: 8th Int. Symp., Leuven, Belgium, 2008,
pp. 63–76.
[25] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Diaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A critical
evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014, pp. 263–274.
[26] C.-M. Chang, H.-C. Hsiao, T. Lynar, and T. Mori, “Know your victim:
Tor browser setting identification via network traffic analysis,” in Proc.
Companion Web Conf., 2022, pp. 201–204.
[27] G. Cherubin, R. Jansen, and C. Troncoso, “Online website fingerprinting:
Evaluating website fingerprinting attacks on tor in the real world,” in Proc.
31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 753–770.
[28] A. Bahramali, A. Bozorgi, and A. Houmansadr, “Realistic website fingerprinting by augmenting network traces,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 1035–1049.
[29] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2020.
[30] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look once:
Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 779–788.
[31] Y. Taigman, M. Yang, M. Ranzato, and L. Wolf, “Deepface: Closing the
gap to human-level performance in face verification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2014, pp. 1701–1708.
[32] Y. Ganin et al., “Domain-adversarial training of neural networks,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 17, no. 59, pp. 1–35, 2016.
[33] J. Howard and S. Ruder, “Universal language model fine-tuning for text
classification,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
[34] J. Oh, S. Kim, N. Ho, J.-H. Kim, H. Song, and S.-Y. Yun, “Refine: Rerandomization before fine-tuning for cross-domain few-shot learning,” in
Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2022, pp. 4359–4363.
[35] Y. Fu, Y. Fu, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Meta-fdmixup: Cross-domain few-shot
learning guided by labeled target data,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, 2021, pp. 5326–5334.
[36] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018.
[37] Q. Zhang, Y. Jiang, and Z. Wen, “Tacdfsl: Task adaptive cross domain
few-shot learning,” Symmetry, vol. 14, no. 6, 2022, Art. no. 1097.
[38] S. Deng, D. Liao, X. Gao, J. Zhao, and K. Ye, “Improving few-shot image
classification with self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud
Comput., Springer, 2022, pp. 54–68.
[39] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Diaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an
efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. 21st Eur. Symp. Res.
Comput. Secur., Heraklion, Greece, Springer, 2016, pp. 27–46.
[40] S. E. Oh, S. Sunkam, and N. Hopper, “p1-FP: Extraction, classification,
and prediction of website fingerprints with deep learning,” Proc. Privacy
Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, no. 3, pp. 191–209, 2019.
[41] A. Shusterman et al., “Website fingerprinting through the cache occupancy
channel and its real world practicality,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2042–2060, Sep./Oct. 2021.
[42] B. Gulmezoglu, “XAI-based microarchitectural side-channel analysis for
website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 4039–4051, Nov./Dec. 2022.
[43] Q. Yin et al., “An automated multi-tab website fingerprinting attack,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 3656–3670,
Nov./Dec. 2022.

648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 22, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2025

[44] Y. Xu, T. Wang, Q. Li, Q. Gong, Y. Chen, and Y. Jiang, “A multi-tab
website fingerprinting attack,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl.
Conf., 2018, pp. 327–341.
[45] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website
fingerprinting,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 717–734.
[46] Y. Cui, Y. Song, C. Sun, A. Howard, and S. Belongie, “Large scale finegrained categorization and domain-specific transfer learning,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 4109–4118.
[47] J. Oh, S. Kim, N. Ho, J.-H. Kim, H. Song, and S.-Y. Yun, “Understanding
cross-domain few-shot learning based on domain similarity and few-shot
difficulty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 2622–2636.
[48] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,”
2013, arXiv:1312.4400.
[49] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[50] X. Ding, X. Zhang, J. Han, and G. Ding, “Scaling up your kernels to
31x31: Revisiting large kernel design in CNNs,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 11963–11975.
[51] Y. Sun et al., “Circle loss: A unified perspective of pair similarity optimization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020,
pp. 6398–6407.
[52] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network
training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[53] R. Tao, H. Zhang, Y. Zheng, and M. Savvides, “Powering finetuning in fewshot learning: Domain-agnostic bias reduction with selected sampling,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 8467–8475.
[54] V. Ganatra, “Logarithm-transform aided gaussian sampling for few-shot
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 247–252.
[55] M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter,
“GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash
equilibrium,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6629–6640.
[56] Y. Song, T. Wang, P. Cai, S. K. Mondal, and J. P. Sahoo, “A comprehensive survey of few-shot learning: Evolution, applications, challenges, and
opportunities,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 13s, pp. 1–40, 2023.
[57] S. Yang, L. Liu, and M. Xu, “Free lunch for few-shot learning: Distribution
calibration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
[58] X. Wang, X. Han, W. Huang, D. Dong, and M. R. Scott, “Multi-similarity
loss with general pair weighting for deep metric learning,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 5022–5030.
[59] T. Wang, “High precision open-world website fingerprinting,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2020, pp. 152–167.

Chenxiang Luo is currently working toward the
bachelor of engineering degree with the School of
Cyber Science And Engineering, Sichuan University.
He is expected to graduate in June 2024. His research
interests include privacy protection and web security.

Wenyi Tang received the PhD degree from the School
of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China, in 2021. He is currently an assistant
professor with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His research interests are
both theoretical and experimental, including weakly
supervised learning, data privacy and security.

Qixu Wang received the PhD degree in computer
science and technology from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
China, in 2017. He is currently an associate professor with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu. He was also
a postdoctoral researcher fellow with the School of
Information and Software Engineering, University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China, in
2020. His current research interests include cloud
computing security, trusted computing, and machine
learning and its applications. He was a technical program committee member
for the IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China and
the EAI International Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking,
Applications and Worksharing.

Danyang Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the BS
degree in computer science from the University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu, China, in 2016, and the PhD degree in
computer science from the Georgia State University,
Atlanta, GA, USA, in 2021. He is currently an associate professor with Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China. His research interests include
network function virtualization, resilient service deployment, in-network computing, and combinational
optimization. He was the TPC member of ICCC
2021-2023 and ICTC 2023.