10604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Flow Microelement-Driven Traffic Relationship
Analysis: Robust Detection of Malicious
Encrypted Traffic
Hao Fu , Degang Sun , Jinxia Wei, Wei Wan , and Chun Long

Abstract—Encryption technologies randomize network communication to protect user privacy. However, attackers exploit
encrypted traffic to conceal malicious activities. The existing
detection methods rely primarily on traffic content or interactive
patterns. Nevertheless, static methods can be easily obfuscated
by advanced attacks. Since the set of potential attacks is open
and infinite, models regularly lose effectiveness against novel
attacks. Robust encrypted malicious traffic detection remains
a valuable research area. In this paper, we propose BSTSNet, a robust unsupervised encrypted malicious traffic detection
model based entirely on traffic relations. The key motivations
are to construct a relation-based traffic contextual representation
and to establish dynamic baselines for anomaly detection. To
represent local relations within flows, we innovatively introduce
the concept of traffic microelements, which capture fine-grained
interaction pattern relations. To integrate the global relationships
between flows, we construct a traffic microelement space based
on the Siamese neural network. Three optimization functions are
proposed to optimize the intraservice, interservice and internode
relations. For robust detection, we introduce a reputationenhanced dynamic encrypted traffic detection algorithm that
constructs dynamic baselines and continuously detects novel
anomalies. We evaluate BSTS-Net through extensive experiments
on three datasets and compare it with seven SOTA methods.
Our results demonstrate its superiority, with an F1 score of
more than 99.63% across all the datasets in multiclassification
scenarios. Additionally, we simulate three adversarial scenarios
for robustness analysis. Although the baseline methods experience
an F1 score degradation of 32.21%, BSTS-Net achieves high
performance, with only 1% degradation.
Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, traffic behaviour,
Siamese neural network, spatial–temporal graph.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the increasing awareness of privacy protection
and security, anonymous communication technologies
such as secure sockets, secure shell protocols, virtual private
networks (VPNs), and Tor have been widely adopted. This
trend has been followed by a significant increase in encrypted

W

Received 7 April 2025; revised 23 August 2025; accepted 16 September
2025. Date of publication 24 September 2025; date of current version
9 October 2025. This work was supported in part by the Youth Innovation
Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) under Grant
2022170 and in part by the Special Project for Cybersecurity and Informatization of CAS under Grant CAS-WX2022GC-04. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Prof. Mika Ylianttila. (Corresponding author: Chun Long.)
The authors are with the Computer Network Information Center, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China (e-mail:
anquanip@cnic.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3613971

cyberattacks. Attackers exploit encrypted malicious traffic as
efficient carriers, posing serious security threats with minimal
costs [1]. Since cyberattacks are executed along with multistage network traffic, mainstream defences focus on detecting
and mitigating the actual impact through traffic analysis [2].
Currently, industries widely deploy intrusion detection systems
(IDSs) for malicious traffic detection. These systems (such as
Suricata [3] and Snort [4]) efficiently detect encrypted traffic
on the basis of threat intelligence and predefined rules [5].
However, with the emergence of novel attacks, rigid detection
methods of IDSs are becoming increasingly ineffective in
dealing with encrypted and obfuscated malicious traffic.
In recent years, various efforts targeting encrypted traffic
detection using artificial intelligence have been proposed [6].
Most of the related research has focused on traffic content to
extract complex potential attack features, and some methods
have achieved accuracies exceeding 99% [7]. Some research
has avoided encrypted traffic content analyses and opted for
traffic interactive patterns to detect malicious communication behaviour. To leverage network communication features
and enhance the representation of nodes in non-Euclidean
spaces, models such as graph neural networks [8] (GNNs) and
knowledge graphs [9] (KGs) integrate entities and interflow
correlations. However, these static methods learn the distributional representation of malicious traffic from labelled datasets
and lack robustness for novel malicious traffic. Specifically,
real-life scenarios still face the following challenges:
• High-precision complex models rely on millions of
high-quality labelled data for reliability, while the persistence and stealthiness of attacks complicate the labelling
process [7].
• While complex model structures enhance generalization
by fitting labelled datasets, the set of potential attacks is
open and infinite. Detection models are updated slower
than novel attacks are generated [10].
• Attackers can easily circumvent static detection methods by modifying encryption algorithms, communications
protocols, etc. [11]
Anomaly-based unsupervised detection methods alleviate
the aforementioned challenges to a certain extent [12]. These
methods construct baselines of normal traffic and subsequently
detect deviations from these baselines. Since encryption protocols generate different encrypted content for the same raw
traffic content, it is impossible to find a completely closed
set of benign traffic. Currently, baselines are constructed on
the basis of normal traffic content or interactive behaviour,

1556-6021 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

10605

and malicious traffic is detected by comparing reconstruction
errors (e.g., Autoencoder [13]). These methods necessitate
meticulous attention to the fitting of traffic content to construct distinct categorical boundaries. Since the randomness of
encryption eliminates the information entropy of the content,
models tend to generate false positives because of overfitting.
Even though some studies integrate more universal features,
such as temporal and graph structures of traffic, models
trained on encrypted content are susceptible to evasion. Current anomaly-based malicious traffic detection methods fail
to meet the robustness requirements necessary for reliable
cybersecurity applications.
To achieve robust detection, we propose a model based
on traffic microelements to extract features of relationships
between similar flows. The microelement is the description
of the intrinsic communication metadata pattern of given
services, which remains relatively stable across multiple
encrypted traffic detection instances. The model focuses on
the traffic relations with better generalization rather than
the encrypted content. To enhance robustness, the traffic
microelements extract flow metadata as features that are less
affected by encryption-related interference. While some works
also propose metadata-based features, their models essentially
perform static feature classification and fail to analyse correlations [14], making it difficult to dynamically detect novel
attacks. Specifically, we introduce a malicious traffic detection
model named BSTS-Net, which is able to exploit the finegrained relations of traffic. By observing the mechanisms of
service traffic generation, we identify their special modular
fragmentation structure. On this basis, observation, a greedy
strategy is employed to extract optimal traffic microelements.
Then, the traffic microelements are used to construct a
traffic microelement space, which maps traffic to a suitable
relational distance space. The subspace reflects high-order
traffic flow behaviours. We construct datasets based on traffic
microelements, including positive and negative samples, which
are used to train an optimized Siamese neural network [15]. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first study in which the
Siamese neural network is applied to unsupervised malicious
traffic detection. To represent the exact relationships between
flows, we propose three loss functions that are optimized
for the intraservice, interflow, and internode flow distances.
The traffic microelement space forms a similarity relationship
between flows.
Finally, we construct baselines based on flows with similar
relationships and obtain these baseline reputation scores. This
article proposes a method for dynamic baseline construction
that is based on the reputation score. We pass and update the
reputation score through the temporal communication structure. Baselines with lower reputation scores will be dropped.
Our approach enables dynamic, continuous and robust malicious encrypted traffic detection.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are summarized
as follows:

• We introduce the traffic microelement space, which
is implemented by an optimized Siamese neural
network. By incorporating traffic microelements, our
method achieves efficient similarity embedding without
the need for labels. We propose three targeted loss functions to improve the model performance.
• We propose a method to construct a fine-grained traffic
baseline on the basis of similarity. On the basis of
the baseline, we propose a dynamic reputation-enhanced
malicious traffic detection model. The model analyses
traffic in real time and detects unknown attacks
• We conduct experiments on three large-scale datasets,
namely, CIC-IDS2017, CIC-IDS2018, and UNSWNB15,
and the results demonstrate that our method outperforms
the current state-of-the-art approaches. A perturbation
experiment is used to verify the ability to detect adversarial attacks. Our model is complete and open source.1

• By analysing traffic relations, we propose a novel
method for traffic microelement extraction. Intraflow
and interflow relations are combined to extract optimal
traffic microelements. The experiments show that the
extracted traffic microelements are robust for adversarial
traffic.

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Content-Based Detection
Attackers hide attack intent using unique encryption algorithms, which makes traffic payloads differ. Researchers have
analysed differences in traffic content distribution by building
deep learning models. Wang et al. [16] first utilized CNN
networks to detect the grayscale images converted from raw
bidirectional traffic, which revealed the difference in traffic
distribution through visualization. To improve the semantic
understanding of encrypted traffic, Hwang et al. [17] proposed
a novel embedding mechanism and leveraged LSTM for
temporal correlation in packet headers. Recent studies have
increased the model parameters for complex flow contents. Lin
et al. [18] proposed a contextualized datagram representation
with transformers pretrained from large-scale unlabelled data,
which was applied to different encrypted traffic scenarios.
Zhou et al. [19] proposed TrafficFormer, a general pretrained
large model for generalization across diverse traffic analysis
tasks, which achieved the best performance on six classification tasks. For robust traffic feature representation, Fu
et al. [20] introduced frequency-domain analysis into the task
of malicious traffic detection. Barradas et al. [21] proposed
an unsupervised feature compression mechanism based on
quantization and truncation, which seamlessly integrates a
downstream machine learning model. Holland et al. [22]
combined a unified binary packet representation, enabling endto-end automation from raw network traffic to high-accuracy
classification models. For efficient detection, Zhou et al. [23]
proposed real-time traffic classification, which is implemented
on a programmable switch, enabling high-speed performance.
Zhao et al. [24] proposed a unified detection framework
for attack traffic that supports fine-grained classification and
incremental updates. In summary, content-based detection can
be improved by complex modelling, while static methods are
costly and unreliable for novel encrypted traffic.
B. Interaction-Based Detection
Owing to the low entropy of malicious encrypted traffic
content and the difficulty of representation generalization,
1 https://github.com/gswsfh/BSTS-Net.git

10606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE I
C OMPARISON W ITH R ELATED W ORKS

researchers have aimed to detect attacks in terms of flow
interactions. Gu et al. [25] discovered temporal similarities
in communication within the same botnet and employed
statistical algorithms to detect malicious traffic from botnets.
To improve detection, researchers have used fine-grained
features to represent interaction patterns. Shen et al. [26]
proposed a detection method using packet length from twoway client–server interactions to train a machine learning
classifier. Fu et al. [27] detected tunnelled attack traffic
by analysing packet length patterns. Recent studies have
constructed communication graphs for topological feature representation. Veličković et al. [28] introduced graph attention
networks (GATs), which enhance node features using message
passing methods. Pareja et al. [29] proposed a model that
dynamically adjusts graph convolutional neural networks to
capture the dynamics of graph sequence data. To incorporate
temporal features, Duan et al. [30] presented sequences of
spatiotemporal graphs and analysed their evolutionary relationships. To better integrate various graph interactions, Li
et al. [31] transformed user features and structural information
into heterogeneous graphs on the basis of relationship weights.
Fu et al. [33] constructed lightweight flow interaction graphs
to capture multiflow collaboration patterns in fully encrypted
environments. Although interaction-based approaches have
improved detection, graph models are sensitive to perturbed
network environments. Consequently, [32] optimized the graph
structure for noise, but the models still lack robustness to
address novel malicious traffic interactions.
Graph-based methods struggle with dynamic environments
because of poor generalization, adversarial fragility, and high
computational cost. GNNs require global graph traversal,
causing high latency in incremental updates. Their memory
overhead scales linearly with graph size, limiting scalability.
Attackers can manipulate topology via malicious nodes or
edges, distorting neighbourhood relationships and misleading
predictions. These issues hinder real-time, large-scale, robust
deployment in evolving network settings.
C. Anomaly-Based Detection
To address the problem of weak robustness of malicious
traffic detection models trained on limited malicious type

datasets, some studies have used anomaly-based detection
methods. These methods use self-supervised or unsupervised
approaches to construct normal traffic baselines and detect
deviation anomalies. Xie et al. [34] proposed Rosetta to
accurately construct a baseline for TLS-encrypted traffic,
enhancing classification performance across various network
environments. Kitsune [35] introduced an autoencoder to learn
from normal traffic and detect abnormal network attacks for
various network channel patterns. The existing anomaly-based
detection methods rely on traffic content or interactions for
baseline construction, which establish classification boundaries by analysing the closure of traffic behaviour. However,
evolving networks lead to high false-positive rates, which
is particularly common in large-scale networks. Nakip and
Gelenbe [36] proposed an online learning detection method
without human involvement to automatically adapt models to
novel malicious traffic. However, long-term baselines produce
biases in classification boundaries, resulting in unreliable
results. Moreover, detection models exhibit significant hysteresis in response to novel malicious traffic.
We improve anomaly-based detectors by exploiting flow
relationships and computing local baselines on the fly, eliminating long-term bias. Compared with existing anomaly-based
methods, the present method demonstrates superior robustness.
Table I summarizes the relevant works.
III. M OTIVATION
Advances in traffic encryption have resulted in increasingly unreliable content-based analysis methods since traffic is
encrypted into entirely unrelated random payloads at different
levels of access. As highlighted by Papadogiannaki and Ioannidis [37] in their survey, traditional malware traffic detection
methods that rely on payload-based features have become
significantly less effective because of the widespread adoption
of encryption technologies such as TLS 1.3 and encrypted
server name indication. To investigate the information content
of encrypted traffic payloads, we design a dedicated experiment aimed at assessing whether communication patterns
generate distinguishable and meaningful payload-level features
despite encryption. Specifically, we establish a proxy server
using Nginx to access static resources and utilize Scapy to

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

10607

Fig. 1. Packet information entropy and the difference between and maximum
randomness.

Fig. 3. Packet length and time series statistical analysis.

Fig. 2. Traffic componentized communication sequence diagram.

capture the encrypted packets. Fig. 1 shows the information
entropy and Pearson coefficient of the encrypted packet during
1000 repeated accesses. The experimental results demonstrate
several key characteristics of the encrypted packets:
• They exhibit a high level of information entropy, with
values exceeding 5.7. The difference from the maximum
random information entropy is less than 0.27.
• The absolute value of the Pearson coefficient between
encrypted packets that originate from the same data
remains within 0.25, indicating nearly uncorrelated
relations.
• Overall, the entropies of the encrypted packets appear
to be highly random and exhibit less significant
differentiation.
Although the traffic payload is entirely indivisible, the traffic interactions exhibit a modular pattern [38], [39], [40],
revealing the behaviour of traffic relations. As illustrated in
Fig. 2, users access a video service through multiple requests.
Initially, users visit a website and authenticate their identify
through requests and then access the images and video data
through staged media requests. Multiple accesses follow a similar interactive mode, and segmented communication reveals
the identities.
For further research, we analyse the access patterns during
the communication process in the same encrypted traffic analysis experiments. Fig. 3 illustrates the sequence of
packet lengths and time intervals during the 1000 accesses.
Fig. 3 (a) and (b) illustrate the distribution of the packet lengths
and sequential lengths, respectively. Fig. 3 (c) and (d) illustrate
the distribution of the time intervals and sequential time intervals, respectively. The results indicate that the packet lengths
and intervals of the same service are confined within finite sets
and exhibit stable and consistent sequential characteristics.
Combining the results of the theoretical analysis and experimental verification, we obtain the following conclusions:

• Traffic data that were once homogeneous are now
segmented because of the finer-grained divisions [41].
These metadata leads to more traffic information. Similar
services utilizing common modules generate comparable fragments [42]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the same
video services produce analogous traffic segments when
accessed by different users, and different video services
also produce partly analogous traffic segments. Although
the content of the encrypted traffic has become completely
indistinguishable, its traffic metadata information has a
large degree of similarity. Although there are variations
in packets due to the content distinction, common frames
and static resources result in common patterns.
• The change in design pattern introduces temporal features
[43]. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the authenticated flows
precede the resource flows. Flows from the same service exhibit consistent access temporal patterns. Different
packets from flows also possess temporal features (e.g.,
heartbeat packets, etc.). The temporal features are crucial
for detecting malicious traffic. On the one hand, traffic
generated by scripts and tools exhibits strong periodicity.
In contrast, attackers use high-frequency attack flows
to improve intrusion efficiency (e.g., probe scanning)
or directly cause damage (e.g., DDoS attacks). Thus,
temporal features reflect traffic intentions to some extent.
• Flows of similar services result in more granular similarities [44]. The communication patterns of normal service
traffic are highly similar and prevalent, forming a majority
that differs sharply from the distinct and minority malicious traffic. Moreover, the finer-grained design pattern
results in more obvious service behaviours [14] between
benign and malicious.
Inspired by the scientific findings above, sophisticated
design methodologies are needed. Specifically, we need to
construct the following core functional components:
• Extraction of traffic relations from network flows.
• Construction of dynamic relevance based on traffic relations.
• Detection of malicious traffic through deviation analysis
from established relevance patterns.

10608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 4. System architecture diagram.

We build the above components in steps. First, we analyse
the traffic metadata within services and identify the most
representative as traffic microelements, which belong to the
most common interactive patterns between traffic and capture
the essential features of services. Second, we construct a traffic
microelement space that uses an optimized Siamese neural
network to determine the relevance between flows. Third,
we construct a dynamic baseline for aggregated traffic on
the basis of time windows and assign reputation. Malicious
encrypted traffic is identified with dynamic baselines. In fact,
our detection integrates various perspectives. By integrating
behavioural patterns and entities, we construct traffic microelements to achieve dynamic optimality. By integrating local
and global features, we construct integrated distance representations between flows. By integrating temporal and spatial
dimensions, we achieve robust malicious detection based on
dynamic local aggregation. In Section IV, we elaborate on the
methodology employed to address the identified issues.
IV. M ODEL S TRUCTURE
To address the challenge of robust malicious traffic detection, we introduce a dynamic detection method that leverages
traffic relations named BSTS-Net. Fig. 4 illustrates the
overall structure of BSTS-Net, which consists of three

TABLE II
S YMBOL M EANINGS

main components–traffic microelement extraction, the SNN
(Siamese neural network), and anomaly detection.
A. Notation
For clarity, we summarize the key notations used throughout
this paper. All the symbols are defined at their first appearance,
and this table II serves as a consolidated reference.
B. Traffic Microelement Extraction
The proposed microelements are designed to derive stable
metadata fingerprints from multiple flows F communicating
with S . The fingerprint, composed of packet slices and their
sequential patterns, captures consistent and recurring communication behaviours while ignoring user-specific payload
variations.

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

TABLE III
F EATURE S ELECTION FOR F ILTERING N OISY S AMPLE DATA

A novel end-to-end approach for extracting traffic features is
introduced by identifying traffic microelements, which search
for as many similar interactions as possible from the traffic of
the same service. The method encompasses three steps: Zeekbased feature extraction, flow feature aggregation and data
filtering, and a greedy traffic microelement extraction process.
1) Zeek Feature Extraction: To obtain a more robust and
generalized representation of flow interactions, we extract
metadata from raw traffic using Zeek [45]. We avoid using raw
metadata features directly. Instead, we leverage these metadata
to construct microelements, which capture higher-level patterns for relation understanding. Since Zeek efficiently handles
packet reordering, loss, and corruption during transmission
[46], it also enables direct alerts on low-level link errors.
Specifically, we develop a custom Zeek script,2 spanning
over 1000 lines for various common protocols, to extract the
following information:
• 4-tuple information, including source IP, destination IP,
source port, and destination port.
• Packet timestamp and payload size.
• Application layer metadata of traffic. This information
extracted by Zeek verifies the effectiveness of traffic
microelements.
2) Flow Feature Aggregation and Data Filtering: As mentioned earlier, we extract traffic microelements under services
provided by specific servers [47]. Therefore, we first aggregate flow metadata based on 4-tuples, and flows under the
same destination IP are considered the same service traffic.
Afterwards, the following processes are carried out on each
flow to extract fine-grained interactions:
• Record the direction of the packet.
• Sort the packets with metadata on the basis of the
timestamp.
In fact, services such as CDN [48] generate a large number
of accesses infrequently, which produces a significant amount
of diverse noise traffic. We filter the noise that is irrelevant
for the traffic microelements before detection. Specifically,
the DBSCAN algorithm [49] is used for clustering, and the
features extracted are shown in Table III. On the one hand,
DBSCAN enables fast detection by leveraging precomputed
distance metrics. On the other hand, it performs coarsegrained grouping, focusing only on the salient and distinctive
characteristics of CDN traffic to ensure stable and efficient
batch filtering. After that, we filter out the most isolated
IPs whose traffic can be regarded as noise. Experiments on
the CIC-IDS2017 dataset [50] demonstrate that the filtering
reduces traffic by approximately 17%, without introducing any
false positives. In the analysis, the IPs filtered include DNS
servers and benign websites.
2 https://github.com/gswsfh/BSTS-Net/blob/main/AllFeas.zeek

10609

3) Greedy Traffic Microelement Extraction: For service
S , we model its intrinsic behaviour from observed traffic
S N = {F N1 , F N2 , . . . , F Nn }, which consists of fragmented flows
induced by heterogeneous user access patterns and each corresponding to distinct phases such as authentication or data
transfer. By grouping flows on the basis of service, we extract
microelements via the longest matching patterns, capturing a
stable behavioural fingerprint that abstracts transient details
while preserving invariant protocol-level interactions. During
training, microfeatures are derived from a clean and comprehensive dataset S F , enabling optimal baseline construction.
In real-time detection, where full traffic S F is unavailable,
a greedy on-the-fly extraction algorithm ensures low latency
and achieves near-optimal matching on the basis of S N ⊆ S F .
A reliable fingerprint requires at least two flows per functional
group for comparison, with statistical stability achieved at
three or more flows. The success probability P of fingerprint
generation is defined in Eq. 1
 T (Nt , Ng )
P = Nt ≥ 2Ng ·
(1)
S (Nt , Ng )
where Nt is the number of traffic fragments and Ng is
the number of functional groups. Here, S (Nt , Ng ) denotes
the Stirling numbers of the second kind, representing the
number of ways to partition Nt distinguishable elements
into Ng nonempty unordered subsets. T (Nt , Ng ) represents
the number of such partitions where each subset contains at
least two elements, ensuring meaningful group-level matching.
We compute S (n, m) using the recurrence relation as shown
in Eq. 2.
S (n, m) = m · S (n − 1, m) + S (n − 1, m − 1)
S (0, 0) = 1, S (n, 1) = 1, S (n, n) = 1
S (n, 0) = 0, f or n > 0, S (0, m) = 0, f or m > 0

(2)

Similarly, T (n, m) is computed via Eq. 3
!
n−1
T (n, m) = m · T (n − 1, m) +
T (n − 2, m − 1)
1
(2m)!
m! · 2m
T (n, 0) = 0, f or n > 0, T (0, m) = 0, f or m > 0
T (n, m) = 0, i f n < 2m

T (0, 0) = 1, T (2m, m) =

(3)

We evaluate the probability over up to 200 traffic fragments
and 10 functional groups. As shown in Fig. 5, our greedy
algorithm achieves a 96% success rate in generating valid
traffic fingerprints, with 94.92% of matches being stable and
93.34% for groups of size 5. The histogram further shows
that when there are two functional groups, more than 80% of
the configurations achieve a matching probability above 95%,
which holds for more than 75% of the cases with three groups
and 70% of the cases with five groups, demonstrating the
robustness of our approach under practical grouping scenarios.
The analysis of the CICIDS2017 dataset reveals that 86.74%
of services exhibit 3 or fewer functional groups, and 95.87%
have 5 or fewer functional groups. Under these realistic
conditions, our method achieves a matching rate of 99.78%,
demonstrating the high effectiveness and practicality of the
proposed greedy microelement extraction strategy for realworld deployment.

10610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

Fig. 7. Example for F~lf .

p
Fig. 8. Example for F~f .

Fig. 5. Fingerprint matching probability.

Fig. 6. Example for F~rf .

Within the traffic of the same service, we identify and
extract a wealth of traffic interaction patterns. Specifically, we
focus on the following five microelements:
• Repetition microelements. Protocols’ (e.g., SMB and
MDNS) fixed packet sizes [51], [52] allows for the
categorization˚of packets with fixed patterns. Specifically,
for flow f = p1s , p2s , . . . , pks , the repeatability feature is
computed as Eq. (4)
F~ τf = 1{k f k>θr ∧k{ f }k=1} · (p1s + 1) − 1

(4)

wherek{ f }k indicates the type of packets in the flow and
k f k indicates the number of packets in the flow. As
illustrated in Figure 6, flow pairs with identical packet
lengths are assigned feature values of 873. For flows that
do not meet this criterion, the default feature value is set
to -1.
• Local microelements. Owing to the similarity of request
or response fragments within the flow under the same
service, we employ a greedy algorithm to extract the
most common fragments between traffic. Specifically,
we compare the current traffic with historical traffic,
identify similar fragments, and flag the longest sequence
of matches. The local feature F~lf is computed as Eq. (5)
argmax argmin ζ i (χ( fc ), χ( f p )), F~lf = ζ( fc , f p )||
f p ∼ fs

(5)

i∈[0,lmin ]

where fc is the current flow to be matched, f p is the
matched flow, and f s is the flow of service. χ(•) denotes
the split function, which splits flows by direction. ζ(•)
finds common segments of flows. || combines all segments and lmin denotes the minimum length of the flows.

Owing to the complexity of network environments, fuzzy
matching based on the forwards and backwards positions
is used to address traffic fragmentation and manage packet
backlog to achieve robust feature extraction. Matching
segments are considered successful when they satisfy the
following rules:
• The size of the segment matches the size of the target
segment.
• The size of the segment matches the size of the target
segment’s preceding or succeeding segment in the
same direction.
• The size of the segment matches the sum of the
size of the target segment’s preceding and succeeding
segment in the same direction.
The specific process is shown in Algorithm 1.
As illustrated in Figure 7, the longest local packet
sequence common to the same service is matched as
873, 165, 539, and 721. The positive and negative signs
associated with these values indicate the direction of each
packet.
• Packet microelements. Similarly, we implement the
greedy algorithm to identify bidirectional traffic segments
that exhibit similar features within the same service. The
packet feature is computed by Eq.(6)
F~pf = argmax ζ( fct , f pt )|| argmax ζ( fc f , f p f )
f p ∼ fs

(6)

f p ∼ fs

where || represents the splice of vectors. Unlike local feature extraction, this algorithm employs a direction-based
correlation, which resolves the issue of long-distance data
dependency. The matching rules are as follows:
• When the current direction traffic and the target
traffic have a common packet size, calculate the
minimum match quantity, and save the matching
segment.
• Choose the segment with the largest total matching
quantity as the best matching segment. The specific
algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2.
As shown in Figure 8, forwards and reverse packet
sequences are matched separately, producing directional
matching patterns. The forwards direction produces the
sequence 873, whereas the reverse direction yields 165
and 721. Each packet is matched only once to ensure an

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

Algorithm 2 Packet Feature Extraction
Input: Flow metadata: F;
Output: Packet microelements:PF;
1: Segmenting the traffic metadata by service yields G,Nb =
−1,S b
2: R = newHashT able()
3: for fd ∈ [T rue, False] do
4: for F c , F m ∈ G do
5: store S m = GetDirFinger(F c [ fd ], F m [ fd ]) if R[F c , F m ] is
not stored.
6: PF(F c , F m )[ fd ] = the longest of all S m
7: end for
8: end for
9: return PF

Fig. 9. Example for F~cf .

Fig. 10. Example for F~df .

accurate representation of the communication volume and
prevent duplication.
• Cyclical microelements. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the
video service periodically fetches segments of resources
after the initial request. Services generate periodic data
packets. Accordingly, we compute the directional periodic
segments of flows and count the repetitions. The circle
feature is computed as Eq. (7)
F~cf = argmax Ξi (χ( fc ))

(7)

i∈[0,lmin ]

where Ξ(•) calculates the number of repetitions. Common
protocols, such as HTTPS [53], generate data packets of
size 0 no less than twice and interference with features.
Therefore, segments of size 0 need to be repeated at
least 3 times. Figure 9 shows successful matching of
repeated traffic segments across flows. The first segment
contains 853 and 259 packets, and the second segment
contains 259 and 539 packets. Tye packet signs indicate
the direction, with positive signs for outbound traffic and
negative signs for inbound traffic.
Algorithm 1 Local Feature Extraction
Input: Flow metadata F;
Output: Local microelements LF;
1: Segmenting the traffic metadata by service yields G
2: R = newHashT able()
3: for F c , F m ∈ G do
4: store S m = GetLocalF(F c , F m ) if R[F c , F m ] is not stored.
5: LF(F c ) = the longest of all S m
6: end for
7: return LF
• Duplicate features. Services generate a large number of
duplicate message fragments. For example, proxy services
transport data with the same size packets. In this paper,
we extract the duplicated segment size within a flow and
choose segments whose number of duplicates is no less
than 2. The duplicate feature is computed as Eq. (8).
F~df = argmax(Ξ( fci ))

10611

(8)

i∈[0,lmin ]

Figure 10 shows the matched periodic patterns from two
flows, identified as 873 and 259. Tye packet signs indicate

the direction, with positive signs for outbound transmissions and negative signs for inbound transmissions.
Additionally, we do not utilize a transport layer or other
headers of traffic, since this information, such as the window
sizes, is mostly influenced by network conditions. Even so,
we can still efficiently detect protocol-targeted attacks such as
slow DDoS using Zeek. Compared with the other potential
features, the uniqueness of these five features is as follows:
• Among all traffic metadata, these microelements are
derived from the packet length and direction, which
remain highly stable across diverse encrypted traffic and
can be extracted efficiently to enable real-time detection.
• These microelements are comprehensive, covering all the
metadata features used in the existing studies, except for
the time metrics and header fields, which are susceptible
to networks. For example, they cover all nontemporal
features among the more than 80 attributes extracted by
CICFlowMeter [54], a tool widely used for malicious
encrypted traffic detection.
• These microelements are both independent and indispensable. Empirical analysis of the CICIDS2017 dataset
has demonstrated that pairwise mutual information is
less than 0.15 and that additional features contribute less
than 0.5% to the F1 score, satisfying the conditions for
minimally sufficient statistics.
C. Microelementary Space Construction
Traffic microelements cannot be directly used as features for
detection. Since different traffic microelements exhibit significant variability, making it challenging to achieve a consistent
and reasonable vector representation in Euclidean space. To
address this, we employ a feature mapping method based on a
Siamese neural network. The Siamese neural network (SNN)
[15] is a special type of neural network architecture that is
typically used to process paired data. It consists of two (or
more) weight-sharing subnetworks that independently process
the input data and then compare their respective outputs.
Owing to weight sharing, the SNN can learn more general
and robust feature representations during training and improve
feature extraction.
We adopt an SNN in place of AE-based approaches such
as variational autoencoders (VAEs) or graph autoencoders
(GAEs), which focus on reconstruction and lack explicit

10612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

where  is the noise parameter and || • || is the Euclidean
distance between flows. This loss function supports the baseline detection that uses the Euclidean distance for anomaly
judgement, which encourages instances with fewer shared
microfeatures to be farther apart in the embedding space.
Since the interservice traffic has a large sequence of
microelements, the loss function is constructed, and the error
coefficients are computed to allow the model to learn larger
interservice microelement features. The specific calculation
equation is shown in Eq. (10)
τ2 = 0.5 ·
Fig. 11. Siamese network structure.

modelling of pairwise similarity. In contrast, the SNN is
specifically designed to learn a similarity-preserving embedding, where instance distances directly reflect behavioural
relevance.
Algorithm 3 Sampling Method
Input: Fingerprints group: Fg , sample size:N s ;
Output: Datasets:D;
1: for all F gs ∈ F g do
2:
for gc , g p ∈ Fgs do
3:
if len(gc ) < 2 then
4:
continue
5:
end if
6:
for i = 0, 1, · · · N s do
7:
S an , S ac ← random(gc ), S ne ← random(g p )
8:
D.add([S an , S ac , S ne ])
9:
end for
10:
end for
11: end for
12: return D

i=0

S ix − S yi

(11)

where num is the number of client streams in the service.
This loss function includes confidence-aware weighting based
on microelement reliability, which reduces the penalty as the
number of flows per service increases, encouraging the model
to focus on microelements from abundant traffic samples.
In summary, the loss function is calculated as shown
in Eq. (12)
L(S an , S ac , S pe ) = τ2 ∗ (τ1 /ω1 + ω2 + τ3 )

τ1 = max {kS an , S ac k − kS an , S ne k + , 0}
kS x , S y k =

(10)

where mask denotes the sought IP binary code, IPS denotes
the source IP, and IPD denotes the destination IP. This loss
penalizes reliance on IP similarity, where traffic between
identical or similar IP pairs is overfit to IP-specific patterns
instead of generalizable microelement similarity.
If the number of clients for the same service is greater,
the more accurate the micrometadata it creates. To reduce the
noise of the model, the internode factor is calculated as shown
in Eq. (11)
τ3 = 1/num(S ac ) + 1/num(S pe )

Dataset Construct Beforehand, we propose a method to
construct positive and negative sample pairs for the model,
which is named the microelement dataset. As mentioned previously, traffic microelements indicate traffic relationships, and
the pairs are divided on the basis of microelements. We choose
a flow from the service as the anchor data and select positive
data that share two or more microelements; the negative data
are selected randomly from the rest of the service. The specific
sampling method is illustrated in Algorithm 3.
Model Structure Subsequently, we train the SNN model.
As illustrated in Fig. 11, the Siamese neural network uses
different networks for positive and negative sample pairs
while sharing model weights. Specifically, we employ fully
connected layers, along with batch normalization and dropout,
to prevent overfitting.
The loss function minimizes the distance between outputs of
similar samples and maximizes the distance between the outputs of dissimilar samples. The intraservice loss is represented
as Eq. (9)

lmax
X

|IPS (S x )&IPS (S y )|
|IP (S )&IP (S )|
+ 0.5 · D x 24 D y
24

(9)

(12)

where ω1 and ω2 are regularization factors. ω1 is set to
the feature dimensionality to prevent loss explosion from
high-dimensional vector norms. ω2 is initialized as −1 to
balance the scaling effect of τ3 on the product of confidence
factors. This ensures stable training and proper sensitivity to
confidence variations across flows.
Our network architecture supports the representation of
traffic relations, as motivated by the earlier discussion. For
any two traffic flows, the learned embedding space satisfies
the condition stated in Eq. 13
d( f s − fa ) > d( fd − fa )

(13)

where d denotes the distance in the embedding space, fa
represents the anchor flow, f s denotes the flow with a similar
pattern to fa , and fd denotes the flow with a dissimilar
pattern. The smaller distance between similar flows ensures
that the model explicitly preserves the relational structure in
the space, enabling effective discrimination between normal
and anomalous traffic.
D. Traffic Anomaly Detection
We construct a traffic microelement spatiotemporal graph
to represent the state. As illustrated in Fig. 12, IPs serve as
nodes, and traffic flows as edges.
The graph is segmented by service. As the time window
advances, we construct a baseline of normal traffic for each
service within the time window. Specifically, we extract the

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

10613

where Re denotes a reputation list that represents either baseline entries or the client.
E. Continuous Detection and Complexity Analysis

Fig. 12. Graphic of flow spatiotemporal behaviour.

spatiotemporal features of the traffic microelements in the
subgraph for clustering according to Eq. (14)
Fni = Ψ f ( fnj ||) + Ψt ( f ) + Ψe ( f )

(14)

where Ψ f (•) represents the flow features, Ψt (•) represents the
temporal feature and Ψe (•) represents the entropy feature. On
this basis, clustering is performed using the K-means algorithm
[55]. This process is formulated as shown in Eq. (15)
Pm ˚ i
1 c = j xi
i
i
˚ i
c = argmin( x − µ j ), µ j = Pi=1
(15)
m
j
i=1 1 c = j
where µ j is the centre of the clusters and ci represents the
centre point speculation. The ci of the majority clusters are
utilized as the flow baselines for anomaly detection. Clustering
is applied after the SNN, where the output consists of pairwise
distance metrics between traffic flows. This naturally aligns
with distance-based K-means methods, making them well
suited for grouping flows by behavioural similarity.
In addition, we consider a particular server as an attack
server where most of the traffic is attack traffic such that it is
impossible to identify the flow baselines. Therefore, we also
construct a baseline for the services and cluster for the service
grouping. We extract features and perform K-means clustering
for the server subgraph with the following features:
• Flow features. Central traffic features for flow baselines.
• Temporal features. Interactions of intragroup traffic within
the service.
• Entropy features. Cross-entropy of client frequency.
Furthermore, we consider scenarios where services change
frequently or attacks change the baselines. To address this, we
employ a reputation-enhanced dynamic baseline construction
method. First, the reputation scores are evenly allocated to all
the baselines. When dynamic traffic is subsequently routed to a
specific baseline, a corresponding reputation value is assigned
to the client. If client traffic is segmented and allocated to a
baseline, the client’s reputation is updated and integrated into
that baseline. Finally, all the reputation values are normalized
to ensure consistency and fairness. The reputation calculation
is shown as Eq. (16)
old
Rb = λ(α ∗ Rnew
n + (1 − α)Rn )

Rn = λ(β ∗ Rb + (1 − β) ∗ Rold
n )

(16)

where Rb denotes the baseline reputation, Rn denotes the client
reputation, α and β are the forgetting rates, and λ is the
regularization function. The function λ is defined as shown
in Eq. 17
λ(Re ) = mean(Re )
(17)

Continuous detection is achieved by maintaining a baseline
repository for long-term anomaly monitoring. The process
involves baseline construction and anomaly detection. When
incoming traffic matches a known service in the database,
its behaviour is compared against established baselines for
anomaly identification. Concurrently, the reputation score is
updated on the basis of the detection results, enabling adaptive refinement and improved baseline stability. For unseen
services, new baselines are constructed and initialized on the
fly. We conduct algorithm complexity analysis for real-time
detection.
• Zeek processes N flows in O(N). Subsequently, DBSCAN
introduces O(NlogN) overhead, where N denotes the total
number of flows. Flow aggregation is incremental and
lightweight.
• Greedy pairwise matching over K service-associated
flows yields O(KlogK) complexity.
• Sample selection and SNN inference both run in
O(K) because of parallel feature extraction and fixed
architecture.
• Graph construction, K-means clustering, and dynamic
baseline updates each take O(K).
Overall, the pipeline achieves O(N + NlogN + KlogK + K),
dominated by KlogK, resulting in quasilinear complexity. The
main limitation, which is greedy flow matching, is mitigated
in practice, as most flows are sparse, reducing the number
of effective comparisons. Consequently, the empirical runtime
scales near O(K), with sublinear growth under increasing load,
confirming the high efficiency and scalability of real-time
intrusion detection.
V. E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
A. Dataset and Experimental Setup
We use the CIC-IDS2017, CIC-IDS2018, and UNSWNB15 datasets for evaluation. The nonencrypted flows in
these datasets are processed using the same feature extraction
pipeline as encrypted traffic, where plaintext content is not
inspected, ensuring a protocol-agnostic evaluation framework.
The CIC-IDS2017 [50] dataset resembles real-world scenarios. To generate realistic traffic data, the dataset employs
the B-Profile system to profile abstract human interaction
behaviours and generate naturalistic benign background traffic.
The dataset is based on 25 common user abstract behaviours
built upon application layer protocols. It contains data from
July 3 to July 7, 2017, spanning five days.
The CIC-IDS2018 [56] dataset is generated using a
combination of B-profile and M-profile configuration files to
create a diverse and comprehensive network intrusion detection dataset. Spanning a 10-day period in 2018, it captures
a wide array of network activities. The attack infrastructure
comprises 50 machines, and the victim organization has 5
departments and includes 420 machines and 30 servers.
The UNSW-NB15 [57] dataset is created by the IXIA
PerfectStorm tool in the Cyber Range Lab of UNSW Canberra,

10614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

which generates a hybrid of real modern normal activities and
synthetic contemporary attack behaviours.
The three public datasets contain pcap files of malicious
traffic generated by network attacks, as well as features
extracted for machine learning. Since the raw datasets are
labelled only for features, we extract the traffic metadata from
the pcap files and label them by comparison. Specifically, for
the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the pcap files are labelled by 4-tuple.
For the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, more precise labels are marked
by matching the 4-tuple and timestamps of the flows. The
CIC-IDS2018 dataset is labelled by combining the IPs of the
attackers, the IPs of the victims, and the time period when the
attack took place. The evaluation metrics are accuracy (AC),
precision (PR), recall (RE), and F1 score (F1). Our code3 is
implemented using Zeek and Python.
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm,
experiments are conducted on the same datasets and compared
with seven state-of-the-art algorithms, representing three mainstream research directions. For the comparative algorithms,
detection is performed using the corresponding feature types
extracted from the datasets.
• Content-based detection. We choose the TMG-GAN algorithm as the baseline. The algorithm employs multiple
generators to increase the diversity of generated samples,
addressing the issue of sample imbalance in malicious
traffic detection.
• Interaction-based detection. (1) DL-GNN [7] uses a
dynamic line graph neural network to extract spatial
information from each discrete snapshot and capture
temporal variations in IP communication. It then uses line
graphs to enhance the detection capabilities of the graph
neural network. (2) ContraMTD [58] comprehensively
considers both vertical and horizontal perspectives and
uses SEC strategies and DE-GAT graph neural networks
to extract local features and global interaction features
of normal traffic. It employs contrastive learning techniques to learn the consistency relationship between these
features and ultimately detects malicious traffic through
multiple rounds of scoring.
• Anomaly-based detection. (1) CIC-GMM [50] uses a
Gaussian mixture model for detection. (2) Rosett-IF [34]
trains an isolation forest to classify the malicious data.
(3) Kitsune [35] uses an autoencoder to train on normal data and identifies attack samples by evaluating
the reconstruction error. (4) CPS-Guard [13] employs
an outlier-aware autoencoder, detecting by setting an
adaptive threshold and comparing reconstruction loss.
Parameter Settings. The training parameters for the SNN
are configured as follows: 100 epochs, an initial learning rate
of 0.001, and the Adam optimizer. The weights from the
epoch with the lowest computed loss value are selected as the
optimal model weights. The network architecture is configured
as follows:
• The input layer is a linear layer with a size of 128 ∗ 64,
the following is a batch normalization layer, and then a
dropout layer with a dropout rate 0.2.
• The first hidden layer is a linear layer with a size of
64 ∗ 32, followed by a batch normalization layer and then
a dropout layer with a dropout rate 0.2.
3 https://github.com/gswsfh/BSTS-Net

• The second hidden layer is a linear layer with a size of
32 ∗ 16.
• The output layer is a sigmoid layer, which limits the
output values to the range [0, 1]. This facilitates the
normalization of different types of classification outputs
to a consistent data distribution range.
B. Analysis of Experimental Results
Table IV presents the comparative experimental results
between BSTS-Net and baseline algorithms across three
datasets. Bold denotes the best results, and underline denotes
the second-best results. The results indicate that BSTS-Net
achieves the best detection performance across all three
datasets, with F1 scores of 99.74, 99.63, and 99.88, respectively. Different sizes and categories of datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of BSTS-Net. Among the content-based
methods, TMG-GAN achieves a high F1 on CICIDS2017 but
F1 scores that are 3.07% and 6.85% lower on the others due to
GAN training instability. Interaction-based DL-GNN and ContraMTD use GCNs and contrastive learning but struggle with
irregular traffic. BSTS-Net avoids long-term dependencies by
segmenting traffic into dynamic windows and comparing it
against local baselines, achieving F1 values that are 8.84%
and 11.92% higher than those of DL-GNN and ContraMTD on
UNSW-NB15, respectively. Among the anomaly-based methods, Rosetta-IF achieves a 91% F1 on CICIDS2017 using TCP
semantics, but BSTS-Net outperforms it by 17.21% via SNNbased microelement mapping. Kitsune and CPS-Guard use
packet-level or environmental features, yielding only 54.99%
and 59.70% F1 scores, respectively. CIC-GMM, which is
based on Gaussian modelling, achieves an approximately 51%
F1 and is sensitive to the data distribution.
C. Results of the per-Attack Binary Classification Experiment
In the binary classification experiment on the CICIDS2017
dataset, BSTS-Net achieves an F1 score exceeding 99% and
outperforms the best baseline methods by 1.17% to 3.92%
for the F1 and 3.13% to 3.99% for the accuracy across seven
attack types. Simple anomaly-based baselines such as Kitsune
have shown limited detection ability. The content-based methods perform better on Patator, Web Attack, Botnet, PortScan,
and LOIT, achieving approximately 2% higher accuracy, but
are less effective on DoS and DDoS attacks, with 1.85%
lower accuracy and a 1.9% lower F1 score. Interaction-based
methods struggle to capture structural patterns. BSTS-Net
integrates traffic microelements and structural information,
achieving the best overall performance and demonstrating
strong robustness across diverse attack categories and scales.
D. Adversarial Experimental Analysis
To evaluate the detection capability under attack conditions,
the dataset is perturbed, an adversarial dataset is constructed,
and experiments are conducted accordingly. Specifically, the
adversarial dataset is designed for the CICIDS2017 dataset,
with packet-level, stream-level and feature-level perturbations
constructed as follows:
• Packet perturbation. The packet-level perturbation is created by randomly adding, removing, or modifying a

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

10615

TABLE IV
R ESULTS OF THE M ULTICLASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTS (%)

TABLE V
B INARY C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS (%)

TABLE VI
R ESULTS OF THE A DVERSARIAL E XPERIMENTS (%)

certain number of packets within the flows of the original
dataset.
• Flow perturbation. The flow-level perturbation is created
by randomly adding, removing, or modifying a certain
number of flows within the services of the original
dataset.
• Feature perturbation. We modify the malicious flows such
that their statistical features resemble those of the benign
traffic in the dataset.
Table VI presents the adversarial evaluation results. BSTSNet achieves the best performance across all the scenarios,
with an F1 score decrease ranging from 0.66% to 2.9%.
This strong robustness is due to its service-specific baseline
construction from normal traffic, which reduces the impact
of perturbations. In addition, the microelement space captures
complex flow correlations, making it difficult for attackers
to generate evasive samples. Interaction-based methods suffer
heavily under flow perturbations, with F1 decreases of 17.96%
and 18.48%, because injected noise disrupts the communication graph and impairs feature fusion. The content-based
methods are most affected by feature perturbations, with a
23.63% decline in the F1 score as the adversarial samples
resemble benign traffic. The anomaly-based baselines show
inconsistent robustness, with F1 decreasing between 6.99%
and 32.21% under packet and feature perturbations because
of simplistic baseline modelling.

TABLE VII
B EHAVIOURAL M ICROELEMENT I NFORMATION

E. Traffic Microelement Analysis
Traffic microelements capture the interaction correlations
between flows. To assess the consistency of the proposed
microelements, we compare their features. The traffic information used for this analysis is detailed in Table VII. We analyse
traffic consistency using metadata. First, flows sharing more
than two identical microelements in either the source or the
destination port are grouped. This grouping does not rely on IP
addresses or service labels, making achieving accurate results
more challenging. Next, we evaluate the consistency within
groups by checking the metadata overlaps. The results across
the three datasets are shown in Table VIII and demonstrate that
more than 99 % of similar traffic from the same service is correctly aggregated, validating the ability of the microelements
to capture flow relationships. This approach provides a novel
and efficient feature extraction method. We also compare the
consistency and efficiency of the microelements with those

10616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE VIII
F INGERPRINT C ONSISTENCY D ETERMINATION (%)

TABLE IX
CICIDS2017 DATASET F INGERPRINT C ONSISTENCY AND
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

of alternative methods, including statistical features, deep
learning and graph neural networks. Deep learning consists
of multiple fully connected layers. Graph neural networks
employ two graph convolutional layers. Statistical features
are extracted using CICFlowMeter [54]. The results are presented in Table IX. The microelement achieves the highest
consistency and shortest processing, outperforming the worst
method by 42.77% in terms of consistency and 47-fold in
terms of efficiency. Deep learning performs poorly because of
the randomness of the encrypted traffic. The use of a graph
neural network improves the consistency by 58.29% when flow
dependencies are modelled, but both deep and graph models
require training and incur a computational cost that is more
than an order of magnitude greater. Statistical features are
efficient but sensitive to traffic variations, resulting in 25.5%
lower consistency than microelements.
To study the distribution of the proposed traffic microelement space, we select samples from three major categories of
attacks and label the samples simply as benign or malicious.
Afterwards, we perform PCA dimensionality reduction on
the original traffic metadata and traffic microelements for
visualization. The results are shown in Fig. 13 (a-f). The experimental results indicate that although the original traffic shows
some clustering indications of distribution, the distribution is
irregular and inconsistent. In contrast, the traffic microelements exhibit a clear linear distribution, which demonstrates
that the proposed microelements achieve a normalized suitable
data distribution. However, relying solely on microelements
overlooks the unique features of different samples, thereby
causing diverse traffic patterns to be mapped into a nondiscriminative space. The traffic microelement space will be used
to address this issue.
F. Analysis of the Traffic Microelement Space
To evaluate the mapping effectiveness of the microelement
space, we visualize the same three attack features after mapping. Fig. 13 (g-i) reveals a surprising finding: despite the
samples being input to the SNN consisting only of positive
and negative sample pairs based on microelements, without explicit labels, benign and malicious traffic demonstrate
distinct distribution patterns, especially for botnets. These
patterns arise from the correlations and comparisons among
the traffic microelements, thereby creating varying levels of
correlation. Additionally, the samples are more uniformly

Fig. 13. Effect of feature extraction.

distributed, which minimizes both the false-positive rate for
malicious traffic and the false-negative rate for benign traffic.
We conduct a comparative analysis of the training time and
sample distribution, which reveals that the SNN reduces the
loss to a low level within just 10 epochs, indicating fast convergence and minimal training overhead. Further experiments
reveal that increasing the complexity of the SNN increases
the training time without yielding significant improvements in
detection performance, suggesting that a lightweight architecture is sufficient for effective learning.
G. Ablation Experiment
To investigate the contributions of each component of the
BSTS-Net model, we conduct three ablation experiments.
• Ablation Experiment 1: Flow features are extracted
by packet size and timestamps instead of traffic
microelements.
• Ablation Experiment 2: The traffic microelement space
is deleted, and the microelements are input into a spatiotemporal graph for classification.
• Ablation Experiment 2-1: The traffic microelement space
is deleted and replaced with VAE embedding.
• Ablation Experiment 2-2: The traffic microelement space
is deleted and replaced with GAE embedding.
• Ablation Experiment 3: The spatiotemporal graph is
replaced with an autoencoder from the baseline methods.
The results of Table X on the CICIDS2017 dataset show
that the traffic microelements significantly increase detection
when relational patterns missed by traditional metrics are
captured. The SNN enhances global pattern learning, but direct
classification harms accuracy because of poor group generalization. Autoencoder-based methods underperform, with the
GAE being better than the VAE. While autoencoder integration
improves accuracy and recall, it remains sensitive to traffic

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

10617

TABLE X
R ESULTS (%) OF THE A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

TABLE XI
R ESULTS (%) OF THE F INE -G RAINED A BLATION E XPERIMENTS

Fig. 14. Comparison of the memory usage over time.

Fig. 15. Change in the proportion of baseline matches.

TABLE XII
R ESULTS OF THE P ERFORMANCE E XPERIMENTS (%)

noise, reducing precision. In addition, we conduct a finegrained ablation study to evaluate the contribution of each
of the five microelements and three components of the loss
function. The results are presented in Table XI. Each feature
and contrastive component is essential. F~lf and F~pf reduce the
F1 scores by 51.92% and 38.03%, respectively, as they capture
local patterns and directionality, which are core to protocol
patterns. Among the loss components, τ1 has the greatest
impact, with an 18.2% decrease in the F1 score because of its
focus on fine-grained low noise comparisons. In contrast, τ2
and τ3 yield smaller performance drops of 5.91% and 5.03%,
respectively, as they operate over broader noisier traffic scopes
with lower discriminability.
H. Performance Analysis
We evaluate the performance of the compared algorithms
on the CICIDS2017 dataset. To ensure fairness, deep learning
models are trained to convergence for optimal performance.
The results are summarized in Table XII. The training and
detection times of ContraMTD are the longest because of the
use of dual-loop graph contrastive learning, taking 2.7 and
5.4 longer than those of the second-slowest method. DL-GNN
scales superlinearly with the graph size, requiring 1.8 and

3.3 times more time than the third-slowest. method. TMGGAN’s adversarial training leads to a 2.5 higher training cost,
although the inference is fast. Kitsune and CPS-Guard reduce
inference latency but still require 3.1 and 1.3 times more time
than the next slowest method, respectively. CIC-GMM and
Rosett-IF complete detection in under 9 seconds but suffer up
to a 46% decrease in the F1 score. In contrast, compared with
the most expensive baseline, BSTS reduces the training time
by more than 2.1-fold and achieves an inference that is 50%
faster than the autoencoder-based models and only 12 seconds
slower than the fastest method. As the baseline repository
increases, the matching efficiency improves, enabling sublinear
scaling and progressively lowering the end-to-end latency.
I. Online Analysis Experiments
BSTS-Net establishes service-specific baselines and monitors for deviations in real time. To evaluate its online
detection capability, we replay CICIDS2017 traffic using tcpreplay. During processing, BSTS-Net dynamically generates
1317 baseline profiles. The corresponding memory and time
overheads are shown in Fig. 14(a) and 14(b), respectively.
BSTS-Net achieves real-time detection on a 2.7 GB dataset
with a peak memory usage of 559 MB and an average of only
39 MB, with processing traffic at 145.6 MB/s. In contrast, the
most memory-efficient autoencoder-based method requires a
peak memory usage of 47189 MB, which is more than 84
times greater than that of BSTS-Net. This efficiency stems
from the lightweight SNN and baseline-deviation classification. During detection, 65.84% of flows are classified via
direct baseline matching, bypassing costly model inference.
Fig. 15 shows that matching accelerates after an initial 20%
slow phase caused by few baselines, revealing self-reinforcing
efficiency.
J. Sensitivity Analysis
In this section, the CICIDS2017 dataset is used for experiments to validate the influence of parameter selection.

10618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 20, 2025

TABLE XIII
W INDOW S IZE A NALYSIS (%)

environments. While our current approach excels in stable
settings, we plan to develop dynamic updating mechanisms
to improve generalization and reduce false alarms in evolving
networks.
VI. C ONCLUSION

TABLE XIV
C ONTRASTIVE L OSS H YPERPARAMETER A NALYSIS (%)

1) Analysing the impact of window size selection. Given
varying session lengths, the window size significantly
affects classification. As shown in Table XIII, a window
size of 4 is too small to capture traffic patterns, whereas
a window size of 256 includes mixed communication stages and introduces interference. For the dataset
in this work, a window size of 32 achieves optimal
performance.
2) Analysing the impact of cluster size selection. As shown
in Table XIII, small cluster sizes disperse malicious
samples across clusters, increasing the false-positive
rate. A cluster size of 10 achieves optimal detection
performance, with stability maintained for larger sizes
and no significant degradation observed.
In conclusion, the selection of parameters in this study influences the experimental outcomes. However, window sizes
ranging from 8 to 256 and cluster numbers from 6 to 14 yield
relatively high accuracy. The robustness of the proposed model
is insensitive to parameter variations.
In addition, we analyse the impact of hyperparameter
settings in contrastive loss on detection performance. The
results are summarized in Table XIV. A large ω1 weakens
the relation modelling and sharply decreases the F1 score. A
small ω1 causes overfitting to host-specific patterns. A large
ω2 amplifies noise and false positives. A small ω2 fails to
balance the confidence weighting. ω1 has a greater impact
than ω2 because it nonlinearly scales an unstable loss term.
Training is highly sensitive to ω1 , and improper values cause
severe degradation.
K. Zero-Day Attack Detection
BSTS-Net effectively detects zero-day attacks by modelling
robust benign baselines and identifying deviations. When
trained on CICIDS2017 and evaluated on CICIDS2018, it
achieves 99.59% recall, demonstrating strong generalizability
to unseen attacks. However, when applied to the benign traffic
of CICIDS2018, a 13.84% false-positive rate occurs because
of behavioural shifts not captured by the static baseline. This
highlights the need for adaptive baseline modelling in new

Current malware detection methods rely on payload or
traffic interactions, which are easily evaded by encryption. In
this paper, BSTS-Net, a behaviour-based approach robust to
encrypted traffic, is proposed. We introduce a greedy-based
microelement extraction method to capture intrinsic traffic
relations. An SNN models local and global communication
patterns in the microelement space without the need for labels.
We further construct a spatiotemporal graph integrated with
reputation scoring for dynamic anomaly detection. Clustering
and dynamic baseline analysis enable effective malicious traffic identification. Experiments show that BSTS-Net achieves
detection rates over 99% across multiple datasets, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods by up to 8%, with strong
robustness under adversarial settings. Future work will explore
richer microelement representations.
R EFERENCES
[1]

S. Elmohamed. (2021). Acronis Cyberthreats Report 2021. [Online].
Available:
https://community.spiceworks.com/t/acronis-cyberthreatsreport-mid-year-2021/807520
[2] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of
suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy,
Mar. 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
[3] (2024). Suricata 7.0.6. [Online]. Available: https://suricata.io/
[4] (2024). Snort 3. [Online]. Available: https://www.snort.org/
[5] R. A. Bridges, T. R. Glass-Vanderlan, M. D. Iannacone, M. S. Vincent,
and Q. Chen, “A survey of intrusion detection systems leveraging
host data,” ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR), vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1–35,
2019.
[6] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[7] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
pp. 1156–1167, 2024.
[8] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
“The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2008.
[9] S. Ji, S. Pan, E. Cambria, P. Marttinen, and P. S. Yu, “A survey on
knowledge graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 494–514, Feb. 2022.
[10] Y. Zhang, P. Tiňo, A. Leonardis, and K. Tang, “A survey on neural
network interpretability,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 726–742, Oct. 2021.
[11] M. Liu et al., “Enhanced detection of obfuscated HTTPS tunnel traffic
using heterogeneous information network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 257,
Sep. 2024, Art. no. 110975.
[12] V. Jyothsna, V. V. R. Prasad, and K. M. Prasad, “A review of anomaly
based intrusion detection systems,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 28, no. 7,
pp. 26–35, 2011.
[13] M. Catillo, A. Pecchia, and U. Villano, “CPS-GUARD: Intrusion detection for cyber-physical systems and IoT devices using outlier-aware deep
autoencoders,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103210.
[14] D. Zhao et al., “Botnet detection based on traffic behavior analysis and
flow intervals,” Comput. Secur., vol. 39, pp. 2–16, Nov. 2013.
[15] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
2021, pp. 15750–15758.
[16] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
classification using convolutional neural network for representation
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.

FU et al.: FLOW MICROELEMENT-DRIVEN TRAFFIC RELATIONSHIP ANALYSIS

10619

[17] R.-H. Hwang, M.-C. Peng, V.-L. Nguyen, and Y.-L. Chang, “An LSTMbased deep learning approach for classifying malicious traffic at the
packet level,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 16, p. 3414, Aug. 2019.
[18] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
pp. 633–642.
[19] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860.
[20] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
[21] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos,
and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for
ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
Secur. Symp., Mar. 2021, pp. 4–5.
[22] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
[23] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of
intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
2023, pp. 6203–6220.
[24] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic
detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
[25] G. Gu, J. Zhang, and W. Lee, “BotSniffer: Detecting botnet command
and control channels in network traffic,” in Proc. 15th Netw. Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2008, pp. 4–5. [Online]. Available: https://
api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:13302792
[26] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021.
[27] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Detecting tunneled flooding traffic
via deep semantic analysis of packet length patterns,” in Proc. ACM
SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dec. 2024, pp. 3659–3673.
[28] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
[29] A. Pareja et al., “EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks
for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Apr. 2020,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 5363–5370.
[30] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic
line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
2023.
[31] X. Li et al., “A high accuracy and adaptive anomaly detection
model with dual-domain graph convolutional network for insider threat
detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1638–1652,
2023.
[32] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A
robust fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on
heterogeneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
[33] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” 2023,
arXiv:2301.13686.
[34] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic classification in diverse network environments with TCP-aware traffic
augmentation,” in Proc. ACM Turing Award Celebration Conf.-China,
Jul. 2023, pp. 131–132.
[35] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018,
arXiv:1802.09089.
[36] M. Nakıp and E. Gelenbe, “Online self-supervised deep learning
for intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 19, pp. 5668–5683, 2024.

[37] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2022.
[38] K. J. Sullivan, W. G. Griswold, Y. Cai, and B. Hallen, “The structure
and value of modularity in software design,” ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng.
Notes, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 99–108, Sep. 2001.
[39] M. Papazoglou and W. Van Den Heuvel, “Service oriented architectures:
Approaches, technologies and research issues,” VLDB J., vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 389–415, 2007.
[40] I. Nadareishvili, R. Mitra, M. McLarty, and M. Amundsen, Microservice
Architecture: Aligning Principles, Practices, and Culture. Sebastopol,
CA, USA: O’Reilly Media, 2016.
[41] O. Mämmelä, J. Hiltunen, J. Suomalainen, K. Ahola, P. Mannersalo, and
J. Vehkaperä, “Towards micro-segmentation in 5G network security,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Netw. Commun. (EuCNC) Workshop Netw. Manage.,
2016, pp. 3–5.
[42] S. McCanne et al., “Toward a common infrastructure for multimedianetworking middleware,” in Proc. 7th Int. Workshop Netw. Operating Syst. Support Digit. Audio Video (NOSSDAV), Jun. 1997,
pp. 39–49.
[43] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, and C. Chen, “Service usage
classification with encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging
apps,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2851–2864,
Nov. 2016.
[44] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (IEEE INFOCOM), Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
[45] (2024). Zeek 7.0. [Online]. Available: https://zeek.org/about/
[46] B.-K. Lee and J.-H. Chang, “Packet loss concealment based on deep
neural networks for digital speech transmission,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio, Speech, Language Process., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 378–387, Feb.
2016.
[47] (2024). Service Name and Transport Protocol Port Number
Registry. [Online]. Available:
http://www.iana.org/assignments/
service-names-port-numbers/service-names-port-numbers
.xhtml
[48] G. Peng, “CDN: Content distribution network,” 2004, arXiv:cs/0411069.
[49] E. Schubert, J. Sander, M. Ester, H. P. Kriegel, and X. Xu,
“DBSCAN revisited, revisited: Why and how you should (still) use
DBSCAN,” ACM Trans. Database Syst., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 1–21,
Sep. 2017.
[50] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, Portugal, Jan. 2018,
pp. 108–116.
[51] (2024). Samba 4.20.2 Document. [Online]. Available: https://
www.samba.org/samba/docs/
[52] (2013). Multicast DNS. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/
rfc/rfc6762
[53] (2000). Http Over TlS. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/
rfc/rfc2818
[54] (2021). Ahlashkari/Cicflowmeter. [Online]. Available: https://
github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter
[55] M. Ahmed, R. Seraj, and S. M. S. Islam, “The k-means algorithm: A
comprehensive survey and performance evaluation,” Electronics, vol. 9,
no. 8, p. 1295, Aug. 2020.
[56] (2018). A Realistic Cyber Defense Dataset (CSE-CIC-IDS2018).
[Online].
Available:
https://registry.opendata.aws/cse-cicids2018/
[57] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set
for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data
set),” in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015,
pp. 1–6.
[58] X. Han et al., “ContraMTD: An unsupervised malicious network traffic
detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web
Conf., May 2024, pp. 1680–1689.