IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

3627

GrainBrain: Multiview Identification and
Stratification of Defective Grain Kernels
Lei Fan , Dongdong Fan, Yiwen Ding, Yong Wu, Donglin Di, Maurice Pagnucco , and Yang Song

Abstract—Grain appearance inspection is crucial for
evaluating grain quality and determining seed stratification. Typically, trained inspectors manually examine each
grain kernel to identify and remove defective ones, which is
time-consuming and error-prone. In this article, we present
GrainBrain, a robotic vision-based system comprising a
hardware prototype (A100) and a deep learning model
(GrainAD). A100 is equipped with five cameras to capture
high-quality, multiview images of each kernel. The identification of defective kernels is treated as an unsupervised anomaly detection task. GrainAD trains a classifier
to distinguish between healthy and pseudoanomaly samples generated at both image and feature levels, and a
supervised contrastive learning loss is employed to obtain
compact feature representations of healthy kernels. In addition, we release a large-scale dataset containing over 100K
annotated images of four types of cereal grains. Extensive
experiments were conducted to verify the superiority of our
system, achieving an average AUROC of 94.4/90.4% at the
image/pixel level. Our system excelled in both efficiency
and consistency, as demonstrated by experiments comparing human experts to the system.
Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, grain
appearance inspection, grain quality.

I. INTRODUCTION
EREAL grains provide various essential nutrients and
serve as fundamental ingredients in food and daily necessities. Grain appearance inspection (GAI) aims at identifying
defective grain kernels and is crucial for quality determination in
high-throughput grain inspection and seed stratification [1], [2].
GAI plays an indispensable role in various stages of agricultural
activities. During breeding, each seed’s appearance needs to be
carefully inspected to eliminate defective ones that are difficult

C

Received 16 October 2024; revised 5 December 2024; accepted 22
December 2024. Date of publication 30 January 2025; date of current
version 21 April 2025. Paper no. TII-24-5437. (Corresponding author:
Lei Fan.)
Lei Fan is with the Gaozhe Technology, Hefei 230088, China, and also
with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, UNSW, Sydney,
NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail: lei.fan1@unsw.edu.au).
Dongdong Fan, Yiwen Ding, and Yong Wu are with the Gaozhe Technology, Hefei 230088, China (e-mail: fandongdong@gaozhe.com.cn;
dingyiwen@gaozhe.com.cn; wuyong@gaozhe.com.cn).
Donglin Di is with the Li Auto, Beijing 101399, China (e-mail:
donglin.ddl@gmail.com).
Maurice Pagnucco and Yang Song are with the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, UNSW, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail:
morri@cse.unsw.edu.au; yang.song1@unsw.edu.au).
The dataset and code can be found on https://grainnet.github.io/
GrainBrain.html.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3528555

Fig. 1. GAI is crucial for agricultural activities, e.g., breeding, harvesting, and trading. To perform grain quality inspection and stratification, we
build a prototype A100 equipped with five cameras to capture multiview
images of each grain kernel. An anomaly detection framework GrainAD
is developed to identify defective kernels.

to germinate, thereby improving the crop survival rate and
yield [3]. At harvest, it reflects the status of pest infestations
and Fusarium head blight, acting as a key predictor of annual
yield and quality [4]. In grain trading, storage, and processing,
it directly estimates the proportion of low-value grain, serving
as an important reference for transaction prices [5], as depicted
in Fig. 1.
Typically, GAI is conducted manually by professional inspectors following standard ISO procedures [6], [7]. They are
required to examine each grain kernel’s appearance based on visual characteristics using hand tools (e.g., sieves, tweezers). This
process is extremely time-consuming because grain kernels are
tiny in size, and the large quantity requires prolonged inspection.
Even experienced inspectors need over 25 min to complete the
inspection for a set of 50-gram samples. The manual process
is prone to human error and inconsistency, which results in
inaccurate assessments and variability in inspection outcomes,
further complicating the task and reducing the overall reliability.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop an automated system for
GAI that can capture high-quality visual information of each
grain kernel and efficiently filter out defective kernels. However,
automated processing and analysis of these grains face several
challenges.
r Cereal grains need to be inspected individually, but their
small and diverse sizes cause occlusion issues, complicating visual assessment and separation.

1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
for more information.

3628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Fig. 2.

Atlas of four types of cereal grains, including healthy and defective kernels with pixel-level annotations marked by red contours ().

r Some crucial characteristics (e.g., pestinduced holes) are dataset, demonstrating the feasibility and superiority of our
extremely small, posing challenges for the acquisition
environment including cameras and optimal lighting conditions for accurate detection, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
r Different types of grains (e.g., wheat, maize) exhibit high
intra- and interheterogeneity. Even experienced inspectors
need specialized training due to inconsistencies in inspection standards and personal experience.
To address these challenges, we develop a robotic visionbased system named GrainBrain, incorporating a prototype
for image acquisition and kernel sorting and a deep learning
model for identifying defective grains. Specifically, we comprehensively analyze the characteristics of various types of grain
kernels and accordingly build a customized prototype named
A100. It consists of a feeding cabin, a transparent plate, a
capturing module, and a sorting module. The feeding cabin
efficiently separates different types of grain kernels one by one.
The capturing module is equipped with five high-resolution
cameras to capture multiview images of each kennel.
To perform GAI tasks, the identification of defective kernels
is formulated as an anomaly detection task, i.e., only normal
(healthy) grains are provided as references for training, and
models are required to identify defective kernels under an unsupervised learning manner. With this setting, we develop a simple
yet effective deep learning model named GrainAD. We build
upon the Simplenet [8] by converting the unsupervised anomaly
detection into a supervised learning manner by leveraging synthetic data. Our model synthesizes pseudoanomalies by injecting
noise into normal samples in the image and feature spaces, and
then trains a classifier to identify these normal or synthesized
data. We further modify the model from both feature and image
perspectives. Considering the multiview characteristics of our
grain dataset, a supervised contrastive learning (SCL) loss is
employed to regularize the feature representations of normal
samples by fully exploiting the information shared across different views. To handle the multiview images captured from various
views, a spatial transformation network (STN) is introduced
to explicitly align the orientations of different views under a
self-supervised learning manner. After training, both branches
used for synthesizing anomalies are removed, resulting in a
streamlined GrainAD that is deployment-ready for integration
into the GrainBrain system for real-time inspection.
In addition, we construct a large-scale dataset with over 100K
images covering four types of cereal grains: wheat, maize,
soybean, and paddy. This dataset includes 21.5K and extra 5.4K
defective kernels with image-level and pixel-level annotations,
respectively. Extensive experiments were conducted on this

system. We further compared our system with human experts
in terms of consistency and efficiency. The main contributions
are summarized as follows.
r A robotic vision prototype, A100, is designed for capturing
high-quality, multiview images of each individual kernel.
An anomaly detection model, GrainAD, is developed for
the analysis of various types of cereal grains.
r Considering the multiview characteristics of our data, an
STN in a self-supervised learning framework is introduced
to explicitly adjust a unified pose alignment. We further
introduce an SCL loss to regularize the feature representations shared across different views.
r We construct and release a large-scale dataset containing
over 100K images with high-quality annotations.

II. RELATED WORK
Grain Appearance Inspection: Inspecting grain appearance is
one of the requisite procedures for high-throughput grain quality
determination and stratification. According to the ISO cereal
vocabulary [6], GAI aims to identify defective kernels, which
refer to grains with decreased value, such as those contaminated
by Fusarium head blight or fungus, crushed by external forces,
attacked by pests, or germinated, as shown in Fig. 2. These grains
typically have lower nutrient content or negatively impact human
health.
Computer vision techniques have been studied in grain inspections for several decades. Limited by sensor technologies and
computational resources, early studies [9], [10], [11] attempted
to classify subtypes of wheat or impurities based on color distributions, morphological attributes, or textural patterns. Recently,
deep learning techniques have achieved considerable progress in
smart agriculture [12], [13]. For example, Fan et al. [14] released
a large-scale grain dataset related to wheat, maize, and rice,
and formulated grain quality inspection as fine-grained recognition, domain adaptation, and out-of-distribution classification.
AV4GAInsp [15] incorporated a device with dual cameras to
capture visual information.
Unlike previous robotic vision-based approaches [12], [15]
that adopt one or two cameras to capture visual information but
leave certain areas unobserved, in our GrainBrain system, we
design a prototype equipped with five cameras on an elaborate
mechanical structure to capture high-quality, multiview images
of each kernel, ensuring comprehensive surface coverage of
the grains. Importantly, our device not only identifies defective

FAN et al.: GRAINBRAIN: MULTIVIEW IDENTIFICATION AND STRATIFICATION OF DEFECTIVE GRAIN KERNELS

TABLE I
DETAILED SPECIFICATIONS OF A100

3629

into normal data, making them more robust in handling the
variability within our dataset. Moreover, the deployed model
must ensure fast detection efficiency to maintain the system’s
real-time performance. Synthetic-based methods introduce additional branches and synthetic samples to train a discriminative
classifier, which can be removed at the testing stage, thus ensuring high efficiency.
III. GRAINBRAIN

kernels efficiently but also performs kernel stratification tasks
by separating defective ones individually.
Visual Anomaly Detection: Anomaly detection aims to train
models using only normal samples, requiring the model to
identify anomalous samples during the test phase. Existing
methods [16], [17] can be mainly categorized into the following
directions:
Feature-based methods use pretrained models to extract
features and characterize the distributions of normal data.
DeepSVDD [18], [19] trained a network by minimizing a hypersphere to enclose features of normal data. PaDiM [20] extracted
features from image patches and employs multivariate Gaussian distributions for modeling the normal data. Patchcore [21]
constructed a memory bank to store multilayer features, detecting anomalies by identifying significant gaps between the test
samples and the stored features.
Reconstruction-based methods assume that reconstruction
models fail to recover anomalous samples when trained with
only normal data. MemAE [22] integrated a memory bank
into an autoencoder to store the encoder’s features and retrieve
them for reconstruction. UniAD [23] performed feature-level
reconstruction and proposes a model capable of one-for-all class
anomaly detection. RD4AD [23] enhanced the teacher–student
model by using the teacher’s output features as input to the
student model.
Synthetic-based methods generate pseudoanomalies using
data augmentation, converting unsupervised anomaly detection
into supervised classification tasks. Cutpaste [24] synthesized
anomalies by cutting an image patch and pasting it at a random
location. DRAEM [25] generated anomalies with pixel-level
annotations by injecting Perlin noise into normal data. SimpleNet [8] attempted to generate anomalies by injecting Gaussian noise into normal features.
Our captured data includes multiview images of the same
object at higher resolutions, requiring the identification of subtle visual differences between normal and defective samples.
Feature-based methods depend on aligned data to effectively
capture the distributions of patches across different positions,
while reconstruction-based models struggle with highly heterogeneous data due to the diverse characteristics of different
samples. In contrast, we adopt synthetic-based methods that are
well-suited for adapting to various data types by blending noise

Our system consists of two parts: a prototype (A100) and an
anomaly detection model (GrainAD), as illustrated in Fig. 3. The
prototype is built to efficiently capture high-quality, multiview
images of each grain kernel and to sort out defective ones. The
model, which follows synthetic-based methods by generating
pseudoanomalies at both the image and feature levels, is designed to detect and localize anomalies in multiview images to
provide sorting signals for the prototype.
A. Prototype: A100
To emulate the detection habits utilized by human experts,
we build a prototype called A100, which efficiently captures
the visual information of grain kernels and sorts them based
on control signals from GrainAD. A100 integrates four main
components: a feeding cabin, a transparent plate, a capturing
module, and a sorting module. The detailed specifications of
each component are shown in Table I.
The feeding cabin is designed to preprocess a set of
test samples to ensure that all kernels are separate and
nonoverlapping without occlusion. It is equipped with a highfrequency inductance coil and a rotating motor. Kernels are
driven along a track with a preset size of 5 mm and vibrated
to separate and move to the transparent plate one by one. The
cabin maintains a flow rate of ṅf grains per second.
The transparent plate is employed to receive grains from the
feeding cabin and convey them through the capturing module
and eventually to the sorting module. It is circular in shape,
connected to a direct drive motor via a flange in the center. The
plate rotates counterclockwise within an angular velocity ωp ,
controlled by pulses from a servo driver.
The capturing module is equipped with five industrial RGB
cameras to capture the superficial information of grains, producing multiview images of each grain kernel. Four cameras are
arranged in a quadrilateral pattern, tilted at 25° above the plate,
while an additional camera is placed below the plate. The effective camera field-of-view reaches 21.5 × 27 mm2 . To mitigate
the influence of environmental factors (e.g., dust), two sets of
LED ring lights are configured to provide sufficient, shadow-free
lighting conditions, and the exposure time is denoted as te .
The sorting module sorts the grains into different storage
boxes based on control signals provided by GrainAD. It consists
of a cross-structure paddle and a 42-step stepper motor, with each
control action rotating the paddle by 90° to complete a sorting
operation.
The entire A100’s efficiency depends on balancing the flow
rate ṅf , the plate’s angular velocity ωp , and the quality of
captured images. While increasing the plate’s speed can expedite
the grain inspection process, it concurrently reduces camera

3630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Fig. 3. (a) The diagram of GrainBrain, including a prototype (A100) and a deep learning model (GrainAD). (b) The workflow of GrainBrain, where
black lines ( ) represent the flow of grain kernels, while green lines () indicate the data flow.

exposure times and thereby image quality. This tradeoff is
examined in detail in the experimental section. Notably, the
processing time of GrainAD must be shorter than the time grains
move from the capturing module to the sorting module, ensuring
that the grains receive control signals for sorting. Empirically,
our prototype can capture 300, 240, 210, and 480 kernel/min for
common wheat, maize, soybean and paddy, respectively.
B. Data Acquisition and Dataset Description
Considering that our A100 is designed to accommodate various types of cereal grains, we specifically focus on wheat, maize,
soybean, and paddy, as these four types of grains constitute a
significant percentage of the world’s food supply. To achieve a
comprehensive analysis, we collect extensive raw samples from
over 30 regions across four countries (CA, CN, KH, and USA).
Many of these kernels are preprocessed before being fed into
A100 to obtain high-quality images. Specifically, raw grains
collected from trucks initially undergo an impurity removal
process consisting of two steps. First, two sieves with different
mesh sizes are used to filter out excessively large and small
impurities. Next, lightweight impurities, such as bran, husks,
and straw, may still adhere to the transparent plate due to static
electricity, obstructing the cameras from capturing high-quality
images. To address this, a low-power fan is employed to remove
any remaining impurities.
Data annotations: We engage a team of six experienced
inspectors: four senior inspectors with 5−10 years of inspection
experience and two experts with over 10 years of experience.
We establish a comprehensive procedure. Each kernel involves
multiple steps to ensure consistency and accuracy.
r The defective or normal label is confirmed if all four senior
inspectors assign the same label.
r If three senior inspectors assign the same label, two experts
are consulted to reach a final agreement.
r The remaining images are discarded.
All captured images are re-examined by quality inspectors,
and some defective kernels are further provided with pixel-level
annotations to indicate anomalous regions.
Dataset: We construct and release a large-scale dataset containing 107.5K images. It encompasses four types of cereal
grains with 50, 30, 17.5, and 10K images for wheat, maize,
soybean, and paddy, respectively. Each type of cereal grain

Fig. 4. Data distribution of our released dataset. It contains 107.5K
individual kernels covering four types of cereal grains.

includes normal and various numbers of defective kernels. According to ISO standards [6], [7], we made our best effort to
collect defective kernels, but it is challenging due to their natural
distributions. Detailed information about defective categories
and data volume is shown in Fig. 4.
Each image includes five views with a resolution ranging from
510 × 111 to 3655 × 797 pixels, where 21.5K defective kernels
are categorized into various anomaly categories, and extra 5.4K
images of defective kernels are further collected and annotated at
the pixel level to highlight defective regions. For example, wheat
may exhibit black embryos, while paddy may show shriveled
grains without internal kernels. It is noteworthy that there is
significant intraheterogeneity among defective kernels within
the same category, and many samples simultaneously exhibit
multiple defective attributes. This is why we employ anomaly
detection methods to train the model instead of the classification
task. We believe this categorical information can also be valuable
for the community.
C. GrainAD
Preliminary and motivation: We formulate the identification
of defective kernels as a classic unsupervised anomaly detection
task. Specifically, given a training set XT = {I1t , . . . , Int } conq
}
taining n normal images and a query set XQ = {I1q , . . . , Im
including m normal or defective images, each image I ∈
RH×W ×3 (where H and W are the height and width) has a

FAN et al.: GRAINBRAIN: MULTIVIEW IDENTIFICATION AND STRATIFICATION OF DEFECTIVE GRAIN KERNELS

3631

Fig. 5. (a) Architecture of GrainAD. It consists of three stages: data augmentation; feature extraction; and classification. A normal image I and a
pseudo-anomaly image I a are fed into the STN, feature extractor, and adapter subsequently to obtain fI and fI a , respectively. fI g is synthesized
by injecting Gaussian noise N into fI . Then, these features are merged and fed into the classifier. (b) Detailed workflow of data augmentation part.
I a is synthesized by using data augmentation (e.g., DRAEM [25]) to an input normal image I.

corresponding label y ∈ {0, 1}, where 0 and 1 indicate the
normal and defective states, respectively. The goal is to train
a model using only normal data but to detect defective samples
during testing. As the model needs to provide control signals
for the sorting module before the corresponding kernel arrives,
it must complete the prediction process within approximately
200 ms (based on empirical practical tests). Therefore, the model
is expected to be a lightweight and deploy-friendly architecture.
Architecture: We aim to develop GrainAD to implement
real-time inspection system. As feature-based methods require
maintaining a memory bank, reconstruction-based approaches
rely on an encoder–decoder architecture. Both methods demand significant computational resources. Therefore, we follow
synthetic-based methods that introduce additional branches and
synthetic samples during training to train a discriminative classifier, which can be removed at the testing stage, thus ensuring high
efficiency in the deployed model. Our framework is primarily
based on Simplenet [8] due to its efficiency and simplicity, and
it converts the unsupervised problem into a supervised one, in
which a classifier is trained to identify anomalies synthesized in
both image and feature spaces. It consists of three stages: data
augmentation, feature extraction, and classification, as shown in
Fig. 5.
In the data augmentation stages, the input image I is augmented into a pseudoanomaly image I a using existing common
data augmentation strategies [24], [25]. A spatial transformer
network (STN) [26], [27] is employed to regulate the orientation
of each view in both I and I a . An affine transformation φθ is
employed:
⎛ ⎞

 xs
 
t
θ11 θ12 θ13 ⎜ s ⎟
x
= φθ =
(1)
⎝y ⎠
yt
θ21 θ22 θ23
1
where φθ is trained to explicitly learn the spatial transformation
from the original coordinates (xs , y s ) to the target coordinates
(xt , y t ). It is optimized by minimizing
Lstn (I a , I b ) =

1
N

||φθ (I a ) − φθ (I b )||22

(2)

encourages φθ to align the views to a similar orientation. The
STN is introduced because trained inspectors typically identify
key parts (e.g., the embryo) first and observe that kernels have
similar morphological shapes. The primary motivation for using
STN lies in its convolutional structure, which is deploymentfriendly and can be trained in a self-supervised manner.
In the feature extraction stage, a pretrained model with a feature adapter (denoted as φe ) is employed to extract and transfer
multilayer features into the task-specific domain. We use φe to
extract the normal feature fI and fI a from the transformed I
and I a , respectively. An anomalous feature fIg is then generated
by adding a Gaussian noise N (0, σ 2 ) to the normal feature fI .
A SCL loss [28] is employed to regularize these features:
Lscl =
i∈V

1
|P (i)|

− log
p∈P (i)

exp(zi · zp /τ )
(3)
a∈A(i) exp(zi · za /τ )

where V is the set of all views in the batch. Five views from
the same image are treated as individual positive samples P (i)
for anchor i, and A(i) is the set of all samples except i. zi
and zp represent the feature representations of samples i and p,
respectively, and τ is a temperature parameter. The motivation
for introducing Lscl is to ensure that different views of fI are
close to each other while remaining distant from the synthesized
features, obtaining more compact feature representations for
normal data.
Finally, in the classification stage, the normal and two synthesized features fI , fI a , fIg  are concentrated and fed into a
classifier τc . It is optimized using a binary cross entropy loss:
Lbce = −

1
3

yi log(τc (fi ))

(4)

i∈F

where F denotes the indices of {fI , fI a , fIg }, yi is the ground
truth label, and τc (fi ) is the predicted probability for class i.
The classifier converts the unsupervised anomaly detection into
a supervised learning task by generating pseudoanomalies in
both image and feature levels. The total training loss is

I a ,I b ∈S

Ltotal = λ1 Lstn + λ2 Lscl + λ3 Lbce

where I a and I b are two random views of the input image, and a
set of S with N view pairs can be obtained in a batch. Using Lstn

where λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 are weights that balance the contributions
of each loss component.

(5)

3632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

Inference: After training, the branches for generating pseudoanomalies are discarded. The query image I q is fed into the
STN, feature extractor, and classifier sequentially to obtain the
predicted map s = −τc (fIq ). Anomaly localization is produced
by interpolating s, with the anomaly score being the highest
value of s.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATIONS
In this section, we introduce the experimental setups, qualitative experiments for A100, experiments for GrainAD, and our
GrainBrain system versus human experts experiments.
A. Experimental Setups
GrainBrain: We employed a microcontroller (version
STM32F4) running on FreeRTOS operating system to control
our prototype, providing unified control signals for optimal
performance. An embedded device (Nvidia Jetson Xavier NX)
was used as the computational platform to execute our GrainAD
model, with all models converted and deployed using the TensorRT framework.
Implementation details: For each subset of our dataset, all
defective samples and an equal number of normal samples were
included in the test set, with the training and test sets split by 60%
and 40%, respectively. For GrainAD, we followed DRAEM [25]
and used Perlin noise to generate pseudoanomalies. The feature
extractor employed a pretrained WResnet50 [29] and selected
layers 2-3 to obtain multilayer features, the feature adapter was
a single fully connected layer, and the classifier was a two-layer
multilayer perceptron (MLP). For synthesizing feature-level
anomalies, σ was set to 0.015 for the Gaussian noise N . For the
training strategy, we first trained the STN separately by using
only Lstn . When using five views together or individually as the
input, images were resized to 224 × 1120 or 224 × 224 pixels,
respectively, and the training batch size was set to 16 with a
training epoch of 50. Adam optimizer was employed with a
learning rate of 1e−4. Then, we fixed the STN and the feature
extractor to train the adapter and the classifier by setting λ1 = 0,
λ2 = 0.5, and λ3 = 0.5. The Adam optimizer was used with a
learning rate of 2e−4, and the batch size was set to 8 with a
training epoch of 50. For the evaluation metrics, we followed
previous studies [21], [25] and adopted the area under the
receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) in both image-level
and pixel-level settings, with higher values indicating better
performance. The predicted map s of the classifier was smoothed
by using a Gaussian filter with σ = 4.
B. Efficiency of Prototype: A100
The high quality of images captured by the capturing module
is crucial for the accuracy of our anomaly detection framework.
The image quality is directly related to the specifications of the
cameras, the feeding rate ṅf of the feeding cabin, the angular
velocity ωp of the transparent plate, and the total exposure time
te of the LED ring light. To ensure the grains from the feeding
cabin to the transparent plate remain stable without movement,
the feeding rate ṅf for various types of grains can reach up to

ten kernels per second. Since this rate is significantly lower than
the camera’s capture frequency (45 FPS), it can be considered
insignificant at this stage. We conducted experiments to determine the optimal settings, ensuring high quality while exploring
the maximum ωp to achieve high inspection efficiency. To better
evaluate the quality of captured images, we used three dice, white
(large), red (medium), and blue (small), with different volumes
to simulate various types of cereal grains.
We first fixed the transparent plate in a static condition (i.e.,
ωp = 0) and tested four LED exposure times te (10, 30, 60, and
100 ms) corresponding to Images-1 through 4, respectively. As
shown in Fig. 6 , the histograms of Image-1 and Image-4 are
focused on low or high intensity, corresponding to underexposure and overexposure conditions. Image-2 and Image-3 have
good intensity distributions with most values between 0-25,
which aligns well with the fact that the majority of captured
images have black backgrounds. From a quantitative evaluation
perspective, the mean brightness and contrast of Image-2 and
Image-3 are 17.6 and 30.1, showing significant differences
from Image-1 and Image-4. High-quality images with proper
exposure conditions can be obtained when the exposure time te
is between 30 and 60 ms.
We further conducted experiments using three dice by fixing
the exposure time (te = 45 ms) and gradually increasing ωp
from 0.8 to 3.2 rad/s. We observed that the visual information
could be well captured when ωp was smaller than 1.6 rad/s,
while the medium and small dice experienced motion blurring
when ωp exceeded 2.4 rad/s. This is because the camera’s field of
view is 21.5 × 27 mm2 , and the movement distance st (during
te = 45 ms) is approximately 7 to 15 mm according to s =
ωp · 21 d · t at a higher angular velocity (ωp = 3.2 rad/s). Empirically, to maintain image quality and inspection efficiency, we
controlled the exposure time te between 30–60 ms and keep the
angular velocity ωp below 1.6 rad/s.
C. Efficacy of Model: GrainAD
Comparison with SOTA: We compared our GrainAD to classic methods: Patch SVDD [19] and DRAEM [25], advanced
methods: Patchcore [21], RD4AD [23], Simplenet [8] and
CDO [30], lightweight methods: EfficientAD [31], CRAD [32]
and MoEAD [33]. We tested two settings: entire-view (·♦ ) and
multiple-view (·† ). In the entire-view setting, five views of a
single kernel were concatenated and used for training. In the
multiple-view setting, each view was treated as a separate input.
As shown in Table II, our GrainAD using the multiview setting
consistently outperformed other methods, achieving the highest
average AUROC scores of 94.4% and 90.4% at the image-level
and pixel-level, respectively. Compared to Patchcore and CDO,
which also utilize pretrained models to extract multilayer features, our improvement lies in incorporating the STN to effectively align different views into a unified orientation, facilitating
easier feature extraction. In contrast to synthetic-based methods
like DRAEM and Simplenet, our use of SCL loss promotes learning compact feature representations of normal data by explicitly
considering different views of the same kernels exhibiting similar information. While lightweight models, EfficientAD, CRAD,

FAN et al.: GRAINBRAIN: MULTIVIEW IDENTIFICATION AND STRATIFICATION OF DEFECTIVE GRAIN KERNELS

3633

Fig. 6. Examples of captured images with different exposure times te and angular velocity ωp . We first verified the range of te with histograms
when the plate is static (ωp = 0). Then, we fixed the exposure time (te = 45ms) and further tested different angular velocities.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE OF GRAINAD IN COMPARISON WITH ADVANCED METHODS

and MoEAD employed few conventional blocks to extract features, our model employed WResnet50 as the feature extractor,
providing multiscale feature representations with richer spatial
and semantic information. However, our model was designed
to synthesize pseudoanomalies within relatively small regions,
leading to suboptimal performance compared to RD4AD in
maize and paddy subsets.
We also observed that many models performed better using
the multiple-view compared to their counterparts using the
entire-view in both image-level and pixel-level performance. We
suggest that the multiple-view approach mimics human inspectors, who carefully examine each view of the grains. Treating
each view individually provides higher resolution and more
detailed information as input to the model. In the complexity
analysis, we observed that RD4AD and Simplenet exhibited
similar computational efficiency, but their performance was
suboptimal. While CRAD, MoEAD, and EfficientAD had significantly smaller model parameters, their performance varied
widely. GrainAD demonstrated the best performance, and its
computational efficiency met the requirements for real-time
inspection.
Ablation study: We further conducted experiments to verify
the effectiveness of each component of GrainAD under the
multiview setting, as shown in Table III. Compared to Simplenet,
which uses only the synthesized anomaly feature fIg , integrating
the STN to explicitly learn the spatial transformation produced

TABLE III
ABLATION STUDY OF GRAINAD

improvements in average image-level and pixel-level AUROC
of 1.5% and 1.1%, respectively. We suggest that adding an
STN results in poorer performance on maize because it lacks
a distinct shape pattern compared to other types of grains,
making it difficult to normalize to a similar shape. Using only
the pseudoanomaly image (I a ) achieved similar performance to
using only the synthesized anomaly feature fIg , and combining
them yielded an average improvement of 2.7% and 4.8% in
image-level and pixel-level AUROC, respectively. Employing
Lscl allowed the model to achieve the best performance in
average scores, obtaining the highest results in wheat, maize,
and soybean.
Ablation study for the loss function: We conducted experiments to explore different settings of weights λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 to
balance the losses Lstn , Lscl , and Lbce , respectively, as shown
in Table IV. Note that the STN in all models was pretrained
to convergence. We observed that different weight settings

3634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2025

TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY OF WEIGHTS FOR THE TRAINING LOSS (REPORTED USING
IMAGE-/PIXEL-LEVEL AUROC (%))

Fig. 8. Visualizations of the pixel-level predictions with/without using
STN. The experts’ annotations are highlighted using red contours ().

TABLE V
KAPPA TESTS BETWEEN GRAINBRAIN AND HUMAN EXPERTS

Fig. 7. Visualizations of the pixel-level predictions of our GrainAD. The
experts’ annotations are highlighted using red contours ().

produced similar performance. Without explicitly fine-tuning
Lstn (i.e., setting λ1 to 0), the models achieved relatively better
performance across four types of cereal grains, and the best
performance was obtained when λ2 and λ3 were both set to 0.5.
We suggest that the STN should be trained in the early stages
using self-supervised learning to achieve stable pose alignment.
Then, only feature alignment and classification losses should be
used for optimization.
Visualization: We also visualized the pixel-level predictions
of our GrainAD, as illustrated in Fig. 7. It was observed that
our GrainAD effectively localized the anomalous regions of
defective kernels. Particularly, when the query kernel is attacked
by pests or is in a germination state, our model precisely
highlighted the pest-affected areas and the germination sites
across multiple views. The pixel-level results significantly supported the model’s interpretability and transparency, especially
in inspecting various types of grains. We further conducted a
quantitative analysis of the effectiveness of STN, as shown in
Fig. 8. Without STN, the models demonstrated good pixel-level
results for identifying anomalous regions but produced several
erroneous predictions. With STN, it successfully aligned the
grains’ pose to a similar orientation in an unsupervised setting,
and the aligned images were used as input for the models,
significantly reducing erroneous regions.
D. GrainBrain Versus Human Experts
The GrainBrain is developed to assist inspectors in reducing
workloads, especially when dealing with large quantities of grain
kernels for quality inspection and stratification tasks. Our goal
is to create a system that maintains high consistency with human
experts while ensuring high efficiency. To evaluate this, we conducted a comparison between GrainBrain and human experts.

Specifically, we built two versions of GrainBrain (denoted as D1
and D2 ) and recruited two human experts (denoted as H1 and
H2 ) with over 5 years of specialized experience. We prepared
16 additional 50-gram test samples, with 4 samples for each
type of cereal grains. All samples were randomly acquired from
grain delivery trucks and underwent an impurity removal process
using a series of tools, such as sieves and a fan. The proportion
of defective kernels in each test sample ranged from 5–20%.
To ensure a fair comparison, experts were required to inspect
images captured by our systems rather than real grain kernels.
The samples were shuffled and inspected under a dual-blind
policy. We conducted the Kappa test to assess agreement and
reported the Cohen’s kappa value κ and the inspection time
using average values and standard deviations. It is noted that
when κ ≥ 0.6, it indicates significant agreement, while a κ of 0
indicates agreement by chance.
As shown in Table V, GrainBrain systems demonstrated
strong consistency with human experts, achieving Cohen’s
Kappa values κ of nearly 65% for all comparison experiments
across various types of cereal grains. These results validated
the feasibility and potential of our system for visual inspection and seed stratification tasks. It is evident that our system
demonstrated a significant advantage in inspection time, costing near 174, 46, 142, and 271 s per test sample for wheat,
maize, soybean, and paddy, respectively, surpassing H1 and
H2 by over ten times. Especially when processing wheat or

FAN et al.: GRAINBRAIN: MULTIVIEW IDENTIFICATION AND STRATIFICATION OF DEFECTIVE GRAIN KERNELS

paddy, which have smaller physical sizes, our systems were
faster by approximately 20× speedup. These results verified the
efficiency of our system. In practice, inspectors typically take
more time because they need to manipulate the grain kernels
using tweezers and individually pick, classify, and tally the
corresponding proportions.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we presented a multiview vision-based system:
GrainBrain for high-throughput grain appearance inspection and
seed stratification tasks. It consists of a prototype A100 and
an anomaly detection model GrainAD. Specifically, A100 is
designed to separate kernels individually and capture five-view
visual images of each grain kernel efficiently. GrainAD is developed to analyze the captured images and provide control signals
for A100 to implement kernel sorting. Our GrainBrain offers
automatic detection, inspection, and individual separation of
defective kernels. Built upon an anomaly detection framework,
our approach significantly enhanced model robustness, enabling
the effective detection of various types of anomalies, including
unseen or unknown defects. In addition, we released a largescale dataset containing over 100K images with high-quality
annotations.
Our system still has some limitations in both the prototype and
algorithms. On the prototype side, the placement of the cameras
restricts the ability to capture certain areas of elongated grains,
such as maize, or grains with recessed surfaces, resulting in some
regions being left unobserved. In addition, different grains, such
as wheat and maize, exhibit varying reflectivity under the same
lighting conditions. Currently, we used the same exposure time
for all grain types, but dynamic adjustments based on the specific
grain type should be considered. The fixed focal length of the
cameras also limits the ability to capture high-quality images of
agricultural products of varying sizes, such as peanuts or millet.
On the other hand, the performance of the unsupervised anomaly
detection method has not yet reached the level of high expert
consensus. Incorporating a small number of labeled anomaly
samples as auxiliary data or leveraging large language models
could further enhance the model’s performance while maintaining robustness. We hope that GrainBrain can stimulate and draw
more attention to various fields of grain quality inspection.
REFERENCES
[1] N. D. Cruz and G. Khush, “Rice grain quality evaluation procedures,”
Aromatic Rices, vol. 3, pp. 15–28, 2000.
[2] R. Henry and P. Kettlewell, Cereal Grain Quality, Springer Dordrecht,
2012. https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-94-009-1513-8
[3] M. Helguera et al., “Grain quality in breeding,” Wheat Qual. Improving Process. Hum. Health, Cham: Springer International Publishing,
pp. 273–307, 2020, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-34163-3_12.
[4] Y. Miao, D. J. Mulla, and P. C. Robert, “Identifying important factors
influencing corn yield and grain quality variability using artificial neural
networks,” Precis. Agriculture, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117–135, 2006.
[5] T. Brosnan and D.-W. Sun, “Improving quality inspection of food products
by computer vision—A review,” J. Food Eng., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 3–16,
2004.
[6] “ISO 5527: Cereals–Vocabulary,” International Organization for Standardization, Standard, Feb. 2015.
[7] “ISO 24333: Cereals and cereal products—Sampling,” International Organization for Standardization, Standard, Dec. 2009.

3635

[8] Z. Liu et al., “Simplenet: A simple network for image anomaly detection
and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2023, pp. 20402–20411.
[9] N. S. Visen, J. Paliwal, D. Jayas, and N. White, “Image analysis of bulk
grain samples using neural networks,” in Proc. ASAE Annu. Meeting,
American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, 2003, pp. 33–
55.
[10] Y. Kim and R. Flores, “Determination of bran contamination in wheat
flours using ash content, color, and bran speck counts,” Cereal Chem.,
vol. 76, no. 6, pp. 957–961, 1999.
[11] T. Bronan and D.-W. Sun, “Inspection and grading of agricultural and
food products by computer vision systems—A review,” Comput. Electron.
Agriculture, vol. 36, no. 2-3, pp. 193–213, 2002.
[12] A. Mitra et al., “Everything you wanted to know about smart agriculture,”
2022, arXiv:2201.04754.
[13] X. Yang et al., “A survey on smart agriculture: Development modes, technologies, and security and privacy challenges,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica
Sinica, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 273–302, Feb. 2021.
[14] L. Fan et al., “GrainSpace: A large-scale dataset for fine-grained and
domain-adaptive recognition of cereal grains,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 21116–21125.
[15] L. Fan et al., “AV4GAInsp: An efficient dual-camera system for identifying
defective kernels of cereal grains,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 851–858, Jan. 2024.
[16] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for anomaly
detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021.
[17] P. Bergmann et al., “The MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J.
Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 4, pp. 1038–1059, 2021.
[18] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[19] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly detection
and segmentation,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 375–390.
[20] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “Padim: A patch
distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Springer, 2021, pp. 475–489.
[21] K. Roth et al., “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 14318–14328.
[22] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 1705–1714.
[23] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from oneclass embedding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2022, pp. 9737–9746.
[24] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “Cutpaste: Self-supervised
learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 9664–9674.
[25] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Draem-a discriminatively
trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
[26] M. Jaderberg et al., “Spatial transformer networks,” Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 28, pp. 2017–2025, 2015.
[27] Y. Zheng, X. Wang, R. Deng, T. Bao, R. Zhao, and L. Wu, “Focus your
distribution: Coarse-to-fine non-contrastive learning for anomaly detection
and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[28] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., vol. 33, pp. 18661–18673, 2020.
[29] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[30] Y. Cao, X. Xu, Z. Liu, and W. Shen, “Collaborative discrepancy optimization for reliable image anomaly localization,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.,
vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 10674–10683, Nov. 2023.
[31] K. Batzner, L. Heckler, and R. König, “Efficientad: Accurate visual
anomaly detection at millisecond-level latencies,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 128–138.
[32] J. C. Lee, T. Kim, E. Park, S. S. Woo, and J. H. Ko, “Continuous memory
representation for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2024, pp. 438–454.
[33] S. Meng, W. Meng, Q. Zhou, S. Li, W. Hou, and S. He, “Moead: A
parameter-efficient model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 345–361.