6990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Graph Anomaly Detection in Time Series: A Survey
Thi Kieu Khanh Ho , Ali Karami , and Narges Armanfard
(Survey Paper)

Abstract—With the recent advances in technology, a wide range
of systems continue to collect a large amount of data over time and
thus generate time series. Time-Series Anomaly Detection (TSAD)
is an important task in various time-series applications such as
e-commerce, cybersecurity, vehicle maintenance, and healthcare
monitoring. However, this task is very challenging as it requires considering both the intra-variable dependency (relationships within a
variable over time) and the inter-variable dependency (relationships
between multiple variables) existing in time-series data. Recent
graph-based approaches have made impressive progress in tackling
the challenges of this field. In this survey, we conduct a comprehensive and up-to-date review of TSAD using graphs, referred to
as G-TSAD. First, we explore the significant potential of graph
representation for time-series data and and its contributions to
facilitating anomaly detection. Then, we review state-of-the-art
graph anomaly detection techniques, mostly leveraging deep learning architectures, in the context of time series. For each method,
we discuss its strengths, limitations, and the specific applications
where it excels. Finally, we address both the technical and application challenges currently facing the field, and suggest potential
future directions for advancing research and improving practical
outcomes.
Index Terms—Time-series anomaly detection, graphs, deep
learning, time-series signals, dynamic social networks, videos.

I. INTRODUCTION
TIME series is defined as an ordered sequence of values
that represent the evolution of one variable, aka univariate,
or multiple variables, aka multivariate, over time [1]. Timeseries data is also referred to as time-stamped data, i.e., each
data point or each observation corresponds to a specific time
index. As time is a constituent of everything that is observable,
time-series data can be found everywhere on the Earth, such as in
nature (e.g., the wind speed, the temperature), in marketing and
industrial activities (e.g., the stock price), in medicine (e.g., the
heart and brain activity), and in surveillance and security (e.g.,
video streams, network traffic logs). Therefore, time-series data
and its analysis have attracted significant interest in the past
decade.

A

Received 28 April 2024; revised 26 March 2025; accepted 29 April 2025.
Date of publication 2 May 2025; date of current version 3 July 2025. This work
was supported in part by the Natural Sciences, Engineering Research Council
of Canada (NSERC), in part by Fonds de recherche du Quebec, in part by
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, in
part by Calcul Quebec, and in part by the Compute Canada. Recommended for
acceptance by B. Rosenhahn. (Corresponding author: Thi Kieu Khanh Ho.)
The authors are with McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 0G4, Canada,
and also with Mila-Quebec AI Institute, Montreal, QC H2S 3H1, Canada
(e-mail: thi.k.ho@mail.mcgill.ca; ali.karami@mail.mcgill.ca; narges.armanfard
@mcgill.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3566620

Time-Series Anomaly Detection (TSAD), the process of detecting unusual patterns that do not conform to the expected
behavior, has been widely studied [2]. The unusual patterns can
be found in many real-world applications such as ecosystem
disturbances in earth sciences, structural defects in jet turbine
engineering, suspicious activities in surveillance videos, heart
failure in cardiology, or seizures in brain activity. Most existing
TSAD algorithms are designed to analyze time-series data as
a univariate modality [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] or as multiple individual modalities (variables) [18], [19], [20], [21], [21], [22], [23], [24]. In
other words, these algorithms only consider the intra-variable
information.
In many practical systems, a more proper and reliable system modeling can be obtained if the data are considered as
multiple related modalities (variables) that are influenced by
each other. Specifically, a comprehensive anomaly detection
(AD) algorithm carefully shall model the variables’ interaction over time, i.e., the inter-variable dependencies, as well as
the intra-variable dependencies. Explicit consideration of the
inter-variable dependencies allows capturing a system’s spatial
dependencies across variables. Examples of systems, which
exhibit spatial dependencies, are the brain where the recording
sensors are placed across the brain, and each sensor is considered
as a variable; in a single time-series signal where every sample
(feature) or time-interval (window) is considered as a variable;
and in a video-based system where a variable can be assigned
to every frame.
While many TSAD algorithms have addressed intra-variable
dependencies, capturing inter-variable dependencies remains
under-explored in existing studies. In recent years, graph-based
methods have gained popularity in TSAD due to their ability to
represent complex data structures inherent in time-series data.
Unlike traditional tabular representations, graphs have demonstrated superior performance in AD by modeling inter-variable
dependencies, where each variable is represented as a graph
node and the interactions between variables are depicted as
graph edges [25], [26]. This property is valuable for TSAD. For
instance, if one variable experiences a change, related variables
are likely to exhibit similar changes as well. This enables the
identification of anomalies that may not be evident through
conventional TSAD methods.
This survey explores TSAD using graph-based approaches. It
categorizes existing research based on the types of constructed
graphs, the nature of graph-based anomalies in time-series data,
the detection methods employed, and the application domains.

0162-8828 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF THE EXISTING SURVEYS WITH OURS

Paper Organization. Section II presents an overview of existing surveys in the literature and our contributions. Section III
outlines the challenges in time-series data. Sections IV and V
provide foundational insights into graphs, common types of
anomalies within graphs, and how the graph-based methods
can address the time-series challenges. Section VI introduces
our unified taxonomy for TSAD using graphs. Within each
category, we discuss the strength of each method in addressing
the challenges outlined in Section III, as well as its applications
and technical drawbacks and how the subsequent methods mitigate these shortcomings. Section VII summarizes widely used
datasets and their real-world applications. Section VIII discusses
employed evaluation metrics in the field. Section IX discusses
the current research challenges and promising directions for
future research. Finally, we conclude our paper in Section X.
II. OVERVIEW OF RELATED SURVEYS
Although graphs have proven effective and yielded state-ofthe-art results in TSAD, as summarized in Table I, none of
existing surveys have focused on the emergence and applications
of graphs for detecting anomalies in time-series data, referred
to as G-TSAD. For instance, Graph-based Approaches (GA)
surveys [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34],
[35] cover a broad range of graph structure learning techniques
for various tasks such as classification, clustering, and prediction, without focusing specifically on AD. On the other hand,
Graph Anomaly Detection (GAD) surveys [36], [37], [38], [39],
[40], [41], [42] provides a comprehensive review of graphbased methods for detecting various types of abnormal graph
objects. However, both GA and GAD surveys solely review
the graph-based methods applicable to static data (e.g., static

6991

social networks or images) and do not provide comprehensive
reviews on the methods that are able to capture the intra-variable
dependencies existing in time-series data. Meanwhile, TSAD
surveys [2], [43], [44], [45], [46] focus on methodologies for detecting anomalies within time-series signals, disregarding other
data types of the time series such as dynamic social networks and
videos. Additionally, existing TSAD surveys show the ability of
non-graph deep learning methods to detect anomalies only based
on the intra-variable dependencies, ignoring the inter-variable
dependencies; this is while both intra- and inter-variable dependencies are crucial for TSAD.
The contributions of this survey are as follows:
r The first survey in G-TSAD. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first survey that reviews the state-of-the-art
graph-based techniques for TSAD. Our primary goal of
this survey is to showcase how anomaly detectors, which
leverage graphs, detect anomalies in time-series data. Until
now, all the relevant surveys focus on either GA, TSAD, or
GAD. There is no dedicated and comprehensive survey on
G-TSAD. Our work bridges this gap, and we expect that
such structured and comprehensive survey helps to push
forward the research in this active area.
r A new perspective. We introduce new concepts in the
field of G-TSAD, such as the intra- and inter-variable
dependencies, and constructed graphs for time-series data.
Such concepts would pave the road for future research to
provide well-structured and easy-to-understand G-TSAD
algorithms.
r A detailed overview of G-TSAD. We discuss the key challenges in TSAD, the core motivations of employing graph
representation for time-series data and its role in facilitating
anomaly detection, and the various types of anomalies in
graphs.
r A systematic and comprehensive review. We conduct a
comprehensive and up-to-date review of the state-of-the-art
on G-TSAD methods, primarily leveraging deep learning
architectures, and categorize them into four groups to
improve their clarity and accessibility. These categories
include Autoencoder (AE)-based methods, Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN)-based methods, predictivebased methods, and self-supervised methods. For each
category, we describe technical details, highlight their advantages and disadvantages, and compare them.
r Outlook on future directions. We point out both technical
and application limitations of the current studies and suggest promising directions for future works on G-TSAD.
III. TIME-SERIES CHALLENGES
In general, a K-variable time series dataset can be denoted by X = (x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(K) ), where each x(i) =
(i)
(i)
(i)
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ), X ∈ RK×N ×m , x(i) ∈ RN ×m , K is the
number of variables, N is the number of observations, and m is
the feature length, representing the number of features in each
(i)
observation. Each xj , j ∈ {1, . . . , N } and i ∈ {1, . . . , K}, is
an m dimensional vector corresponding to a recording at the jth
time interval and the ith variable. For example, in Fig. 1 (Left),

6992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 1. An example of anomaly detection in a multivariate time-series signal
data to show the difference between TSAD (Block 1) and G-TSAD (Block 2).
The inputs are three successive time intervals (S: Sensor). In the constructed
graphs, the solid and dash lines, respectively, indicate the inter-variable and
intra-variable dependencies, m = 3, and the edge features are not shown for
simplicity. Normal and abnormal cases are respectively shown in black and red
colors. G-TSAD has the potential to detect anomalous sensors, local-relations,
regions, and time intervals.

the raw input data of three intervals of a dataset X consisting
of five variables (sensors) is shown. The raw interval at the ith
variable is encoded by m = 3 features, as depicted on the top of
each sensor in Block 2 of Fig. 1. Hence, X can be represented
as X = (x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(5) ), where X ∈ R5×3×m , x(i) =
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(x1 , . . . , xj−1 , xj , xj+1 , . . . , xN ), x(i) ∈ R3×m . Note that
one may directly use the raw values as features; e.g., if an
observation consists of 100 samples, then m = 100. Similarly,
a video sequence can be considered as either univariate or
multivariate data. For univariate data, one may consider every
frame or a subset of frames as one observation of that single
variable, and use the raw pixel values of the frame(s) or their
corresponding features. In the multivariate case, each pixel can
be considered as a variable. In this context, an observation of
a variable can be obtained from a single frame or a subset of
frames.
Working with time-series data requires careful consideration
of several factors, which are discussed below in detail.
Intra-variable dependency. Observations available in one
variable depend on each other, i.e., there exist dependencies
of the jth observation and a lagged version of itself in the
ith variable. Positive dependencies indicate that an increase (or
decrease) in the jth observation is likely caused by an increase
(or decrease) in the previous observations and to be followed
by an increase (or decrease) in the subsequent observations
of the ith variable. In contrast, negative dependencies suggest
an inverse relationship. However, in practice, one of the main
obstacles is dealing with the non-linear complex dependencies present within a variable. In fact, the mutual relationship
between observations is not straightforward, and the effect of
the future/past observations on the current one may vary over
time. This makes it difficult to determine the appropriate lags
for consideration, as different lags may have different levels of
significance.
Inter-variable dependency. It is important to capture the
inter-variable dependency as it can provide insights into the

underlying relationship patterns that exist between different
variables; a useful property for TSAD. For example, if two
variables are correlated, a change in one variable can be used to
predict changes in another variable. Another example is the case
if individual variables have fairly normal behavior, but when all
(or a subset) of variables and their interactions are considered
together, an anomaly can be caught. Hence, employing graphs
that can capture complex relationships between variables would
be a great tool for TSAD.
Non-stationarity. It is important to consider trends, seasonality, and unpredictability. Although the trend is known as an
average tendency of the series, the trend itself may vary over
different time intervals. Seasonality presents the variations of
repeating short-term cycles in the series, which causes a change
of variance over time. Unpredictability occurs randomly that are
neither systematic nor predictable. Such properties influence the
variables statistical properties such as mean, variance, etc. Thus,
time-series data is said to be non-stationary, which may easily
mislead an AD method as anomalies at certain observations
may not be true anomalies [9]. Methods that can adapt to the
changes in the data structures require a large number of training
data.
Dimensionality. The current advances in technology allow
us to record a large amount of time-series data to capture
the intra-variable and inter-variable dependencies. Existing of
such rich datasets allows us to design time-series analyses that
are consistent and reliable across various datasets. Looking
at the raw data, every data sample in every variable can be
considered as one dimension; hence we are dealing with the
curse of dimensionality challenge. Therefore, there is a need
to develop algorithms that can handle such complicated and
high-dimensional data.
Noise. It is important to make a distinction between noise
and anomalies. Noise is the random, unwanted variation that
degrades the data quality. In contrast, an anomaly is an unusual entity with respect to a set of pre-established normal
observations. Therefore, AD algorithms explicitly designed to
distinguish noise from anomalies are more robust when dealing
with contaminated data; however, various types of noises may
happen depending on the operational environment, recording
sensor types, etc., that a researcher may not be aware at the
problem onset. Hence, it is critical to understand the nature of
noise in every application and apply appropriate noise modeling/reduction techniques to not mix them with the anomaly
concept.
In the subsequent sections, we will delve into graph-based
techniques and their effectiveness in tackling individual challenges or combinations thereof present in time-series data, hence
enhancing our understanding of their applicability and utility in
real-world scenarios.
IV. WHY GRAPHS?
A. Graph-Based Solutions for TSAD Challenges
1) Capturing Intra- and Inter-Variable Dependencies: Many
TSAD studies have shown superior performance when employing graphs. This is because many real-world systems can
be represented as graphs, and graphs can inherently capture

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

intra- and inter-variable dependencies. We define a graph set
representing a time-series data as:
j,j  ∈{1,...N }

,
(1)
G = Gj , Sim{Gj , Gj  }

j=j

where Gj = {Mj , Aj } is a graph representing the jth observation, Mj is the K × m node-feature matrix, Aj is the
K × K × m edge-feature matrix representing the relationships
across nodes (variables) in the jth observation, m and m respectively denotes the number of features representing the nodes and
their relations. Sim{·, ·} defines the relation between two graphs.
The Sim{·, ·} goal is to capture the intra-variable dependencies between two observations. This can be defined as a function of node-features and edge-features, i.e., Sim{Gj , Gj  } =
F{Mj , Mj  , Aj , Aj  }. The literature identifies two types of
constructed graphs: static and dynamic, which are described as
below.
Dynamic Graphs. G is trained dynamically if either of Gj
or Sim{·, ·} has learnable parameters; e.g., an encoder network
with a set of parameters ξ1 can be used to provide Mj and Aj
from the raw data that forms the jth observation [48], [49], or
a network with a set of trainable parameters ξ2 can used as F
[50], [51].
Static Graphs. If there are no learnable parameters assigned to
Gj and/or Sim{Gj , Gj  }, we are dealing with static graphs [52]. In
other words, a static graph is built using a set of pre-defined node
features and edges obtained from the jth observation of the K
variables. For example, with prior knowledge about the sensors’
locations in a K-variable sensory system, a static graph at the jth
observation is constructed where nodes are sensors and edges
are defined by the euclidean distance between sensors. Note that
in some algorithms, the relations across static graphs are learned
implicitly through employing a temporal-based network such as
recurrent neural networks [53]. Notably, [53] has been shown to
be the first in the G-TSAD field to incorporate a predefined
Sim{·, ·}, as an additional form of supervision within their
model. This study demonstrates that utilizing Sim{·, ·} improves
model performance compared to approaches that do not make
use of this measure.
2) Handling Non-Stationarity in Time-Series Data: In many
real-world applications, dynamically learning graphs is crucial
since dynamic graphs allow for the adaptation of relationships
between variables as the underlying data distribution changes.
For example, in financial markets, the correlations between
assets (variables) may fluctuate over time due to shifting market conditions. By dynamically updating the graph edges and
Sim{·, ·} to reflect these changing relationships, dynamic graphs
can effectively capture the non-stationarity inherent in timeseries data.
3) Addressing High Dimensionality: Graphs have also
demonstrated their capability to address other challenges such
as dimensionality [34]. One approach is to construct the static
graphs based on prior knowledge [52], incorporating information such as the distance, correlations and similarity measures
between variables. Based on their relevance and importance
in the graph structure, graph-based methods can select features that are most discriminative or relevant for the task at

6993

hand. By focusing on a reduced set of features, dimensionality
can be effectively managed while maintaining the predictive
power of the data. Another strategy is to project the graph
elements onto the graph embedding space using techniques
such as node2vec [54] or graph neural networks [27], which
can map high-dimensional data into a lower-dimensional space
while preserving the structure and relationships encoded in the
graph. Lastly, graph-based regularization techniques [55], [56],
[57], [58] can be applied to impose constraints on the model
parameters during the graph learning process. This ensures that
the learned graphs exhibit desirable properties or structures of
the graphs such as smoothness, where features should change
smoothly between neighboring nodes, or sparsity, to prevent
overly connected graphs.
4) Mitigating Noise in Time-Series Data: Graph regularization techniques can also mitigate the effect of noise in the
data [59], [60], [61]. For example, smoothness regularization
encourages gradual changes in signal values between neighboring nodes, effectively filtering out high-frequency noise components [62]. Moreover, many methods have been developed
to minimize the impact of noisy data when learning the graph
structure [63], [64], [65]. These algorithms leverage robust optimization techniques to handle noise, resulting in more accurate
graph representations that are less susceptible to noise.
B. Graph Representations Across Different Time-Series
Domains
Fig. 1 visualizes G-TSAD versus the non-graph approach
(i.e., TSAD). Fig. 1 (Left) shows raw signals from three time
intervals of a multivariate system with five sensors, each recording different types of data with varying ranges and characteristics. Each sensor is then represented as a 3-dimensional
feature vector, shown in both Blocks 1 and 2. Block 1 illustrates
non-graph TSAD methods, where each interval is depicted as a
rectangle containing data from all sensors. A key limitation of
these conventional methods is their inability to explicitly model
inter-sensor relationships. That is, they simply concatenate the
sensor data, train the model based on this concatenated input,
and aim to detect only interval-level anomalies. This diminishes
their ability to detect anomalies at a finer-grained level, such as
abnormal sensors, abnormal sensor interactions (aka relations),
or anomalies involving multiple sensors (aka regions).
Moreover, Fig. 1 (Left) shows that the recording of Sensor #4
during the jth interval is abnormal. While, as shown in Block
1, TSAD methods fail to identify the location of the anomaly,
G-TSAD methods can localize such node anomalies by analyzing each sensor individually, shown in Block 2. In contrast, the
recordings of Sensors #3 and #4 during the j + 1 th interval
do not exhibit significant anomalies detectable by non-graph
TSAD methods. However, a well-designed G-TSAD method
can identify these anomalies by considering node relationships
within and between intervals through edges and Sim{·, ·}, as
discussed in Section IV.
As depicted in Fig. 1, graphs hold potential to detect various types of anomalies in a sensory multivariate system. One
may wonder whether graphs can be applied to an univariate

6994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 3. Example of node-level, edge-level, sub-graph-level, graph-level, and
Sim{·, ·}-level anomalies in a graph set G with three successive observations.
In each graph G, m = 4 and m = 1.

a stream of time-evolving object-level graphs, where an object
(e.g., a human body joint, an object in the scene) is considered
as a graph node and edges represent the nodes relation within a
video frame. Fig. 2(b) shows an example of anomalous activity
detection where a node is assigned to every body joint – any
unexpected joint movements shall be detected as anomalies.
In summary, we have shown the capability of graphs in addressing various challenges present in time-series data described
in Section III. More technical insights into methods specifically
tailored to address individual challenges or combinations thereof
are provided in Section VI.
Fig. 2. Examples of time-series data and the corresponding constructed
graphs. Each example is shown with three consecutive observations. The top
figures show the original data and the bottom figures show the constructed
graphs. In the constructed graphs, the solid and dash lines, respectively, indicate
the inter-variable and intra-variable dependencies, m = 3, and the edge features
are not shown for simplicity. Normal and abnormal cases are respectively shown
in black and red colors.

time-series signal system, where there is only a single sensor used to record the signals, in order to detect various
anomaly types such as point-level, contextual-level and trendlevel anomalies defined in [44]. Constructing graphs that represent the relationships between data points, short/long time
intervals, with each denoted as a variable, can be beneficial. By
analyzing the level of connectivity within the graph, anomalies
can be identified as data points or time intervals that have few or
weak connections to neighboring points, contexts, or patterns.
Graphs also present a capability in other time-series domains. Fig. 2 shows two additional examples of time-series
data and their constructed graphs by which both the intraand inter-variable information are captured. Note that the three
successive observations at the j − 1, j, and j + 1 intervals,
shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b) respectively, correspond to three
successive snapshots of a social network and three successive
frames of a video. In social networks, the users are considered as
graph nodes, and the users’ interactions as edges. Most normal
nodes have reasonable number of connections, which indicates
the user has an ordinary social network activity. A node with
an exceptionally high number of connections can be defined
as an abnormal user. An abnormal node may represent a
celebrity, an influential person, or a leader within the network
(Fig. 2(a)). In video applications, a video can be modeled as

V. ANOMALIES IN GRAPHS
As illustrated in Section IV, there are many types of anomalies
in time-series data. For instance, anomalies may manifest as
anomalous sensors, local relationships between sensors, regions,
and time intervals within a sensory multivariate signal system. In a univariate time-series system, anomalies can take the
form of point-level, contextual-level, and trend-level anomalies.
Dynamic social networks may feature abnormal users (nodes)
and relationships between users (edges) as anomalies. In video
streams, unusual object movements can be regarded as anomalies. To provide a general categorization applicable to most of
time-series data, we categorize anomalies that can be observed
in graphs into five groups, namely anomalous nodes, edges,
sub-graphs, graphs and Sim{·, ·}. They are, respectively, known
as variables, the local relations between variables, small sets
of variables and their corresponding connections, the full set
of variables and their corresponding connections at the jth
observation, and the global relations between observations. Note
that detecting anomalous objects in constructed graphs is much
more challenging than other graph types due to the dynamic
variations of nodes and edges [25].
Fig. 3 shows
a graph set with
 three successive observations,

. The five anomaly types are
i.e., G = Gj , Sim{Gj , Gj  }

j=j

illustrated in the figure. In the first observation, all nodes and
edges are normal. However, in the second observation, one
anomalous node, two anomalous edges, and one anomalous
sub-graph are appeared. In an anomalous sub-graph, each node
and edge might look normal; however, if they are considered as
a group, an anomaly can be detected. As sub-graphs vary in size,

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

6995

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE AE-BASED METHODS

as well as node and edge level properties, detecting anomalous
sub-graphs is more challenging than nodes and edges. Regarding
graph-level anomalies, they are defined as abnormal graphs in
a graph stream – specifically, given a sequence of graphs, an
anomalous graph at the third observation can be distinguished
from other graphs based on their unusual evolving pattern of
nodes, edges and corresponding features.
Lastly, anomalous Sim{·, ·} occurs when there are unusual
relationships between graphs (aka observations). As Sim{·, ·}
can capture both short-term and long-term relations across observations, anomalous Sim{·, ·} can be detected by analyzing the
evolution of the graphs and their relationships over time. Assume
that the three observations in Fig. 3 correspond to the monthly
stock market; short-term variations, modeled by Sim{Gj−1 , Gj }
and Sim{Gj , Gj+1 }, may represent a small price change.
These small variations can be considered normal. However, a
longer relationship presented in Sim{Gj−1 , Gj+1 } may raise an
abnormality.
In general, given a graph G, the goal of an ideal anomaly detector system is to produce a learnable anomaly scoring function
f (·) that assigns an anomaly score to nodes, edges, sub-graphs,
and graphs at every observation, and Sim{·, ·} at the coarse level.
The larger f (·) is, the higher the probability of the graph object
being abnormal.
We introduce G-TSAD methods capable of detecting individual graph-based anomaly types or their combinations throughout
Section VI. Note that although five types of graph anomalies are
observed in the example shown in Fig. 3, currently, there is
no study that targets detecting all types of anomalies. None of
the existing methods target to detect anomalous Sim{·, ·} and
very few works could simultaneously detect multiple anomalous
objects in graphs. This will be further discussed in Section IX.
VI. CATEGORIZATION OF G-TSAD METHODS
Existing G-TSAD methods can be categorized according
to several taxonomies. One taxonomy is based on the type
of constructed graphs: static and dynamic, as discussed in
Section IV-A1. A second taxonomy considers the trainable
parameter perspective, i.e., for dynamic graphs, methods can be
further categorized into node, edge, and Sim{·, ·} learning. In the
literature, no studies have explored Sim{·, ·} learning. Note that

static graphs do not involve learnable parameters as node, edge
and Sim{·, ·} features are predefined. A third taxonomy relates
to the types of anomalies that G-TSAD methods aim to detect, including node, edge, subgraph, graph-level, and Sim{·, ·}
anomalies. In this paper, we adopt a coarser taxonomy that
encompasses all existing taxonomies mentioned above, based on
the type of loss function minimized during training. Specifically,
we group methods into four categories: AE-based, GAN-based,
predictive-based, and self-supervised methods. This high-level
classification is elaborated in Sections VI-A through VI-D.
Within each of these categories, we further provide fine-grained
classifications in Tables II–V, which summarize the type of
constructed graphs (static or dynamic), learning tasks (node,
edge, or Sim{·, ·} learning), and the types of anomalies (node,
edge, subgraph, graph, or Sim{·, ·}).
First, in AE-based methods, the reconstruction loss is the core
mechanism. The model is trained to minimize the difference
between the input data and its reconstruction using an encoderdecoder architecture. The goal is for the model to accurately
reconstruct the normal samples, resulting in a low reconstruction
error for normal data. In the test phase, anomalies are detected
based on the reconstruction error.
Second, GAN-based methods operate with a more complex
mechanism, consisting of a generator and a discriminator. The
generator inputs both noises and real samples to reduce the
randomness issue. It aims to generate fake samples that are
as realistic as the real samples, so the generator loss is the
reconstruction loss to minimize the difference between the fake
and real samples. Meanwhile, the discriminator uses the crossentropy loss to classify the real samples as real and the generated
samples as fake. The generator and discriminator losses together
provide a richer training loss, distinguishing them from pure
reconstruction-based AE methods. In the test phase, the losses
of both components can be used as an indicator for anomaly
scores.
Third, unlike the other categories that only consider the current and past data for loss calculation during training, predictivebased methods aim to forecast future values based on historical
data. The loss function is the prediction error, which measures
the difference between the predicted and actual future values.
While this prediction error can be commonly viewed as a form
of reconstruction error — since the model aims to reconstruct

6996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

Fig. 4. Overall framework of AE-based methods. The input is a graph G with
three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features are not
shown for simplicity.

the next time steps based on past data — the focus of predictive
methods is on forecasting future values rather than reconstructing the given input data. Note that predictive-based methods,
though capable of incorporating AE, GAN, or self-supervised
approaches, are focused on forecasting future values rather than
reconstructing input data. A sample is flagged as anomalous if
the model fails to accurately predict the desired future values.
Lastly, self-supervised methods are a subgroup of unsupervised learning methods where there is no label for the training data. Compared to the three categories discussed above,
self-supervised methods aim to derive more meaningful representations from the data by incorporating pretext tasks specifically designed for the unlabeled data. Their self-supervised loss
functions are designed to minimize the difference between the
model’s predictions and the predefined outputs associated with
these pretext tasks.
Note that all method categories share common elements of
deep feature learning [66], as their training involves proxy
tasks that enhance representation learning. Additionally, most
of the existing methods employ a notion of encoder and decoder
when developing their algorithm. Furthermore, most of existing
studies train on only normal data, while the test set additionally
includes anomalous data to verify the methods’ detection performance. We refer to methods that only have access to normal
data during training as unsupervised AD. Further details will
be described in the following sub-sections. Each begins with an
overview of the corresponding method category and concludes
with a summary highlighting key takeaways. Accordingly, we
retain the “Overview” and “Summary” labels to enhance readability.
A. AE-Based Methods
Overview. Fig. 4 and Table II illustrate the overall framework
and representative methods in the AE-based category. In the
literature, the AE-based methods take the full graph at every
observation as the input and aim to reconstruct its components:
nodes/edges features and the adjacency matrices. The origin of
these methods can be traced back to vanilla AE, an encoderdecoder framework, where the encoder network Eθ (parameterized by θ) learns to compress graph data into low-dimensional
embeddings, and the decoder network Dφ (parameterized by φ)
aims to reconstruct the input. This can be formulated as:
θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lrec (Dφ (Eθ (G)), G) ,
θ,φ

(2)

where the reconstruction loss Lrec is often the mean squared
error (MSE) or the cross entropy (CE) loss [67].
DeepSphere [68] is the first AE-based approach for G-TSAD.
It incorporates an LSTM-AE with hypersphere learning to capture both intra- and inter-variable dependencies in dynamic
networked graphs. It uses adjacency matrices available in these
networked graphs to reconstruct normal patterns. The idea of
employing AE is that AE has a strong capability in learning
non-linear patterns. Such high-quality non-linear representation
supports the hypersphere learning – the hypersphere boundary
is trained to enclose the normal data in the representation space.
The node-level objects lying outside the hypersphere tend to
be anomalous. DeepSphere has proven effective in detecting
anomalies in traffic networks and social media scenarios.
The main challenge of this vanilla AE framework is the
non-regularized latent space i.e., no specific constraints are
imposed on the latent space during training. Hence, the reconstruction process is done by sampling the data points from the
non-regularized latent space. This could limit the model’s ability
to reconstruct valid inputs in the test phase since AE may simply
memorize to perfectly reconstruct the input data during training.
Variational autoencoders (VAE) [69] come into the picture to
address this issue. VAE maps the inputs to a distribution in the
latent space rather than vectors as done by the vanilla AE. This
means instead of learning a single encoding for each input, VAE
learns a distribution for the data. VAE imposes a constraint by
which the latent space has a normal distribution; this constraint
guarantees that the latent space is regularized. With such a
distribution, VAE allows to represent the input with some degree
of uncertainty, i.e., a more generalized data representation is
learned.
Recognizing the potential of VAE, many algorithms have been
developed to improve G-TSAD performance. GReLeN [70]
integrates VAE and a Graph Neural Network (GNN) with a graph
structure learning for AD in multivariate time-series signals, collected from the server and water systems. Specifically, the latent
space in VAE serves as the module for feature extraction, while
GNN with the self-attention mechanism [71], which assigns the
attention weights to the edge weights in the graph, captures
the between-sensor dependency. Each sensor (node) is then
assigned an anomaly score based on the reconstruction error.
GreLeN addresses the importance of learning the inter-variable
dependency between sensors by its graph-based module, as well
as the intra-variable dependency learned implicitly by its VAE.
Deep Variational Graph Convolutional Recurrent Network
(DVGCRN) [72], another VAE-based method, was proposed to
capture both intra- and inter-variable dependencies, as well as
the stochasticity present in the multivariate time-series signals,
collected from the server machines and satellite monitoring
systems. DVGCRN includes three components: a stacked graph
convolutional recurrent network to model the multilevel intravariable dependency; a Gaussian-distributed channel embedding module to characterize the similarity and stochasticity of
different sensors by computing graph edges through the inner
product of sensor embeddings; and a deep embedding-guided
probabilistic generative network to model the non-deterministic
inter-variable dependency in the latent space; hence it can

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

capture multilevel information at the different layers. Note that
DVGCRN captures multi-level information since it extends the
model into a multi-layer network. The reconstruction error is
assigned for each sensor (node) as an anomaly score.
Although VAE can map the input to a distribution in the latent
space to learn generalized representations of data, VAE may
struggle to model high-dimensional distributions with complex
structures. Thus, VAE may not reconstruct the samples that are
as realistic and high-quality as the original data. Moreover, VAE
models are sensitive to the hyperparameter choice and require
careful tuning to achieve good performance. To tackle these issues, few recent studies, leveraging Normalizing Flow (NF) [73],
[74], have developed and yielded superior performance as NF
can model complex distributions in the latent space; hence,
high-quality samples can be reconstructed. NF is a statistical
method using the change-of-variable law of probabilities to
transform a base distribution into a target distribution.
A recent novel NF-based method, called GANF [48] learns
Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG) inside a continuous flow model,
allowing for an explicit representation of sensor dependencies
in sensory systems, such as highway traffic, water systems
and power grids. Specifically, in addition to learning the intravariable dependency by an LSTM model, GANF includes a
graph-based dependency encoder to capture inter-variable information in DAG. Note that DAG is a bayesian network in
which a node is conditionally independent of its non-parents. NF
is included to learn DAG by modeling the conditional density
of each node in DAG, i.e., NF expresses the density of each
node through successive conditioning on historical data and uses
conditional flows to learn each conditional density. Unlike OmniAnomaly [74], which uses the reconstruction error for anomaly
scores, GANF employs density estimation, identifying nodes in
low-density regions of the data distribution as anomalies.
However, there are several major issues with the NF-based
methods in G-TSAD. NF can be computationally expensive,
especially for modeling complex distributions for large datasets
since each transformation in the flow requires computing invertibility and the determinant of the Jacobian matrix. Moreover, the
resulting NF models may not be highly interpretable for highdimensional data as it is difficult to understand the relationships
between the input variables and the generated samples in such
complex data.
The above unsupervised methods assume that the training data must be clean. However, in real-world applications,
collecting clean data poses significant challenges due to its
time-consuming, costly, and labor-intensive nature. Moreover,
anomalies often sneak into normal data, regarded as contaminated data, that come from the data shift or human error [77].
Consequently, existing unsupervised methods, which extensively train on normal data to model its behavior, would misdetect anomaly samples encountered during training in the test
phase. To address such challenges, [76] introduced an approach,
called TSAD-C. TSAD-C comprises three modules: a Decontaminator, aimed at eliminating abnormal patterns; a Long-range
Variable Dependency Modeling, designed to capture long-range
intra- and inter-variable dependencies, where graphs are learned
through a self-attention mechanism with the attention weights
assigned for the edges’ weights; and Anomaly Scoring based

6997

Fig. 5. Overall framework of GAN-based methods. The input is a graph G
with three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features are
not shown for simplicity.

on reconstruction scores used to detect graph-level anomalies in
both industrial and biomedical multivariate signal domains.
Note that TSAD-C employs a diffusion model - a type of
generative models [78], [79], in its Decontaminator. However,
similar to the drawbacks of NF, training a diffusion model can be
computationally expensive, especially for large datasets. It also
demands large memory resources during training when storing
intermediate data representations. Moreover, diffusion models
usually rely on various hyperparameters, including learning
rates, batch sizes, and model architecture, which can significantly influence performance. Effectively tuning these hyperparameters can be challenging and time-consuming, requiring
extensive experimentation.
Summary. Many studies in the AE-based methods, ranging
from vanilla AE, VAE to NF, have shown promising results in
G-TSAD. However, designing a model that can capture both
intra- and inter-variable dependencies requires careful consideration of multiple factors. Large amounts of data and computational resources for training are required to produce satisfactory
results, which can be expensive and time-consuming for many
time-series applications. Also, interpretability are necessary to
understand the model’s behavior with the detection outcomes.
This ensures that the model makes unbiased decisions on detecting anomalies. Moreover, most of the AE-based methods
limit their applications to only time-series signal systems while
there are many other data types such as videos, social networks,
and edge streams, which are common in real-world scenarios.
This restricts the adaptability and applicability of AE-based
approaches to a wider variety of time-series contexts.
B. GAN-Based Methods
Overview. Fig. 5 and Table III provide the concept map and
representative methods in the GAN-based category. Overall,
parameters of the two components of GAN, i.e., the generator
and the discriminator, can be found as below:
θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lgen (Dφ (Eθ (G, z)), G) ,

(3)

 

ψ ∗ = argmin Ldisc Dψ G , G ,

(4)

θ,φ
ψ

where z is the random noise vector, D is the discriminator
network (parameterized by ψ), G is the fake set of graph samples
generated by the generator. The generator loss Lgen is often MSE,
and the discriminator loss Ldisc is often CE.

6998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE GAN-BASED METHODS

Recent studies have applied GAN to G-TSAD. For example, [80] proposed Cross-Correlation Graph-Based Encoder–
Decoder GAN (CCG-EDGAN) for unsupervised AD in multivariate signals, collected from satellite, wind turbine monitoring,
and power consumption systems. CCG-EDGAN consists of
three modules: a preprocessing module to transform signals into
predefined correlation graphs; a generator to generate the fake
data via the encoder-decoder-encoder structure, which captures
the features in the correlation graphs; and a discriminator to
classify the real from reconstructed data. Note that the input
includes both noise and real data to help the generator improve
the reconstructed samples’ diversity and avoid the mode collapse
problem, which refers to the situation that the generator can
only produce the fake samples that look similar to each other
but are not diverse enough to represent the full range of possible
samples. The anomaly score assigned for each node is computed
by the reconstruction error.
CCG-EDGAN encounters two limitations. First, it could only
handle the inter-variable dependency through the correlation
graphs, while the intra-variable dependency could not be captured by the GAN module. Second, its anomaly score computation is only based on the reconstruction error obtained by
the generator, ignoring the discriminator’s potential in detecting
anomalies. To overcome the first limitation, HAD-MDGAT was
proposed [81]. Unlike CCG-EDGAN, which relies on predefined correlation graphs, HAD-MDGAT uses a graph attention
network to learn graphs dynamically from attention weights,
allowing it to capture inter-sensor correlations. A GRU network is used to capture the intra-variable patterns. Node-level
anomalies are detected by a reconstruction scheme via GAN.
HAD-MDGAT also compares the performance between GAN
and vanilla AE and confirms that GAN achieves a better reconstruction and could solve the overfitting problem of vanilla AE.
Despite the ability to tackle the first limitation of CCG-EDGAN,
HAD-MDGAT could not tackle the second issue, i.e., HADMDGAT only uses the anomaly scores obtained by the generator.
HAD-MDGAT shows its applications in satellite monitoring and
soil moisture signal systems.
Several recent methods address both limitations, i.e., capturing both intra- and inter-variable information, as well as using
both the generator and discriminator for computing the anomaly
score. STGAN [50] was proposed to detect node-level anomalies
in the traffic networks. STGAN first constructs graphs for the
traffic network, with edge weights calculated using the euclidean
distance between nodes. STGAN then includes two components:
a generator to model intra- and inter-variable patterns, trend,

and external features; and a discriminator to distinguish the real
samples from the fake samples. STGAN calls its components,
respectively, spatiotemporal generator and spatiotemporal discriminator since both are based on graph convolutional gated
recurrent unit that explores the intra- and inter-variable correlations among neighboring nodes. Anomaly score is computed
based on the performance of both the generator and discriminator. While the generator detects sudden changes in traffic
networks, the discriminator detects traffic anomalies such as
abnormal times and locations.
While HAD-MDGAT can overcome the first challenge and
STGAN can tackle both challenges seen in CCG-EDGAN, the
major issue of both HAD-MDGAT and STGAN methods is
that, unlike CCG-EDGAN that uses both noises and the real
data as the input to improve the generated samples diversity
and unlike any GAN-based methods applied on images that use
only noises as the input, HAD-MDGAT and STGAN set only
the real data as the input and no noise is used to generate fake
samples. This potentially leads to the mode collapse problem
in the GAN framework.
Summary. Although GAN-based methods have made important contributions to the G-TSAD field, they still have some challenges that require further research. Many GAN-based methods
suffer from the mode collapse problem when the generator can
not produce a wide range of samples since taking only the real
data as the initial input can make the generator create the same
or very similar samples. Moreover, as the generator and the
discriminator constantly compete against each other, the training
process could be unstable and slow. Also, GAN-based methods
are sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters; hence, carefully
choosing them to avoid unstable training, mode collapse, and
poor-quality generated samples is needed. Importantly, it is essential to design a GAN that can properly combine the detection
ability of both the generator and discriminator. Lastly, to date,
there are only a few GAN-based methods applied to G-TSAD,
and their applicability is largely limited to time-series signal data
from traffic or sensory systems. Exploring effective GAN-based
methods that can be adapted to other data types, such as videos
and dynamic social networks, would be a valuable direction for
future research.
C. Predictive-Based Methods
Overview. Fig. 6 and Table IV illustrate the overall framework
and representative methods in the predictive-based category.
As mentioned earlier, predictive methods are different from

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

6999

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE PREDICTIVE-BASED METHODS

Fig. 6. Overall framework of Predictive-based methods. The input is a graph
G with three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features
are not shown for simplicity.

other categories as they aim to predict future values based on
current and past values. A sample is detected as an anomaly
if the model can not provide accurate time-series forecasting.
Specifically, at each observation j, a predictive-based approach
calculates an expected graph Ḡj+1 . The anomaly score is then
computed as the difference between the expected graph Ḡj+1
and the actual graph Gj+1 . The time-series prediction problem is
difficult, as learning the long-distance intra-variable complexity
of observations is necessary. As a result, in addition to the
features of nodes/edges, and the connectivity patterns between
nodes represented by the adjacency matrices, other important
properties, such as the node degree, shall be considered – this
enables better capturing of the long-distance dependencies.
This framework can be defined as follows:
θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lpred (Dφ (Eθ (G)), Gj+1 ) ,
θ,φ

(5)

where the prediction loss Lpred is often MSE, Root MSE
(RMSE), or CE. The first term in the loss represents
Ḡj+1 .
Many recent studies have shown the potential of GNN with
a graph attention network in detecting anomalies in the future.
For example, [49] proposed Graph Attention-based Forecasting (GDN) to dynamically learn the graph by an attention
mechanism with attention weights assigned for edge weights,
then predict the behavior of each sensor at each time step by

learning the past. This helps detect sensor (node) anomalies
that deviate from their expected behavior. An anomaly score
for each sensor at each time step is computed using the absolute error value. Normalization is then applied to all anomaly
scores across all time steps for each sensor. Importantly, the
obtained attention weights are used to provide explainability for
the detected anomalies. GDN addresses very important issues
in G-TSAD research, i.e different sensors may have different
behaviors and properties (e.g., some sensors measure the water
pressure while others measure the flow rate). However, existing
GNN-based methods use the same set of model parameters
for all sensors. Moreover, many of them pre-define the graph
nodes/edges/adjacency matrices. Though using the pre-defined
matrices results in a more stable training phase, defining the
matrices themselves requires prior knowledge about the dataset,
which may not be reachable in many applications. In spite of the
GDN’s great capability to address real-world issues, its limitation is that it detects anomalies mainly based on inter-variable
dependencies; the intra-variable relations across different time
steps are ignored.
To overcome the limitations of GDN, MTAD-GAT [83] was
proposed. It leverages the graph attention network for learning
the graphs and capturing both inter-, and intra-variable dependencies. The key ingredient in MTAD-GAT is that there are
two graph attention layers with respect to the inter- and intravariable information: the feature-oriented graph attention layer
to capture the relations between sensors and the time-oriented
graph attention layer to capture the dependency among observations. MTAD-GAT jointly trains a forecasting-based module, for
single-observation prediction with RMSE, and a reconstructionbased VAE module, for capturing the data distribution of the
entire time series. Although MTAD-GAT could address the issue
in GDN studies, its graph attention module could not provide
interpretability on the characteristics of different sensor types,
present in the multivariate sensory systems, as done by other
GDN works [49], [84].

7000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

As seen from the above studies, a graph structure learning
strategy (i.e., learning the features of nodes/edges and adjacency
matrices) via attention mechanisms is important and commonly
used in many time-series applications. This is because, with
limited prior knowledge, it is difficult to pre-define the graph
structure that can carry comprehensive information about the
graph. Meanwhile, uncovering the important patterns in graphs
is possible through learning with GNN. However, many existing
methods learn the adjacency matrices in the sensor embedding
space by defining measurement metrics such as the cosine similarity or top-k nearest neighbors (kNN) [93]. Cosine similarity,
which computes the dot product of all sensor embeddings, results
in a fully connected graph, leading to quadratic time and space
complexity with respect to the number of sensors. top-kNN is
another approach based on a similarity metric, such as cosine
similarity, Gaussian similarity, or euclidean distance, that selects only the top-k neighboring nodes, which can not entirely
underline the strong and wide-spread connections among sensor
embeddings.
To overcome this challenge, GTA [88] presents the connection learning policy based on the Gumbel-softmax sampling
approach. This is to learn bi-directed edges between sensors,
thereby avoiding the issue of selecting node neighbors by the topkNN method. GTA also handles the intra-variable dependency
from the graph sequence by a transformer-based graph convolution network. Moreover, to tackle the quadratic complexity, GTA
proposes a multi-branch attention mechanism to substitute the
original-head self-attention method. A forecasting-based strategy is then adopted to predict the graph at the next time step and
return an anomaly score assigned for each graph by MSE. GTA
demonstrates its effectiveness in multivariate sensory systems,
such as water and satellite monitoring systems.
In contrast to detecting abnormal sensors (nodes) of the graph
in many multivariate signal systems, several studies show an interest in detecting abnormal edges (e.g., the unexpected interactions between sensors or the anomalous edges in an edge stream).
SEDANSPOT [85] considers an AD problem in an edge stream,
where the edge anomalies tend to connect parts of the graph that
are sparsely connected or occur as bursts of activity. An example
of a burst is an occasion (e.g., a burst of longer-than-usual phone
calls during festivals). SEDANSPOT exploits these abnormal
behaviors by proposing a rate-adjusted sampling technique that
downsamples edges from bursty periods of time and employs a
holistic random walk-based edge anomaly scoring function to
compare incoming edges and the whole graph. This approach
is applied in traffic networks, co-authorship analysis, and social
media scenarios.
Midas [87] also tackles the same problem in detecting anomalous edges in an edge stream, particularly for cybersecurity
and social media applications. However, unlike SEDANSPOT,
which identifies individual abnormal edges, Midas aims to detect microcluster anomalies, which are the sudden appearing
bursts of activity sharing many repeated edges. Midas provides
explanations on the false positive rate and is also an online
method that processes each edge in constant time and memory, while SEDANSPOT does not address these issues. Moreover, SEDANSPOT and Midas propose different hypotheses

on anomaly scores. SEDANSPOT designs an anomaly scoring
function that gives a higher score to an edge if adding it to a
sample of edges produces a large change in distance between
its incident nodes. Midas computes the Gaussian likelihood of
the number of edge occurrences in the current timestamp and
declares an anomaly if the likelihood is below an adjustable
threshold, which is to guarantee low false positive probability.
Not limited to node and edge AD in the context of time-series
data, several predictive-based studies show the interesting task
of detecting anomalous sub-graphs. As mentioned in Section V,
detecting abnormal sub-graphs is much more difficult than abnormal nodes and edges since abnormal sub-graphs vary in size
and inner structures. It is even more difficult when individual
nodes/edges are normal but abnormal when considered as a
group of nodes/edges.
Series2Graph [90] tackles these problems by proposing a
novel idea for detecting anomalous sub-graphs with varying
sizes in the graphs, which are constructed from multivariate
time-series signals, collected from both industrial and biomedical domains. Specifically, Series2Graph first extracts subsequences (aka time intervals) from the time series using a sliding window technique. It then projects the sub-sequences onto
a two-dimensional embedding space. The graph is constructed
by considering the densest regions in the two-dimensional
embedding space, where a notable concentration of projected
sub-sequences is observed. These dense regions are selected
as nodes, which serve as summaries of the repetitive patterns
observed in the data, indicating normal behavior. To create
the edges, Series2Graph determines the edge weights based
on the frequency of occurrences of one sequence immediately
following another in the input time series. If there is a transition
between two nodes, they are connected by an edge; otherwise,
no edge is created. Series2Graph determines the abnormality
level of the sub-graphs using the node degree (aka the number
of connected edges to the node) and the edge weights (aka the
number of consecutive occurrences of two sequences).
Existing predictive-based methods have shown the capability
to deal with many time-series applications, ranging from timeseries signals, edge streams to social networks. However, none
of these approaches are applicable to videos in which a video
is a sequence of image frames indexed in time. GCLNC [86],
WAGCN [51], and WSANV [94] are some of the earliest
G-TSAD studies working on real-world surveillance videos.
While most of the existing studies use only normal data during
their training phase, these three studies have taken advantage of
weakly-supervised labels (e.g., include noisy labels as wrong
annotations of normal graphs) during training to improve the
detection of abnormal graph-level frames in videos. As a video
sequence has temporal evolution between frames, these methods
construct graphs, where each frame is modeled as a graph node,
and the adjacency matrices are computed based on not only
the similarity metric of the inter-variable features but also the
intra-variable proximity, i.e., the short-distance intra-variable
dependency to capture relationships among frames. Note that
instead of pre-defining the adjacency matrices, they adjust them
as the model is trained. A computed anomaly score based on CE
is then assigned for each frame.

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

7001

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE SELF-SUPERVISED METHODS

applications. For example, in medical systems, it is difficult to
obtain sufficient patient data that covers all types of diseases
and rare conditions due to privacy concerns and limited access
to patients over time.
D. Self-Supervised Methods

Fig. 7. Overall framework of Self-supervised methods. The input is a graph
G with three successive observations. In each G, m = 3 and the edge features
are not shown for simplicity.

Despite the capability of these methods on videos, they only
consider frame-level graphs, hence, the relationships between
frames are captured. However, in practice, it is essential to model
a video as a stream of time-evolving object-level graphs, where
a node is an object and edges represent the relationships among
objects. Object-level graphs can help to determine the abnormal
changes in actions/movements of an object across frames in a
video.
Summary. Predictive-based methods have shown great potential in various time-series applications, from time-series signals,
edge streams, social networks to videos. Interestingly, many
predictive-based methods integrate the reconstruction and prediction tasks to yield more accurate anomaly scores. However,
several challenges still remain unsolved. While existing methods
have shown their effectiveness in building graphs to capture
inter-variable information, one of the biggest challenges of these
methods is modeling the long-term intra-variable dependency,
which is required to effectively perform time-series forecasting
tasks [95]. For example, existing methods only consider the
intra-variable dependency in a short-term period where observations close to each other in the time series are expected to be
similar. However, as mentioned in Section III, trend, seasonality,
and unpredictability patterns are, in nature, always available
in time-series data. Hence, forecasting future values simply
based on near-distance past values is problematic. Plus, a large
amount of data with a diversity of patterns is required during
training for the forecasting tasks, but in practice, having access
to a comprehensive dataset is very difficult in many time-series

Overview. Fig. 7 and Table V provide a visualization of
the overall framework and representative methods in the selfsupervised category. Self-supervised learning (SSL), a subset
of unsupervised methods [96], has provided novel insights into
training without annotated labels [97]. Similar to other fields,
SSL has demonstrated its effectiveness in graph-based learning
methodologies [25]. The intuition of SSL is to learn transferable
knowledge from massive unlabeled data with well-designed
pretext tasks and then generalize the learned knowledge to the
downstream tasks [98]. In the SSL-based G-TSAD research, a
sub-group of SSL methods, called contrastive learning (CL),
has been used so far. CL aims to learn useful representations
of data by contrasting positive and negative pairs, i.e., CL is
trained to create an embedding space that pulls positive (similar)
samples close together and pushes negative (dissimilar) samples
far apart. To achieve this, a contrastive loss function is defined
to encourage the model to maximize the similarity between positive samples while minimizing the similarity between negative
samples. This approach can be formally described as:



θ∗ , φ∗ = argmin Lcon Dφ Eθ (G(1) ), Eθ (G(2) ) , (6)
θ,φ

where Lcon is the contrastive loss, G(1) and G(2) are two different
sets of graph samples, Dφ is the discriminator that estimates the
similarity between these two sets of graph samples. In unsupervised AD, data augmentation is essential to create negative
samples/pairs while every two normal samples can potentially
form a positive pair. Applying augmentation on graphs is challenging compared to other data types; this will be discussed in
Section IX.
AddGraph [99] is an unsupervised anomalous edge detection
technique that has access to only normal edges during training.
It employs CL to train its graphs obtained from social networks,
where the positive samples are all the available normal edges

7002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

while negative samples are generated by applying the Bernoulli
distribution to the normal edges. AddGraph employs a temporal
graph convolutional network with an attention-based GRU to
learn long and short-term temporal patterns of the nodes. The
hidden state of the nodes at each time step is used to compute the
anomaly scores for all edges. As the generated negative edges
may have a possibility of being normal, it is inappropriate to use
a strict loss function such as CE; hence, AddGraph proposes a
margin-based pairwise loss to distinguishes the positive edges
from the generated negative ones.
Another CL study aiming to detect abnormal edges in social
networks and cyber security systems, called TADDY [100],
also assumes that all normal edges are positive during training,
similar to AddGraph. However, TADDY proposes a different
negative sampling strategy. Given positive pairs, TADDY randomly generates candidate negative pairs with a number equal to
the number of positive pairs. It then checks these candidates to
ensure that they are different from the existing normal edge set.
Then, TADDY develops a framework with four components: an
edge-based substructure sampling to sample the target nodes and
the surrounding nodes; a node encoding component to generate
the node embeddings in both intra- and inter-variable spaces; a
graph transformer to extract the intra- and inter-variable knowledge of edges; and a discriminative anomaly detector based on
CE to calculate anomaly scores for all edges.
Although TADDY demonstrates its effectiveness on six realworld graph datasets, while AddGraph uses only two social
network datasets, TADDY still remains several issues. First,
TADDY implements a random selection technique for generating negative samples, but it does not ensure that they do not belong to the normal set. Hence, its negative sampling approach is
less reliable than AddGraph. Second, given the random selection
technique of TADDY, the bias can easily occur when the negative
sample set is not sufficient to represent the full distribution
of negative pairs; hence, additional sampling techniques are
required. Lastly, it employs a CE loss to distinguish normal edges
from negative edges; however, as denoted in AddGraph, since it
is not guaranteed that all generated negative samples are actual
non-normal, using a strict loss (e.g., CE) is inappropriate.
The major challenge of both AddGraph and TADDY is that
they consider the generated negative samples as actual abnormal samples since there is no access to the actual abnormal
data during training, and the generated negative samples are
created based on the given normal data. This limits the methods’
performance as the generated negative samples might be just a
variation of the normal data or a subset of the possible abnormal
distribution, resulting in biased representation learning for the
actual abnormal data.
Very recent studies [52], [53] have addressed these challenges
by recognizing that the negative samples generated based on the
normal data may differ from the actual abnormal data that will
be observed in the test phase. These methods demonstrate that
discriminating the positive and negative pairs during training
through minimizing the contrastive loss is just for providing
a less noisy and more reliable representation space for the
normal data as all the negative samples are created from normal data – in other words, the generated negative samples are

just a transformation of normal data, not an actual abnormal
sample.
EEG-CGS [52] introduces a sub-graph sampling technique
for the epilepsy application of detecting abnormal channels
and regions in the brain using multivariate time-series signals.
EEG-CGS first represents the signals as static graphs, constructed based on the euclidean distance or correlation matrices,
to capture the relations between sensors. It then proposes a local
sub-graph sampling strategy to sample contrastive pairs. For
each target node, a positive sub-graph is sampled by closely
connected nodes based on controlling the radius of surrounding
nodes, while a negative sub-graph is sampled by finding the
farthest nodes using the same radius. By sampling positive and
negative pairs based on the knowledge of local sub-graphs, EEGCGS overcomes the issues of the random selection technique
seen in TADDY.
Similar to EEG-CGS, mVSG-VFP [53] incorporates the reconstruction and contrastive modules to detect vehicle failures.
However, its module design differs from EEG-CGS. mVSGVFP first uses a sliding window to generate segments in the
time-series vehicle data and then builds mini-batches of segments. Each segment is represented as a static graph, where
each sensor is a node, and edges are predefined using Mutual
Information between sensor pairs, measuring the statistical dependence between two sensors. Regarding the reconstruction
module, mVSG-VFP masks a segment of one sensor at a time
and encourages the GNN-AE module to reconstruct it. Regarding the contrastive module, unlike other CL methods that positive
and negative samples are created through a contrastive pair
sampling strategy, mVSG-VFP leverages a unique characteristic
in their vehicle data, i.e., time-series segments recorded during
a trip (aka a continuous recording of sensors) are more similar
compared to those that are produced during another trip. This
acts as a predefined Sim{·, ·}, providing an additional layer
of insight. While not learnable, this Sim{·, ·} operates at the
segment-label level by utilizing prior knowledge about whether
segments belong to the same vehicle trip.
Given this unique property, adjacent segments in the minibatch are considered as positive samples, and the remaining segments in the same mini-batch are denoted as negative samples.
Then, a contrastive loss is applied to pull adjacent segments
closer and push them away from the rest of the mini-batch.
mVSG-VFP uses the reconstruction error to detect anomalous
graph-level segments. Due to the data’s property, a detected
abnormal segment can imply that its adjacent segments are
also anomalies. As such, mVSG-VFP addresses both intra- and
inter-variable dependencies, while EEG-CGS only considers the
latter. mVSG-VFP also demonstrates superior performance by
leveraging Sim{·, ·}, compared to other graph-based methods
like GDN that do not utilize it. The main challenge of mVSGVFP is that the way of generating contrastive pairs is only
applicable to a data compound of operational blocks like vehicle
trips, a property that is not available for many applications where
using the knowledge of adjacent segments is meaningless.
CL has also been successfully applied for detecting anomalies
in videos. Many existing studies such as CFRAD [101] overlook
the important matter of developing models with interpretability

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

that can interpret the causes of anomalies. An important application of video AD is to understand and take appropriate actions
whenever an anomaly occurs. A response to an abnormal event
in a video is usually dependent on its severity, which cannot be
easily understandable without having an interpretable model. To
address this, IVAD [103] proposes a dual-monitoring approach
that monitors individual objects (aka local object monitoring),
and their interactions with other objects present in the scene (aka
global object monitoring) in surveillance videos.
In the local branch, each object is monitored independently to
determine if its action (e.g., body movement) is anomalous. An
anomaly score for each frame, based on reconstruction loss, is
computed by a GRU-AE. In the global branch, the relationships
between objects (e.g., a human, a predicate, and a bike) within a
frame are monitored. This creates a scene graph where objects
and predicates (i.e., words that relate two objects) are respectively defined as nodes and edges. CL is adopted in this global
branch. Positive pairs are selected from the normal training set,
while negative pairs are randomly generated and verified to
ensure that they do not belong to the positive set. A contrastive
loss is employed to minimize the euclidean distance between
positive samples and maximize the distance between positive
and negative samples. This loss is also used as an anomaly
score for each object in a frame. Finally, an in-depth analysis
on both branches is performed to interpret the root cause of
anomalies. If the cause of an anomaly is from the global branch,
it is interpreted that the edge-level anomaly is caused due to a
previously unseen relationship between objects. Otherwise, if
the source of an anomaly is from the local branch, it is caused
due to an anomalous object action in the graph.
Summary. Existing SSL studies have shown interesting ideas
and addressed some problems seen in the other three categories
of G-TSAD methods. For example, SSL methods incorporate
a variety of pretext tasks, such as CL and masked reconstruction, to enhance the representation of normal data. These pretext tasks allow SSL to better learn complex patterns, leading
to improved AD performance. Additionally, unlike predictive
methods, which focus on modeling each frame in video data as
a graph node, SSL methods can go beyond this limitation by
constructing object-level graphs. This allows SSL methods to
capture detailed interactions between objects within the data.
However, as SSL is a new topic to G-TSAD, it has not yet
confirmed its effectiveness in a variety of applications compared
to predictive methods. Moreover, it is suggested that different
effective graph augmentations for positive and negative sample
generation be employed to improve performance.
In conclusion, while there may be some overlap in the deep
feature learning mechanisms and the use of loss functions, such
as reconstruction losses, shared across all method categories, the
key distinction lies in the specific losses each category minimizes
during training. AE-based methods focus purely on reconstruction error of the previous or current input data. GAN-based
methods minimize both generator and discriminator losses.
Predictive-based methods minimize prediction errors rather than
merely reconstructing the input data, and self-supervised methods minimize pretext-based losses.

7003

VII. DATASETS AND APPLICATIONS
In this section, we present commonly used datasets related to
time-series signals, social networks, and videos that have been
widely adopted in G-TSAD research. Table VI summarizes these
datasets based on their type, characteristics, specific anomalies,
and application domains.
A. Time-Series Signals
Numerous existing G-TSAD studies have trained models
using popular benchmark time-series signal datasets, such as
Yahoo S5 [105], NASA [106], SWaT [107], WADI [108],
SMAP [74], and SMD [74]. However, it has been highlighted
in recent literature that these benchmarks possess various flaws,
including mislabeled ground truth, triviality, unrealistic anomaly
density, and run-to-failure bias [8], [126], [127]. This renders them unsuitable for the robust evaluation and comparison
of G-TSAD algorithms. Therefore, improving benchmarking
practices is crucial to ensure a more accurate assessment of
G-TSAD methods. [8] has introduced The UCR Time Series
Anomaly Archive, designed for evaluating and benchmarking
AD algorithms. [109] has also introduced The UCI Machine
Learning Repository, which contains datasets that cover a broad
range of domains such finance, healthcare, biology, and social
sciences. Additionally, [110] has recently introduced the vorausAD dataset for robotic applications. These datasets serve as
valuable resources for testing and developing TSAD algorithms.
Moreover, recent studies [76], [128], [129] have showcased
the superiority of their proposed TSAD methods on several
reliable alternatives collected from biomedical domains such
as The PhysioNet [111], The European ST-T database [112],
PTB-XL [113], ICBEB [114], and TUSZ [115].
B. Social Networks
As clarified in Section IV-B and Fig. 2(a), social networks,
which are represented as dynamic graphs, are also considered as
time-series data. This is because there are always fresh persons
who enroll in the community network every day/month/year,
hence, the relationship between individuals is changing overtime. Detecting anomalies in these dynamic social networks
gains significant attention in G-TSAD research. Various datasets
on social networks have been used. For instance, UCI Messages [116] is a social network dataset constructed into dynamic
graphs, where each node represents a user, and each edge indicates a message exchange between two users. Email-DNC [117]
is network of emails, where each node indicates a person in the
United States Democratic Party, and each edge denotes an email
sent from one person to another. Digg [118] is a network dataset
collected from a news website, where each node represents a
website user, and each edge indicates that one user replies to
another user. Bitcoin-Alpha and Bitcoin-OTC [119], [120] are
two “who-trusts-whom” networks of bitcoin users engaged in
trading on the Internet platforms, where each node denotes
a user, and an edge is present when one user rates another
on the platform. AS-Topology [121] is a network connection

7004

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

TABLE VI
SUMMARY OF COMMONLY USED DATASETS IN G-TSAD RESEARCH

dataset collected from autonomous Internet systems, where each
node denotes an autonomous system, and each edge indicates a
connection between two autonomous systems.
C. Videos
As illustrated in Section IV-B and Fig. 2(b), video data is considered as the time series as it is a sequence of frames captured
over time. The frames are arranged sequentially to create the illusion of motion when played back at a rapid pace. This sequential
nature of video data, where each frame depends on the preceding
and succeeding frames, makes it inherently a time-series data.
Various video datasets have been used in G-TSAD research such
as UCF-Crime [122], Xd-Violence [123], ShanghaiTech [124],
and UCSD-Peds [125]. Specifically, UCF-Crime is a large-scale
dataset that consists of 13 types of anomalies captured by CCTV
camera indoors and outdoors during day and night scenarios.
Xd-Violence is a large-scale dataset composed of violent videos
from diverse scenarios recorded from CCTV cameras. ShanghaiTech is a medium-scale dataset recorded by a CCTV camera
in an outdoor location. UCSD-Peds is a small-scale dataset
acquired by a camera to record pedestrian walkways.
VIII. EVALUATION METRICS
Evaluation metrics play a crucial role in assessing the performance of G-TSAD algorithms. This section presents the
commonly used evaluation metrics, and discusses several issues
of evaluation protocols and potential solutions.
In the domain of time series signals, several metrics such as F1
score (F1), Precision (Pre), and Recall (Rec) are commonly used.
However, it is important to highlight that recent critiques [9]
have raised concerns about the evaluation protocol employed
in many studies [20], [130], [131]. Specifically, these existing
studies compute F1 score after applying a peculiar evaluation
protocol, called point adjustment (PA). Generally, PA considers
that if at least one point within an anomaly segment is detected as

an anomaly, the entire segment is then considered to be correctly
detected as an anomaly. Consequently, this practice leads to high
F1 scores, yet it results in a high possibility of overestimating the
model performance. [9] conducted experiments demonstrating
that without PA, the performance of existing methods yields no
significant improvement over the baseline. Note that the baseline
is simply a randomly initialized reconstruction model, such as
an untrained autoencoder that consists of a single-layer LSTM.
To address this issue, [9] proposed a new evaluation protocol,
named PA%K, where K denotes the threshold, to mitigate the
overestimation effect of PA. The concept behind PA%K is to
apply PA to a segment only if the ratio of the number of correctly
detected anomalies within that segment to its length exceeds the
threshold K. Note that K can be selected manually based on prior
knowledge.
While PA%K can address the PA issue, selecting a decision
threshold remains non-trivial in TSAD research. There are four
scenarios for threshold finding. The first scenario is a common
practice where the threshold is selected directly on the labeled
test set [72], [132], [133], which can lead to biased and unfair
evaluations. In the second scenario, the threshold is selected
based on a labeled validation set that yields the best F1 score. The
selected threshold is then applied to the test set [49]. However,
the first two cases may not align with real-world unsupervised
applications where labeled data is unavailable. To tackle this
limitation, the third scenario advocates for using an unlabeled
validation set to select the threshold, which is then applied to
the test set [76].
The issue of the above threshold-dependent scenarios lies in
their evaluation of the model’s performance at a single threshold,
which may not capture the model’s behavior across all possible
thresholds. Hence, several methods in the domains of time-series
signals, as well as social networks and videos [48], [51], [99],
[100], [101], [103], [128] have adopted the fourth scenario,
employing the threshold-independent metrics such as Area Under the Receiver-Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC) [134],

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

[135], and Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (APR) [136].
This offers a comprehensive assessment of the model’s performance by considering multiple thresholds, which allows for a
deeper understanding of the trade-offs between Prec and Rec,
facilitating better decision-making for a given application.
Overall, depending on the specific applications at hand and
the goals of the evaluation, it is essential to use an appropriate
method for selecting threshold as different scenarios may necessitate different approaches, such as supervised, semi-supervised
or unsupervised approaches, to ensure accurate and fair evaluations. Moreover, it is advisable to employ a combination
of evaluation metrics to comprehensively assess the model’s
performance.
IX. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although G-TSAD is a new topic, it has been rapidly growing
in popularity, as can be inferred by the number of studies published in the prestigious Artificial Intelligence venues described
in Section VI. However, detecting anomalies in graphs with
evolving graph features and adjacency matrices is challenging,
leading to several major concerns in the existing studies. In
this section, we analyze these challenges and pinpoint potential
directions for future studies.
Theoretical Foundation and Explainability. Despite its great
success in various time-series applications, most existing GTSAD methods are designed and evaluated by empirical experiments without sufficient theoretical foundations to prove their
reliability. Plus, they ignore the explainability of learned representations and predicted results – e.g., what are the important
features of nodes and edges, and adjacency matrices in graphs?
Is the output (e.g., anomaly score) sufficient to conclude the
abnormality of graph objects? These are important concerns for
interpreting the model behavior. Therefore, we believe that in
addition to the empirical design, providing a solid theoretical
foundation and a deep analysis of the learned representations to
improve the model’s generalization and robustness are crucial.
On Equivalence between Intra-variable and Inter-variable
Dependencies. Capturing both intra- and inter-variable dependencies in time-series data is very important for effective AD.
However, many existing methods could not handle this problem.
Regarding intra-variable dependency, time-series data often involve long-term intra-variable correlations, yet many existing
studies could not tackle this issue. Regarding inter-variable
dependency, it is difficult to pre-define the graph features and
adjacency matrices for many time-series systems due to the
limited prior knowledge of the developer. Recent studies have
shown that without pre-defined graphs, graph structure learning techniques [93] can learn the graph information, i.e., the
node/edge features and adjacency matrices, which dynamically
evolves over time. This provides a better capturing of the system’s underlying mechanism. Hence, a proper integrating of
both graph learning techniques and deep sequence models is
essential to provide more accurate AD.
Graph Augmentation Strategy. Augmenting graphs is crucial
for SSL methods, e.g., generating positive and negative pairs is
required in CL-based methods discussed in Section VI-D. There

7005

are many image augmentation methods in the literature [98].
However, due to the dynamic nature of graphs (e.g., intravariable complexity, non-euclidean structure), it is not appropriate to directly apply image-based augmentations to the graphs.
Most existing SSL studies only consider random sampling techniques, sub-graph sampling, or graph diffusion for augmentation
– this may provide limited diversity and uncertain invariance.
Having additional yet effective augmentation techniques such
as feature-based (e.g., masking a portion of node/edge features), edge-based (e.g., adding or removing portions of edges),
sampling-based (e.g., sampling nodes and their connected edges
using importance sampling or knowledge sampling), and adaptive augmentations (e.g., using learned attention schemes) [26]
would be promising directions for G-TSAD studies.
Detection of Multiple Types of Graph Anomalies. Most of
existing methods could only detect either anomalous nodes,
edges, sub-graphs, or graphs. However, in many real-world systems, different observations can have different anomaly types;
e.g., in some observations, only a single sensor is anomalous,
but in other observations, a group of sensors is anomalous.
Moreover, although few studies [53] use Sim{·, ·} to facilitate
detecting anomalous nodes, edges, sub-graphs, and graphs, there
is no study that targets to detect anomalous Sim{·, ·}. Since
Sim{·, ·} presents both short-term and long-term relationships
across observations, analyzing Sim{·, ·} can be beneficial for
understanding the underlying dynamics of time-series, e.g., any
anomalous Sim{·, ·} can be considered as an unexpected shift
of time-series dynamics. Thus, having a model that can detect
multiple anomaly types, including Sim{·, ·}, would be a very
interesting research line.
Broader Scope of Methodology. Each category in the GTSAD studies has its own strengths and drawbacks. AE-based
and predictive-based methods are simple to implement as the
losses are easy to build, but recovering the input and learning
long-term dependencies is a challenging task to realize. Meanwhile, GAN-based methods are difficult to implement due to
the adversarial training process that needs a careful selection of
hyperparameters, the network architecture, and the optimization algorithm. SSL methods have shown promising results
but designing the frameworks, augmentation techniques, and
loss functions heavily relies on empirical experiments. These
disadvantages may cause poor AD performance. To improve
overall AD accuracy, leveraging the complementary strengths
of these approaches is important. For example, we can integrate
the AE-based and predictive-based models to detect a wider
range of anomalies. While the AE-based detects anomalies that
occur in the current/past time, the predictive-based model can
detect anomalies that occur in the future.
Another example is a hybrid SSL method, e.g., combining
the predictive SSL and contrastive SSL modules to achieve
better generalization of the learned representations. Moreover,
this combined approach can be adapted to different anomaly
types; e.g., the contrastive SSL module learns to detect sudden
spikes in the time series, while the predictive SSL module can
be trained to detect future abnormal trends unseen in the training
data. Overall, the hybrid SSL approach can benefit from multiple
pretext tasks of the different SSL modules, yet it is important

7006

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

to design an effective joint learning framework to balance each
component in the model [25]. Given its great potential, hybrid
methods would be interesting for further G-TSAD studies.
Datasets and Evaluation Metrics. As emphasized in
Section VII, acknowledging the limitations of current benchmark TSAD datasets is crucial for advancing the field. It is
important to invest efforts in curating high-quality benchmark
datasets that reflect real-world scenarios and challenges. Moreover, as discussed in Section VIII, the existing challenges with
evaluation protocols and metrics underscore the need for a
comprehensive evaluation approach. It is essential to employ
a combination of evaluation metrics to thoroughly assess model
performance for an accurate and fair comparison between methods while improving reproducibility.
Limitations of Graph-based Methods to Real-world Scenarios. As discussed earlier, most existing methods assume that
only normal samples are available during training. Graphs, while
effective in capturing the underlying normal patterns of data,
face difficulties in scenarios where this assumption does not
hold. For instance, in open-set scenarios where only a limited
amount of labeled anomalous data is available during training [137], graph-based methods may struggle in learning the data
patterns due to insufficient abnormal samples. Recent open-set
studies [128] have shown that their non-graph-based method can
outperform graph-based methods [83], which assumes that the
training data should contain only normal samples.
In contaminated datasets, where anomalies sneak into the
normal training data and both the labels and positions of these
anomalies are unknown [77], conventional graph-based methods
can become ineffective. Recent studies dealing with contaminated data [76] have compared their method with state-of-the-art
graph-based methods [49]. [76] showed that naively applying
graph-based methods to contaminated data leads to inaccurate
results, as these methods typically assume that the training data
contains only normal samples and is free from noise or anomalies. In [76], the challenge of data contamination is addressed by
incorporating a decontamination phase before the graph learning
process.
Another limitation arises with highly complex and stochastic
signals, such as brain or vehicle systems’ signals, which are
often noisy and unpredictable due to variabilities in brain states,
environmental variabilities, drive behavior, and mechanical wear
and tear on top of the common sensor and measurement noise.
In such scenarios, the recent methods presented in [52], [53]
suggest constructing static graphs using predefined adjacency
matrices. Their experiments show the superior performance of
static graphs compared to state-of-the-art dynamic graphs [49].
This improved performance could be due to the current limitations of graph learning techniques or the insufficient availability
of training data to properly train these more complex methods.
Further exploration of these areas remains a promising direction
for future research in the field of G-TSAD.
Finally, the use of Sim{·, ·} as an additional layer of supervision remains an underexplored area. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one study, i.e., [53], that leverages Sim{·, ·}
in this way. [53] demonstrates that incorporating Sim{·, ·}
can enhance model performance compared to other graphbased approaches [49] that do not make use of this measure.

However, in their approach, Sim{·, ·} is predefined based on
their given vehicle dataset’s characteristics; the definition may
not be applicable to other real-world datasets. The result of
this study confirms the potentials of employing Sim{·, ·} in
improving AD. Developing methods that can either learn or
adapt Sim{·, ·} for various applications would offer new research
directions for improving graph-based TSAD techniques.
X. CONCLUSION
This paper conducts a comprehensive survey of G-TSAD.
First, we introduce new concepts in G-TSAD, the major challenges of time-series data, as well as the advantage of representing them as graphs in the context of AD. Then, we present a
systematic taxonomy that groups G-TSAD methods, primarily
leveraging deep learning architectures, into four categories:
AE-based, GAN-based, predictive-based, and self-supervised
methods. For each category, we discuss the technical details
of the methods, their strengths and weaknesses, as well as comparisons between them. A wide range of practical time-series
applications are also introduced. Finally, we point out several
limitations from both technical and application perspectives of
the current research and suggest promising directions for future
works. We hope this survey will serve as a useful reference for
follow-up researchers to explore more research in this field.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
series: A comprehensive evaluation,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, 2022.
[2] A. Blázquez, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
[3] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
2018, pp. 1–19.
[4] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at Microsoft,” in
Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019,
pp. 3009–3017.
[5] T. Kieu, B. Yang, C. Guo, and C. S. Jensen, “Outlier detection for time
series with recurrent autoencoder ensembles,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 2725–2732.
[6] K.-H. Lai, D. Zha, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, and X. Hu, “Revisiting time
series outlier detection: Definitions and benchmarks,” in Proc. 35th Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, 2021, pp. 1–13.
[7] Q. Rebjock, B. Kurt, T. Januschowski, and L. Callot, “Online false
discovery rate control for anomaly detection in time series,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 26487–26498.
[8] R. Wu and E. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks
are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
[9] S. Kim, K. Choi, H.-S. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous
evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., 2022, pp. 7194–7201.
[10] A. Deng, A. Goodge, L. Y. Ang, and B. Hooi, “CADET: Calibrated
anomaly detection for mitigating hardness bias,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2002–2008.
[11] H. Hojjati and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised acoustic anomaly detection via contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech
Signal Process., 2022, pp. 3253–3257.
[12] R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
“Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
pp. 11996–12004.
[13] J.-C. Feng, F.-T. Hong, and W.-S. Zheng, “MIST: Multiple instance selftraining framework for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 14009–14018.

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

[14] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu, and
M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and multi-task
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021,
pp. 12742–12752.
[15] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial networks for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9389–9403, Nov. 2023.
[16] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 13576–13586.
[17] J.-C. Wu, H.-Y. Hsieh, D.-J. Chen, C.-S. Fuh, and T.-L. Liu, “Selfsupervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 729–745.
[18] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
[19] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous
rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439.
[20] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
“USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
in Proc. 26th SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 3395–3404.
[21] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
[22] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
pp. 2485–2494.
[23] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and interpretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data
Eng., 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
[24] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,”
2022, arXiv:2201.07284.
[25] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023.
[26] L. Wu, H. Lin, C. Tan, Z. Gao, and S. Z. Li, “Self-supervised learning on
graphs: Contrastive, generative, or predictive,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4216–4235, Apr. 2023.
[27] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A
comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[28] Y. Xie, Z. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised
learning of graph neural networks: A unified review,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2412–2429,
Feb. 2023.
[29] Y. Zhou, H. Zheng, X. Huang, S. Hao, D. Li, and J. Zhao, “Graph neural
networks: Taxonomy, advances, and trends,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–54, 2022.
[30] M. M. Li, K. Huang, and M. Zitnik, “Graph representation learning
in biomedicine and healthcare,” Nature Biomed. Eng., vol. 6, no. 12,
pp. 1353–1369, 2022.
[31] X. Liu et al., “Survey on graph neural network acceleration: An algorithmic perspective,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022,
pp. 5521–5529.
[32] C. Zhang et al., “Few-shot learning on graphs: A survey,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 5662–5669.
[33] C. Gao et al., “A survey of graph neural networks for recommender systems: Challenges, methods, and directions,” ACM Trans. Recommender
Syst., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–51, 2023.
[34] S. Khoshraftar and A. An, “A survey on graph representation learning
methods,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–55,
2024.
[35] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 10466–10485,
Dec. 2024.
[36] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
[37] H. Kim, B. S. Lee, W.-Y. Shin, and S. Lim, “Graph anomaly detection
with graph neural networks: Current status and challenges,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 111820–111829, 2022.

7007

[38] A. D. Pazho, G. A. Noghre, A. A. Purkayastha, J. Vempati, O. Martin, and
H. Tabkhi, “A survey of graph-based deep learning for anomaly detection
in distributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 1–20, Jan. 2024.
[39] J. Ren, F. Xia, I. Lee, A. Noori Hoshyar, and C. Aggarwal, “Graph learning for anomaly analytics: Algorithms, applications, and challenges,”
ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–29, 2023.
[40] T. Bilot, N. El Madhoun, K. Al Agha, and A. Zouaoui, “Graph neural networks for intrusion detection: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 49114–49139, 2023.
[41] P. B. Lamichhane and W. Eberle, “Anomaly detection in graph structured
data: A survey,” 2024, arXiv:2405.06172.
[42] O. A. Ekle and W. Eberle, “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs: A
comprehensive survey,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 18, no. 8,
pp. 1–44, 2024.
[43] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT
time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
pp. 6481–6494, Jul. 2020.
[44] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly detection
in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
[45] G. Li and J. J. Jung, “Deep learning for anomaly detection in multivariate time series: Approaches, applications, and challenges,” Inf. Fusion,
vol. 91, pp. 93–102, 2023.
[46] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. Aggarwal, and M.
Salehi, “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–42, 2024.
[47] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2,
no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021.
[48] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–16.
[49] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
pp. 4027–4035.
[50] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional adversarial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
[51] C. Cao, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive graph
convolutional networks for weakly supervised anomaly detection in
videos,” 2022, arXiv:2202.06503.
[52] T. K. K. Ho and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised learning for anomalous
channel detection in EEG graphs: Application to seizure analysis,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 7866–7874.
[53] H. Hojjati, M. Sadeghi, and N. Armanfard, “Multivariate time-series
anomaly detection with temporal self-supervision and graphs: Application to vehicle failure prediction,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Princ.
Pract. Knowl. Discov. Databases, 2023, pp. 242–259.
[54] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks,” in Proc. 22nd SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
2016, pp. 855–864.
[55] X. Zhu, C. Lei, H. Yu, Y. Li, J. Gan, and S. Zhang, “Robust graph
dimensionality reduction,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018,
pp. 3257–3263.
[56] H. Qu, L. Li, Z. Li, and J. Zheng, “Supervised discriminant isomap with
maximum margin graph regularization for dimensionality reduction,”
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 180, 2021, Art. no. 115055.
[57] H. Yang, K. Ma, and J. Cheng, “Rethinking graph regularization for graph
neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4573–4581.
[58] I. Ahmed, T. Galoppo, X. Hu, and Y. Ding, “Graph regularized autoencoder and its application in unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 4110–4124,
Aug. 2022.
[59] J. Zeng, J. Pang, W. Sun, and G. Cheung, “Deep graph Laplacian
regularization for robust denoising of real images,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2019.
[60] S. Rey and A. G. Marques, “Robust graph-filter identification with graph
denoising regularization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
Process., 2021, pp. 5300–5304.
[61] X. Li, H. Fan, and J. Liu, “Noise-aware clustering based on maximum correntropy criterion and adaptive graph regularization,” Inf. Sci., vol. 626,
pp. 42–59, 2023.
[62] S. Tang et al., “Modeling multivariate biosignals with graph neural
networks and structured state space models,” in Proc. Conf. Health,
Inference, Learn., 2023, pp. 50–71.

7008

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 47, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025

[63] Z. Kang, H. Pan, S. C. Hoi, and Z. Xu, “Robust graph learning from noisy
data,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1833–1843, May 2020.
[64] P. Berger, G. Hannak, and G. Matz, “Efficient graph learning from noisy
and incomplete data,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Netw., vol. 6,
pp. 105–119, 2020.
[65] X. Du et al., “Noise-robust graph learning by estimating and leveraging
pairwise interactions,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=r7imkFEAQb
[66] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 1–38, 2021.
[67] Z. Zhang and M. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for training
deep neural networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 8792–8802.
[68] X. Teng, M. Yan, A. M. Ertugrul, and Y.-R. Lin, “Deep into hypersphere:
Robust and unsupervised anomaly discovery in dynamic networks,” in
Proc. 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 2724–2730.
[69] M. J. Kusner, B. Paige, and J. M. Hernández-Lobato, “Grammar
variational autoencoder,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017,
pp. 1945–1954.
[70] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “Grelen: Multivariate time series
anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[71] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[72] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
pp. 3621–3633.
[73] I. Kobyzev, S. J. Prince, and M. A. Brubaker, “Normalizing flows: An
introduction and review of current methods,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 3964–3979, Nov. 2021.
[74] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
[75] F. Xia, X. Chen, S. Yu, M. Hou, M. Liu, and L. You, “Coupled attention
networks for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 240–253, Jan./Mar. 2024.
[76] T. K. K. Ho and N. Armanfard, “Contaminated multivariate time-series
anomaly detection with spatio-temporal graph conditional diffusion models,” 2024, arXiv:2308.12563.
[77] X. Jiang et al., “Softpatch: Unsupervised anomaly detection with
noisy data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022,
pp. 15433–15445.
[78] Y. Tashiro, J. Song, Y. Song, and S. Ermon, “CSDI: Conditional scorebased diffusion models for probabilistic time series imputation,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 24804–24816.
[79] K. Rasul, C. Seward, I. Schuster, and R. Vollgraf, “Autoregressive
denoising diffusion models for multivariate probabilistic time series
forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8857–8868.
[80] H. Liang, L. Song, J. Du, X. Li, and L. Guo, “Consistent anomaly
detection and localization of multivariate time series via cross-correlation
graph-based encoder–decoder gan,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71,
2022, Art. no. 3504210.
[81] L. Zhou, Q. Zeng, and B. Li, “Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead
dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 40967–40978, 2022.
[82] D. Guo, Z. Liu, and R. Li, “Regraphgan: A graph generative adversarial
network model for dynamic network anomaly detection,” Neural Netw.,
vol. 166, pp. 273–285, 2023.
[83] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
pp. 841–850.
[84] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations
for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM
SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986.
[85] D. Eswaran and C. Faloutsos, “Sedanspot: Detecting anomalies in edge
streams,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 953–958.
[86] J.-X. Zhong, N. Li, W. Kong, S. Liu, T. H. Li, and G. Li, “Graph
convolutional label noise cleaner: Train a plug-and-play action classifier
for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern
Recognit., 2019, pp. 1237–1246.

[87] S. Bhatia, B. Hooi, M. Yoon, K. Shin, and C. Faloutsos, “MIDAS:
Microcluster-based detector of anomalies in edge streams,” in Proc. AAAI
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 3242–3249.
[88] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J.„ vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
Jun. 2022.
[89] T. Zhao, B. Ni, W. Yu, Z. Guo, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “Action sequence
augmentation for early graph-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th
ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 2668–2678.
[90] P. Boniol and T. Palpanas, “Series2graph: Graph-based subsequence
anomaly detection for time series,” 2022, arXiv:2207.12208.
[91] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–temporal
graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,” Inf. Fusion,
vol. 89, pp. 527–536, 2023.
[92] A. Karami, T. K. K. Ho, and N. Armanfard, “Graph-jigsaw conditioned
diffusion model for skeleton-based video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2025, pp. 4237–4247.
[93] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and
opportunities,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1–10.
[94] N. Li, J.-X. Zhong, X. Shu, and H. Guo, “Weakly-supervised anomaly
detection in video surveillance via graph convolutional label noise cleaning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 481, pp. 154–167, 2022.
[95] Z. Chen, M. Ma, T. Li, H. Wang, and C. Li, “Long sequence time-series
forecasting with deep learning: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 97, 2023,
Art. no. 101819.
[96] Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in
driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 444–459, Jan. 2023.
[97] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024.
[98] H. Hojjati, T. K. K. Ho, and N. Armanfard, “Self-supervised anomaly
detection in computer vision and beyond: A survey and outlook,” Neural
Netw., vol. 172, 2024, Art. no. 106106.
[99] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection
in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. Int.
Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4419–4425.
[100] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transformer,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12081–12094,
Dec. 2023.
[101] D. Purwanto, Y.-T. Chen, and W.-H. Fang, “Dance with self-attention: A
new look of conditional random fields on anomaly detection in videos,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 173–183.
[102] S. Chang, Y. Li, J. S. Shen, J. Feng, and Z. Zhou, “Contrastive attention for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 24,
pp. 4067–4076, 2022.
[103] K. Doshi and Y. Yilmaz, “Towards interpretable video anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2023,
pp. 2655–2664.
[104] H. Chen, X. Mei, Z. Ma, X. Wu, and Y. Wei, “Spatial–temporal graph
attention network for video anomaly detection,” Image Vis. Comput.,
vol. 131, 2023, Art. no. 104629.
[105] N. Laptev, S. Amizadeh, and Y. Billawala, “S5-A labeled anomaly
detection dataset, version 1.0 (16M),” 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
//webscope.sandbox.yahoo.com/catalog.php
[106] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom,
“Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric dynamic
thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[107] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop CyberPhysical Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36.
[108] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
pp. 25–28.
[109] S. D. Bay, D. Kibler, M. J. Pazzani, and P. Smyth, “The UCI KDD archive
of large data sets for data mining research and experimentation,” ACM
SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 81–85, 2000.
[110] J. T. Brockmann, M. Rudolph, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “The vorausAD dataset for anomaly detection in robot applications,” IEEE Trans.
Robot., vol. 40, pp. 438–451, 2024.

HO et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION IN TIME SERIES: A SURVEY

[111] A. L. Goldberger et al., “Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet:
Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,”
Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, 2000.
[112] A. Taddei et al., “The European ST-T database: Standard for evaluating
systems for the analysis of ST-T changes in ambulatory electrocardiography,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 13, pp. 1164–1172, 1992.
[113] P. Wagner et al., “PTB-XL, a large publicly available electrocardiography
dataset,” Sci. Data, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 154.
[114] F. Liu et al., “An open access database for evaluating the algorithms
of electrocardiogram rhythm and morphology abnormality detection,” J.
Med. Imag. Health Inform., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 1368–1373, 2018.
[115] V. Shah et al., “The temple university hospital seizure detection corpus,”
Front. Neuroinform., vol. 12, 2018, Art. no. 83.
[116] T. Opsahl and P. Panzarasa, “Clustering in weighted networks,” Social
Netw., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 155–163, 2009.
[117] R. Rossi and N. Ahmed, “The network data repository with interactive
graph analytics and visualization,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015,
pp. 4292–4293.
[118] M. De Choudhury, H. Sundaram, A. John, and D. D. Seligmann, “Social
synchrony: Predicting mimicry of user actions in online social media,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Eng., 2009, pp. 151–158.
[119] S. Kumar, F. Spezzano, V. Subrahmanian, and C. Faloutsos, “Edge weight
prediction in weighted signed networks,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf.
Data Mining, 2016, pp. 221–230.
[120] S. Kumar, B. Hooi, D. Makhija, M. Kumar, C. Faloutsos, and V. Subrahmanian, “REV2: Fraudulent user prediction in rating platforms,” in Proc.
11th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2018, pp. 333–341.
[121] B. Zhang, R. Liu, D. Massey, and L. Zhang, “Collecting the Internet
as-level topology,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 35,
no. 1, pp. 53–61, 2005.
[122] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
2018, pp. 6479–6488.
[123] P. Wu et al., “Not only look, but also listen: Learning multimodal violence
detection under weak supervision,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
2020, pp. 322–339.
[124] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly
detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2017, pp. 341–349.
[125] W. Li, V. Mahadevan, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly detection and
localization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 18–32, Jan. 2014.
[126] D. Wagner, T. Michels, F. C. Schulz, A. Nair, M. Rudolph, and M. Kloft,
“TimeSeAD: Benchmarking deep multivariate time-series anomaly
detection,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=iMmsCI0JsS
[127] A. Koran, H. Hojjati, and N. Armanfard, “Unveiling the flaws: A critical analysis of initialization effect on time series anomaly detection,”
2024, arXiv:2408.06620.
[128] T. Lai, T. K. K. Ho, and N. Armanfard, “Open-set multivariate timeseries anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024,
pp. 2003–2010.
[129] E. C. Erkus and V. Purutcuoğlu, “A new collective anomaly detection approach using pitch frequency and dissimilarity: Pitchy anomaly detection
(PAD),” J. Comput. Sci., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 102084.
[130] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoencoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[131] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using
temporal hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 13016–13026.
[132] C. U. Carmona, F.-X. Aubet, V. Flunkert, and J. Gasthaus, “Neural
contextual anomaly detection for time series,” in Proc. 31t Int. Joint
Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2843–2851.
[133] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.

7009

[134] H. Zhang, Z. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, and Y.-G. Jiang, “Prototypical residual networks for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 16281–16291.
[135] X. Yao, R. Li, J. Zhang, J. Sun, and C. Zhang, “Explicit boundary
guided semi-push-pull contrastive learning for supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023,
pp. 24490–24499.
[136] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall and
ROC curves,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006, pp. 233–240.
[137] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 7388–7398.

Thi Kieu Khanh Ho received the MSc degree from
the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
in 2020. She is working toward the PhD degree
with iSMART Lab, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, McGill University and MilaQuebec AI Institute. From 2017 to 2018, she was
a research assistant with Seoul National University
Hospital. From 2020 to 2021, she was a researcher
with the Korea National University of Transportation.
Her research focuses on time-series anomaly detection, graph anomaly detection, and self-supervised
learning.

Ali Karami received the BSc degree in electrical
engineering from the University of Tehran, Iran, in
2021. He is working toward the master’s degree with
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University. He is also affiliated with
Mila-Quebec AI Institute. His research interest includes graph learning, anomaly detection, and selfsupervised learning.

Narges Armanfard received the PhD degree in artificial intelligence from McMaster University and the
postdoctoral degree in artificial intelligence from the
University of Toronto. She is the founder and principal investigator with iSMART Lab. She holds the
position of associate professor with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, and with Mila-Quebec AI Institute. She is also
affiliated with McGill Centre for Intelligent Machines
(CIM), McGill initiative in Computational Medicine
(MiCM), and McGill Institute for Aerospace Engineering (MIAE). Her research focus lies in developing innovative algorithms
for various domains such as time-series analysis, computer vision, reinforcement learning, and representation learning for tasks including data clustering,
classification, and anomaly detection.